

Preface
This book was the first in the I Believe series published during the 1970s.
The series has been widely welcomed and used, and a number of its volumes are being reissued in a different format.
This gives the authors opportunity to make alterations and additions to the text, and I am particularly grateful to have this opportunity to revise I Believe in the Holy Spirit .
The reason is not that I now disagree with the stance I took ten years ago, but that in this past decade my own understanding of the work of the Holy Spirit in the individual and in the Church has greatly developed, and the whole charismatic or renewal movement, then comparatively young, has matured enormously within the life of the Church at large.
The series was intended to take a fresh look at controversial issues in the Christian faith.
It was written by scholars who had one foot firmly anchored in the Bible and the other equally firmly in the contemporary scene.
Each writer sought to give an overall biblical interpretation of his subject, but to do so in such a way as to be of practical value to modern Christians who found themselves perplexed by controversy on the subject.
Thus in this particular book, while trying to present as fully and clearly as space allowed the teaching of the Scriptures about the Holy Spirit, I would have been failing to meet the aim of the series had I neglected the controversial issues of the baptism, the gifts and the  fullness of the Holy Spirit.
And because the series has not been directed only to the scholarly elite but to the Church at large, authors in the series have tried to keep the style comparatively light, though the content has been, we hope, of some weight.
I chose to write on the Holy Spirit myself for a very definite reason.
I had, for the previous fifteen years, enjoyed the privilege of living in a Christian community where the charismatic question had been a lively issue, and where  ‘charismatic’ and ‘non-charismatic’ordinands lived together in a high degree of mutual trust and love.
The charismatic movement did in places cause division and provoke suspicion, especially in its early days, but it is my settled conviction, and my experience, that this need not be so, and that the Spirit of unity would have it otherwise.
I therefore offered the book in the hope that it might embody a healing and unitize perspective on this most exciting and disturbing movement of our times.
In its revised form it has precisely the same aim: to provide a bridge between those who find themselves divided by the renewal movement.
It is the function of the Unholy Spirit to divide Christians.
The Holy Spirit unites.
That remains the fundamental conviction be-hind the reissue of this book.
There has been a great deal of literature on the subject in the past ten years, and the situation has not remained static during that time.
Christians across the spectrum are beginning to wake up to the living vitality of the Holy Spirit.
The suspicion with which the renewal movement was viewed seems to have diminished, as does the stridency of charismatic claims.
A whole new and virile Christian movement, the house churches, has emerged; and yet many are saying that the day of the charismatic movement is over, and that its emphases were either trivial or misguided.
It is therefore appropriate to look at the subject afresh.
In the first edition I felt I owed a debt of gratitude to my old teacher, Professor Geoffrey Lampe, who has since died so courageously of cancer, to close friends, the Revd.
David Watson and the Revd.
Julian Charley, to Edward England, my publisher, and to St. John's College, Nottingham, where I was at that time principal, and by whose Governors I had been given study leave in order to write the book.
How things have changed since then!
David Watson became a household name, and then he too died with the utmost courage and radiance, of cancer, to the great loss of the whole Christian world.
Edward England, who inspired the series in the first place, has left Hodders, and I took my leave of St. John's in 1975 in order to become Rector of St. Aldate's Church, Oxford.
I have been there nearly ten years now, and they are years in which I have grown to learn a good deal more about  the power of the Holy Spirit, his gifts, his humbling and breaking, and the glorious way in which he takes and transforms congregations and lives from every conceivable background once opened to him.
So above all acknowledgments, I want to thank God for his inexpressible generosity in giving the Holy Spirit to us fallen human beings, to be to us both the means of grace and the hope of glory.
The Year of our Lord, 1984      
CHAPTER I
The Holy Spirit
The Spirit
Discounted?
The Christian Church has always had a good many professing members who are rather like those disciples at Ephesus who, when asked by Paul, ‘Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?’ replied, ‘No, we have never even heard that there is a Holy Spirit’(Acts 19:2).
Of course, this group at Ephesus must have heard something about the Holy Spirit if they listened at all attentively to John the Baptist, but they did not realise that the promised Spirit was available for them; that he could make a difference to their lives.
Many adherents of all denominations have been in the same state.
They have, of course, heard about the Holy Spirit, but have either put it all down to typical ecclesiastical in-talk, or assumed that it was not intended for ordinary folk like themselves.
For all practical purposes, the Holy Spirit could be discounted.
Christianity was a matter of churchgoing, of soldiering on and trying to do one's best, and of believing in the existence of God and the historical life and death of Jesus (even if his deity and his resurrection were not to be taken too seriously).
Imprisoned in Church…?
On the other hand, there have always been people in the Christian Church who were very sure about the Holy Spirit.
It was simple.
He was the divine backer of their particular emphasis in theology and practice.
A good deal has been written in recent years about Primitive Catholicism, the tendency apparent even within the New Testament period itself to domesticate the Holy Spirit, to make him the  perquisite of the Church.
The man who is validly baptised or rightly instituted into office in the Church is assured that he has the Holy Spirit.
…or Bible?
It is not only Catholic Christendom which has been guilty of seeking to domesticate the Holy Spirit in this way.
Protestants have been no less anxious to do so, for the Holy Spirit is a disturbing influence.
Let him therefore be paid lip service, but for all practical purposes be shut up in the Bible where he can do no harm.
Let his presence attend the confessional statement of our particular brand of Protestantism.
Let the bizarre and miraculous elements which the New Testament documents narrate about his activity be relegated to those far-off apostolic days: it would be very embarrassing and doctrinally untidy if the Holy Spirit were to speak to men today, or to enable miracles to be performed and men to speak in tongues not their own.
The Bible, accordingly, is the safest place for the Spirit.
That is where he belongs; not in the hurly-burly of real life.
…or theology?
There was at least this to be said for the mainline Catholic and Protestant positions.
They were comprehensible and clear, if narrow and restrictive.
However, since the growth of biblical criticism in the last two centuries, and the revolt against authoritarianism in the past fifty years, there has been a marked tendency to seek the Holy Spirit in other quarters.
Since we can no longer be shackled by the authoritarianism of a discredited Bible and a crumbling Papacy, it is to the human spirit that we must look for inspiration.
To begin with, liberal theologians thought of the Holy Spirit of God as speaking to contemporary man through those elements in Bible or Church tradition which accorded best with their own insights.
Pope and Bible were dethroned, to make way for the Professor of Theology.
But unfortunately he did not last very long, and his views were soon considered out of date by his successors.
Why, then, should it be assumed that  the Holy Spirit was particularly active in professors?
Surely this was a hang-over from the scholasticism of an infallible Bible and the authoritarianism of an ecclesiastical teaching office?
…or congress?
Perhaps it would be better to seek the contemporary witness of the Spirit in ecumenical discussions, where all could contribute their special insight and the Holy Spirit would, doubtless, be found along with the majority of the votes at the end of the day?
I have been to enough ecclesiastical congresses which have claimed that the voice of the Holy Spirit lay behind the votes of the big battalions to be sickened by it.
It was not a habit of the Holy Spirit in biblical times to be identified with the views of the majority!
…or wider?
Often we are invited to take a broader view of the whole scene and to discover the Holy Spirit at work in Buddhism and communism, in humanism and atheism.
Is it to the Holy Spirit, then, that I must assign Buddhism's denial of the possibility of forgiveness, or communism's cavalier attitude to truth and human life, or the self-satisfied man-centredness of much contemporary humanism?
This broad interpretation of the person and work of the Holy Spirit is somewhat confusing, to say the least.
The whole subject bristles with problems.
…in the Renewal?
Is it surprising that against a background as inchoate as this a new and virile movement should have arisen, central to whose belief is the power and reality of the Holy Spirit?
At the beginning of this century there were no Pentecostals.
Now they number many millions drawn from almost every nation on earth, and almost every denomination too.
The characteristic emphases of this movement can be seen from glancing at some of the book titles published on the subject in recent  years.
It is, first and foremost,The Haven of the Masses , a movement of the people; neither dominated by its ministry, nor dependent on foreign indoctrination.
They speak with other tongues , which is embarrassing and distasteful to many non-members of the Pentecostal scene.
The claim that they and they alone have The Baptism with the Holy Spirit , in contrast to water baptism which marks the rest of Christendom, and the conversion which figures as largely in Evangelical theology as does confirmation in Catholic.
As at the Beginning the gifts of Pentecost have been renewed to a parched Church, and It can happen to Anybody .
For the Church of God's  frozen people this is the Pathway to Power , individual and Church alike are Gathered For Power .
The Third Force has come into the Christian spectrum, and it is a force to be reckoned with.
Healings, exorcisms, tongues, prophecy are merely the spectacular tip of the iceberg, the heart of which is a living, loving, believing Christian fellowship.
What has God disclosed?
What, then, in the face of these many and conflicting voices, is the Christian to make of the Holy Spirit?
Where shall we begin?
It is important to remember that we are mere men, talking about God.
And it is not possible for us to know anything at all about him unless he is generous enough to disclose himself Another book in this series has tackled the question of revelation; suffice it to say at this point that without revelation we cannot say anything about the Lord who is Spirit.
St. Paul makes this very clear.
‘What person can know a man's thoughts,’ he asks, ‘except the spirit of the man which is in him?
So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God’(1 Cor. 2:11).
In other words, it takes God to reveal God.
And Paul claims that God has done so, through the Spirit interpreting spiritual truths to men who possess the Spirit.
Accordingly, the purpose of this book is to examine what the Scriptures, particularly in the fuller light afforded by the New Testament, have to teach about the Holy Spirit, and to relate their message to our own situation.
Theologians often distinguish between God as he is in  himself, and God as he has revealed himself to us.
It seems to me to be both useless and presumptuous to attempt to pierce the incognito of the essential Godhead.
It is quite enough for me to try to grasp the way in which God has disclosed himself to us.
And without too much distortion, you could say that it is a drama in three acts.
Act One: on from Eden
Act One is a long one.
It lasts from the beginning of the world's history until the coming of Jesus Christ.
It comprises the whole history of the people of Israel until the coming of the Messiah.
The Law, the Prophets and the Writings (the three divisions of the Old Testament Scriptures) combine to teach one basic lesson.
It was this.
There is one God, and no runners up.
That is the lesson Abraham learnt in polytheistic Ur of the Chaldees.
It had to be learnt time and again by his  descendants throughout the succeeding twenty centuries.
Yahweh, the God of Israel, was the only deity.
The other gods of the heathen were idols (literally ‘nothings’ in Hebrew).
The downtrodden captives in Egypt at the time of the Exodus came to realise that Yahweh, the only self-existent one (Exod. 3:14), was a mighty deliverer who could be trusted.
The Mosaic Law underlines the fact that their whole social, religious and daily life must be governed by loyalty to that one God who brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
They forgot the message times without number.
The Old Testament records them running after false gods, the gods of the nations round about them, whenever opportunity offered.
Elijah has to drag them back from the worship of the heathen fertility gods introduced by Jezebel.
Hosea has to recall them to Yahweh, their first love, when they have gone and committed adultery, like Hosea's own wife, with some other ‘Lord’ on whom they have lavished their worship and devotion.
Jeremiah and Isaiah never tire of reminding the people that there is one God who can save his people, and that all other refuges are in vain.
At last the lesson got home, and in the last two centuries before Christ, the Jewish people gave signal proof of their loyalty to  the one God.
Under the Maccabeans they withstood the attempts of Antiochus to overcome their country and shatter their religion.
Later, under Roman occupation, they maintained with unbreakable courage their strict monotheism; so much so that the Roman governor did not even dare to bring his standards into Jerusalem lest the medallions on them depicting the emperor should be thought to infringe the Second Commandment.
Roman coinage struck in Palestine carried no image of the emperor.
Indeed, when Pilate produced a coin which had an augur's staff on its obverse, it could well have cost him his job; for an augur's staff smelt of pagan religion, and that could not be tolerated in Judea.
Finally, as everyone knows, Jewish faith in the one God who alone was fit to govern Israel led to the Great Revolt of A.D. 66–70.
It culminated in the capture of Jerusalem, and the destruction of that temple whose empty Holy of Holies eloquently proclaimed the greatness of God whose name was too holy to mention and whose nature was too inscrutable to copy by any image.
Act One was complete.
Israel knew beyond a shadow of doubt that there was one God, the Creator of the whole world, who had disclosed himself in a special way to their nation.
Act Two: on from Bethlehem
But this one who could not be named with impunity, who could not be copied without distortion, still remained very much beyond our ken.
In Act Two God comes in person to make himself known.
After years of scrutinising Jesus of Nazareth, of listening to his teaching, of watching his character, of observing his miracles, after witnessing that shameful death and experiencing that glorious resurrection, the men who had known him best were sure of it.
This man had brought God into focus.
‘God, who spoke of old in many and varied ways to our fathers through the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us in a Son.
Him he has appointed the heir of all things.
Through him he created the worlds.
He reflects the glory of  God, and bears the very stamp of his nature, upholding the universe by the word of his power.’
‘In him dwells all the  fullness of the Godhead in bodily form.’
‘He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation; for in him all things were created, in heaven and on earth…all things were created in him and for him.
His is the priority over everything, and in him all things hold together.’
‘No man has ever seen God; the only Son, himself God, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has made him known.’
In words like these Paul, John and the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews struggle to express the unheard-of claim, that they themselves would have deemed blasphemous but for the irrefragable evidence of the life, death and resurrection of Jesus, that God had indeed visited and redeemed his people.
The one it was unlawful to name had taken the name of ‘Emmanuel’(‘God with us’) and ‘Jesus’(‘God saves’).
He had done just that; lived with them, and saved them from a doom and a captivity worse than that which gripped their forefathers in Pharaoh's Egypt.
They could no longer plead ignorance of God.
He had become one of them, their contemporary.
In Jesus all of God that could take on human expression had been expressed.
God, they had come to see, was Christlike.
Act Two was complete.
The one true God was not only over them as their Creator.
He was alongside them, to reveal himself to them in human terms, and to rescue them from the self-induced estrangement into which they had fallen.
Act Three: on from Pentecost
Act Three began at Pentecost, and it has not ended.
Nor will it end until the completion of God's purposes for this world at the return of Christ.
God the Creator, the God who had come alongside men in Jesus, now made himself available to come within their very personalities.
It is inconceivable that any-one sat down to think out any doctrine so intrinsically improbable as the Trinity.
It was forced upon them by  experience.
Convinced as they were of the unity and uniqueness of God, the disciples became confident that he was present in Jesus.
After Pentecost, they became assured that their experience of God's activity in their midst and in their mission was nothing less than the continued work and presence of Jesus among them.
Accordingly, they did not shrink from speaking indifferently of ‘the Spirit of God’ and ‘the Spirit of Jesus’or ‘the Spirit of Christ’.
Jesus of Nazareth was now the prism through which the various shafts of light in the Old Testament about the Spirit became luminous and in focus to them.
An analogy such as I have just drawn in this three act drama of salvation can be dangerously misleading.
It could lead to what the theologians have called ‘Modalism’, as though God disclosed himself in these three successive modes or forms — forms which do not correspond to any differences in his own nature, but are merely adopted for our benefit.
I do not think that this will do.
The ministry of Jesus provides sufficient refutation.
On the one hand he is conceived and baptised by the Holy Spirit, and promises the gift.of that Spirit to his followers after his death.
On the other hand, he clearly looks to God as his Father, and into this Father's hand he commits his spirit when he dies.
There is, in other words, a double overlap in the ministry of Jesus, which prevents us from assuming that Father, Son and Spirit are three moulds into which the Deity pours himself at different periods in the history of salvation.
Despite the dangers, however, this three act drama can provide a useful provisional approach to our understanding of the person and work of the Holy Spirit, and is perhaps worth investigating in greater detail.
So in the next chapter I shall look at the main strands of teaching in the Old Testament about the Holy Spirit, in the light of fuller perspective brought about by Jesus, the supreme bearer of the Spirit.
CHAPTER 2 The Spirit in the Old Testament
Spirit of God
The word used for the Spirit of God in both Hebrew and Greek is highly significant.
Ruach in Hebrew and pneuma in Greek have the three main meanings of ‘wind’, ‘breath’ and ‘spirit’.
The Spirit of God is his life giving breath without which man remains spiritually inert.
It is his mysterious wind, which man cannot get under his own tidy control: as Nicodemus was reminded by Jesus, ‘The wind (pneuma ) blows where it will, and you hear its sound but you do not know where it comes from or where it is going.
So it is with every one who is born of the Spirit (pneuma )’(John 3:8).
As well as being mysterious the wind is powerful: it was by a mighty wind that God assuaged the waters of the Flood (Gen. 8: 1), and by a wind that he caused the waters to recede before Israel at the Exodus (Exod. 14:21).
Those twin notions of power and mystery mark much of the teaching of Old and New Testaments alike when they treat of the Spirit of God.
Quality of man?
This brings us up short at the outset of our study.
The Spirit of God in the Bible is no natural quality of man.
It is no hidden recess within our bodies.
For one thing, the Hebrews did not divide man up into spirit, mind and body as we tend to do: they thought of him as a single entity, an animated body, a living person.
For another, they had a perfectly good word to describe our human vitality, the quality that marks off a living person from a dead one and that was nephesh .
Only comparatively rarely is this word brought into contact with ruach , though we cannot expect, and do not find, complete consistency.
It is true that ruach is used of man's  spirit in a number of ways.
It is used in the story of the Flood, for instance, to denote ‘the breath of life’(Gen. 6:17) which God gives — and takes back again.
It is used to denote full vitality, real spirited living; contrast the deflation of the Queen of Sheba when she saw all Solomon's treasure — there was no more ruach left in her' (I Kgs. 10:5).
It comes to mean the seat of the emotions, intellect, and will particularly often applied to the governing impulse in a man's life (e.g. Prov. 25:28, Ps. 32:2, Num. 1 4:24).
Occasionally, therefore, a man's ruach ‘spirit’ seems to be equated with his nephesh , his ‘life’, but this is by no means the normal usage.
Ruach and nephesh can be thought of as each having their own circle of meaning.
Occasionally the circumferences of those circles intersect, but the main content of each is clear.
Nephesh is natural; it belongs to man.
ruach is supernatural; it belongs to God.
Though ruach may be found in man, it is always, so to speak, on loan, and not a possession; a resident alien, not a native.
Principle of life?
And just as the Spirit cannot be equated with any property in man, equally it cannot be regarded as the stuff of which the world is made, the comprehensive life principle which integrates the universe, as the Stoics maintained — a view which, through pagan philosophical influence, crept into the inter-testamental books of the Apocrypha.
No, the Old Testament insists that this powerful, mysterious Spirit belongs to God, and to God alone.
It is essentially the personal God, Yahweh, in action.
It is therefore to the teaching of the Old Testament about the Spirit of the Lord, the ruach adonai , that we shall be looking in order to get the background for the Christian doctrine of the Holy Spirit.
Invading Spirit
Perhaps the first thing that strikes us as we come to the Old Testament is the tremendous emphasis on the Spirit of God as a violent, invading force.
It is like the wind that hurtled  across the desert or whistled through the cedars or rushed down the wadis.
‘The grass withers, the flower fades when the ruach adonai blows upon it.
Surely the people is grass,’ cried Isaiah (40:7), and that is typical.
There is a whole host of places where we are told that God's action is like the wind strong, boisterous, uncontrollable.
He sends the wind.
He controls it.
He causes it to cease.
In Scripture…
In speaking of the ‘Spirit of the Lord’ the Old Testament writers significantly retain this emphasis on God's violent invasion from outside our experience, disturbing and mysterious like the wind.
It is their way of stressing that the Beyond has come into our midst, and we can neither organise nor domesticate him.
This comes out very strongly in the Book of Judges.
The oppressed people of Israel cry to the Lord to send them deliverance.
His response is to ‘raise up a deliverer for the people, Othniel.
The Spirit of the Lord came upon him; he judged Israel; he went out to war; and his hand prevailed’(Judg. 3:9,10).
Again, Gideon was a very ordinary man until ‘the Spirit of the Lord took possession of him’(Judg. 6:34).
Then he became instrumental in a signal deliverance for his country.
It was most noticeable in the case of that fabulous strong man, Samson.
It was when ‘the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him’ that ‘he tore a lion asunder as one tears a kid’(Judg. 14:6).
This strength which enabled him to do so much for his country against the Philistine overlords was not his own.
He was sharply reminded of that when he disobeyed God at Delilah's instigation, and woke up to find that ‘the Lord had left him’(Judg. 16:20).
Sometimes the violent power of the Spirit is seen in almost physical terms, as when the Spirit of the Lord entered into Ezekiel and set him on his feet, or lifted him up, or brought him out into the valley (Ezek. 2:2, 3:12, 37:1).
Today
I believe we have to take this aspect of the Spirit very seriously today.
We have grown used to expecting the Spirit  of God to speak in a gentle whisper, not a roaring wind.
We have sought him in the promptings of our hearts or the resolutions of our committees.
We are in danger of forgetting that it is God we are talking about: the God who created us, the God who sustains us and has sovereign rights over us.
This God can and does break into human life, and sometimes he does it through the violent, the unexpected, the alien.
It was this same Spirit that drove Jesus off into the desert to be tempted after his baptism, that pioneered the mission of the early Church often in the most bizarre, unexpected and ‘unorthodox’ ways; that gripped a man like Philip, removed him from a flourishing evangelistic campaign in Samaria and drove him into the desert because there was one man who needed his help.
When that help was given ‘the Spirit of the Lord caught up Philip’, just like Ezekiel long before him, and ‘Philip was found at Azotus, and passing on he preached the gospel’(Acts 8:26,39,40).
I once met a girl who awoke to find herself gripped by the Spirit of God at 2 a.m.
She was a cripple, and at once her hip was cured — a hip, incidentally, that had defied the efforts of the country's best doctors — and she found herself praising God in tongues.
Now she is doing a remarkably useful piece of Christian service.
I think of another man, devious, self-centred, arrogant, who went to criticise a charismatic meeting, but found himself seized with unaccountable trembling, tears, and a deep meeting with God, the God of the unexpected.
The wind of God certainly blew on that man, Christian though he already was; he has not become a paragon of virtue over night, but the manifest change in his disposition and attitudes cannot be denied.
Perhaps this surrender to the invading power of God's Spirit, this willingness for him to take us and break us and use us, IS one of the prime lessons which the charismatic movement throughout the churches is teaching us at the present time.
Some years ago Bishop Joe Fison expressed it well in his book about the Spirit,Fire upon the Earth (p. 9):
Of course, this uprush of the primitive, the elemental and the unconscious, this ‘possession’ by the Spirit, is not the  be-all and end-all of the biblical evidence for the doctrine of the Holy Spirit.
But it is the starting point of this doctrine, and only if we are prepared, to start where the Bible starts are we likely to know in experience anything of the higher reaches of the Spirit's work.
We cannot jump the queue.
Spirit of prophecy
Closely allied to this emphasis on the ‘otherness’ of the Spirit of God is the stress throughout the Old Testament on his inspiration of prophecy.
It is one of the major themes of Scripture.
This God who is beyond us and invades our world does not do so in order to terrify, but to communicate.
The wind or Spirit of the Lord is indeed power, but it is morally defined power, designed to communicate the will of God and bring his creation into conformity with it.
That is why, I think, there is a frequent link in the Bible between ‘the Spirit of the Lord’ and ‘the Word of the Lord’.
The breath of God and the message of God cannot be divorced.
Time and again, therefore, in the parallelism of Hebrew poetry dabar (word) and ruach (spirit) go hand in hand.
Thus
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth (Ps. 33:6).
or
The Spirit of the Lord speaks by me, his word is upon my tongue (2 Sam.
23:2).
Word and Spirit
When Saul disobeys God, and is rejected as king over Israel, we read, ‘You have rejected the word of the Lord,’ and consequently, in judgment, ‘the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul’(I Sam.
15:26; 16:14).
Bishop John Taylor, in his moving and perceptive book The Go Between God , has pointed out the importance of this link between the Spirit, with all his  undifferentiated power, and the Word, with all its particularity of meaning.
By distinguishing too sharply between the divine Word and the divine Spirit the Church has lost a most important biblical perspective.
Certainly that link is strong and clear in the Old Testament Scriptures.
When the Spirit comes upon a man, he communicates some message from God.
This message may take strange, mysterious forms.
It may come through dreams, as when Joseph was able to discern and interpret Pharaoh's dreams through the Spirit of God within him (Gen. 41: 38f).
It may come through visions.
Men like Abraham (Gen. Is:l), Jacob (Gen. 46:2), Ezekiel (1:1) and Daniel (1:17, 4:5, 7:7) grasped something of the purposes of God in a vision.
It may come through ecstatic utterance, as when the Spirit of the Lord came upon King Saul and he joined a band of wandering prophets.
But even this medium was no mere excitement, as God broke in from the beyond and seized him: there was communication.
He not only prophesied, but he became in some unspecified sense ‘a different man’(I Sam.
10:7–13).
The later prophets laid less emphasis on ecstasy.
Amos protests that he is no prophet in the ecstatic sense, such as were to be found in attendance at the sanctuaries of his day.
‘I am no prophet, nor a prophet's son; I am a herdsman, and the Lord took me. from following the flock.’
Nevertheless he is quite clear that God has inspired his message.
‘The Lord said to me, ‘Go, prophesy to my people, Israel.’
Now, therefore, hear the word of the Lord…’
(Amos 7:14–16).
It is not ecstasy that marks prophecy, but meeting with God, so that God speaks through the prophet.
Amos himself puts the matter with telling simplicity:
The lion has roared: who will not fear?
The Lord has spoken: who can but prophesy?
(Amos 3:8)
An early prophet like David claims that when he delivers his oracles no less than ‘the Spirit of the Lord speaks’(2 Sam.
23:2).
In the eighth century B.C. Hosea describes the prophet as supremely ‘the man of the Spirit’(9:7), and Micah spells it  out more fully with his claim, over against the false prophets who get no word from God:
But as for me, I am filled with power,’ With the Spirit of the Lord, And with justice and might, To declare to Jacob his transgression And to Israel his sin.
(Mic. 3:8)
Isaiah of Babylon, in a later age, knows that his message is true, because ‘The Lord God has sent me and his Spirit’(48:16).
Zechariah, after the Return from Babylon, has no doubt that it is through the Spirit of the Lord that God has sent ‘the law and the words’ through the prophets (Zech. 7: 12).
The point does not need labouring.
When a man prophesies, it is because the Spirit of the Lord comes upon him and communicates a message through him.
But there are several aspects of this prophetic Spirit that are especially important, and they are taken up in the New Testament.
Spirit and Servant
The Spirit of the Lord was promised to the Servant of Yahweh
Behold, my servant, whom I uphold, My chosen, in whom my soul delights, I have put my Spirit upon him, He will bring forth justice to the nations.
(Isa. 42:1)
Just as the will of God cannot be known without the revelation of the Spirit, so the service of God cannot be carried through without the equipment of that same Spirit.
It is only through God's revelation that we can know him.
It is only through his power that we can serve him.
Isaiah 61: takes up this theme, and the prophet cries:
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me Because the Lord has anointed me To bring good tidings to the afflicted; He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, To proclaim liberty to the captives And the opening of prison to those who are bound; To proclaim the year of the Lord's favour…
These prophetic visions of the Spirit coming upon the Servant of Yahweh and upon his anointed prophet were specifically claimed by Jesus.
The first comes at his baptism, the second at the first sermon he preached (Mark 1:11, Luke 4:18).
It is not easy to exaggerate their significance.
As the prophet Jesus could say with authority, ‘Amen, amen I say unto you,’ and claim to speak final truth about God, ‘We speak of what we know, and bear witness of what we have seen’(John 3:11).
As the Servant of Yahweh, Jesus treads the path of suffering and obedience right the way to Calvary: so much so that Peter could describe his suffering and death in terms culled from the famous prophecy of the Suffering Servant in Isaiah:
He committed no sin; no guile was found on his lips.
When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; When he suffered he did not threaten But trusted to him who judges justly.
He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree That we might die to sin and live to righteousness.
By his wounds you have been healed.
(I Pet.
2:22ff)
Spirit and king
The ideals
There is another area in which Jesus strikingly fulfilled one of the main strands of Old Testament teaching about the Spirit.
God had given his Spirit to his anointed king in order to equip him for his leadership of the people.
Saul is the classic  example.
Samuel anoints him king: he is promised, and receives, the power of the Spirit of God upon him (I Sam.
10:1,6).
Subsequently he disobeys God disastrously, and has to be set aside as king in favour of David.
Samuel anoints David, and we read that ‘the Spirit of the Lord came mightily (literally ‘leaped’) upon David from that day forward' (l Sam.
16:13).
What happened to Saul, then?
‘The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul,’ and from now on we read that an evil or distressed ruach elohim troubled him.
The Spirit of the Lord, the ruach adonai passes to David to equip him for his princely service.
The profane word elohim (which need not necessarily refer to Yahweh) is now used to describe Saul's fits of mania and ecstasy.
The reality
Unfortunately the kings of Israel were a pretty disappointing lot, and most of them showed little sign of the presence of the Lord the Spirit in their lives and reigns.
However the link was not lost, and the hope grew in Israel that one day God would raise up a prince of the Davidic line for whom the Spirit would be no passing enduement, to be bestowed and with drawn as he joined his predecessors in disobedience.
Instead, the Spirit of the Lord would rest and remain on such a man.
Hence the idyllic dream of Isaiah 11: 1ff:
There shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse, And a branch shall grow out of his roots.
And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, The Spirit of wisdom and understanding, The Spirit of counsel and might, The Spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord.
The hope
This hope lived on in Judaism.
In the intertestamental days we read of the Messiah, ‘God will make him mighty in the Holy Spirit’(Psalms of Solomon 17:37), and in the Targum or Commentary on Isaiah 42: 1, the Servant is seen as the Messiah, and God says of him ‘I will cause my Holy Spirit to rest on him.’
It is therefore extremely significant that we read  of Jesus in the New Testament that the Spirit descends and remains on him (John 1:32) and that God did not give his Spirit by measure or sparingly to him (John 3:34).
In Jesus we have the final embodiment of God's ideal ruler, and he is fully equipped with an unwithdrawn endowment of the Holy Spirit.
Spirit and people
There was a further dimension to this prophetic hope.
On the whole, you had to be someone rather special in Old Testament days to have the Spirit of God.
A prophet, a national leader, a king, perhaps some specially wise man (Prov. 1:23) or artistic person (Exod. 31:3)— in which case you would be beautifying the Lord's Tent of Meeting, or enunciating the Lord's wisdom.
But the Spirit of God was not for every Tom, Dick and Harry.
To be sure, there were promises in a very general sense that ‘My Spirit abides with you: fear not’(Hag. 2:5), but this was an assurance to the people as a whole, not a promise to the individual.
The gift of God's Spirit was on the whole to special people for special tasks.
It was not generally available, nor was it necessarily permanent.
Wanted: a new covenant
Many a godly Jew must have felt what a wonderful thing it would be if Moses' longing could be fulfilled, ‘Would that all the Lord's people were prophets, that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them’(Num. 11:29): and that is just what the prophets were led by God to foretell for the last days.
And it shall come to pass afterwards, That I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, Your old men shall dream dreams, And your young men shall see visions.
Even upon the menservants and maidservants In those days I will pour out my Spirit.
(Joel 2:28ff)
He did precisely that, on the Day of Pentecost; and the gift has never been withdrawn.
We shall be looking at this point more closely later, but for the moment it is sufficient to point out that the gift of the Spirit at Pentecost to all believers without distinction fulfilled one further hope of the prophets of old.
Men like Jeremiah and Ezekiel looked for the day when God would forge a new covenant, or agreement, with men.
The problem about the existing one was this.
Although it all sprang from God's initiative, it was nevertheless very much a two-sided affair.
‘If you will obey my voice,’ said God to the Israelites after the Exodus, ‘and keep my covenant, you shall be my own possession among all peoples’(Exod. 19:5).
But there lay the rub.
They could not and did not keep his covenant.
They were constantly breaking their side of it.
And though God remained faithful to his side of the agreement, and looked after his people wonderfully down the centuries, it was not very satisfactory as a covenant.
It kept getting spoiled.
Jeremiah longed for the day when God would, so to speak, underwrite both sides of the covenant.
He would not only keep his side of the bargain, but enable Israel to keep hers, by putting his Spirit within her people.
Listen to his vision:
The days are coming, says the Lord, When I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel…
Not like the covenant which I made when I took them by the hand To bring them out of the land of Egypt — my covenant which they broke Although I was a husband to them, says the Lord.
But this is the covenant that I will make with the house Israel After those days, says the Lord: I will put my law within them and I will write it upon their hearts; And I will be their God and they shall be my people.
And they shall no longer each man teach his neighbour and his brother Saying ‘Know the Lord’, For they shall all know me, from the least to the greatest, says the Lord; For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.
(Jer. 31:31ff)
A new covenant, involving a complete pardon, a personal knowledge of the Lord, and the will of God no longer external to them on tablets of stone, but written inwardly on their hearts.
A new covenant indeed!
Ezekiel speaks in much the same strain, and specifically attributes this change to the Spirit of God:
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you.
A new heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take out of your flesh the heart of stone, and give you a heart of flesh.
And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes.
(Ezek. 36:25ff)
That is what was wanted.
A new Spirit, God's own Spirit within man, which would warm his heart to want to go God's way, and enable his will to keep it.
Such was the hope for the last days, and this was the hope that the Christians had seen fulfilled since the resurrection and ascension of Jesus.
Hebrews 8:7ff and 10: 15ff work it out in detail.
Such was the prophetic hope, not only for the Suffering Servant or the Messiah of Israel but for the whole people of God.
Of course, it could not come without national repentance and renewal on a grand scale.
Ezekiel was bold enough to long for this too, and God gave him the marvellous vision of the valley of the dry bones (chapter 37) as an assurance that the longed-for day would indeed come.
God's ruach , his breath, could infuse new life into dry bones; God's ruach , his Spirit, could bring the people of Israel out of their graves, and give them life.
Creator Spirit?
There are three further surprises for us as we look at the Old Testament teaching about the Spirit of God.
In the first place, he is hardly ever connected with creation.
This is all the more significant when one thinks of the nature mysticism that was so common in every variety of ancient paganism.
There was no hint of it in the religion of Israel, which maintained such a clear emphasis on the otherness, the transcendence of the Creator God.
Indeed, in the Old Testament, language about the Spirit is restricted almost exclusively to the area of relationship between God and man .
Despite this, whole theologies have been erected on the theme of the Creator Spirit.
It is moving to think of the Spirit of God being involved in the continuous and on-going process of creation.
It is fascinating to follow John Taylor's poetic imagination in attributing to the Spirit of God the ‘inner awareness of the unattained’, ‘the stimulation of initiative and choice’, and the ‘principle of sacrifice’ inherent in the creative development of our world (The Go-Between God , chapter 2).
But the roots for all this in the Old Testament are rather shaky.
Professor Moule has seized on the fact that only in four places in the whole of the Old Testament does the Spirit seem to be associated with creation of the physical world — and even these four are patient of another interpretation.
Genesis 1:2, 5, ‘the Spirit of God was moving over the face of the waters’ may indicate a creative function for the Spirit, but may equally describe the chaos referred to in the earlier part of that verse, ‘the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the water’: and ‘a ruach adonai , a mighty hurricane from God, was moving over the expanse of the unruly waters’may be a better translation.
Psalm 104:30: ‘When thou sendest forth thy Spirit they are created, and thou renewest the face of the ground’ refers to the animal creation, and may mean not so much that the Spirit created them, but, as in Genesis 2:7, that God breathes his life into the already moulded form of animals and man.
In other words Psalm 104:30 may speak of the energising rather than the creative work of the Spirit, and thus fall into line with the  rest of the Old Testament teaching on ruach as ‘breath’.
Psalm 33:6 is no more certain.
To be sure ‘By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all their host by the breath (ruach ) of his mouth’ could mean that the ruach , the Spirit, created the heavens.
But more probably, in the light of the parallel with ‘word’ in the first half of the verse,ruach means God's fiat .
His word is creative.
When he says ‘Let there be light’, light ensues.
The last hint of a Creator Spirit in the Old Testament is in Job 33:4, but once again this is ambiguous.
It may mean ‘The Spirit of God has made me’, but in view of the parallel ‘and the breath of the Almighty gives me life’ it is just as likely to mean that the Spirit is the animating principle of life.
Professor Moule may not be right in the interpretation he gives to these four verses.
The Old Testament may give these few hints of a Creator Spirit, and certainly this thought is found in the intertestamental period — where the parallelism between Wisdom, Word and Spirit is important — but the paucity of instances that can be adduced, and the plausibility of taking them in another sense, does make one very cautious of building up a great doctrine of co-operating with the Holy Spirit in his on-going work of creation.
The Spirit of God breathes his life into man; he revives the dry bones; he infuses vitality into inert matter, but the evidence that he is involved in the work of creating the world is very slim indeed in the Old Testament and non-existent in the New.
We would be wise not to build too high a building on such a flimsy foundation.
Holy Spirit?
The second surprise concerns the rarity of any mention in the Old Testament of the Holy Spirit.
Pagan Greek literature does not have the phrase at all, and only twice do we find it in the Old Testament.
In Isaiah 63:10, 11 we read that the people on whom God had set his love ‘rebelled and grieved his Holy Spirit’, although he had put his Holy Spirit in the midst of them when he rescued them from Egypt.
In Psalm 51:11 the writer prays to God in penitence;
Create in me a dean heart O God, and put a new and right spirit within me Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me.
In both cases the writers are very conscious of the moral and ethical aspect of God's ruach .
The nation of Isaiah 63 had grieved this Holy One to whom they were dedicated.
The individual of Psalm 51 had done the same.
The holiness of the Spirit of the Lord stands in sharp contrast to the unholiness of his fallible servants, and perhaps this is why the Spirit is here called Holy.
In the New Testament, of course, it is the normal name for the Spirit.
The reason for this may be because God was increasingly called ‘the Holy One’(there was a slightly increasing tendency in intertestamental writings and the Dead Sea Scrolls to speak of ‘the Holy Spirit’) but might just be due to the character of Jesus.
The one in whom the Spirit had a permanent dwelling amazed men by the sinlessness of his life.
Such was the character produced in human life by the Spirit of Yahweh once he was given full control.
Such, therefore, should be the character in the followers of Jesus, called as they were to be ‘holy’ or ‘separated to God’as his special possession (I Pet.
1:15f, 2:9).
As we have seen, Ezekiel and Jeremiah expected God to change men in the days of the New Covenant by putting his Spirit within them, so that they should walk in his ways and keep his commandments: after Pentecost the Holy Spirit begins to produce holiness in God's people.
This does not mean separation from sinners, in a sense of isolation and self-satisfaction like the monks of Qumran; instead, it means involvement with needy, fallen, spoiled humanity, following the example and endued with the Spirit of him who was a friend of tax gatherers and sinners.
Personalised Spirit?
The final surprise is that in the Old Testament the Spirit does not appear as a divine being.
He is rather seen as God's personal presence and intervention.
The point is well made in a verse like Isaiah 31:3.
The Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses are flesh and not spirit.
In those words, Isaiah is not contrasting flesh and spirit in the way we might, as the exterior and the interior of the same being.
No.
He is grouping flesh and men together, and God and Spirit together.
The Spirit is on God's side of reality; quite different from our side.
And when the Spirit of the Lord is present with men, it means the gracious and personal intervention of God himself.
As we saw just now in that passage in Isaiah 63, the Spirit is the personal expression of God himself, and can be grieved: he is holy, not only the divine power but the moral character of God: he is God in action for the benefit of his people — notice how the Spirit is equated with the ‘arm’ of Yahweh, that is to say his saving activity.
The Spirit is no less than the personal, moral, active power of the Lord God, and for the further revelation of his nature we must await Act Two, the coming of Jesus, to which we shall turn in the next chapter.
CHAPTER 3 The Spirit of Jesus
Each in his own way, the four evangelists make it abundantly plain that a new era has dawned with the coming of Jesus of Nazareth.
It is the long-awaited era of the messianic kingdom, the age characterised by the availability of the Spirit of God.
And Jesus is the Messiah, by virtue of his unprecedented endowment with the Spirit of God.
He is both the unique bearer of the Spirit, and the unique dispenser of that Spirit to the disciples; moreover, for ever afterwards the Spirit remains stamped with his character.
1.
Jesus is the unique Man of the Spirit
St. Mark on the baptism of Jesus
Mark was in all probability the earliest evangelist.
He knew the power and the reality of the Holy Spirit in the church of his day, when he wrote in the 60s of the first century.
But he went to great pains to exclude all mention of the Spirit as available for believers from his Gospel, with one notable exception.
Why was this?
Surely because he wished to make it abundantly plain that it is Jesus, and Jesus only, who is the man of the Spirit.
Not until his death and resurrection could that same Spirit become readily available for his followers.
This age of fulfilment
Accordingly, he begins his Gospel with the story of the baptism of Jesus.
The crowds who flocked to listen to John's preaching of repentance were baptised by him in the Jordan in penitent expectation of the age of fulfilment which he proclaimed.
But.
when Jesus was baptised, Mark makes it plain that the age of fulfilment has already dawned .
A voice was  heard from heaven.
Now there had been a great shortage of messages from heaven for a very long time.
The writings of the rabbis repeatedly maintain that the Holy spirit departed from Israel after the last of the prophets, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi (e.g. T. Sota 13:2).
What is more, the Spirit of God, and the shekinah , or glory of God, were not to be found in the Second Temple (b.
Yoma 21 b).
Men cherished a tremendous sense of nostalgia for the departed glories of the previous temple, and for the Spirit of Yahweh which used in Old Testament days to be displayed in mighty deliverers and inspired prophets.
Nostalgia, yes, and expectation, as men awaited the promises of Ezekiel and Jeremiah, of Joel and Isaiah about deliverance, an anointed king, and a renewal of the Spirit in the days of fulfilment.
Well, says Mark, in effect: those days of fulfilment have arrived.
In John the Baptist s ministry you find the fulfilment of the prophecies made long ago that a messenger would come to prepare the way of the Lord.
That is precisely what the Baptist was doing.
And Mark immediately introduces Jesus on to the scene: the messenger has indeed prepared the way of the Lord.
Daring words those, for in the prophet Malachi they clearly referred to Yahweh himself.
Mark is quietly claiming that in Jesus we have to do with none other than Yahweh, who had come to our world in the man Jesus.
as if that is not enough, he makes two other shattering claims.
The end of the silence
The first is that the age-long silence is ended.
God has spoken again.
The heavens are no longer brazen and unyielding.
The rabbis believed that when the Holy Spirit was with drawn from Israel at the end of the prophetic era, God left them with a substitute, the bath qol , which means literally ‘daughter of the voice’ or ‘echo’.
It is usually said that in the voice from heaven at the baptism of Jesus we have an example of the bath qol .
But this is quite mistaken.
The bath qol was an inferior substitute for the Word of God formerly given by the Spirit to a prophet.
But this voice was no feeble substitute; it was a direct address from the God who had been silent.
It is inconceivable that at this juncture when Mark is  heralding the return of the Spirit in Jesus he should introduce The writings of it with anything so banal and second-hand as an echo.
And the content of this voice is even more amazing than its occurrence.
‘Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased,’ seems to be a deliberate combination of two famous Old Testament texts.
‘Thou art my Son’ comes from Psalm 2:7, where the king of Israel is addressed as ‘Son’of God.
The kings had been pretty poor specimens as ‘sons’: they showed little enough of Yahweh's family likeness, and there was a long-standing hope in Israel that one day God would bring into the world a messianic Son, a worthy ruler to sit on David's throne.
We know people were treasuring this hope at the time of Jesus, because in the caves of Qumran there has turned up a messianic anthology which includes the prophecy given to David in 2 Samuel 7:14.
There God undertakes to give an everlasting kingdom to the boy ‘and I will be his Father and he shall be my Son’.
The voice from heaven, recorded by Mark, announced that the ultimate messianic ruler had arrived in Jesus.
The role of the Messiah
But that was only half the message.
The other half ‘with thee I am well pleased’ comes from that picture of the Servant of Yahweh in Isaiah 42:1 which we looked at in the last chapter.
At his baptism, then, Jesus publicly assumed a double role: the role of the Messianic Son, and the role of the Suffering Servant.
Such was the destiny he willingly undertook.
The availability of the Spirit
But the Baptism of Jesus did not merely see the end of the long silence, and God's declaration that in Jesus the role of the Servant and the Son had converged: the age-long drought of the Holy Spirit was ended too.
As we saw in the last chapter the anointed king of Israel was equipped with the Spirit to enable him to carry out his work; hence the expectation of Isaiah 11:1 ff that the Messiah would also be equipped, in fuller measure, with that Spirit.
It was just the same with the Servant.
‘I have put my Spirit upon him; he will bring  forth justice to the nations’ says God through the prophet And now the Spirit had come, and Mark's account of the baptism makes it abundantly clear that he sees Jesus as the Messianic Son and the Suffering Servant, equipped or his…stupendous task with the Spirit of God promised for the end-time.
The last days are no longer entirely in the future; in the person of Jesus the end has dawned No wonder Jesus' first recorded words in Mark's Gospel are ‘The time is fulfilled: and God s kingly rule has drawn near (Mark 1:15).
St. Mark on the battle with Satan
Mark has two ways of emphasising the fact that Jesus is fully and uniquely endowed with the Holy Spirit in his role as Son and Servant of Yahweh, who brings in the kingly rule of God in the end-time.
First, he makes a great deal of the struggle with Satan in which Jesus is involved both in the temptation in the wilderness into which the Spirit thrusts him (Mark 1:12) immediately after his baptism; and also in the healings and exorcisms which follow during the ministry.
He does so in a very subtle manner.
The temptation
In the Old Testament there was a use of ruach which I did not mention.
It concerns evil spirits which are seen as rebellious creatures of Yahweh, bent on wrecking his purposes but ultimately subject to his control.
In the earlier books of the Old Testament we read of these evil spirits (I Sam.
16:14, Judg. 9:23, I Kgs. 22:21); later they are personalised in Satan, whose name does not appear before the rather late books of I Chronicles (21: 1ff), Job (1: 6ff) and Zechariah (3:1ff).
In the intertestamental period there is a great deal about these evil spirits and their prince.
It is important to bear in mind that there is no absolute dualism in the Hebrew religion.
Even the devil is God's devil: he is on a chain held by God, even though the chain is a long one.
The devil and his spirits are seen as a distortion of the original good creation of God, and though they are allowed to tempt and hurt men  because of men's wickedness (see, e.g. Jubilees 10:7–11) in the last-time they will be bound and punished.
Now against that background of thought we must set Mark's emphasis on the binding of Satan by Jesus.
Jesus, filled with the Spirit, goes off into the wilderness, the place where Israel had been tested for forty.
years after the Exodus, and tries conclusions with the tempter for forty days.
He wins where Israel's forebears failed.
In him the days of fulfilment, the days of Satan's defeat, have dawned.
The exorcisms
And so it continues throughout his ministry.
Time and again we find him casting out unclean spirits from afflicted people: it is one of the well-known characteristics of Mark's Gospel which on the whole contains little teaching, but a great deal of action by Jesus.
That action includes many miracles of healing, the most important being the curing of people who were possessed.
The meaning is clear.
Jesus is the conqueror of demonic forces through the power of the Spirit.
He is the victor over Satan, and he tells a gem of a story to drive the point home.
‘No one can enter a strong man's house and plunder his goods unless he first binds the strong man; then indeed he may plunder his house.’
The context in Mark 3:20–30 makes it abundantly clear that by his cures and exorcisms Jesus is driving out the demons.
The man endued with the Holy Spirit is more than a match for the unclean spirits which are such a feature in Mark's account.
Jesus is the conqueror.
And men are amazed.
They see in the presence and power of Jesus a cameo of the final victor over the forces of evil.
‘With authority he commands even the unclean spirits and they obey him’(1:27).
The controversies
But it is not only through his healings and exorcisms that Jesus shows himself as the bearer of the Spirit: he claims it explicitly in the controversy with the scribes about Beelzebub (apparently another name for Satan, conceived of as ‘lord of the house’).
In response to their charge (Mark 3:22) that it is  through demonic power that he casts out demons, he replies that no divided house can stand: if Satan casts out Satan, his empire is doomed.
And he makes that terrifying statement about the sin against the Holy Spirit, over which many people have needlessly tortured themselves.
‘All sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and whatever blasphemies they utter; but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness…for they said, ‘He has an unclean spirit’ ' More light is shed on this verse by the form in which it occurs in the ‘Q’material (sayings of Jesus preserved in Matthew and Luke independently of Mark).
‘Whoever says a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him.
But the man who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven’(Luke 12:10).
It is one thing to mistake and misrepresent Jesus, clothed in all his humility as Son of Man; it is one thing to misread his parabolic teaching, coming as it does in riddles.
But it is quite another thing to see the truth clearly and wilfully to reject it; quite another thing to ascribe the power of the Holy Spirit to the devil — which is what the scribes were doing.
If men firmly reject the saving work of God in Jesus, they forfeit the very possibility of rescue, not because God will not have them, but because they say like Satan in Paradise Lost, ‘Darkness, be thou my light.’
Jesus then is the bearer of the Spirit: he, and he alone during the period of the ministry.
It is a mark of the extraordinary faithfulness of St. Mark to the historical situation of the life of Jesus that he does not read back into those days the experience of the Spirit to which he and his friends were used in the post-resurrection era.
There is one place only where he lifts the curtain.
In the ‘apocalyptic discourse’ of Mark 13, Jesus promises the disciples that in the coming days when they are out preaching the gospel, they will be put on the spot time and again when arrested and unjustly accused.
And then the Holy Spirit will give them words to say.
He will equip them for witness-bearing.
The promise refers to the post-resurrection days; it does not provide an exception to Mark's sharp portrait of Jesus alone as the man uniquely possessed by the Holy Spirit.
The teaching of Matthew
Matthew is equally convinced that Jesus is the focus of the Spirit's activity.
He brings it out in a number of ways, in addition to those we have noticed in Mark.
The birth of Jesus
For one thing he carries the story of Jesus back far beyond the baptism to his very conception.
This too was specially brought about by the Holy Spirit (Matt 1:18,20).
Just as the Spirit was active in breathing life into the first man (Gen 2:7), so here he is associated with the birth of the last Adam.
But Matthew is claiming more than this.
He knows that the Messiah is uniquely endued with the Spirit, and he stresses that from the outset of Jesus' life this was the case
The role of the Servant
Matthew makes quite explicit the way in which Jesus fulfils the role of the Servant.
He quotes Isaiah 42: 1–4 in full, and says that Jesus' works of healing are the fulfilment of that prophecy.
In other words, the power of the Spirit is specifically set out as the energising principle in Jesus' healing ministry
The equipment for mission
Finally, this evangelist is as well aware as Mark that the Spirit was during the ministry concentrated, as it were, in Jesus, and will only be available to the disciples when they, too, are engaged in the mission.
Then they will baptise those they evangelise in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit (28:19), but in the meantime they are given one trial run, if we may so call it, when they are sent out on a missionary journey (Matt. 10:20).
Mark's promise that the Holy Spirit will look after their words when arraigned before councils for the sake of the gospel is brought into the Mission Charge by Matthew: it seems clear that he is looking forward from an isolated incident in the ministry of Jesus to the  continuing mission of the post-resurrection church of which he was a member.
The teaching of Luke
Luke has a lot to say about the Holy Spirit, both in the Gospel and the Acts.
At present it is sufficient to notice his agreement with the other evangelists that Jesus is the unique messianic bearer of the Spirit.
New dawn
He makes a very special point of emphasising the presence and activity of the Spirit in the birth stories of John and Jesus, and in underlining the new outbreak of prophecy, which had been silent so long, but as we have seen, was confidently expected afresh in the Age to Come.
Right at the start of the gospel story we find the Spirit active in full vigour.
The new age had dawned, and the signs of its presence were experienced.
It is a weakness in Dunn's useful book Baptism in the Holy Spirit that he sweeps aside these dozen or so references to the Spirit in the first three chapters of Luke and insists that the kingdom did not come until the baptism of Jesus.
In fact, Luke could hardly go to greater lengths in stressing that the Age to Come dawned with Jesus' birth.
The Spirit, active in an upsurge of prophecy, active in the birth of John and Jesus, rests upon Jesus and in its power he carries out his mighty works and after the resurrection imparts that same Spirit to his disciples.
From Bethlehem at the beginning of his Gospel to Rome at the end of Acts it is the one Spirit active throughout: first showing us the nature of that messianic salvation brought by Jesus, and then showing us how it was spread.
Luke lays even more stress on the Spirit activating the whole life and ministry of Jesus than any other evangelist.
By the Spirit he went in to the wilderness, by the Spirit he was led there, and in the power of the Spirit he returned to Galilee to begin his ministry (Luke 4:1,14).
Messiah and Spirit
Luke persistently links the coming of the messianic age with the gift of the Spirit in various subtle ways.
There is an ancient variant in the Lucan version of the Lord's Prayer, which is attested as early as Marcion in the second century and reads, ‘May thy Holy Spirit come upon us and cleanse us,’ instead of, ‘Thy kingdom come.’
This, if it is original, would suggest that Luke saw the Holy Spirit as the supremely desirable object of prayer (as in his version of the saying of Jesus, recorded in 11:13, ‘If you, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall the heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him’— compared with Matthew who reads ‘good gifts’ for ‘the Holy Spirit’).
It also suggests that he saw the gift of the Spirit as the supreme characteristic of the kingdom.
But the experience of this Spirit must wait for the disciples until after the death and resurrection of the man filled with the Spirit.
As in Matthew, the isolated promise of the Spirit in the Mission Charge points beyond the resurrection to the days when they really are engaged in the mission.
Meanwhile, it is Jesus alone on whom the Spirit rests in his  fullness .
And the prophecy of Isaiah 61: 1, ‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me to preach the good news to the poor…’ stands in Luke's Gospel (4:18), as a beacon shedding light over the whole of his ministry.
It is the passage he reads in the synagogue of his home town at the outset of his work.
It contains all the great themes of the Gospel.
It identifies the Spirit with the anointed one.
And he calmly tells them that
‘Today this scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing.’
Could anything stress more strongly the concentration of the Spirit in the person of the Messiah for his mission?
It is exactly the same point as John makes by his assertion that ‘the Spirit was not given by measure’ to Jesus, but rested upon him and remained in fulfilment of the promises of the Old Testament (3:34, 1:32,33).
There is a striking passage in the early second-century Gospel according to the Hebrews which may serve as a summary of this point.
The Gospel itself has perished, though it was very popular in the early Jewish Christian community.
This  fragment of it survives, however, because it is quoted by Jerome — significantly in his Commentary on the messianic prophecy of Isaiah 11:1.
It runs as follows:
It came to pass that when the Lord had ascended from the water, the whole fountain of the Holy Spirit descended and rested upon him, and said to him, ‘My Son, in all the prophets I looked for thee, that thou mightest come and I might rest in thee; for thou art my rest, thou art my Son, my first-born, who art king for evermore.’
2.
Jesus is the Unique Dispenser of the Spirit
If, then, all the evangelists agree that Jesus is the unique bearer of the Spirit, in whose power he ushers in the Messianic Age, they are no less agreed on a second vital point.
And here the Gospel according to the Hebrews is silent.
The whole fountain of the Spirit is indeed his, but not for himself alone; rather that he should shower it upon his followers.
And this the canonical evangelists stress, each in his own way.
The point is that Jesus is the unique dispenser of the Holy Spirit.
You cannot get him except through Jesus, or get to Jesus except through him.
John's baptism: mercy
All four evangelists record the promise of John the Baptist that whereas he baptises in water, the One who comes after him will baptise with the Holy Spirit (and, according to Matthew and Luke, ‘with fire’).
Precisely what John expected, it is difficult to know.
But it is evident that John's work was preparatory: to get men ready for the forgiveness of sins which his baptism foreshadowed but did not profess to provide, and to warn men of judgment, the wrath to come.
His baptism exemplified these two themes of his teaching.
The prophet Ezekiel had given this oracle from God, looking ahead to the age of fulfilment:
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be dean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you.
I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put within you.
(Ezek. 36:25f)
John saw his baptism as the preparation for this new era.
He was under no illusions that water could convey forgiveness.
In common with the men of Qumran, with whom he seems to have had some links, John saw washing with water as merely a preparatory rite, while the great cleansing and the gift of the Spirit lay in the future (I QS: 9–1 of and 4:21).
John's baptism: judgment
But judgment as well as mercy was presaged in John's baptism.
The Old Testament had a lot to say about God administering fire.
And it always means either destruction or cleansing.
Daniel 7:10 had spoken of the stream of fire issuing from the throne of God, and this too is picked up in one of the Qumran hymns which describe the molten river of judgment that will befall the world in the last day (I QH 3:28ff) Probably this idea was in John's mind.
In the very book of Malachi from which he derived the understanding of his own mission to prepare the way of the Lord, he would have read of fire both burning up evil-doers and also refining and purifying the faithful like a refiner's fire (Mal. 4: If, 3:1–4).
Perhaps those who came in repentance and were prepared for the running waters of Jordan to flow over their heads in judgment were thought of as undergoing the judgment of God in symbol so that they would not have to undergo it in its awful reality on the Day of Judgment.
John's baptism: preparatory
At all events, John knows that his baptism is merely preparatory.
The coming Messiah will baptise with the Holy Spirit and fire.
T. E. Yates has tried to maintain in The Spirit and the Kingdom that this prophecy was fulfilled in the ministry of Jesus, for he.
was not only filled with the Holy Spirit but  constituted the fire of judgment to his hearers by means of his teaching and miracles.
It is of course true that the coming of Jesus did bring a fire upon the earth, a fire of judgment; men judged themselves by their response to him.
But he did not baptise with the Holy Spirit until after his death and resurrection.
We do not have to rely on the verse which embarrasses Yates (‘the Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus was not yet glorified,’ John 7:39) for this, though that is unambiguous enough.
It is the concerted teaching of the whole New Testament that the Christian experience of the Holy Spirit is possible only after the death and resurrection of Jesus.
We have seen the evidence for this clearly enough in the preceding pages.
Mark emphasises it by only allowing one reference in his Gospel to Christians having the Holy Spirit, and that in a prophecy about what would be their lot in the days after the passion (13:11).
Matthew and Luke in their Gospels speak of the Holy Spirit for Christians only in the Mission Charge which anticipates their future role as ambassadors of Christ.
Furthermore, Matthew stresses that the task of telling men the good news and ‘baptising them into the possession of the Holy Spirit will only De theirs after the cross and resurrection have given them a gospel to proclaim and a Spirit to receive (28:19).
Luke, as we have seen, makes the prayer for the Holy Spirit the supreme blessing of the Messianic Age, and shows now wonderfully.
It is shed upon the thirsty disciples of Jesus from the day of Pentecost onwards — but not before…
John, whose Gospel scheme does not include, except by implication, the story of what the church, equipped with the Holy Spirit, achieved, and therefore could not make room for Pentecost (as Luke does at the outset of his second volume), nevertheless makes the same point with considerable clarity In the first chapter of his Gospel he stresses that the Spirit rests exclusively upon Jesus, the fulfilment of the messianic hopes of the Old Testament for the bearer of the Spirit.
In the twentieth chapter, significantly after the cross and resurrection, he shows how Jesus fulfils the second part of Old Testament expectation for the Messianic Age by breathing upon his disciples, charging them with his mission, bidding  them continue his role of proclaiming remission of sins to the penitent and judgment to those who refused to hear, and saying to them ‘Receive the Holy Spirit’(20:22f).
The Spirit which rested upon him is now made over to them, along with the mission on which he was engaged; this too is theirs.
As we shall see, the mission and the Spirit belong together.
The important point is not to try to harmonise this account with that of Luke in the Acts — after all, John in all probability never read Luke's work, and presents the material in a very different manner and with different aims.
I do not think we get much further by supposing that Jesus gave two insufflations of his Holy Spirit, one in John's upper room, and one at Luke's Pentecost.
No, the point they both make is that Jesus was equipped for his messianic mission by the Spirit promised for the last days; that this Spirit was not available to others in the days of his flesh; and that after his death and resurrection the last days were extended, so to speak, by the followers of Jesus inheriting his mission, his authority and his Spirit.
On this point the evangelists are agreed.
3.
Jesus Stamps a New Character on the Spirit
This leads us on to a third important point about the relation of the Holy Spirit to Jesus.
We have seen that the Spirit of God which appeared fitfully, in a variety of forms, and prophetically in the Old Testament days shone steadily, personally, and fully in the Man of Nazareth.
No longer is the Holy Spirit encountered as naked power; he is clothed with the personality and character of Jesus.
If you like, Jesus is the funnel through whom the Spirit becomes available to men.
Jesus transposes the Spirit into a fully personal key.
Jesus is the prism through whom the diffused and fitful light of the Spirit is concentrated.
Jesus is the prophet (Luke 7: 16 A t 3:22, 7:37) the long-awaited prophet of the end-time, Through whom the prophetic Spirit so active in the Old Testament, gave full and final revelation.
We have seen that Jesus gave this Spirit to his disciples in virtue of, and subsequent to, his death and resurrection.
What follows is  that the Spirit is for ever afterwards marked with the character of Jesus.
Indeed, he can be called ‘the Spirit of Jesus’(Acts 16:7).
This is the common teaching of the New Testament, but no writer brings it into sharper focus than St. John.
In the fourth Gospel Jesus tells his followers, heart-broken because he is going to leave them, that it is better for them that he should do so:
I tell you the truth: it is to your advantage that I go away; for if I do not go away, the Paraclete will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.
(John 16:7)
In a word, it is the task of the Paraclete to universalise the presence of Jesus.
In the days of his flesh Jesus was limited by space and time.
His physical departure made possible the coming of the Spirit as Paraclete and there would be no barriers of space and time to prevent disciples being in intimate contact with him.
Indeed, they would find the relationship even closer than companionship with Jesus in the days of his flesh.
They have known Jesus as their Paraclete (we will examine the meaning of the word in a moment) during his ministry.
He has dwelt with them, but the one whom he promises as another Paraclete will dwell in them (John 14:17).
There it is in a nutshell.
The Spirit universalises the presence of Jesus in the hearts of disciples.
The Spirit as Paraclete
The teaching of John
It is well worth taking a careful look at the teaching of St. John's Gospel about the Spirit as Paraclete.
There are five references to him in the farewell discourses.
They are 14:15–18, 14:25–7, 15:26,7, 16:7–11, 16:13–15.
Once only in the rest of the New Testament do we meet this title, in 1 John 2:1.
And this, I think, is very significant.
In the Epistle of St.John we find that Jesus is the Paraclete.
He is the one who represents us before his heavenly Father.
The righteous Lord  Jesus having dealt with the defilement of our sins, represents us — stands in for us if you like, before his Father.
As such he is the guarantor of our acceptance.
In the Gospel, too, Jesus alludes to himself as Paraclete: for when promising ‘another paraclete’ or ‘another as paraclete’in 14:16 (it makes no difference which way you take the Greek) Jesus is dearly insisting that he is their Paraclete already, just as the Epistle says he is.
The identity between Jesus and the Spirit could scarcely be more strongly stressed, particularly as he goes on to say, ‘I will not leave you orphans: I will come to you’(14:18).
Nothing of the personality of the Spirit as embodied in Jesus will be lost when the disciples come to experience him as Paraclete.
Indeed, John breaks all the rules of Greek by referring to the Spirit (a neuter word in Greek) by the masculine pronoun.
The Spirit is as personal as the Jesus at whose behest he comes.
A tandem relationship…
A great deal of discussion has centred around the meaning of this word Paraclete.
It has been understood as ‘Comforter’, ‘Intercessor’, ‘Interpreter’, ‘Preacher’ and either ‘Prosecutor’or ‘Defence Counsel’.
The basic meaning of the word is ‘One called alongside to help’.
Jesus is the one called to the Father's side to help us, according to the Epistle.
The Spirit is the one called from the Father's side to help us, according to the Gospel.
The way in which he helps will be best discovered by looking at the text, not by speculating about the meaning of the term.
But before we do so, it is worth mentioning the shrewd suggestion of Professor Raymond Brown that foremost in the complex imagery behind this word is the idea of what he calls a ‘tandem relationship’.
Sometimes in Old Testament days God granted a man signally endued with his Spirit to pass it on to his successor.
Thus Moses passes on the Spirit of the Lord to Joshua (Deut. 34:9) and Elijah does the same to Elisha (2 Kgs. 2:9,10,15).
So Jesus passes on to his disciples the Spirit which has ‘rested’ upon him throughout his ministry.
…among disciples
What do we find when we look at the detailed promises about the Paraclete?
Precisely what this tandem relationship and the reiterated link with the historical Jesus would lead us to expect.
Namely, that the Spirit acts for, and in, and against men in precisely the same way as Jesus had done when on earth.
Just as Jesus had come forth from the Father into the world as the Father's gift to mankind, so it is with the Paraclete (5:43,16:28, 3:16f).
Just as the Father sent the son into the world as his representative, so the Paraclete will be sent in Jesus name (5:43, 14:26).
Just as Jesus remained with and guided the disciples, so will the Paraclete (14 16–18).
Just as Jesus taught them the truth because he was Truth, so the Spirit of Truth would lead them into all the truth about Jesus (14:6,17, 15:26, 16:13).
Just as Jesus did not draw attention to himself but set out to glorify his Father by passing on the Father s message to men (8:28, 1 2:28,1 7:4), so the Paraclete will not speak on his own authority…but will take what is mine and declare it to you' (16: 14).
Jesus bore witness to the Father (8:14) and the Spirit would bear witness to Jesus (15:26,2 7 j.
For Jesus had still much to teach the disciples which they could not understand before his passion; so he assured them that the Spirit would continue his teaching function among them when he had left them (16: 131.
…in the world
Not only was the Spirit to universalise the person of Jesus to future believers, he was to do the same to the unbelieving world.
One of the prime purposes of his coming was to nerve the disciples themselves to witness to Jesus in the face of a hostile or apathetic society.
Look at 15:26,27: ‘He will bear witness to me…and you also will bear witness.’
Through the witness of the disciples which he will apply to the hearts of the hearers, the Spirit will convict men of being in the wrong.
Three of the great themes of the apostolic preaching are then mentioned; sin, righteousness and judgment.
Through the witness of the apostles and the witness of the Spirit (now seen  as Accuser), men are shown that they are wrong with their moralistic ideas of sin: sin is essentially the refusal to commit themselves to Jesus, God's saviour.
They are wrong in their views of righteousness, supposing Jesus to be a sinner like themselves — and worse because he ended up in the place of cursing on a cross (cf.
Deut. 21:23): his sinlessness had b vindicated by the resurrection (‘I go to the Father’).
And they are wrong in thinking that the judgment lay entirely in the future: the decisive battle which dethroned Satan had been won on the cross, and from now on he was a defeated foe, and believers were ransacking his empire.
But is this triple message, taken home by the Paraclete in the apostolic mission, not precisely what the Johannine Christ proclaims throughout the Gospel, and particularly in a passage like 9:35- 41?
In a Word, the paraclete takes over the role of Jesus.
Just as the world refused to accept Jesus, so it will refuse to accept the Paraclete (1: 10, 11 and 14: 17).
Just as Jesus had to bear the unwelcome truth (7:7) so will the Spirit (16:8).
Whether his witness against a background of hate because he told we look at the Paraclete's role in the world or among the disciples the answer is the same.
The Holy Spirit is ‘another Jesus’.
Another Jesus
He is sent to replace Jesus among the disciples and to do for them what Jesus had done on earth.
More, he is to equip them for their mission just as he had equipped Jesus for his.
Yet there is no complete autonomy for the Spirit, just as there had been none for Jesus.
He had lived his life in dependence on his heavenly Father: if he was to give a true representation in human terms of the nature of Yahweh, then he needed to live, as man, in constant obedience to Yahweh both as his anointed Ruler and as his obedient Servant.
And if the Spirit was truly to represent Jesus, he had to remain bound to the person and character of Jesus.Jesus was God's Last Word to man; and the function of the Spirit was not to give some new revelation of his own, but to bear witness to Jesus, to draw out the implications of God's Last Word.
We shall look at  some of them in the next chapter, but before closing this one it might be pertinent to speculate why it was in St. John's Gospel, of all places, that we get such stress laid on the Spirit as Paraclete.
The reason is probably twofold.
The Spirit replaces the apostles
There is good reason to suppose that St.John's is the latest of the Gospels to be written.
Chapter 2 I, which seems to have been composed as an afterthought to the main body of the Gospel with its climax in 20:31, indicates that there was a tradition doing the rounds in Christian circles to the effect that John would not die: he would be there until the Second Coming of Christ.
Imagine the feelings of the Christians when the old man died!
On the one hand the last of the apostles had passed on; the last of those authorised interpreters of the person and work of Jesus had left them bereft.
On the other hand the promised Advent had not materialised.
What would help them most in such a situation?
Well, the record must first be set straight.
Jesus did not actually say that John would survive until the Second Coming, but, ‘If it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you?’(21:23).
After doing that, the problem must be faced head on, in both its aspects.
The Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, provides the answer to both problems.
Christians were distressed because the age of revelation was over (and they were acutely conscious of this with the passing of the apostolic generation, as is made clear not only by the speedy recognition in the second century that their writings were determinative for the Christian faith, but also by the deep sense of nostalgia to be found in the earliest of the sub-apostolic writers like Polycarp and Ignatius).
Yet to them comes the promise that they are not worse off, but if anything better.
They may have lost their apostles, but they have the Spirit of the Lord himself remaining with them to teach and to inspire.
The risen Christ carries on his teaching work through the Spirit whom he has given to the Church.
Sometimes people today bewail the fact that they were not contemporaries of the historical Jesus, and imply that it  would be much easier to believe and much more advantageous generally if they had been.
To them the words of Jesus still apply.
‘It is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away the Paraclete will not come to you.
But if I go, I will send him to you.
’ And that is what he has done.
The Spirit is his parting gift to the Church to make his presence as real to them as if they were listening to him teaching beside the Sea of Galilee: and the Spirit can do more for us than ever Jesus could have done had we been his contemporaries.
He can come within us, and take up residence within our very beings.
He can not only bring to our remembrance what Jesus taught, but can reveal to us the deeper significance of his person, his death and resurrection which we could never have grasped by historical contemporaneity.
We are indeed not worse off but better.
The Spirit anticipates the end-time
The second problem that would have troubled the faithful at the death of the last apostle was this.
Why had the promised Advent not happened?
It was a problem as early as I Thessalonians which was partly written in order to meet it.
It was a more acute problem by the time of 2 Peter: chapter 3 of that Letter is specifically directed towards those who have given up hope in the Return of Christ.
But when the last apostle died, and Jesus, who had uttered the mysterious words, ‘There are some of those standing here who will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God come with power’(Mark 9:1), had not returned — what were they to think?
Had they been misled?
No, they had not.
In a very real sense, though not the sense they were expecting, the kingdom had come in power.
It came in the power of the Holy Spirit on the Day of Pentecost, and that power had never been withdrawn, and never would be.
The previous chapter in St. John had drawn attention to it.
Jesus had breathed his Spirit upon his disciples.
This was the gift through which the Messiah had accomplished his work.
This was the endowment of the end-time which he had lived and died with — and yet the last page of the last chapter of  human history had not been written.
Were the disciples to be any different from their Lord?
No.
To be sure, the last page of the last chapter had not been written at the death of the last apostle any more than it had at the death of the Messiah; but, like him, the disciples enjoyed the characteristic gift of the end, the Holy Spirit whom the prophets knew would be poured out in the last days.
Let them not therefore bewail the delay of the Parousia.
Jesus had not left them orphans: he had come to them in the person of the Spirit, who was not only the special gift of the Messiah to the messianic people in order to enable them to know his continued presence with them, but was the first instalment of the Age to Come, the pledge that the last days which had dawned with Jesus of Nazareth would, one day, come to God's perfect conclusion.
CHAPTER 4
The Spirit and Jesus
You may well be wondering why I have taken such pains to show that the Spirit of God, his active intervention on the human scene which took such varied forms in the Old Testament, became concentrated in the person of Jesus the Messiah, and then was poured out by him upon the messianic community.
Why does it matter?
It matters a great deal, and I want in this chapter to sketch out some of the implications of this inviolable link which the New Testament writers make between Jesus and the Spirit.
The Spirit in the Gospels?
For one thing, it gives an answer to an otherwise very puzzling problem.
Why is it that there is so little about the Holy Spirit in the Gospels?
We know that the early Church was intoxicated with the experience of the Spirit, and the comparative silence of the Gospels about him is a great credit to their historical trustworthiness in not reading back the conditions of their post resurrection situation into the days of Jesus' life.
This in itself is highly significant, particularly since many New Testament scholars seem to believe that the early Christians had no sense of historical propriety and would be perfectly happy to dream up some saying and attribute it to Jesus, or to listen to a message from one of the Christian prophets in the congregation, and then put that into the mouth of the historical Jesus.
It is a staggering compliment to their historical reliability that we find almost nothing of the major concerns which engaged the primitive Church written back into the Gospels.
How easily they could have tried to solve their problems about law keeping, Spirit possession, circumcision, law and grace by inventing ‘words of Jesus’ to settle the matters in question.
But granted the credit for historical reliability which accrues to the evangelists through their reserve about the Spirit, that still does not help us with the problem of why there is practically nothing in the Gospels about men and women being filled with the Holy Spirit now that he was clearly in business again.
If he was active in Jesus, why not in the disciples?
The answer is clear.
Because the Spirit was tied up with the person of Jesus.
He was the funnel through whom all subsequent experience of the Spirit of God would be mediated.
That is why other men do not receive the Spirit between his baptism and Pentecost.
The gift of the messianic Spirit, promised to the people of God in the end-time, depends upon the Messiah accomplishing his mission.
Until he had died for man's forgiveness, until God had raised him from the dead by way of vindication, the Spirit which rested upon him was not available to be passed on to others.
The Spirit in other faiths?
A second problem is this.
Why is there nothing said in the New Testament about the Holy Spirit disclosing himself in other faiths, in the struggles of men to find God, and in the ethical endeavours of decent people?
In our day, as mentioned in chapter one, we are sometimes told that the efforts of our statesmen, the voting procedures of our councils, the ethical advances of our humanitarians, are being directed by the Holy Spirit.
We go further, and it is often said that God has revealed his Spirit as much in Buddhism and Hinduism as in Christianity; indeed, as much in atheism as in theism.
The scandal of particularity
In these days when inter-faith dialogue can easily slip into syncretism, and when man's search for God can easily supplant all idea of God's self-disclosure to man, it is most important to remember the emphatic union which the New Testament asserts between the Holy Spirit and Jesus.
If God really has disclosed himself in a Son; and if that Son was characterised by his possession of the Holy Spirit which he  has passed on to his followers then we cannot with t denying Christ maintain that God has revealed himself a much in Buddhism as in Christianity; we cannot make an amalgam of religions as if we were all honest seekers after a God who hides himself.
I think it is of the utmost significance that the New Testament writers do not assign to the inspiration of the Ho! y Spirit the noble elements in pagan ethics or in other religions.
For the task of the Spirit is to bear witness to Jesus.
He is the Spirit of Christ.
The light in other faiths
This does not mean that there is little truth in the tenets of other faiths.
Of course there is much that is true, alongside much that is not.
It does not mean that God has failed to give any indication of his person through ‘the moral law within and the starry heaven above’.
It does not mean that the Holy Spirit cannot work on men of other faiths and draw their inner longings to Christ.John Taylor, in The Go-Between God , says rightly, ‘The eternal Spirit has been at world in all ages and all cultures making men aware and evoking their response, and always the one to whom he was pointing and bearing witness was the Logos, the Lamb slain before the foundation of the world.
Every religion has been a tradition of response to him, however darkly it groped towards him, however anxiously it shied away from him.’
He goes on to give a splendid example of the thing he has in mind, when an old Muslim tribesman went on urging a drug-addicted English hippy to ‘pray to Jesus the Messiah’, until he was converted and delivered.
The old man explained his views on the matter afterwards to a Christian friend, ‘For an ordinary man in normal circumstances it is enough that he believe faithfully in God.
But when anyone is beset by such evil power as this, nothing can save him but Jesus Christ: this I firmly believe.’
Dr Taylor gives another example of the Spirit of God drawing a man to Jesus in circumstances that were very unpropitious and through a medium that was to say the least opaque.
The first missionaries to preach in the Muslim north of Nigeria were greeted by a handful of people who were  already believers in Jesus and claimed to follow him.
They were the disciples of one Malam Ibrahim, a teacher of the Koran whose studies had slowly convinced him that the Jesus of whom he read in its pages was the mediator through whom the prayers of the faithful are offered up to the All-Merciful.
So he gathered around him a group who began to pray regularly in the name of Isa Masih, Jesus the Messiah.
When the Islamic authorities discovered this, he was charged with heresy, refused to recant, and was crucified in Kano market place thirty years before a Christian preacher arrived in the country.
The importance of biblical language
Under such circumstances it is thoroughly in line with the teaching of the New Testament to ascribe such leanings among non-Christians to the agency of the Holy Spirit.
Is it not his task to convince the world of sin, righteousness and judgment?
Is it not through his agency that anyone makes the Christian confession ‘Jesus is Lord’(1 Cor. 12:3) and is born again (John 3:5)?
After all, it is the role of the Paraclete to bear witness to Jesus, and he does it with and without our testimony, to men of any faith or none.
But that is a very different matter from the exegetically unjustified expedient adopted by some modern students of mission, of divorcing the Spirit from Jesus, evading the scandal of his particularity, and attributing to the Spirit's agency whatever seems to them to be admirable in the beliefs and practice of other faiths.
If we wish to claim the leading of the Spirit of God with any assurance, we shall find that the leading is always towards Jesus.
As Professor Moule has written in an unpublished paper, ‘to generalise the Holy Spirit and use the term to denote God's activity anywhere and everywhere, is to miss the biblical theme of election for service, and to ignore God's strange way of particularising in order to universalise.’
Bishop Stephen Neill, in an article in The Church Quarterly for April 1971, made the same point.
The Spirit in the New Testament is ‘not found anywhere outside the realm of direct and personal encounter with the risen Christ…
It would  be an advantage if Christian writers would take as their example the actual usage of the Christian Scriptures.’
The Spirit in person?
There is a third problem to which this link between Jesus and the Spirit provides the key.
In the Old Testament, as we have seen, the Spirit of God was manifested in a variety of ways — strength, wisdom, ecstasy, even frenzy being attributed to the wind or Spirit of Yahweh.
By the time of the New Testament Epistles, on the other hand, the Spirit is the fully personal embodiment of the Godhead.
How comes this change?
It is simply due to the fact that the diffused, little defined, fitfully manifested and sometimes sub-personal presence of God as Spirit which we found in the Old Testament, becomes clearly focused for the first time in Jesus of Nazareth.
No longer is this presence diffused; it is sharply localised in Jesus.
No longer is it ill defined: it is marked with the lineaments of his character.
No longer fitfully manifested, the Spirit rests upon him with unwithdrawn steadiness.
No longer sub-personal, the Spirit is stamped with the personality of Jesus.
From now on the Spirit is seen as a person within the Trinity, though the New Testament is not interested in doctrinal formulations of this type.
The sheer facts of experience, however, drive the Christians to acknowledge the deity of Yahweh, Jesus, and the Spirit, whilst distinguishing between them.
Thus, Jesus is divine, but he is not all of God that there is: he lived his earthly life in dependence on Yahweh.
The Spirit is divine, marked with the very stamp of Jesus, and yet distinct: for Jesus was anointed by the Spirit, lived in the Spirit and passed his Spirit on to the church.
A growing and almost unreflective recognition of the diversity and unity within the Godhead led the New Testament writers to make the assertions which became the raw material for later Trinitarian orthodoxy.
Thus in 1 Corinthians 12:4–6 Paul correlates the work of the Spirit, the Lord (i.e. the Lord Jesus) and God.
He does it again in Ephesians 4:4–6, 2 Thessalonians 2:13,14, Galatians 4:4–7, Romans  8:9–11 and in the well-known ‘grace’ of 2 Corinthians 13:14.
We have already mentioned the baptism into the name of ‘the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit’ which is enjoined upon the disciples by the risen Christ in Matthew 28:19.
In various other places and strands of the New Testament we find similar unselfconscious allusions to the three persons in the deity.
One of the most interesting is attributed to the sermon of Peter on the day of Pentecost, where he maintains that ‘This Jesus God raised up, and of that we are all witnesses.
Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out what you now see and hear’(Acts 2:32ff).
You find the same thing brought out in I Peter 1:2 and Revelation 1:4,5.
If, then, the Spirit is fully personal, and the personality he wears is the personality of Jesus, two very important con-sequences follow.
We cannot rightly  attribute to the Spirit any teaching which does not shed light on Jesus, or any religious experience which is not congruous with the life of Jesus.
There is a danger of falling into both these traps in the present spate of Christian enthusiasm for the Spirit.
Let me enlarge on this a little.
A criterion for doctrine
In contrast to a few years ago when one would rarely hear any teaching on the Holy Spirit, it seems that some people can speak of nothing else these days.
There is a cult of the Holy Spirit, and often it has precious little to say about Jesus or God the Father.
It was very apt of Tom Smail to write a book entitled The Forgotten Father .
Now in view of the past neglect, this is understandable enough.
But it is none the less dangerous.
The Holy Spirit does not draw attention to himself.
He is sent by the Father to glorify Jesus, to show Jesus' attractiveness, and not to take the centre of the stage.
One of the wisest criteria we can apply to any of the claims made for the Holy Spirit and any of the teaching about the Spirit which is being advanced from all sides today is this: does it glorify Christ?
It is the characteristic of the Paraclete  to bear witness to Jesus, to glorify Jesus, to take the things of Jesus and declare them to us (John 15:26, 16:13f).
In contrast to this emphasis of the New Testament writers, much of the stress on the Spirit today dishonours Jesus, tends to squeeze him out of the picture, and infers that allegiance to Jesus is only the lower reaches of the Christian life, the heights of which belong to the Holy Spirit.
Imbalance of this sort is only to be expected; for we are very human and our understanding is limited and our perspectives often determined by what has particularly struck us.
But it is a salutary reminder that nothing less than a fully Trinitarian Christianity can stand.
Catholic danger
Some strands in Christendom, particularly the Catholic, have laid stress on God the Father almost to the exclusion of the Son and the Spirit.
They need to remember that the Father said, ‘This is my Son, my beloved, in whom I am well pleased.
Listen to him,’ and to reflect on St.John's assertion, ‘No man has ever seen God.
The only begotten one, himself, God, has made him known’(John 1:18).
Evangelical danger
Other strands, particularly the Evangelical, have so concentrated on ‘the Lord Jesus’ in their teaching and worship that they have virtually made an idol of the flesh of Christ instead of coming to the Father through him.
They need to remember that even Jesus did not primarily draw attention to himself, but taught men that they could find the Father through the way he showed, the truth he revealed, and the life he lived.
Pentecostal danger
Other strands, particularly the Pentecostal, make the mistake of concentrating on the Spirit to the prejudice of the Father and Jesus.
At the end of the second century, Montanism was a Spirit-centred movement which had great  strengths but fell into terrible error because it lost sight of Jesus as the controlling factor in spirituality.
If I may quote Professor Moule's wise words again, ‘Authentic Christianity finds itself uttering, in the power of the Spirit of God, the address of Jesus Christ the Son of God to God the Father, and thus bearing witness about Jesus to the world.
It is this balance that keeps it authentic.’
A criterion for experience
If remembering that the Spirit is the Spirit of Jesus keeps doctrinal formulation authentic, the same may be said for experience.
There is real danger in prizing, let us say, speaking in tongues (which I believe can be a real gift of the Holy Spirit) so highly that those who lack it are regarded as second-class Christians if Christians at all.
So far as we know, Jesus never spoke in tongues.
And the Spirit is the Spirit of Jesus.
It cannot, therefore, be a Christian insight to urge that speaking in tongues is an indispensable mark of life in the Spirit of Christ; whereas it is an undeniably Christian insight to insist that love and holiness, so manifest in the life of the incarnate One, should mark those who claim to have his Spirit.
The Spirit of Jesus points us back to Jesus.
If we want to understand and possess the Spirit in his  fullness , we need to keep our eyes firmly on Christ himself, for it is to him that all the Spirit's authentic witness is directed.
If we do this we shall not claim as the teaching of the Spirit what does not relate to Jesus.
And we shall not claim as experience of the Spirit what cannot be shown to flow from Jesus.
There is a further sense in which the very strong link between the Spirit and Jesus will determine our experience of the Spirit.
The Spirit of Jesus is the Spirit which marked him out as Son of God, as Servant of Yahweh, and sent him on his mission to Israel and the world.
If the Spirit of Jesus is the gift bestowed on his followers, we shall expect to find the same characteristics marking authentic Christian life in the Spirit.
And that is very much what we do find in the pages of the New Testament.
The Spirit of sonship
Take first the question of sonship.
Now there is a very obvious difference between us and Jesus.
He was born by the express agency of the Holy Spirit: we are not.
He was Son of God by right: we are sons only by adoption.
Nevertheless it was the possession of the Spirit that set Jesus apart as the messianic Son of God, and brought the voice from heaven at his baptism ‘Thou art my Son’.
As Son, Jesus coined a new word for God.
He called him ‘Abba’(Mark 14:36).
Jeremias has shown in The Central Message of the New Testament that nowhere in pre-Christian literature does anyone dare to call God by this intimate, family word which could better be translated as ‘Daddy’ or ‘Dear Father’.
It was a word for the intimacies of the family, not for the worship of God.
Jesus, the one set apart by the Spirit as the Son of God, dares to call God by this name.
He alone has the right to, for he alone enjoys the intimate relation of sonship with God the Father.
Adoption
It is into this sonship that he installs us.
He enables us to pray the Lord's Prayer, which, in the form known to Luke, begins simply ‘Abba’, ‘Father’.
It is the Spirit who adopts us alongside Christ into this sonship with God, and who enables us to cry the ‘Abba’ of little children in the family of God.
‘You have received the Spirit which makes you sons,’ exults the apostle Paul.
‘When we cry ‘Abba!
Father’, it is the Spirit himself bearing witness with our Spirit that we are children of God, and if children then heirs, heirs of God and fellow-heirs with Christ, provided we suffer with him in order that we may also be glorified with him' (Rom. 8:15ff).
That is the incredible privilege and status of the Christian.
He possesses the Spirit of God's Son, which makes him a son of God, and enables him to utter the family cry to God as ‘Abba’.
Well may Jeremias conclude that the whole of the good news is concentrated in that single word, Abba.
The Spirit of servanthood
For Jesus
But even in that word of highest privilege and relationship there lie hints of another aspect of the Spirit-filled life of Christ that devolves upon his followers.
‘Provided that we suffer with him,’ says Paul, reminding us, perhaps, that the agonising context in which Jesus is actually recorded as calling God ‘Abba’is in the Garden of Gethsemane.
Unlike the kings of Israel who had aspired to the title of ‘Son of Yahweh, Jesus displayed utter trust in his heavenly Father though the outlook was black as night; utter obedience to his Father, even though it would take him to a cross; and utter readiness to suffer — in bloody sweat there and then, and the blood, sweat and hell of crucifixion thereafter.
Sonship could not be divorced from servanthood.
The Messianic Son was appointed by the Spirit at his baptism to be also the Suffering
For Christians
In this respect, too, authentic Christian experience is stamped with the mark of the Servant.
In the enthusiasm of the renewed emphasis on the Spirit these days he is some times presented as the pathway to power in the Christian life, the secret of success in personal living and in service.
There is truth in this, but it is only a half truth.
The other side of the coin is the agonising trust in the dark, the utter obedience when all our inclinations go the other way, and the willingness to suffer which marked our Lord.
It is when they first suffer for Christ that the earliest apostles return to their friends, pray (not for safety but for boldness), and find the place shaken by the Holy Spirit (Acts 4:29–31).
It is the Spirit who not only convinces Paul that ‘imprisonment and afflictions’ await him if he goes to Jerusalem, but constrains him to accept that destiny (Acts 20:22,23).
Peter, too, stresses that the Spirit calls us into the experience of suffering which Christ underwent.
He calls on his persecuted readers to rejoice when they suffer as Christians and so share Christ's  sufferings, for ‘the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you’(1 Pet.
4:13–16).
Crowns with thorns
But perhaps the most striking example of the sombre side of suffering in obedience to God which the Spirit of Jesus calls us to Is provided by Paul in the Corinthian correspondence Kasemann has perceptively observed, in Jesus Means Freedom that this church at Corinth was infatuated with a theology of the Spirit whilst allergic to a theology of the cross.
They revelled in charismatic experiences of the Spirit, so richly was their community endowed with tongues, miraculous healings and prophecy.
They reckoned that they had already entered into their reign with Christ: they were already rich already filled with the powers of the Age to Come (1 Cor 4:8) Paul comes down immediately like a ton of bricks on this attitude which regards the Spirit as a medium of religious experience or an embodiment of supernatural power, rather than as the vocation to and equipment for the role of the Servant.
He contrasts their position of self satisfaction with his own.
‘God has exhibited us apostles as last of all (like gladiators in the arena), as men sentenced to death.
For we have become a spectacle to the world, to angels and to men (like the dying gladiators).’
He goes on to speak of the hardships he endured, the thirst, the hard work the opposition, the homelessness, the abuse, and concludes ‘we have become, and still are, the refuse of the world, the offscourings of everything (1 Cor. 4:8–13).
He could scarcely put more vividly the truth that the Spirit who has come upon Christians is the Spirit of Jesus, and that our destiny will involve the suffering and the hardship of the Servant of the Lord That is why he is determined to know nothing among these Corinthian enthusiasts but ‘Jesus Christ, and him crucified’(1 Cor. 2:2).
For the power of Christ's resurrection, as he puts it elsewhere, is available only to those who are willing ‘to share his sufferings and become like him in his death’(Phil 3:10).
The era of the Spirit in which Christians may exult (2 Cor. 3 throughout) leads inescapably to the rejection the hardship, perplexity and physical sufferings of which the  apostle speaks in chapter four, for he carries about in his body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may shine through his personality (2 Cor. 4:103.
In short, no crown without thorns.
No exultant, joyous experience of the Spirit of Christ without a corresponding taste of Christ's suffering.
The Spirit of witness
Son, Servant, and Witness.
This was the third notable characteristic of the Spirit in Christ, and this too is every-where to be noted in the early Church's experience of the Spirit.
It was in the power of the Spirit that Jesus carried out his work of proclaiming the good news of God's kingly rule (Luke 4:18): and it was in the power of the same Spirit that the disciples got to work after the resurrection.
They were told by Jesus not to speculate about the time when God would bring in the kingdom in all its  fullness , but, once they had received the Holy Spirit, they were to witness to Jesus in Jerusalem, Judaea, Samaria, and throughout the world (Acts 1:8).
That is precisely what they did, and we shall be examining it more closely later.
It is sufficient here to notice the pronounced link between the Spirit and power to witness which can be seen both in the life of Jesus and that of the post-ascension Church.
Conclusion
In drawing these three threads together, it is fair to say that if, as we have shown, the Spirit is the Spirit of Jesus, we shall expect similar marks in the Church of our age and every age as the Spirit displayed in the life of our Lord.
We shall expect the Spirit to bring us assurance that we are indeed the sons of God, and conversely we shall be careful not to deny that any Christian people, any sons of the heavenly Father, possess the Spirit of adoption.
Secondly, we shall be very suspicious of any claim to spiritual blessings which does not render the man who claims it willing to tread the path of the Servant, and endure suffering joyfully.
And thirdly, we shall be unimpressed with any claims to the Holy Spirit's presence  where men are unwilling, in the power and joy of that same Spirit, to go and bear witness to Jesus.
To crown it all, we shall realise that this strong link between the Spirit and Jesus leads us to think of him in personal terms, as the one who makes Jesus real to us and works out in the common clay of our lives the priceless treasure of Christ's character.
CHAPTER 5 The Spirit in Mission
Why did God send us his Holy Spirit?
It is a fair question, and allows of more than one answer.
The Spirit of God came upon Christian individuals in order to create in them a quality of life that would otherwise be beyond their powers.
The Spirit of God came upon the Christian community in order to unite them in a fellowship which could not be paralleled in any other group.
We shall be looking at both these important functions of the Holy Spirit in the next two chapters.
But there can be no doubt from a candid examination of the New Testament accounts that the prime purpose of the coming of the Spirit of God upon the disciples was to equip them for mission.
The Comforter comes not in order to allow men to be comfortable, but to make them missionaries.
This is so contrary to our general assumptions (namely that the Holy Spirit, however vaguely we conceive of him, is an internal gift for the faithful, appropriate only to be mentioned in church) that it is important for us to see the crucial link between the Spirit and mission which is presented to us in the pages of the New Testament.
The evangelists make the point in their own characteristic ways.
The age of the Spirit and the mission
Mark's perspective
Mark's only mention of the Holy Spirit for Christians is, as we have seen, placed in the Apocalyptic Discourse in chapter 13, where Jesus is looking ahead to the tribulations which will face his followers in the years running up to the fall of Jerusalem, and, interwoven with that theme, up to the end of the world.
They will be hard times, with opposition, persecution, famines, wars and distress.
Yet against this sombre  background (so matching the experience of the hard pressed Christians in Rome of the 60s A.D., for whom Mark wrote his Gospel) two clear and closely linked rays of light shine out.
The coming age will be the age of the gospel being preached among the nations: equally, it will be marked by the presence of the Holy Spirit enabling the Christians to bear faithful witness to Jesus, despite the costly consequences (Mark 13:9–13).
Only the one reference, it is true: Mark is recording the story of Jesus, not of the Church.
But that one reference speaks volumes.
The age of the Church to which Jesus looked forward is to be marked by evangelism and the Spirit.
He is the power for mission.
Matthew's outlook
Matthew's way of expressing the same point is this.
He makes a great deal, as we have seen, of the gift of the Holy Spirit to Jesus: but only once in the ministry does he speak of the disciples having the Spirit.
In 10:1ff he solemnly names the twelve disciples, and tells how Jesus sent them out on a mission.
He then makes two very significant points.
First, for the only time in his Gospel, he calls them apostles.
Second, he says that Jesus gave them power over unclean spirits, and that when they were under pressure the Spirit of their Father would speak within them (11:20).
Whatever the meaning for those twelve disciples on that short mission (and the Spirit may well have come upon them temporarily as he did upon the Old Testament of God to equip them for a special purpose), it is hard to mistake the shadow this event casts towards the time of the Church, when men sent out by Jesus (‘sent one' is the root meaning of the word ‘apostle’) would be equipped by the Spirit given them by Jesus, for carrying out Jesus' own mission in the world.
The Holy Spirit is for mission.
as if to emphasise the point, Matthew ends the Gospel by Jesus' mission charge to the disciples, ‘Go there-fore, and make disciples of all nations.’
How is this to be done?
Why, it is in the power of Jesus to whom all authority in heaven and earth is entrusted; this Jesus is with them always in their mission, to the end of the age; and naturally, therefore, they baptise men not only into the possession, the  ‘name’, of God the Father and the Lord Jesus, but into the sphere of that Holy Spirit who makes real to them the presence of the risen Christ, and empowers them for their work of making him known (Matt. 28:18–20).
John's vision
If we turn to St. John, it is precisely the same picture that meets us, although painted in very different colours.
The Paraclete will come upon the disciples when Jesus is taken from them.
He will bear witness against the world, as Jesus did, and he will bring conviction (John 16:8).
But he will not do it on his own.
‘The Spirit will bear witness to me…and you will bear witness’(15:27).
So when Jesus breathes his Spirit upon them after the resurrection, it is to enable them to enter into his own mission received from the Father and proclaim forgiveness of sins to believers, and doom to the impenitent (20:20–23).
John is saying, loud and clear, that the coming of the Spirit upon the Church is to equip it for evangelism.
Paul ‘s emphasis
If we turn to Paul, we find him characterising his missionary work at Christ's behest among the Gentiles as a sort of priestly offering, sanctified by the Holy Spirit (Rom. 15:16).
Unusual and striking imagery, but the same linking of the Holy Spirit with evangelism at Christ's command.
If we turn to I Peter 1:11,12, we find that the Spirit, once active in the prophets, led towards the suffering Christ, at whose instigation and in whose Spirit evangelists have brought the readers of the Epistle to faith.
Luke's vista
But the man who gives us the clearest picture of the link between the Spirit and evangelism is St. Luke in his two volume work.
In volume one he showed how Jesus was the bearer of the Spirit: he was conceived and born in an atmosphere where the Spirit had been poured out afresh, in  the days of messianic salvation.
He was baptised and, as Peter put it later, ‘God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with power’(Acts 10:38).
The word ‘anointed’(echrisen ) is the one from which Messiah (Greek christos ) is derived.
Jesus was designated as Messiah or ‘Christed’ by the coming of the Spirit to rest upon him, and he could claim that the prophecy of Isaiah 61:1 had been fulfilled —‘He has anointed me (echrisen ) to preach the good news’(Luke 4:18).
In Jesus the Spirit destined for the messianic days, the days of salvation,had come to stay .
That is why there is so much stress in Luke's account of the life of Jesus that his deeds and words were at the inspiration of the Spirit (Luke 4:1,14; 10:21; 23:46, etc.).
Accordingly, as he leads up to the day of Pentecost, Luke is at greatest pains to maintain that the Spirit, who equipped Jesus for his mission, equips the disciples to carry it on.
Beginning at Jerusalem
The end of the beginning
Notice, first, how Luke links the ascension of Jesus with the Spirit and evangelism.
In the Gospel we have been told that Jesus will bring about a new exodus (9:31) by his death and resurrection at Jerusalem: a release from a worse bondage and a more terrible death than that which befell the Israelites in Egypt.
Three times Luke tells us that Jerusalem was Jesus' goal (9:51, 13:22, 17:11).
It is to Jerusalem that the Spirit of the Suffering Servant leads Jesus.
At the end of the Gospel, therefore, we find the resurrection appearances that Luke records are confined to the city where these climactic events have taken place.
No mention of the Holy Spirit, you notice: merely a foreshadowing of the role of the disciples in being witnesses to the Messiah who had to suffer and rise from the dead so that repentance and forgiveness could be preached to the nations,beginning from Jerusalem (Luke 24:46f).
And with that the curtain comes down on the Gospel.
The volume telling us of the coming of salvation to Israel is complete with the death and resurrection of Jesus.
His ascension to the place of power at God's right hand is the fitting conclusion.
The beginning of the end
But at the beginning of Acts, volume two in the drama, we find the story of the ascension related again, and from a very different point of view.
This time the ascension does not bring down the curtain on the life of Jesus; instead, the curtain goes up on the life of the Church.
The exaltation of Jesus to the Father's right hand is not only God's vindication of his spreading from Jerusalem person and his achievement; it is the precondition of the coming of his Spirit upon the witnesses who are to carry on his mission (Acts 2:32f).
Volume one tells of what Jesus began to do and to teach until his ascension to the right hand of God; volume two tells of what Jesus continued to do and to teach through the apostolic Church after his ascension, through the gift of the Holy Spirit which he shed upon it.
That, surely, is the implication of Acts 1:1ff, with its studied throw-back to the beginning of the Gospel.
Just as there was a great outpouring of the Spirit at the coming of the Messiah — prophecy, divine begetting, voice from heaven, baptism and so forth; so at the beginning of the age of the Church's witness-bearing to Jesus we find a similar intensive manifestation of the Spirit.
As the Spirit equipped Jesus for his ministry, so it is with the people of Jesus.
Luke makes part of his point through the misunderstanding of the disciples.
They were still thinking of the kingdom in materialistic terms.
When was Jesus going to fulfil his promise and bring it in?
They had to learn that the final day of God's victory might be long delayed, and they could not tell its date (a point to which successive generations of enthusiastic date-guessers have remained remarkably blind).
How- ever, the first instalment of the kingdom would soon be sent them by the ascended King himself.
Until God's final day when he will bring in the kingdom, two characteristics would mark the age of the Church: the Holy Spirit, and witness to Jesus.
The Spirit, who had inspired Jesus to teach and heal and proclaim the good news of God's kingly rule among men, would come upon them, marked with all Jesus' character.
The mission on which Jesus had been engaged would devolve on to their shoulders.
‘You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, and you shall be my witnesses’(Acts  1:8).
Precisely as in Mark, we find the Spirit and mission being the two notable marks of the Church in the age stretching between the advents.
The Spirit mediated in evangelism, is the mode of the kingdom's presence among men until the return of the King.
Spreading from Jerusalem
And Just as the Gospel had concentrated on Jerusalem the location of God's great exodus for man, so the Acts shows the mission spreading out from that centre in ever widening circles.
As Jesus insisted in Luke 24:47, it was all to begin in Jerusalem: hence the emphasis on Jerusalem as the place where the Pentecostal gift arrived.
It was never to lose touch with Jerusalem : hence the repeated journeys of Paul back to the metropolis (e.g. Acts 18:22; 1 9:21) and the supervisory visits of Jerusalem leaders to various parts of the expanding Christian arena (e.g. Acts 8:14; 11:22).
But it was to move from Jerusalem .
The Acts is the story of that moving out.
New initiatives
First within Jerusalem, where three thousand are converted on the day of Pentecost itself; it would be hard to stress more emphatically the link between the Spirit and mission than by showing such effective evangelism as the result of the reception of the Holy Spirit on that notable day!
Then the good news spreads out in the pattern outlined in Acts 1:8.
At every point in the advance, it is the Holy Spirit of God who takes the initiative.
It is the Spirit who inspires Peter to withstand the rulers of Israel (4:8ff) and proclaim to them the Messiahship of Jesus.
The Spirit marks out Stephen as a special vehicle of God when he refuses to remain restricted to the static categories of the temple and moves into broader pastures (6:3,5,10, 7:55).
It is the Holy Spirit who so signally lays his mark of blessing upon the preaching of the good news to those untouchables (from the traditional Jewish viewpoint) the Samaritans in the first half of Acts chapter 8, and the eunuch  in the second part of that chapter.
For it was the Spirit who called Philip from his successful mission in Samaria to reach the Ethiopian eunuch with the gospel (8:29 and probably 26), and led him on his further preaching tour as far as the very Hellenised city of Caesarea.
It was here in Caesarea that Peter had his memorable lesson not to call any man ‘unclean’— which, as a Jew, he would instinctively have done to all Gentiles.
In order to drive home the point that the messianic Spirit, the Spirit of the days of salvation, was really available to all believers, the Spirit had first of all to inspire Peter with his vision of the unclean animals in the sheet which were intended for him to eat, and then to apply that vision to a Gentile officer whose men were at that very moment waiting in the courtyard for Peter to accompany them to Cornelius so that he might receive the good news of Jesus.
Even then, such is Peter's Jewish prejudice, the Holy Spirit has to take the initiative in falling upon Cornelius and his company before ever Peter had got round to making any appeal to repentance, faith and baptism (10:44f).
The Spirit has shown that he validates the Christian mission among Jews, proselytes, ‘Godfearers’(as Gentile adherents on the fringe of the synagogue were called), and even outsiders like eunuchs and Samaritans.
But more was to come.
Gentile mission
The second part of Acts is  dominated by the mission to the Gentiles, under the leadership of Paul.
It is the Spirit who leads the Antioch church to send out Saul and Barnabas on the first missionary journey (13:2,4) which enabled them to return and report that, ‘The Lord has opened the door of faith to the Gentiles’(14:27).
This is a keystone in the expanding arch of mission in Acts.
The Holy Spirit has broken through all the man-made obstacles, and has incorporated all types and backgrounds of people in the messianic community.
‘The greatness of Luke's view,’ wrote Professor Eduard Schweizer in Church Order in the New Testament (p. 75), ‘lies in his showing more impressively than  anyone else that the Church can live only by evangelising, and by following whatever new paths the Spirit indicates.’
Those paths lead ever wider and wider afield in the cause of Christ.
The evangelist who tells us three times that Jesus contracted his perspective to concentrate on Jerusalem and that at Jerusalem the disciples had to await the coming of the Spirit that would equip them for mission, ends his second volume with a triple reminder that this good news, beginning from Jerusalem (Luke 24:47) reaches Rome (19:21; 23:11; 27:24).
The butterfly of the gospel has broken out of its chrysalis at Jerusalem and has flown to the centre of the civilised world.
The Spirit that dwelt in the Messiah of Israel is available to the citizens of Rome.
The faith of Israel is good news for the world.
Perfect balance
It is one of the remarkable indications of the balance of St. Luke that he manages to stress the initiative of the Spirit in ever-expanding circles of evangelism with the reminder that the mission is one.
The Paul who receives his mission to the Gentiles does so in a trance in the temple at Jerusalem (Acts 22:17ff).
The apostle who brings the Acts to an end by preaching unhindered in the capital of the pagan world is also shown as arguing all day with the leaders of the Jews ‘declaring to them the kingdom of God’ and ‘persuading them about Jesus’by appeal to the law and the prophets (28:16–31).
To the Jew first and also to the Greek, the Spirit of the Messiah is available through the preaching of the good news of what the Messiah has done.
There is neither Jewish nor Gentile bias in this chronicler of the Holy Spirit's initiative in mission throughout the world, though his application of the famous ‘blinding’ passage of Isaiah 6 to Jewish leaders who refused to receive their Messiah, and his assertion, ‘Be it known to you that this salvation of God has been sent to the gentiles:they will listen ’(28:25–28), is suggestive of the direction in which the Christian mission would, for the most part, go.
The Spirit initiates mission
The initiations of the Spirit
Now all this emphasis on the Spirit as the author, the controller and the energiser of the Church's mission is highly significant.
It reminds us that mission did not originate, in the earliest days, in the leadership of the Church.
It was not a matter of Peter and subsequently Paul saying ‘What about a bit of evangelism?’
Luke does not teach us that the apostles initiated mission.
They sat quietly in Jerusalem until the Spirit came upon them at Pentecost; then they could not keep quiet about the mighty deeds of God.
It was not the twelve who fulfilled their Lord's command to go and teach all nations the good news.
It was rather an ex-Pharisee opponent of the gospel, converted through the direct agency of God and thrust out on the mission at the direct leading of the Lord the Spirit.
It was not the apostles at Jerusalem who ever dreamed of reaching eunuchs or Samaritans with the good news: the Holy Spirit led the way.
It was not the Jerusalem leaders who agreed to the first widespread dissemination of the Word.
That came through their being cooped up at Jerusalem in the persecution which followed on the death of Stephen: as a result of the ordinary followers of Jesus being scattered by that persecution, they were able to preach the good news along the Phoenician seaboard until they came to Antioch, later to become the home of the Gentile mission.
And so one could go on.
The initiatives in evangelism were always those of the Holy Spirit.
So much so that the crucial coming of the Holy Spirit on Cornelius is recorded three times in Acts, so that no one might miss the message.
The Holy Spirit was not to be confined to the narrow straits of Jewish respectability, nor was he the perquisite of the Church leadership.
He was sovereign, and he was the leader of the whole Christian outreach as well as its energising power.
The Church was only effective when it broke through its old taboos and shibboleths and followed the Spirit who could come upon Samaritans and Gentiles as well as Jews.
So far from the Church being the possessor and dispenser of the Spirit, as Käsemann would have it with his astonishing  reading of primitive Catholicism into Acts (see Essays on New Testament Themes p.89ff), it is the Spirit who energises the evangelism of the Church and drives its often unwilling members into the task for which God laid his hand on them; mission.
The sovereignty of the Spirit
This sovereignty of the Spirit is worth dwelling on.
It humbles us, as God intended it to do, to find that there is no tidy doctrine of the Spirit to be found in Acts or, for that matter, in the whole of the New Testament.
He always retains that unpredictable, mysterious otherness of the ruach adonai .
Utterly unmediated in his coming on the day of Pentecost, and on what has been called ‘the Gentile Pentecost’ to Cornelius and his entourage, the Spirit works in many varied ways.
He leads through a committee at the Council of Jerusalem (15:28), through a prophet in 11:28, through a trance in 10:19.
In 13:2 he reveals his will to the community gathered at worship.
Sometimes it is through a mysterious inner constraint that he makes his presence felt, as when he guided Paul's evangelistic direction away from the province of Asia in 16:6,7 and towards the hardships and opposition he realised he would have to face if he went up for that last journey to Jerusalem (Acts 20:22,23).
It is impossible to get the Holy Spirit taped, and to fit his movements in the Acts into any tidy ecclesiastical or doctrinal pattern.
He remains the sovereign Spirit, but always the Spirit who is bent on leading the people of Jesus out into mission.
The Spirit universalises mission
We have already seen some of the emphasis on this in the account Luke gives of Pentecost.
But there are more subtle nuances in that story.
Luke clearly interprets Pentecost as the fulfilment of the prophecy of John the Baptist, which he quotes in Acts 1:5.
It is the fiery baptism of Holy Spirit which John looked forward to.
Hence the emphasis Luke gives on the physical manifestation to the disciples of tongues of fire  and rushing wind, which equipped them for their mission, just as the physical coming of the Spirit upon Jesus ‘in bodily form, as of a dove’(Luke 3:22) equipped him for his ministry.
Once baptised in the fiery power of the Spirit which had been in Jesus, the disciples at once interpret it as the fulfilment of Joel's prophecy about the availability of the Spirit in the last days, and proclaim the good news to the representative crowd from ‘every nation under heaven’ which had gathered in Jerusalem for the feast of Pentecost (2:16ff).
Aspects of Pentecost
Pentecost did not only mean the offering of the firstfruits to God (and what remarkable firstfruits of the Spirit were offered to the Lord that day as three thousand people believed, were baptised, and joined the company of the disciples praising God in the temple): first-century Jews would also have recalled the giving of the law on Mount Sinai (see Jubilees 1:1, 6:17).
According to one rabbinic tradition (preserved in Midrash Tanchuma 26) when the law was given on Sinai, ‘the ten commandments were promulgated with a single sound,’ yet it says, ‘All the people perceived the voices’(Exod. 20:18).
This means that when the voice went forth it…went into seventy tongues, and every people received the law in their own language.’
The nations of the world were reckoned to number seventy, after the indication in Genesis lo.
It may be that Luke is referring to this tradition, and if so, he will mean us to understand that on the day of Pentecost, the gathered representatives ‘from every nation under heaven’ heard the mighty deeds of God being proclaimed, ‘every man…in his own language’.
The Christian Pentecost would thus not only reverse the Curse of Babel (Gen. 11:9) but be the antitype of the covenant inaugurated on Sinai through the giving of the law.
What was there external to men has now, in the new covenant, become interiorised through the Spirit.
Good news for all
Such an interpretation is attractive but speculative.
It would fit the teaching of Paul, who makes just this contrast between the law and the Spirit in 2 Corinthians 3; it would fit Hebrews chapters 8 and 10.
But Luke nowhere speaks of the new covenant unless Luke 22:19b and 20 are original (against the main weight of manuscript attestation).
He prefers to see believers as the heirs to the one Abrahamic covenant which inaugurated the Old Testament people of God (Acts 3:25).
At all events we shall not go wrong in assuming that it is not without good reason that he tells us of so impressive a roll call of nationalities on the day of Pentecost (2:5–11).
At the very least he is showing us that the Christian good news is for the whole world.
The Spirit uses testimony
The unsung missionaries
The agents in this mission inaugurated by the Spirit are, of course, the disciples of Jesus.
But this role is by no means confined to the Twelve.
‘The great mission of Christianity was in reality accomplished by means of informal missionaries,’ wrote Harnack long ago (The Mission and Expansion of Christianity p. 368).
He was right.
As early as Acts 6 we find the apostles seeking deputies to manage the administration Of the church, while they give themselves to prayer and the ministry of the Word.
The Seven, sometimes improperly called deacons, are accordingly appointed.
But the next thing we find.
is one of these administrators, Stephen, preaching his heart out!
As soon as he has been liquidated, another of the Seven, Philip, takes over.
And he has four daughters with the gift of prophecy: doubtless they engaged in the mission too.
That same eighth chapter of Acts records the spread of the gospel by informal missionaries, men and women evicted from Jerusalem by the persecution which followed Stephen's death.
The message is clear.
All disciples are expected to bear their testimony to Jesus.
That is what the Holy Spirit is given them for.
The meaning of ‘witness'
The word ‘witness’ is significant.
Its root figures over thirty times in the Acts, in one form or another.
The apostles, the folk who had known Jesus in the old days in Galilee, Stephen, Paul; all are ‘witnesses of these things; and so is the Holy Spirit whom God had given to those who obey him’(Acts 5:32).
The witness attests his own experience: he does not necessarily preach.
The Acts gives us many examples of Christian people bearing witness to Jesus, in particular his death and resurrection, to soldiers and governors, prince-lings and mediums, crowds and individuals.
Witness in the New Testament is neither the silent churchgoing that passes for witness among many Christians, nor the sickening self-advertisement that often results when a believer ‘gives his testimony’; but simple factual reference to the historical Jesus, his death and resurrection, his gift of the Spirit, and his present availability and power.
The power of testimony
This emphasis on testimony is one of the great strengths of the present Pentecostal revival in South America.
You are scarcely accounted a Christian in Chile until you have got up in the street and given testimony to Jesus.
This is not necessarily the best way of passing on the good news, but it does stir the passers-by to find not the paid priests but the cobbler, the miner, the man who sells meat fritters telling them about Jesus.
In his book,Haven of the Masses (p. 47), Dr. d'Epinay describes the impact of such witness.
It offends the elite, of course.
‘These men,’ said a teacher, ‘do not even speak in Castilian, but in slang; sometimes they don't even know how to write, and can hardly read.
And they quote epistles of St. Paul so difficult that the theologians, who have been working on them for two thousand years, have not got to the bottom of them.
By what authority do they teach?’
That is just the reaction provoked by Jesus and by the informal missionaries in the Acts (Mark I:27, Acts 4:13).
The elite were offended, but the common people loved it.
If the language is slang, what does it matter so long as the  preachers are radiant with the experience they speak of, and live in the midst of the same social situation, with all its problems and difficulties, as the listeners?
When ordinary men and women are fired by the Spirit to bear witness to ‘a Lord who pardons and loves, a Lord who is just as powerful as the landowners, the mine-managers or the trade union secretaries, because he is God, a God who desires to be called Father, and who treats the most wretched of men as his son’(d'Epinay) then people will sit up and take notice.
They did in the first century, and they do still when the Christians come out of their ghettos and chatter the good news in the streets.
The Spirit enlivens the Word
The power of the Word
It is not only this informal witness to Jesus which is promised the aid of the Holy Spirit.
So is the more formal proclaiming of the Word.
‘The Word’ is as common in the Acts as ‘The Spirit’, and they belong very clearly together.
One of the great merits of C.
K. Barrett's book,Luke the Historian in Recent Study is the weight he gives to the Word as the prime agency through which the Spirit extends the good news of Christ.
It is expressed in a number of ways: ‘the Word of God’, ‘the Word of salvation’, ‘the Word of the gospel’ or quite simply ‘the Word’.
It means the message about Jesus.
Wherever the early Christians went, it was the Word they carried (Acts 8:4).
When Paul was encouraged at Corinth by the fellowship of Priscilla and Aquila we read that he became gripped by the Word (18:5).
During the two years and more of his mission in Ephesus ‘all the residents of Asia heard the Word of the Lord’(19: 10).
When Luke wants to indicate the success of evangelistic work, he can say that ‘the Word of the Lord grew and prevailed’.
So it was in Judea (6:7), Samaria (8:4–7,14), on the first missionary journey (13:49) and in Asia (19:10).
The Word makes its own impact on Theophilus (Luke 1:1, Acts 1:1), Cornelius (10:44), the proconsul of Cyprus (13:7), and on the citizens of Antioch (13:44).
No  wonder the Twelve made it their priority, and the nameless missionaries of 8:4 took it as their great weapon.
For if a man believes, it is because the Word brings faith (4:4).
If a man receives the Spirit, it is because he has responded to the Word (10:44).
It is no exaggeration to say that the Word is the prime tool used by the Spirit of God in advancing the Christian mission.
The content of the apostolic message
It would take us too far afield to examine the content of this apostolic ‘Word’.
Essentially it was concerned with Jesus.
Many people have tried to summarise it, and perhaps the most celebrated attempt is that of C. H. Dodd in The Apostolic Preaching and its Development .
He maintained that the good news about Jesus had a clearly defined form.
This form is discernible in Mark's Gospel, the Acts sermons, the Pauline Letters and in certain other parts of the New Testament.
The kerygma of the early Church, contained in that outline, amounted to something like this:
The age of  fulfilment has dawned.
This has taken place through the ministry, death and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth.
By virtue of the resurrection Jesus has been raised to the right hand of God, as messianic head of the Israel of God.
The Holy Spirit in the Church is the sign of Christ's present power and glory.
The Messianic Age will shortly reach its culmination in the return of Christ.
Hence the importance of repentance, faith, baptism into the messianic community, and the reception of God's offer of forgiveness and the Holy Spirit.
Footnotes in plenty have been added to Dodd, but his pattern remains a fair summary of the early preaching so far as we can reconstruct it.
But such summaries will inevitably remain speculative since we have only one source in the New Testament for determining the content of the early preaching to people who were not Christians, and that is the sermons in Acts.
And it remains a matter of debate to what extent Luke is exercising editorial privilege in his accounts of the apostolic preaching.
Furthermore, as I have tried to show in my book Evangelism in the Early Church , there was considerable  flexibility in the way the gospel was preached to different audiences in different circumstances, coupled with great unity in presenting men with the person of Jesus, the offer of forgiveness through his death on the cross, the promise of the Holy Spirit, and the challenge to repent and believe and be baptised.
Such, in essence, was the Word that the Holy Spirit could confidently be expected to take home to the hearts of the hearers.
He still does.
The mystery of preaching
Preaching is a very humbling thing.
You feel such a fool.
Paul catches the feeling precisely in 2 Corinthians 4:1–6.
The preacher is involved in a titanic confrontation, in which he is a tiny Lilliputian.
He becomes aware that ‘the god of this age (i.e. the devil) has blinded the minds of those who do not believe, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine on them’.
Every effective preacher knows that proclamation involves not mere communication, but confrontation.
‘For we are not contending against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the world rulers of this present darkness’(Eph. 6:12).
We don't get anywhere by what Paul calls ‘preaching ourselves’: gimmicks do not help.
It is by being prepared to be people's servants for Jesus' sake so that the light may shine through to them.
For light is not lacking: ‘the Gal who commanded light to shine out of(primeval) darkness has shone in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ’(2 Cor. 4:6).
But how is this glory to shine through to others?
Only as the Holy Spirit takes the ‘foolish’ message of the gospel home to people's hearts, and convinces them of its truth; that it is indeed ‘the wisdom of God to every one who believes’(1 Cor. 1: 18ff).
We come back to this theme of the double witness, by the Holy Spirit and ourselves, which the New Testament continually brings before us.
A preacher can talk till he is blue in the face, but he can never bring anyone to faith in Christ.
Yet the Holy Spirit can take his words home to the conscience of the hearer and bring that person low in repentance and faith before the crucified and risen Christ.
Anyone  who has been instrumental in this transformation of another person's life through the impact of the Word of God and the Spirit of God will know that it is not his own doing.
I have on occasion preached the same sermon in two different churches.
In one, between twenty and thirty people professed conversion.
In the other, nobody did.
The Spirit and the message and the messenger all combine to carry out this strange alchemy of new birth.
But only the Spirit is indispensable.
The Spirit and the Word
I heard a remarkable story recently from a leading Indian Christian, the Revd.
Samuel Kamelesan.
A friend of his, who was engaged in Christian colportage work, decided to go to the heart of Brahmin country in Kumbbakoman in Southern India.
He wanted to bear witness to Jesus in this tough spot, and invited some of the nearby Christians to accompany him.
They declined.
‘We have to live here,’ they replied!
So he went alone.
This brave man entered the courtyards of the main temple, and began to preach Jesus.
He expected to be killed.
Instead, he had hardly begun before he was embraced by a Brahmin woman and was asked, ‘Why did you not come sooner?’
Her story was a fascinating one.
This rich, high-caste woman had had terminal cancer.
She was given a very short expectation of life by the doctors.
So she went to Madras, in whose pleasant climate she would live out the few remaining weeks of her life.
Then, apparently, she died.
She was laid out in the mortuary.
But she was not dead, only deeply unconscious.
In this state she had a vision of Jesus, about whom she knew nothing.
In the vision the Lord looked on her with love.
‘If you will let me live again, Lord, I will give my life for you,’ she promised.
While the woman was lying there in the mortuary unconscious, a crossing sweeper happened to notice a faint movement in this supposed corpse.
She went immediately to the doctor who had signed the death certificate.
The doctor examined her, found a faint pulse, and immediately swung into action to resuscitate the patient.
A blood transfusion was  necessary.
It so happened that the crossing sweeper had blood of the same group as this rich Brahmin lady.
And she happened to be a Christian.
She gladly gave her blood for a substantial blood transfusion, and the patient was told after-wards by the doctor, ‘You owe the fact that you are alive today to the crossing sweeper who first detected a movement in you when you were in the mortuary and then gave her blood for you.’
The Brahmin lady was as good as her word.
From that day onward she worshipped Jesus only, and renounced her Hinduism.
This provoked intense opposition, not least from her own family, in a militantly Hindu city like Kumbbakoman.
The woman began to bear witness to the Jesus of whom she knew almost nothing, and was physically beaten up for her pains.
Indeed, her own brothers knocked two of her teeth out.
Yet her simple witness led three of her five brothers to Christ.
And when the colporteur started to preach Jesus in that temple courtyard the lady ran out and embraced him, delighted to find a fellow believer in that unexpected place.
He taught her much more about the Lord in whom she believed, rather as Paul, Aquila and Priscilla did to Apollos.
Now in that story only one of the normal evangelising agencies was present, the Holy Spirit.
There was no proclamation of the word to bring the Brahmin woman to belief And there was no human messenger to tell her about Jesus, though the part played by the Christian  outcast crossing sweeper was of the utmost importance.
The Spirit of life not only revived the woman, and caused a spontaneous remission of the cancer, but brought her to trust in Christ — which from that background was quite as great a miracle.
In more senses than one we can say with the Creed, ‘I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Lifegiver.’
The Spirit convicts and attracts
Conviction
At every point the Holy Spirit is involved in the process of a man becoming a Christian.
As we saw in discussing John  16:8, it is the Holy Spirit who acts as prosecuting counsel, and convicts a man of sin.
No man can do that to another.
If this conviction arises through my preaching, it is frequently through some phrase or thrust that I had not intended.
I well recall one tough Yorkshire girl who was on drugs at the time, coming to a service where I was preaching, and being pierced to the heart by a throwaway line I had never intended saying, about God hardening Pharaoh's heart.
I knew nothing about this convicting work of the Spirit in her, until a week later when she rang me from Halifax and asked, ‘Does God really harden people's hearts?’
It was through this most improbable passage of Scripture, taken home to her by the Spirit, that she in due course became a Christian.
I think of another man, to whom I had said something about Jesus Christ while marching down alongside him to an army parade!
He had seemed very uninterested, and I had not pursued the conversation.
In any case, the conditions were scarcely suitable.
To this day I cannot recall what it was I said to him.
Nevertheless, the Spirit took it home with unerring aim.
A day later he came to see me, unable to sleep and distraught.
He had begun to see what he looked like to God, and now he was not in the least uninterested to hear what Jesus Christ had done about it.
Before that night was out he had surrendered himself to Christ.
Attraction
Not only is the Spirit the one who convicts a man of sin: it is he, and only he, who can make Jesus attractive.
As we have already seen, it is the Spirit who bears witness to Jesus and glorifies him (John 15:26, 16:14).
Sometimes this happens over a long period, as a person finds himself constrained to attend a Christian place of worship, or drawn to read the Christian scriptures.
Time and again I have met folk who have been warmed by the Spirit to perceive the beauty of Christ in the life of a group of believers or in the story of the New Testament, and have come to faith that way.
Sometimes this attraction to Jesus happens instantaneously.
The penny suddenly drops, and he is revealed as the one who makes sense of life.
I remember an English don once coming to me at  the end of a meeting, and saying that she had suddenly seen that evening in Jesus Christ the answer to the rather negative existentialist framework into which her life had been cast.
That was the work of the Spirit, revealing Christ to her.
The Spirit brings repentance and faith
Repentance
The Spirit is probably meant by passages of the New Testament which speak of repentance as a gift of God.
Acts 11:15–18 is a case in point.
Peter is recounting the Cornelius episode.
He tells how the Holy Spirit fell on Cornelius, and points out that God had given Cornelius the same gift as the Jewish believers.
Their response is, ‘Then God has given the Gentiles also the gift of repentance leading to life.’
The plain inference is that it is through the operation of the Spirit that these Gentiles have come to repentance.
The same is probably intended by Acts 5:31 and 2 Timothy 2:25.
Faith
When it comes to faith, we are left in no doubt that this is a gift of God brought about by the Holy Spirit.
No man can make the Christian confession ‘Jesus is Lord’ without the Holy Spirit enabling him to do so (1 Cor. 12:3).
Seen in its context, that is a most significant verse.
For the Corinthians were fascinated with the charismatic and ecstatic aspects of the work of the Spirit.
St. Paul tells them at the outset of his three-chapter discussion on spiritual gifts, that ecstasy is no sure mark of inspiration by the Spirit.
So-called spiritual men could, and did, call Jesus accursed in ecstatic cries in the Corinthian assembly (12:3).
The true mark of the Spirit's operation is when a man can say from his heart that Jesus is his Lord.
Once again we see the Spirit is related securely to the person of Jesus, and it is when the Spirit enables a man to see who Jesus is and respond to him in allegiance that faith is born.
It is the Spirit who takes the things of God and reveals them to us (1 Cor. 2:12), and Paul can rightly say that the very capacity to respond in faith is a gift of God and no  man-made attribute of which we can boast (Eph. 2:8).
The Spirit can therefore be called ‘the Spirit of faith’(2 Cor. 4:13).
And to possess the pledge of the Spirit is interpreted as living the life of faith (2 Cor. 5:5,7).
Adoption
In other words, it is due to the work of the Holy Spirit that we become Christians at all.
He is the Spirit who adopts us into the family of God alongside Jesus (Rom. 8:15, Gal. 4:6).
Though by nature we Gentiles are ‘without Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope and without God in the world’, the Holy Spirit has given us access, through Christ's self-sacrifice for us (Eph. 2:12–18).
‘Now you are no longer strangers and foreigners,’ Paul exultantly reminds his readers, ‘but fellow citizens with the Old Testament believers, and in the very household of God.’
The New Testament writers use a variety of terms to speak of the Holy Spirit's work in making us Christians.
‘You received the Spirit,’ says Paul to the Galatians.
‘You began in the Spirit.’
You accepted ‘the gracious provision of the Spirit’, or ‘the promise of the Spirit’(Gal. 3:2,3,5,14).
Sometimes this initial encounter with the Spirit is seen as a great washing (1 Cor. 6:11).
Sometimes it is a new birth (Titus 3:s, John 3:3,5) brought about by the entry of the Spirit into our lives.
Whatever the imagery, one thing remains constant.
It is only through the agency of the Holy Spirit, enabling us to repent and believe, convicting us of sin and making Jesus attractive to us, that we ever become Christians.
It is the Spirit of Christ that unites us with Christ: so much so that Paul can say ‘If any man does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to Christ’(Rom. 8:9).
We shall be looking further at this vexed question of Christian initiation and the relation of the Holy Spirit to baptism in a later chapter.
But we have seen enough to be able to frame a clear answer to the question formulated at the outset of this chapter.
God sent the Spirit of Jesus to his followers in order to equip them to carry on the mission of his Son in the world.
Empowered by that Spirit, and bearing  witness to the crucified and risen Jesus, the early Christians and succeeding generations alike have found hard hearts softened, strong men brought to repentance, sceptics coming to faith, and people of all ages, backgrounds and classes coming to taste the salvation of the messianic community and being born into the very family of God.
CHAPTER 6
The Spirit in the Individual
If God's overall strategy in sending us his Spirit is to equip the Church for mission, and bring people into the messianic kingdom, the sphere of salvation — we may well ask what he does when he has got them there?
Why does he give his Holy Spirit to the individual?
1.
The Spirit in Christian Initiation
The Spirit initiates us
Christian incorporation
As we have seen, it is the Spirit who brings men to repentance, faith and incorporation into Christ.
To believe the gospel, respond to Jesus or receive the Spirit are three ways of looking at the same thing (2 Cor. 11:4).
The whole Godhead is involved in the rescue and restoration of mankind, and so we read of Paul giving thanks over Christians, for ‘God chose you from the beginning to be saved’.
How was that achieved?
When ‘the Spirit set you apart’— that was God's side; and ‘when you believed the truth’— that was your side.
‘To this he called you through our gospel, so that you may obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ’(2 Thess. 2: 1 4).
Christians are people who have tested the ‘grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of (better ‘joint participation in’) the Holy Spirit' (2 Cor. 13:14).
The three experiences cannot be divorced.
As Peter puts it, ‘you are chosen by God the Father, and set apart as his own by the Spirit for obedience to Jesus Christ and sprinkling with his blood’(I Pet.
1:2).
In other words, any experience of Christ is also an experience of the Holy Spirit who mediates Christ to us.
In that fascinating passage in Romans 8:9–11 Paul  recognises ‘the Spirit of God’ from Old Testament days to be none other than ‘the Spirit of Christ’, the Spirit who indwelt Christ and who is given us from Christ.
Thus to have the Spirit is to have Christ, and vice versa.
The Spirit is the one who makes Christ real to us.
So ‘if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is no Christian’.
It is right to say, ‘If Christ is in you,’ and in the next verse to say, ‘If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you,’for it is by means of the Spirit, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, that Jesus makes his home in the believer.
The Spirit is the mode of the divine indwelling.
That is why Jesus in St. John's Gospel can promise that through the arrival of the Paraclete not only he himself will come back and indwell the disciples, but so will the Father (John 14:17,18,21,23).
We are back to the three act drama with which we began.
Act Three reveals the deity actually resident within believers, and it is through the Spirit that this takes place.
Mutual indwelling
The New Testament writers sometimes speak of Christ living within Christians, sometimes of the Spirit doing so (Gal. 2:20, Col. 1:27, Rom 8:10, 8:11, 1 Cor. 3:16).
They sometimes speak of Christians being in Christ, and sometimes of being in the Spirit (Phil 1: l, 1 Cor. 3:1, Rom. 8:1, 8:9, Col. 1: 8, Eph. 2:22).
It does not seem to matter very much which way we look at it.
If you intertwine your fingers together, it is equally true to say that your right hand is in your left, or that your left hand is in your right.
The point is that they are firmly connected.
And that is what the New Testament wants to say about our relationship to Christ and his Spirit.
On the whole there is a tendency to speak of us being in Christ, and of the Spirit being in us.
That is the predominant emphasis, and it is a helpful one.
Christ is the new man, the last Adam (1 Cor. 15:45), and Christians are members of his body (1 Cor. 12:12ff).
The Spirit comes and takes up residence in our bodies, which he wants to use as his temple (Cor. 6:19).
Very well then.
The Spirit comes and takes up residence in a man once he is invited in.
What is his task then?
The Spirit assures us — through sacraments
Assurance…
The first requirement, when a man passes ‘out of darkness into light, from the power of Satan to God’(Acts 26:18) would seem to be that he needs assurance.
He needs to know he belongs to the new family, that he is ‘accepted in the beloved one’(Eph. 1:6).
And that is just what the Spirit does.
St. John tells us that this is one of his main functions.
‘This is how we know that he remains in us, by means of the Spirit whom he has given us’(1 John 3:24).
He repeats it in 4:13, ‘This is how we know that we remain in him, and he in us, because he has given us a portion of his Spirit.’
And in chapter 5 he expands his meaning.
…through baptism
There are three grounds for Christian assurance, he tells us: ‘the Spirit, the water and the blood’.
This passage should be seen against its background.
The Gnostic teacher, Cerinthus, was active in Asia Minor at the time when John wrote, and he taught that the heavenly Christ came upon the human Jesus only at his baptism, and left him before his passion: the union between them only seemed to be real -actually it was merely temporary.
Had this been the case, there would have been no Christian gospel to preach: no incarnation of the Son of God, no real solidarity between him and us, no expiatory death upon the cross.
John therefore opposes it strongly.
Jesus, the Christ, is the one who has come through the water of his baptism, through the blood of his cross, and is mediated to us through the Holy Spirit.
The coming through water, the cross, and the gift of the Spirit are all thoroughly historical events: and yet they are more than that.
They are continuing factors in the life of the Church through the experience Christians have of the Spirit, and through the sacraments of water (baptism) and blood (the eucharist) which seem to be alluded to here.
Baptism is a mark of belonging, a ground of assurance, which the Spirit can take home to our hearts.
It was so to Martin Luther when  he was tempted to despair of his spiritual state: ‘Baptizatus sum ’ he recalled with joy.
Joy, because it did not rest upon his own faith, strongly though he valued that: but when in the morass of doubt, one has no confidence in subjective attitudes such as faith.
But his baptism, administered to him by another, sealing physically upon him the objectiveness of what Christ did for him on the cross, that was indeed a ground of assurance.
It was the sacrament of justification by grace; the physical, palpable reminder that God acted for him without his aid and prior to his response.
…and eucharist
The eucharist, too, is one of the ways in which the Spirit gives us assurance.
This is strongly implied in John chapter 6 where the Spirit is brought closely into relation with ‘eating his body and drinking his blood’ and so being confident of dwelling in Christ, being fed by him, and being raised up by him at the last day (6:54,56,63); just as he is in chapter 3:3–8 in connection with the new birth.
Of course the sacraments can be completely empty, like the marriage ceremony.
But JUSt as it IS proper for me to look back to my wedding day as assurance that I am really married, so it is proper to look back to my baptism as a mark given me by the Holy Spirit that I am really born again in Christ, and to the eucharist as a pledge that I do partake of his life, feed on him, and shall in the last day share his resurrection.
The Spirit assures us — through signs
Signs of life
But it is not only through the sacraments that the Spirit assures us we belong to Christ.
I John gives several other ways which enable us to be confident of our new status.
The Spirit means us to know where we stand (I John 3:24; 5:13) and the Epistle is at pains to point out various signs which give confidence to true believers, while breaking down false assurance.
Changed behaviour
The Christians should expect the indwelling Spirit to make a difference.
If there is no difference, there is good reason to suppose that the Spirit has not been received into the man's life.
Thus a believer begins to ‘keep God's word’ or ‘walk as Christ walked’(2:5,6): ‘he does not go on sinning, because God's seed remains in him, and he cannot go on sinning, because he is born of God’(3:9).
Of course John does not mean that the Christian becomes sinless overnight.
He knows full well that Christians can and do sin, and if we pretend otherwise we are lying (1:8,10).
But he is insisting, in black and white terms, that the divine sonship, mediated by the Spirit, must show itself in changed behaviour.
We cannot go on untouched in the old self-centred ways if the Holy Spirit has made his residence within us.
Fellowship
Another of the marks of belonging is a willingness to face the opposition of ‘the world’(a technical term in the Johannine literature to indicate society which has left God out), and to get involved in the loving fellowship of the family of Christ.
‘Do not be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you.
We know that we have passed from death to life because we love brother Christians’(3:13f).
Love, joy and power
What is more, the Spirit who has become resident in the followers of Jesus mediates to them the victory over the world which Jesus had (4:4) as they trust him for the power to overcome temptation (5:3,4).
Joyous fellowship, too, is a mark of the new life which the Spirit initiates in us (1:3,4), and so is the experience of answered prayer (5:14).
Most of all, perhaps, the love for God and for our fellows which the Holy Spirit produces in our hearts, a quality which we do not possess independently of him (4: 18ff).
Inner confidence
Over and above all this, John tells us of the internal testimony of the Holy Spirit with the spirit of the believer, assuring him that God's testimony to his Son is reliable, assuring him that the Christian experience is real.
Christians are meant not only to believe in Jesus, but to know that we have eternal life (5:13) and it is the task of the Spirit to bring this quiet confidence home to us.
Assurance not presumption
After all, we need to know we belong.
No man can erect a building of any serious dimensions on a rickety foundation.
It would not be possible to live a Christian life on the shifting.
sand of doubt as to our relationship with our Lord.
Accordingly, it is not modesty to say, ‘I hope I am a Christian, but I cannot say more.’
That might indeed be the proper thing to say if being a Christian were the result of my own efforts, goodness or achievements.
But the New Testament writers insist with one voice that it is nothing of the kind.
I am saved by God's gracious intervention on my behalf, not by ‘works’ of whatever type.
So I have nothing to boast of.
‘It is all of God that you are in Christ Jesus,’ says Paul to the Corinthians (1 Cor.
I:30), ‘and God makes Christ to be our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, so that, as the Scripture says, ‘He that boasts must boast in the Lord.’
'It is not, therefore, presumptuous to say with quiet confidence, ‘I know that I belong to Christ.
I have not done anything to earn it, but God has given me the Spirit and accepted me into his family; and he means me to know that I belong.’
Five aspects of belonging to the Spirit
There are five words in particular which the New Testament writers use to describe different aspects of this work of assurance which the Holy Spirit does for the believer.
Adoption
The first is the metaphor of ‘adoption’.
Paul alludes to a pagan custom, rare indeed in the Jewish world, whereby a man might adopt the children of another family into his own.
It was quite common for the Emperor to adopt his putative successor in this way.
And this, says the apostle, is what God has done for us.
Jesus died to redeem us, and adopt us into the Father's family; and because we are sons God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, enabling us to call ‘Abba, Father’(Gal. 4:5,6, Eph. 1:5, Rom. 8:15).
The Spirit of Jesus, entering our lives, comes to us as God's adoption present, so to speak, and enables us to call God by the intimate family name which Jesus used and which we have already considered.
The Holy Spirit accomplishes and applies to us our sonship, and all the privileges that flow from it: ‘for if children, then we are heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ’(Rom. 8:17).
Seal
The second word is ‘seal’.
Paul tells the Ephesians that having heard the word of truth and having believed the good news of salvation, they are ‘in Christ’ and have been sealed with the Holy Spirit who was promised long ago (1:13, cf. 2 Cor. 2:21).
‘Seal’ is a property word.
It speaks of belonging.
The Holy Spirit is given us to identify us as belonging to Jesus, just as the seal on a letter or the brand on a sheep identifies it as mine.
There may even be a double nuance in the assurance of ownership that is mentioned here.
The seal of the Spirit is meant to assure us that we belong to Christ, and to let others also know the fact.
It is perhaps an anachronism to read back into New Testament times the usage of second-century Christians whereby this word ‘seal’ was explicitly used of baptism, or sometimes confirmation.
Paul uses it of the Spirit, without any indication of any outward sign.
But in view of passages in Revelation like 7:3 which speak of ‘sealing the servants of God in their fore-heads’, and Romans 4:11 which speaks of circumcision as ‘the sign and seal of being in the right with God through  faith’, it is not impossible that baptism may have been in the apostle's mind when he spoke of this sealing with the Spirit.
What circumcision was to men of faith under the old covenant, assuring them that they belonged to Yahweh, so baptism is to the Christian; and Colossians 2:11, 12 brings the two ordinances together round the cross of Christ which alone gives them meaning.
First instalment
Another word which Paul uses of the Spirit who assures Christians of their position is ‘earnest’.
Two of its three occurrences go with the ‘sealing’ work of the Spirit (2 Cor. 1:22, Eph. 1:14.
The other one is.2 Corinthians 5:5).
If ‘seal’ is the property word, ‘earnest’is the prophetic word.
It looks forward to a greater gift in the future while stressing a real gift in the present.
Often used in commerce for a ‘down-payment’, or ‘first instalment’, it is a highly appropriate word for the Holy Spirit.
He is God's first instalment of the future salvation that awaits us; the part of the future we have now in the present; the pledge of the fuller life that is to come.
Indeed, the modern Greeks use that word for an engagement ring, and that gives not a bad idea of the Holy Spirit's work as ‘earnest’ in Paul's thought.
He is the heavenly Lover's engagement ring given to us.
We shall carry that engagement ring with us into God's future, when we have the full wedding ring of final union with Christ.
At present, the Spirit is the pledge of blessing to come.
He is a real part of the age to come that is available to us here and now: he will never be supplanted.
But there is more to come, in the  fullness of God's time.
Such is the nuance of the Spirit as ‘earnest of our inheritance’.
Firstfruits
The fourth word is ‘firstfruits'.
This is a word from farming.
If the firstfruits are good, so will the main crop be.
The metaphor is used in the New Testament in a variety of ways.
Epaenetus was the firstfruit of the harvest of converts in the province of Asia (Rom. 16:5).
Christ's resurrection is seen as  a firstfruit from the grave, and pledge of the great harvest to come when those who are in Christ will share his risen life in heaven (1 Cor. 15:20,23).
Paul takes comfort from the firstfruits of Jewish believers that the whole nation will, in God's time, turn back to the Lord (Rom. 11:16).
And the Holy Spirit is given as a firstfruit of the harvest God has in store for us (Rom. 8:23);
Assurance
A fifth word to describe this witness of the Spirit with our spirit that we are indeed sons of God (Rom. 8:16) is ‘assurance’.
In I Thessalonians 1:5 Paul reminds his readers how the gospel was first preached to them: ‘it came not in word only, but in power and in the Holy Spirit and in full assurance.’
The literal meaning seems to be that a man is so full of the Holy Spirit that he carries conviction when he speaks about Christ.
Christian assurance is no merely intellectual persuasion, but an overwhelmingly convincing experience of the indwelling Spirit welling up within us and flowing out to others.
Such is the confidence that the Spirit means to give believers.
Already…and not yet
But a final word is needed before we leave this side of the Spirit's work.
There is an ‘already’ and a ‘not yet’about the Spirit's witness of assurance.
This reminder of the ‘not yet’ is clear in the word ‘earnest’.
God has not yet come back to buy up his possessions (the Christians), for whom he has paid the down-payment of the Spirit (Eph. 1:14); and it is in the context of our future inheritance beyond death that Paul speaks of the Spirit as our ‘earnest’ in 2 Corinthians 5:5.
Similarly ‘seal’ has a future look to it.
Ephesians 4:30 tells us that the Spirit seals us in preparation for the day of redemption: the ‘already’ and the ‘not yet’are united in that phrase To speak of a ‘firstfruits’inevitably takes one's eyes to the ‘not yet’(and this is made explicit in Romans 8:23).
Even our sonship, mediated to us by the Spirit, has this ambiguity about it.
On the one hand we can be sure that the Spirit  makes us sons (Rom. 8:15).
On the other, we have still to wait for our final adoption at the Second Coming (Rom. 8:23).
And to match our assurance, our being so full of the Spirit that he bubbles over from us, there is the other side of the picture: we also groan in the Spirit, and he groans with us (Rom. 8:26).
For the Spirit's work in assurance is to give us a firm foundation to build on, not to make us arrogant; the ‘already’ and the ‘not yet’of the Spirit's internal witness enable us to be sure without being cocksure.
2.
The Spirit in Christian Character
After assuring us of our sonship the Spirit sets out to reproduce in us the character and graces of the family into which we have been adopted.
First and foremost he brings us into an entirely new dimension of freedom.
The Spirit of freedom
Christian freedom — not trying hard
Paul in particular found that when he preached the forgiveness and gift of the Spirit which Christ made possible he ran up against a deeply entrenched problem.
The Jews of his day had come to see the Old Testament law not as a pointer to the life of trusting obedience in God which it was meant to be but rather a code to be scrupulously followed in every detail.
If you managed to do this, you would earn, indeed almost compel from God, a favourable verdict at the Last Day.It all depended on human effort.
Justification would come from law-keeping.
This belief, though not taught in the Old Testament, was widely held in the Jewish constituency among whom Paul worked: it is widely believed today that if only you try hard and do your best, God will accept you at the last.
The apostle attacks this belief with a battery of arguments.
Galatians 3: 10–14 is a good example.
Trying hard will not do…
First, he shows scathingly that it cannot be done, this perfect law-keeping.
If you do not keep all the things written in the book of the law, you remain under its curse as a lawbreaker As James put it in his Epistle, ‘whoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all’(2: 10).
If legal contract is what you are after, one slip in the contract is sufficient to invalidate it.
And which of us has not broken the law of God not just once but thousands of times?
So getting in the right with God is impossible for human beings to achieve by their own efforts.
As guilty failures we all come beneath that ‘curse’ imposed on lawbreakers.
‘All the world is guilty before God,’ Jew and Gentile, virtuous and wicked alike (Rom. 3: 19).
All have come short of the divine standard for human life; none can lay claim to earning the verdict of acquittal by keeping the law in its entirety: ‘for there is no distinction, since all have sinned and come short of the glory of God’(Rom. 3:23).
It is not only overt actions which are reprehensible, but rather the thoughts of the heart and that attitude of rebellion against God which characterise us all (Rom. 3:9–20).
…and is unacceptable
Secondly, even if man could achieve the impossible and live a perfect life, fulfilling the divine requirements in all particulars, a doctrine of merit would remain unacceptable to the God of the Bible.
For, according to the prophets, ‘he who by faith is righteous shall live’; and the law does not rest on faith, for ‘he who does them shall live by them’(Gal. 3:12).
The whole principle of merit militates against the personal God whom Scripture depicts as wanting to have personal relations with his creatures.
The father in a family can never be satisfied if his children clean his shoes and lay the table, but never talk to him, and never hug him.
How could the heavenly Father be satisfied with mechanical obedience devoid of love and trust?
…and is not God's way
And thirdly, Paul argues that the way of self-commendation to God by merit is not the way of God's heroes in the Old Testament.
The Jews of Paul's day could draw no credit for being sons of Abraham unless their attitude was like that of Abraham.
God gave his inheritance to Abraham by promise, not as a reward for law-keeping (Gal. 3:18).
He graciously appeared to Abraham, who had no claim on him, and offered to give him a posterity like the stars of heaven: Abraham responded to this grace by an act of faith which issued in a life of obedience.
The whole thrust of Paul's argument at this point, and again in Romans, is that the true few follows the example of Abraham, and responds in faith and obedience to the God who meets him in grace: and that is precisely the terms of the gospel which Paul preaches.The only difference is this.
Abraham was accepted by God in virtue of what Christ would do upon the cross by bearing the curse of the broken law upon his representative shoulders: men living after the cross could be accepted by God as they put their trust in what God had done for them through Jesus.
That is the only difference.
‘Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us — for it is written ‘Cursed be every one who hangs upon a tree’— so that in Christ Jesus the blessing accorded to Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, that we might receive the promised Spirit through faith' (Gal. 3:14).
The mysterious irony of salvation lay in this paradox: Jesus, the only one who kept the law in its entirety, paid the penalty of lawbreakers, by being exposed upon that accursed cross and subject to the judgment of God.
He acted as the substitute and the representative for the whole human race.
As a result believers under the old covenant and under the new are accepted before God as if they were sinless, for they are incorporated in the sinless Messiah who stood in their place of sin and judgment (2 Cor. 5:21).
They are ‘justified’ by the grace of God that gives them what they do not deserve, and by the ‘faith’which grasps that proffered gift and responds in obedient dedication to that proffered love.
God's way of salvation is shown to be the same throughout the ages: men respond in faith to his initiative in  grace.
Through the crucial action of ‘Abraham's seed, which is Christ’(Gal. 3:16) even the despised Gentiles can become children of that archetypal believer, Abraham, and receive the promised Spirit.
The deadness of legalism
Away, then, with all attempts at self justification before God.
They are impossible, immoral, and out of step with the whole history of salvation.
The Messiah has done for us what we could never do in putting us in the right with God; and the gift of his Spirit releases us from the need to try to justify ourselves.
‘Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law, or by hearing with faith?’ asks Paul of the Galatians who were being tempted to go back to legalism (Gal. 3:2).
The Spirit brings new life, new freedom from those old legalistic attitudes.
‘We serve not under the old written code, but in the new life of the Spirit’(Rom. 7:6).
‘The written code kills, but the Spirit gives life’(2 Cor. 3:6); new life, and liberation from this whole depressing attempt to justify ourselves.
‘Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty’(2 Cor. 3:17).
The Spirit of power
Liberty not licence
But liberty does not mean licence.
If Jesus died in order to make the unjust justified, he also endowed them with his Spirit in order to make them just.
God has done for us what law-keeping, weakened by the frailties of our own fallen nature, could never do.
He sent his own Son in human flesh, identical with us except for sin, and he condemned man's sinfulness in Christ's person, hanging upon the cross, as a sin-offering for us.
He did so in order that the just requirement set out in God's law might be fulfilled in us who live our lives not after the principle of self-effort but in the power of the Spirit.
That is a rough paraphrase of Romans 8:3,4.
It shows that Christ's work of sinbearing did not abrogate the moral claims of the law, but was the precondition to men  being able to face up to them.
In other words, we are not forgiven because we keep the law: but once we are forgiven we are called to keep it.
The claim of a holy Gad that those who have fellowship with him should not only be acquitted and accounted righteous, but actually and progressively be made righteous in an ethical sense is strongly brought out in the Pauline letters.
He will not for a moment allow that the doctrine of justification through free grace, received by faith, can lead to antinomianism (Rom. 6:1ff).
Far from it.
For justification, and the very baptism which is its outward symbol, means dying with Christ and rising again; dying to the old sinful ways, and being prepared to see them as characteristics of the unregenerate nature that was dealt with on the cross by Jesus and must be kept there.
And it means rising with Christ too; rising to share in the new life which he makes possible, and which in the fullest detail Paul, in Romans chapter eight, ascribes to the Spirit of Jesus, resident within us.
The power to fulfil God's law
The law of God had demanded holiness, but could not enable it.
The law remained an external authority expressing God's requirements, but providing no power to keep them.
The demand and the requirements still stand.
But through the Spirit, God has given us the ability to fulfil those requirements.
Not only is there ‘no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus’, but ‘the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death’(Rom. 8: l, 2).
Paul finds himself not only with a new pardon now he is united with Christ: but also with a new power.
The Spirit of Jesus has come within him, and provides a higher law than the law of sin and death.
By this he means that the principle he had known as dominant in his life was the principle of sin and the death to which it inevitably led.
Now in Christ, he has a new principle active within him, a higher law, the life-giving power of the Spirit.
Just as the higher law of life stops an apple held in my hand from obeying the law of gravity to which it would otherwise be subject, so the law (as he daringly calls it) of the Spirit overcomes the sin  death principle to which the Christian would otherwise be subject.
The battle
There is nothing automatic about this.
Paul knows, not only from pre-conversion experience but, as a careful reading of Romans 7 will show, from painful experience of struggle and failure as a Christian , that when he relies on himself and his own resources (such seems to be the nuance of ‘I of myself’ in Romans 7:25), he remains subject to the law of sin.
But, thanks to what God has made available through Jesus Christ our Lord, Paul knows that we need not remain defeated.
Though the sinful propensities remain in us till our dying day, they need not be dominant.
Through the Spirit we can put to death the deeds of the ‘flesh’(by which he means unredeemed human nature, alienated from God, Rom. 8:13).
And at the end of our human course, the Spirit who can overcome sin, will also prove his ability to transcend death.
‘If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit which dwells in you’(8:11).
In other words, it is the Spirit of Jesus who reproduces in us the crucifixion and the resurrection of our Lord.
The old unregenerate ‘I’ is nailed to the cross with Christ (Gal. 2:20): we ‘live in the Spirit’or ‘walk in the Spirit’precisely in so far as we allow the Spirit to ‘crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts’(Gal. 5:24).
And equally it is the Spirit who liberates Christ's risen power in us and enables us to share in his triumph.
So ‘walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh’(Gal. 5:16).
In Romans 8 and Galatians 5 Paul makes it very clear that a battle royal rages in the lives of believers; a far greater battle than before their union with Christ.
This is because the Spirit is opposed to the fallen human nature I am born with (and do not lose after my incorporation into Christ).
The two principles are opposed to one another.
And the ensuing battle, of which all Christians are aware in their experience, means either that they cannot achieve the good intentions they have or, if the Greek is taken  in another sense, that the presence of the mighty Spirit prevents them doing what, if they followed the dictates of mere self-will, they otherwise would (Gal.5:17).
In any case, we are reminded of the spiritual battle.
Power over the inclinations of the fallen ‘flesh’ is possible only when the Spirit is given control by our act of deliberate choice.
He has the power to overcome my fallen appetites, but he will not use it in me unless I ask him.
The transformation
Mercifully, the Spirit works deeply within my subconscious self.
When I am so self-centred that I would not dream of asking the Spirit for his strength, preferring to go my own way, I am encouraged to recall that ‘God is at work in you both to will and to work for his good pleasure’(Phil.
2:13).
We shall not be mistaken in seeing that as a reference to God the Holy Spirit.
He it is who not only empowers us to do right, but works in us the desire to want to do right, without which we would never dream of turning to ask him for his strength.
But that strength is available to all who are in Christ.
It is none other than the superhuman power which raised Christ from the dead which is let loose within our human bodies (Eph. 1:18f).
Paul is evidently referring to the Spirit when talking of this power, since he not only prays that the Spirit will reveal it to his readers, but he, in common with other New Testament writers, associates the Spirit with the resurrection of Christ from the dead (I Tim.
3:16, cf I Pet.
3:18).
In Ephesians 3:16 Paul makes it quite explicit.
He prays that ‘according to the riches of his glory, the Father may grant you to be strengthened with might through his Spirit in the inner man’.
The Spirit of Christlikeness
The seed of the Spirit
This power given to individuals by the Spirit is not the naked ruach that we sometimes met with in the Old Testament days  in men like Saul and Samson.
It is the powerful application to believers of the character of Christ.
Thus when Paul is talking about the spiritual battle in Galatians 5, the content of the Christian freedom he advocates is defined by the character of Jesus.
This powerful, victorious Spirit which indwells believers, and can keep their sinful natures nailed upon the cross, is like a seed planted in the soil of the believer's life.
If cultivated and nourished, this seed will grow into a lovely fruitful tree; and this is what the fruit is like: love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, self-control (Gal. 5:22).
And what is that, but a description of the character of Jesus?
A holy God requires his people to be holy.
But the God who ‘has called us for holiness…gives us his Holy Spirit’(I Thess. 4 7,8) to enable us to fulfil his requirement.
This holiness is not merely a devotion to the deity (there was plenty of such attachment in the ancient world that was far from holy — for instance the cult prostitution that was so common in the temples), nor a mere adherence to ethical rules (there were plenty of those current in antiquity, too, and they possessed all the disadvantages, while lacking the advantages, of the Jewish law).
Christian holiness involves both devotion and ethics; it springs from allegiance to Jesus, who embodies in himself the ideal of human conduct.
The qualities of Jesus
Consequently we find the characteristics of Jesus being stressed time and again throughout the New Testament as the qualities which the Holy Spirit seeks to produce in Christ's people.
The kingly rule of God which Jesus proclaimed and so signally embodied is not a matter of mere externals, what you eat or drink; but righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit (Rom. 14: 1 7), and all three were pre-eminently to be found in Jesus.
Power marked the apostolic preaching in the Holy Spirit at Thessalonica, and joy marked its reception by the new believers (1 Thess. 1:5f).
The Spirit that rested upon the suffering Messiah rests upon  suffering Christians (I Pet.
4:14).
Just as Jesus' life was the embodiment of God's love, so we find that the Holy Spirit is particularly given to believers to live out God's own love in their loveless lives.
‘God's own love has been poured out into our hearts by the Holy Spirit who has been given us,’ says Paul in Romans 5:5, and he rejoices to hear of that ‘love in the Spirit’, which is to be found in the church at Colossae (1:8).
So cardinal a quality is this, so clear a mark of a man being filled with the Spirit of Christ, that in the middle of his three chapters on spiritual gifts (1 Cor. 12–14), Paul sets the crowning gift of love.
One has only to substitute the name of Jesus for ‘love’ in that chapter to see that the whole thing is a pen picture of Christ's way of life.
The first and foremost fruit of the Spirit is that outgoing love for others, irrespective of their deserts, which marked the Giver of the Spirit in his earthly life.
The way to holiness
True holiness, into which the Spirit calls us, is nothing other than Christlikeness.
And in one marvellous passage, in which he contrasts the old dispensation with the new, Paul reaches this point as the climax of his theme.
The Lord who had revealed himself fitfully and alternately under the old covenant, when Moses commuted between the Lord on Sinai and the people on the plain (with the glory reflected from his communing with God waxing and waning correspondingly) has now revealed himself steadily and with unwithdrawn accessibility.
Under the new covenant Yahweh makes himself present to his people as Spirit (which seems to be the meaning of ‘Now the Lord is the Spirit’ 2 Cor 3:17); d such his presence IS constant, unwithdrawn and steady The divine presence, concentrated in Christ, and universalised through his death and resurrection, becomes available to transform his people.
As we fix our gaze upon the Lord Jesus worship him, and reflect on his character brought before us in the Gospels, our faces will shine, as Moses' did when he went in to seek the presence of the Lord.
But the glory will not fade from the Christian as it did from Moses.
It will increase God s purpose is to change us by his Spirit within us (the  word ‘change’ is used in the Gospels to denote Jesus' transfiguration!); and to change us from one degree of glory to another.
‘Glory’ indicates the person and character of God, under the imagery of light.
If we want to see the glory of God (which no man can do in all its unmediated radiance, and live, Exod. 33:20) then we must seek it in the person of Jesus.
In him the glory of God shines out in human form (John 1:14, 2 Cor. 4:4).
Well, the work of the Spirit in the believer is supremely to transform us from one degree of glory to another: that is to say, to make us more and more like Christ.
Daily reward
In Titus 3:5 the Holy Spirit is said to be the one who not only regenerates us, but who renews us; and this work of renewal of our natures from within is stressed in Romans 12:2 (as we present our bodies a living sacrifice to God) and in Colossians 3:10.
There Paul explains that the new kind of life they live through union with the crucified and risen Christ involves having done with anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy talk' which characterised ‘the old man (i.e. their fallen human nature).
Instead they are to put on, as if it were a suit of new clothes, the new humanity that Is brought to them in Christ and is constantly renewed by a deepening knowledge of Christ, into the Creator's original image in man, a likeness to God himself: hence the ‘compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, patience, forbearance’, love, peace and gratitude of which he goes onto speak (Col. 3:1,5–16).
It is the work of the Spirit, then, to make us progressively reflect the character of Christ, himself the Last Man who demonstrates the image of God which God intended for us when he made us.
Progressive sanctification
The process of Christlikeness is a progressive one: let nobody think he has attained it.
Paul himself after decades of knowing Christ could still say that he had not attained the purpose for which Christ laid hold of him; he was still following on (Phil.
3:8–15).
But as he grew older, and felt the signs of decay in his mortal body, he rejoiced to think that his inner  man was being renewed every day, until he should attain that ‘being at home with the Lord’ to which his whole Christian life was directed and of which he had been given the Holy Spirit as a guarantee (2 Cor. 4: 16f, 5:1ff, 5,8).
So in our sanctification as in our assurance, there is always an ‘already’ and a ‘not yet’about the work of the Spirit.
He is indeed given us to actualise in us the character of Christ: but that process will not be complete until we see him as he is, either at death or the Parousia.
Let St. John have the last word on the subject.
‘Beloved, we are now the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
And everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself’(1 John 3:2f).
3.
The Spirit in Christian Growth
The Holy Spirit, who is both one with God and resident in us, has a further role in the life of the believer.
He is indeed, as John Taylor has aptly called him, ‘the go-between God’, for he both takes the things of God and makes them real to us on the one hand, and takes our faint longings and prayers and brings them to the Father on the other.
The Spirit illuminates God
Paul develops an interesting and original line of argument in I Corinthians 2.
He is explaining that the Christian message is no earthly wisdom, such as the travelling philosophers of the day peddled, and with which some of the Corinthians were confusing it.
No, it is nothing less than God's truth mediated to them by God's Spirit (2:9).
And just as human wisdom is only perceived and passed on by the human spirit inside us, so it is with the truth of God.
No man can comprehend the things of God: if there is to be any comprehension on our part, then the onus is on God to reveal himself.
That he has done.
The Spirit has been given us to  enable us to understand not the future, but the gracious gifts God has already made over to us (2:12).
Jesus, the focus of all illumination
But did we not read in St. John that it is Jesus who makes the Father known and discloses to us his nature (John I 18, 3:13 etc.)
? Certainly.
But the same Gospel makes it plain that the Spirit will interpret Jesus as the focal point of all God's revelation.
That is why ‘the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father’ is shown in his role of bearing witness to Jesus who is the truth of God incarnate (John 15:16, 16:14,15, 14:6).
Paul sees it in precisely the same way as John.
In I Corinthians 2 he can say almost in the same breath that it is the Spirit who shows believers the deep things of God, and that we have the mind of Christ.
Once again we come up against the indissoluble limit between the Spirit and Jesus.
He does indeed reveal to us God's gracious provision for us.
But the name of that provision is Jesus.
In many other places in the New Testament the Spirit who was active in the prophets is promised to the Christians to guide them, but always that guidance centres upon Jesus in whom the truth of God took personal form.
Thus in Romans 8:14 we are promised the guidance of the Spirit, but it is along the pathway of sonship wherein we follow Jesus in addressing God as ‘Abba’, and share his mortification and risen life.
A prayer for Ephesus
In Ephesians 1:17f Paul prays that the readers may have the spiritual illumination afforded by the Spirit.
But this illumination is granted by the God of our Lord Jesus Christ and is possible only ‘in knowing him’.
The Spirit enables us to know the Master, to sense his will, to grasp his mind and to see things his way.
In particular it is Paul's prayer that the Spirit would reveal to them three things.
First, ‘the hope of his calling’.
In that phrase the Spirit characteristically mediates between the ‘already’ and the ‘not yet’.
The calling is past.
The hope of the calling is future.
The first instalment of heaven, the Spirit himself, enables us  to see the reality of our calling and its future consummation.
Second, ‘the wealth of the glory of his inheritance in the saints’, a deliberately ambiguous phrase which could mean that the saints have God as their inheritance — and what inexhaustible riches lie there!
But it could also mean the even more staggering truth that the saints are God's inheritance, and pose the question to what extent he-is allowed the freehold of that inheritance which is our lives.
Third, Paul prays that they may perceive ‘the extreme greatness of his power to aid believers, the very power that raised Christ from the dead of God's right hand’.
And so we are brought by the Spirit's revelations back to Christ again.
No further light has broken, nor will break, from God than Christ: the Spirit's task is to illuminate him to us.
And to make this centrality of Christ even more emphatic the apostle ends his paragraph by reminding the readers that this mighty, risen, ascended Christ is the head of the body constituted by the Church, and his  fullness fills their lives (or, perhaps, their lives are the complement of his  fullness , Eph.
I: 23)
A prayer for Glossae
When in Colossians 1:9ff Paul prays for Christians he has never met, his first request is that the Spirit would give them understanding of the Lord's will for their lives; then, that they should live their lives in accordance with that will by pleasing the Lord in everything; then, that they should increase in their knowledge of God; and finally, that they should be strengthened with all might according to the measure of his glorious power which should result for them as it did for Christ, not in arrogance but in patience and longsuffering.
Such was the Christian path of imitatio Christi on which the Spirit could be relied to shed the light of his illumination.
The Christocentric nature of his revelation is once more to the fore; so is the characteristic Hebrew emphasis on knowledge leading to obedience.
Illumination in 1 John
In the Gnostic situation to which I John was addressed, ‘knowledge’ was the ‘in’word, and false teachers were laying exclusive claims to it.
John's response is to say that they did not need false teachers, or any other teachers for that matter: ‘you have been anointed (lit.
‘Christed’) by the Holy One, and you all know' (2:20).
There is no doubt about the content of this divinely imparted illumination: ‘who is a liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ?’(2:22) They are warned not to believe every spiritual manifestation, because the authentic disclosures of the Spirit always bear witness to the incarnate Jesus.
‘By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus has come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not of God’(4:2).
Confident that the anointing they have all received is the person of the Spirit of the Anointed One, who remains with them (2:27), John knows he can safely leave their instruction to that same Spirit who is true and who shows them how to abide in Christ, the Christ who will one day return (2:28f).
It is thoroughly in line with this that the author of Revelation can say, ‘Witness to Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy’(19:10).
For Jesus is God's final word to men; and the Spirit illuminates and interprets but does not add to that word.
The Spirit will teach
This means that if a man is truly brought to faith in Christ, he is not dependent on human teachers to lead him on, helpful though these may be.
He has the heavenly Spirit to be his teacher.
And he can safely set down to the Spirit's guidance anything which brings Jesus into sharper focus.
I learnt this lesson some years ago when the soldier to whom I referred earlier came to Christ.
I was at the time very concerned, because he was posted almost immediately to North Africa, and there was no chance of helping him forward in the early days of his Christian life.
I heard some months later that he was organising a Bible study in his quarters in North Africa to which not only fellow subalterns were coming but even  such exalted members of the Army hierarchy as majors!
He had no human teacher, but he had the Spirit of Christ and the Scriptures, and through them he grew in knowledge and in spiritual stature.
The Spirit guides believers
Two common mistakes
The problem of how the Spirit of God guides us is one which confronts every humble Christian.
There is no easy answer, for the Spirit blows where he wills, and man can neither prescribe to him nor control him.
In practice, two tendencies are discernible in the Church.
The first is to suppose that God always guides by the majority vote, by the reasonable thing, by sanctified common sense.
This can easily deteriorate into prudential judgment, worldly planning and manipulation of voting procedures.
The second is to suppose that the guidance of God is always extraordinary, individualistic, and sudden.
Four strands in guidance
David Watson has some wise words to say on the matter in his One in the Spirit (p. 54ff).
He draws together from the Bible four strands in divine guidance which, taken together, pro-vide a confident basis for action, and avoid excessive recourse to that overworked claim, ‘The Lord told me to do such and such.’
First, God guides through circumstances (Acts 16:10).
God closes some doors and opens others; our responsibility is to be sensitive to his leading, and to follow through the doors when they open.
Second, God guides through other Christians, as he did in Acts 6 when the whole multitude chose the Seven, or in Acts 13 when the Spirit spoke to the church at Antioch about the need for Paul and Barnabas to go abroad.
Personal convictions should be open to testing by the guidance of other Christians.
If our conviction really comes from God, others, who are in touch with God, will confirm it.
‘The Christian who will not listen to reason is a fool,’ says Watson forth-rightly.
To be sure, this is not the only criterion: the voices of other Christians may be very confused.
But at least we must be willing in principle to receive guidance through other members of the Body of Christ.
Third, God guides us through the Scriptures.
The Spirit who inspired their writing is perfectly well capable of taking some part of them and writing it on our hearts so that it becomes an inescapable pointer to a particular course of action.
This method, also, taken by itself, is liable to abuse.
To pick verses at random from the Bible proves nothing at all, except that we are gullible and are not using the Scriptures as we are intended to.
Paul's advice is very different: ‘Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, as you teach and admonish one another in all wisdom’(Col. 3:16).
An increasingly broad appreciation of the Scriptures will give us a developing ability to scent the will of God in any given situation.
Fourth, God guides us in prayer.
Watson.points to Colossians 3:15, ‘Let the peace of Christ rule (i.e. be the arbiter) in your hearts.’
There is such a thing as praying a situation through until one is virtually sure of the will of God on the matter.
One has a deep inner peace about it; not absolute intellectual certainty, but practical confidence, which allows one to proceed to action with joyful assurance.
These are some of the ways in which we may expect the Spirit of God to illuminate not only the person of God but his will for us.
He is the supreme Teacher for Christians who are growing in grace and in knowledge of their Lord.
The Spirit empowers prayer
The Spirit-object of prayer
As go-between, the Spirit not only teaches us the truth of God, he opens our eyes to the one in whom that truth became incarnate, and guides us in our lives.
He also enables us to approach God in prayer.
We have already seen that it is  through the uniting Spirit that Jew and Gentile alike have access to the Father (Eph. 2:18).
We have noticed that it is-the Spirit who enables the adopted sons to call God ‘Father’, ‘Abba’, that intimate form of address first found on the lips of Jesus.
Bearing in mind that ‘Abba’ is the opening word of the Lord's Prayer in Aramaic, we could rightly say that only through the Spirit can we pray and live out that prayer.
Indeed, in the immediate context of the Lucan Lord's Prayer, Jesus promises that the Father will give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him.
The Spirit is thus the supreme object of prayer.
And it is interesting to see how Luke works this theme out in his two-volume work.
He tells us that as Jesus was praying before his baptism the Spirit came upon him.
As the disciples were at prayer in Jerusalem awaiting Pentecost, the Spirit came upon them.
Saul of Tarsus after his Damascus road experience spent three days in fasting and prayer; that showed he was in the receptive mood which invited the Spirit to come.
It was the same with Cornelius, another great landmark in the spread of the gospel in Acts.
It was as Cornelius waited humbly and receptively in prayer, that God's supreme gift, the Holy Spirit, was poured out upon him before ever Peter who was preaching the good news to him, reached the climax of his sermon!
Luke could scarcely underline more strongly that the supreme object of prayer is the Holy Spirit of God.
The Spirit — inspirer of prayer
But that is not all.
The Spirit who is the supreme object of prayer is also the prime inspirer of prayer.
Not only does he enable us to cry ‘Abba’ with the joyous obedience and trust of newly adopted members of the family; not only does he enable us to pray and articulate words of the prayer that Jesus taught us.
He initiates prayer within us on at least three other levels.
In the first place, we read of Christians ‘praying in the Holy Spirit’(Jude 20, Eph. 6:18).
This seems to indicate a deep, free, and intensive time of prayer, when the Spirit takes over and controls and leads the prayers, and one can go on praying for several hours without being aware of the passage  of time.
Those who have taken part in nights of prayer can no doubt, all recall such times when the Holy Spirit has led people to pray in harmony, with intensity, with breadth, with perseverance and assurance.
‘Pray at all times in the Spirit,’ writes Paul, ‘with all prayer and supplication.
To that end keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all saints, and also for me…that I may declare the gospel boldly, as I ought to’(Eph. 6:18f).
It is fascinating in this context concerning the spiritual warfare in which we are engaged to notice how he ascribes the work of the Spirit to two juxtaposed concepts: prayer, and the Word of God which he calls the sword of the Spirit.
The go-between God addresses us primarily through the Word or message enshrined in the Scriptures; and he enables us to address God with freedom and confidence in prayer.
A second way in which the Spirit inspires prayer is by giving to the man in question the gift of tongues.
We shall be examining this in another chapter.
It is sufficient to notice here that speaking in tongues is one of the gifts of the Spirit to his people (I Cor. 12:10), and that the primary purpose is to enable the recipient to pray to God from the depths of his being and not merely from the conscious levels of his mind.
Indeed, the conscious mind is not employed when the Christian prays in tongues to the Lord (I Cor. 14:14).
But perhaps we have grown over-concerned about the conscious levels of rationality and suppressed for too long the reservoirs of subconscious feeling which the Spirit seems to touch and use when a man prays in tongues, with the result that he is built up, even though he cannot understand what he is saying (I Cor. 14:4).
There is no doubt among those who have been given the gift of tongues that their prayer life and their ability to praise God in all circumstances has grown dramatically.
It is one of the ways in which the Spirit evokes prayer in the people of the Messiah.
The third level at which the Spirit undertakes for us in our weakness is brought movingly before us in Romans 8:26f.
‘The Spirit helps us in our weakness.
For we do not know what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself intercedes for us with sighs too deep for words.
And he who searches the hearts of men knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because  he intercedes for the saints according to the will of God.
And we know that in all respects he co-operates with those who love God.’
There are some profound depths here for the Christian to ponder.
For many of us, prayer in the Holy Spirit is something about which we know very little.
Our prayers tend to be mechanical or at best self-centred, and prayer in the Holy Spirit means allowing the Spirit of Christ to pray in us, to pour into our souls his overflowing life of Intercession.
‘Praying Hyde'
I came across a striking example of this recently in the story of John Hyde nicknamed ‘Praying Hyde’, a missionary to India early in this century.
A man once asked him to pray for him.
‘He came to my room, turned the key in the door, dropped on his knees, waited five minutes without a single syllable coming from his lips.
I could hear my own heart thumping and beating.
I felt the hot tears running down my face.
I knew I was with God.
Then with upturned face, down which the tears were streaming, he said ‘O God’.
Then, for five minutes at least, he was still again, and then, when he knew he was talking with God, his arm went around my shoulder and there came up from the depth of his heart such petitions for men as I had never heard be-fore.
I rose from my knees to know what real prayer was.’
Prayer in the Spirit need not, I think, always have that emotional intensity.
It does need to have that direct meeting with God.
The Spirit's aid in prayer
This is where the Spirit's aid is so crucial in our prayers.
For the Holy Spirit understands not only the mind of the Lord, as we saw in I Corinthians 2, but the mind of struggling Christians.
He knows we find it hard to pray.
He knows there are times when we feel so deeply and yet so confusedly that we cannot frame petitions, but simply come in silent pleading to the Lord.
He knows that we are often very unsure what is the will of God, and therefore cannot pray with clarity and  confidence about it.
He knows the varied and perplexing circumstances in which we are placed.
And he helps-the very word in Greek is highly suggestive.
It means he grasps the situation for us and with us.
He frames the petitions in our lips; and he prays within us to the Father, with sighs too deep for words.
As for the variety of circumstances to which we are exposed, the Spirit works with us in them all, and his aim is to promote our good.
What a tremendously encouraging thing this is.
We have in the Spirit a divine intercessor, resident within us, to teach us to pray and to pray alongside us.
Perhaps this is the reason why we rarely if ever find a prayer in the New Testament addressed to the Spirit.
The Holy Spirit is that part of the deity given us to enable us to pray.
Christian prayer is normally offered to the Father through the Son, or ‘in his name’, and ‘in ’ or at the instigation of the Spirit.
Jesus' aid in prayer
There is a fascinating passage in Hebrews 7; 25, where the Lord Jesus is said to be able to ‘save to the uttermost those who come to God by him, because he is always alive to make intercession for them’.
The word for ‘make intercession’ is the same in Hebrews 7:25 as in Romans 8:26; except that in Romans it has a prefix which indicates intensity, or, perhaps, stresses that it is done for us.
But the basic thought is the same in both cases.
It does not say that the Spirit or the Son begs the Father to give us what he otherwise might not.
The usual word for ‘ask’ is not used; instead, we have this strange, rare word which literally means ‘to be around’.
Is that, perhaps, significant?
What higher confidence could a Christian have than to reflect that in heaven the risen Christ in his ascended manhood ‘is around’ on our behalf?
His presence at the Father's side is the silent guarantee that we are accepted.
There is in the Godhead in heaven one who fully understands us and is there as our representative and our head.
Equally, what an encouragement it is to know that there is, in struggling Christians on earth, one of the Godhead who ‘is around’ on our behalf; and that when we are agonising in prayer, we do not approach the Almighty on our own, in all  our poverty.
We have the Spirit as the divine representative in our hearts who enables us to pray acceptably.
The sum of the matter
This has been a long chapter on the work of the Spirit in the individual Christian.
But it is no use making out an extensive list of the treasures in our inheritance if we do not make use of them.
The Holy Spirit is God's gift to us, and he means us not just to read about him but to make use of him.
God means us to know that we are in Christ, and has given us the Spirit to assure us.
God means us to grow in Christlikeness, and has given us the Spirit to change us.
God means to free us from the bondage to the self-centredness and self-vindication which marked us in the old days, and has equipped us with the Spirit of the Messiah to set us free to serve him unselfconsciously, effectively and joyfully.
God has set the seed of his Spirit in our hearts and intends to produce in us a crop of lovely qualities of character if we do not grieve the Spirit (Eph. 4:30) by wilful disobedience or neglect.
God under takes to teach us through the Spirit if we will allow him to lead us into a closer understanding of and obedience to Jesus Christ.
And God will not only listen to our insignificant prayers, but has given us his Spirit to enable us to pray and to share with us in that most demanding task.
Nor is that the full extent of God's generosity.
The Spirit groans (Rom. 8:26): we, who have the firstfruit of the Spirit, groan as we await the redemption of our body (8:23); indeed, the whole created order groans (8:22), as on tip-toe it awaits the day when it will be redeemed from all its anguish and frustration and share in the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
The Spirit, then, is fully involved in the anguish of our world-in-the-making, and of us Christians-in-the-making; and he points towards the day when the pains of travail will give way to the joys of birth.
His very presence in our world and in our lives is guarantee of that future day: he is the one part of God's future present here and now.
That is why time and again in the New Testament he is linked with hope.
We can only ‘abound in hope through the power of the Holy Spirit’(Rom. 15:13).
For the Holy Spirit and hope are two sides of  the same coin; respectively the objective and the subjective modes in which the future is made real to us in the present.
No wonder that in that same verse Paul bids us be filled with all joy and peace in believing.
With so powerful and so complete an equipment as the Holy Spirit, the Christian has every reason for peace and joy in believing.
CHAPTER 7
The Spirit in the Church
What is the function of the Holy Spirit within the Christian Church?
Historically speaking there have been two main tendencies.
Sometimes the Church has tried to exercise proprietary rights over the Holy Spirit, confining him to its basis of faith, its ministerial orders, its sacraments.
Some-times the ‘spiritual people’ have reacted against the institutional church of their day, and broken off to form a ‘pure church’consisting of themselves and likeminded friends and before long this new church has usually become as encrusted with barnacles as the one from which they broke away.
In the New Testament era the Christians had to face similar problems, and yet they managed to live with them and surmount them.
This chapter will, therefore, examine the ways in which the early Christians were conscious of the Spirit's presence in their community; the next four chapters will glance at some of our contemporary problems concerning the Spirit in the Church, when set against this back ground.
The Spirit creates unity
The Spirit makes unity
One of the notable ways in which the Spirit expressed himself in the Christian community was through creating unity.
When in Ephesians 4:3,4 Paul is sketching some of the things all Christians have in common, he has this to say: ‘Endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
There is one body, and one Spirit, as you are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of us all, who is above all, and through all, and in all.
But grace was given to each of us according to the measure of Christ's gift.’
He then goes on to outline some of the gifts of the ascended Christ.
‘His gifts were that some should be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teachers.’
Whilst therefore making full allowance for the diversity of gifts God has given to his Church in the varying capacities he has accorded to different members, Paul insists that the Spirit creates unity, and that it is the job of the Christians to keep that unity and not spoil it.
Paradoxically, like so much in the Christian life, unity is a gift of God, and yet we have to work at it.
The Church must preserve unity
This given unity is not surprising.
As we have seen, the first Christians were aware that the Spirit of the Messiah had come to indwell them.
Hardly surprising, then, that with this Spirit of their Master making them into sons of God, they should be conscious of the closest ties with other members of the family.
In this family, seen as one Body indwelt by one Spirit, there was no place for distinctions of wealth or station, sex or nationality; no room for pride in education or religious privilege (Col. 3: 1 I, Jas. 2: Iff).
After all, not one of them had anything to boast about.
All had been rescued by their Lord when they could never have earned their salvation.
As for their differing gifts, well, they were God's gifts to them, and no reason for pride.
‘Who makes you different from anybody else?
And what have you that you did not receive?
If, then, you received it, why do you boast, as if it were not a gift?’
(I Cor. 4:7) This concern to preserve the unity the Spirit had created, accounts for so much in the life and teaching of the early Church.
It accounts for the determination of the Jerusalem leaders that there must be no independent Samaritan church growing up without the age-old split from Judaism being healed (Acts 8).
It accounts for the decision of the Council of Jerusalem that the issue of circumcision must not be allowed to split the Church (Acts 15).
It accounts for the constant visits of the apostle to the Gentiles back to the Jerusalem church (Acts 18:21, 20:16, 25:1 etc.), and his organisation of a great collection for their benefit, little  though he could have approved of their theology (Rom. 15:26, I Cor. 16:1, 2 Cor. 8:1ff).
It accounts for Paul's repeated call to the Christians at Philippi to pull together and stand together (Phil.
1:27, 2: Iff, 4:1–3).
It explains why Paul will not allow that there are specially illuminated, ‘gnostic’ Christians at Colossae: the divine mystery of the gospel is an open secret, and Paul warns ‘every man, and teaches every man in all wisdom so as to present every man mature in Christ’(Col. 1:26,28).
John does the same, with his emphasis that, ‘You all have knowledge…you do not need anyone to teach you’(I John 2:20,2 7).
This unity in the Spirit bridges the gap between Jews and Gentiles once they become Christians (Eph. 2:15) and breaks down the hostility between men of different col-ours and backgrounds.
Unity at Antioch
There is a splendid example of this in the church at Antioch (13:1ff).
Its leadership was corporate, unlike that of most modern churches; it comprised an equally unusual feature, prophets and teachers in the leadership together- and they are not always the easiest of bedfellows.
But more amazing still is the composition of this group.
There is Barnabas, who used to be a rich, landowning Cypriot Levite: Symeon, called ‘Swarthy’, who seems to have been a Negro; Lucius of Cyrene, no doubt a Jew from the dispersion in North Africa; Manaen, who was educated in court circles alongside Herod the tetrarch; and Saul of Tarsus, the Jew from the Levant who had studied under Gamaliel.
What a varied leadership!
Their very names speak volumes for the unity which the Spirit creates.
Christ's will for his Church, that they should be one (John 17:21), was being carried out in the Christian community at Antioch.
That is why Paul was so angry and distressed when he heard of the divisions in the Christian church at Corinth.
Disunity at Corinth
The first three chapters of I Corinthians are dominated by this problem.
Thinking of the faith as though it were a  philosophical position, and of those who had come to preach to them as if they were travelling intellectuals, led the Corinthians to imagine themselves as judges between the various emphases they heard.
The catch cries of ‘I belong to Paul’, ‘I belong to Peter’, ‘I belong to Apollos’ and perhaps ‘I belong to Christ’(1:12) were merely subtle forms of self-advertisement.
Paul hammers this savagely.
The gospel is not analogous to philosophical wisdom; it is folly to the worldly.
Its teachers are not like travelling philosophers: they are co-operating labourers in God's vineyard, and one plants while another waters, but God is the only one who can make anything grow (3:6).
The Corinthians are not in the privileged position of judges between theological niceties.
To think they are, shows that they are governed not by the Spirit but by the attitudes and outlook of their unregenerate days (3:1,3).
Disunity is utterly repulsive to Christ.
The Church can no more acquiesce in being divided than Christ or baptism can (1: l 3).
God has built his Church into a temple for the Spirit of God to indwell (3:16).
The thought is that the Spirit of God whose glory filled the temple of Solomon, then shone out through the temple of Jesus' life (see John 2:18 — 22), now resides in the Christian community.
Though he does not develop the metaphor, Paul would, I think, agree with the fuller details to be found in I Peter: individual Christians are spiritual stones which go to make up the spiritual temple which is built on Christ (I Pet.
2:5).
At all events he is very strong in this passage in I Corinthians 3.
The man who spoils the temple of God by encouraging disunity will be destroyed by God (3:17).
That is how highly Paul rates the unity of the Christian Church.
The Spirit brings reconciliation
Reconciliation is closely allied to this concept of unity.
It is well brought out in Ephesians 2:14,18.
A great wall separated Jew from Gentile in the ancient world: the law.
This was graphically symbolised by the notice in the outer court of the temple threatening death to any Gentiles who went beyond  that point.
The ‘unclean’ might not enter the sanctuary of the Lord.
That barrier bred enmity.
Jews despised and hated Gentiles: despised them because they did not belong to the elect; and hated them because they lorded it over God's chosen people.
Gentiles returned the compliment with interest, as can be seen by the references of Martial, Horace and Juvenal to the Jews.
Yet in Christ that barrier has been broken down, along with the far bigger wall separating both Jew and Gentile from God.
Both have been reconciled in one Body by Christ on the cross.
Indeed, by incorporation into him the two have become one new humanity.
The peace of the Messianic Age belongs both to those who once were outsiders and to those who prided themselves on being the elect.
‘For through him we both have access by one Spirit to the Father’(2:18).
That is no mere theological idealism.
We see it happening in a crucial passage in the Acts, the conversion of Cornelius.
There his reception of the ‘one Spirit’ convinces Peter, the orthodox Jew, that Cornelius, the Gentile soldier, has been accepted by God into his family on just the same basis as the original disciples.
The Spirit brings intractable barriers down.
The Spirit reconciles men who were at variance.
This is a standing characteristic of his work in the Church