

Disease Concept
Disease causes disturbance In function.
Addictive disease causes the sufferer to return at some time to the substance, process or relation-ship of addiction despite various disturbances of function and despite previous negative consequences.
Addiction is in the Person, not just in the drug.
Consider alcohol: We are all of us exposed to it.
It is legal and socially acceptable in our society.
Parties and celebrations would not be considered the same without it.
Some churches use it in communion services.
But some people do not appear to be able to use it responsibly: they do not seem to know when enough is enough.
Someone who cannot predict what will happen after he or she takes the first drink.
Who is an alcoholic?
The alcoholic may be able to do without a drink for days.
weeks, months or even years.
But once he or she takes that first drink in any day there is no prediction of when that drinking bout will stop.
It may stop after one or two drinks or it may go on into a spree.
 "Inability to predict what will happen after taking the first drink" is how we define alcoholism.
Yes, to some people.
Is Alcohol an addictive drug?
Probably to about 10% of the population and probably not to the other 90%.
This figure varies in different cultures.
No, but many of them are.
HOW TO COMBAT ALCOHOLISM & ADDICTION
Are all heavy drinkers alcoholic?
Whether they are or not, they can suffer severe medical, social and other consequences from their consistent heavy drinking.
It does nobody any favour to be termed a heavy drinker rather than an alcoholic.
You probably do not.
How do you know if you are alcoholic?
Alcohol affects the perception mechanism of the brain.
Alcoholism is a disease that tells you that you do not have it.
Some counsellors suggest that patients try "controlled drinking" and diagnose themselves as being alcoholic if they fail.
This can be successful in later stages of the disease but may miss some patients in the early stages through their sheer "whiteknuckle" determination.
It may be helpful to attend six meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous to see how close is the identification with acknowledged sufferers.
There are hundreds of sets of questions — many newspapers and magazines and various helping, agencies publish "do-it-yourself" check lists but these are notoriously Inaccurate.
Are there any simple questions that can pick out an alcoholic?
Alcoholics Anonymous (who should know) in their Pamphlet "Are you an alcoholic?" say that a Positive answer to any four of the following questions indicates cause for concern: To answer this question ( "Are you an alcoholic?" ) ask yourself the following questioned and answer them as honestly as you can.
NO YES 1.
Is drinking making your home life unhappy? 2.
Does your drinking make you careless of your family's welfare? 3.
Do you drink because you are shy with other people? 4.
Is drinking affecting your reputation? 5.
Do you drink to escape from worries or trouble?
NO YES 6.
Do you drink alone? 7.
Have you lost time from work due to drinking? 8.
Has your ambition decreased since drinking? 9.
Has your efficiency decreased since drinking? 10.
Is drinking jeopardising your job or business? 11.
Have you ever felt remorse after drinking? 12.
Are you in financial difficulties as a result of drinking? 13.
Do you turn to or seek an inferior environment when drinking? 14.
Do you crave a drink at a definite time daily? 15.
Does drinking cause you to have difficulty in sleeping? 16.
Do you want a drink the next morning? 17.
Do you drink to build up your self-confidence? 18.
Have you ever had a complete loss of memory as a result of drinking? 19.
Has your doctor ever treated you for drinking? 20.
Have you ever been in hospital or prison because of drinking?
What's your score?
Did you answer yes four or more times?
If so, chances are you have a serious drinking problem, or may have one in the future.
Why do we say this?
Only because the experience of tens of thousands of recovered alcoholics has taught us some basic truths about the symptoms of problem drinking — and about ourselves.
The Michigan Alcohol Screening Test asks just four questions: i.
Have you ever tried to cut down your alcohol consumption?
ii.
Have you ever felt guilty about your drinking?
iii Have you ever felt angry about your drinking?
iv.
Have you ever had a drink in the morning?
Positive answers to two or more of these questions are said to reveal 40% of all sufferers from alcoholism.
Two further questions may be helpful.
v. What was the time of your last drink?
vi.
When in your life did you take your first drink?
Sufferers frequently know the exact time of their last drink and may remember their very first introduction to alcohol as a very special experience, something that may clearly differentiate them from the non-addictive population.
How do other individuals know if you are alcoholic?
They probably do not.
The social stigma of alcoholism sees it as a disgrace rather than a disease that is beyond the control of the sufferer and for this reason (and their own "denial" — which will be explained later) friends and family may be reluctant to accept the true nature of the diagnosis.
People often make false assumptions.
That all tramps are alcoholic and that all sufferers from alcoholism are tramps.
What false assumptions are there?
That sufferers from alcoholism get drunk easily.
That sufferers from alcoholism always drink in the mornings.
That sufferers from alcoholism cannot stop drinking for a day, a week, a month, a year or more.
That you cannot be alcoholic if you still have a family, a house, a car, a job and money in the bank.
That you cannot be alcoholic unless you are first a regular heavy drinker.
That alcoholism occurs in people who are weak-willed or morally degenerate or both.
Often they do not.
How do doctors know if you are alcoholic?
The medical consequences of high alcohol consumption are well known but even doctors are reluctant to use the term "alcoholism" because it may be seen as a personal insult rather than as a justifiable clinical diagnosis.
In medical schools a great deal is taught about the medical and other consequences of high alcohol consumption but little or nothing is taught about alcoholism, the addictive disease.
Doctors are themselves not immune from the disease of alcoholism and some of them may therefore give inappropriate reassurance to patients.
Another alcoholic in recovery from the disease.
By telling his or her own story of drinking and its consequences, the recovering alcoholic is often able to get through the Protective denial system of the sufferer so that the sufferer himself or herself, through personal identification with many elements of that story and with the associated feelings, is gradually able to make his or her own diagnosis.
Who can help to make the diagnosis of alcoholism?
Professional Counsellors, Doctors or others who are used to dealing with addictive disease and who have significant experience of long-term recovery of their patients through Alcoholics Anonymous.
Anyone can help by making a clear list of what he or she sees as the consequences of the sufferer's drinking.
If anyone else is significantly worried about a person's alcohol consumption and its consequences, that person may well have a problem that requires further assessment.
I. "8–14 million working days a year are lost through heavy drinking" .
(Alcohol Concern.)
ii.
 "The total annual cost of alcohol misuse is £l .9 billion, including £748 million cost of sickness absence" .
(Professor Alan Maynard, Department of Health Economics, University of York.)
iii.
Alcohol abuse is associated with: 52% of deaths from fire 66% of attempted suicides 62% of serious head injuries in males 45% of fatal road accidents involving young people 36% of road traffic accidents involving pedestrians 33% of all domestic accidents 30% of drownings 30% of all accidents not involving road traffic.
What are the UK national consequences of alcohol consumption?
(Summary researched by "Action on Alcohol Abuse" .)
No.
Prohibition does not work in preventing alcoholism and never has done throughout history.
Should alcohol be made illegal?
No.
Prohibition brings legal and social problems of its own in the attempts to get round it.
No.
It would be inappropriate to penalise the relatively harmless social use of alcohol by 90% of the population in order to try to control the damage caused mainly by the alcoholic 10%.
No.
The 10% of the population who have addictive disease will always find methods of obtaining alcohol or will turn to use of other mood-altering chemicals.
Yes, it probably does.
Does this mean that we shall always have alcoholism in our society?
Furthermore, because alcohol and other mood-altering chemicals are cross-addictive, we shall probably always have drug addiction as well.
Any substance that tends to re-awaken the craving for the primary addictive "drug of choice" is cross-addictive with that drug of choice.
What is cross-addiction?
Each sufferer from addictive disease tends to have one favourite "drug of choice" that is particularly craved although some sufferers may have two or more "drugs of choice" that are equally craved.
Other  "secondary" drugs of choice are cross-addictive because they have similar but not such marked effects as the primary drug of choice for that particular sufferer.
Alcohol tends to be cross-addictive with other mood-altering chemicals such as minor tranquillisers, antidepressants, sleeping tablets and some other prescribed drugs such as Pethidine, Morphia and many other pain-killers, anti-histamines and the various illegal drugs such as cannabis, amphetamines, LSD, Mescalin, Ecstasy, magic mushrooms and other hallucinogens, cocaine, heroin and opium.
A sufferer from alcoholism given any one of these cross-addictive sub-stances will tend to revert to using his primary drug of choice, alcohol.
Extreme care must therefore be taken in the medicinal use of any of these drugs in sufferers from alcoholism.
It also follows that any sufferer primarily addicted to one of these other drugs will tend to be cross-addicted to alcohol.
For example, a sufferer from heroin addiction in recovery is best advised to be totally abstinent from alcohol: the risks of cross-addiction are great.
It should be borne in mind that despite the fact that psychiatric diseases such as depression or manic-depression tend to be vastly over-diagnosed, particularly in sufferers from alcoholism (in whom these features may be indications of their primary disease of alcoholism), some patients do have both addictive disease and psychiatric disease and need appropriate treatment for both.
The incidence of true psychiatric disease in patients with addictive disease is no greater than in the general population.
The behavioural consequences of drug use are virtually the same as for alcohol.
How does one know if someone in on drugs?
Drugs such as cannabis specifically affect short-term memory and therefore under-achievement in examinations and in other tests is a common indicator of drug use, although care must be taken not to assume that all under-achievers are necessarily on drugs.
Observing progressive disrespect for reliability and dependability, personal appearance, legal and other authority and for social pursuits and friendships that are not alcohol or drug related.
Again, some of these processes occur in normal adolescence and indeed even all of them may occur in some people in the absence of drug use, although this is improbable.
It should be emphasised that occasional drug use may be simply a "normal" pattern of behaviour corresponding to "normal" drunkenness and not necessarily he a sign of delinquency, depravity or addictive disease.
Nonetheless, disrespect for the law and the general customs of society are commonly a sign of addictive disease.
On the other hand, there are some sufferers from addictive disease — Particularly cocaine users — who may for quite some time be highly respectable and law-abiding and thereby wrongly assume that they are not addicted.
Looking for specific physical signs, such as the "nodding" head of heroin users, the lack of general motivation in cannabis users, acute wildness in amphetamine or cocaine users or slowness in barbiturate or tranquilliser users may all be totally unrewarding.
Addictive drugs are commonly used in combination and the users become temporarily "expert" on the pharmacological effects of drugs and at balancing the effects of one drug with those of another.
Further, these general behavioural characteristics can easily he confused with those of normal adolescence or personal idiosyncrasy and, conversely, one may find much "normal" behaviour even in those who have severe addictive disease.
Paradoxically, families are often more concerned by the behaviour of a primary sufferer who, unbeknown to them, is desperately trying to withdraw from drugs than they are by his or her apparently normal behaviour when he or she is continuing regular use.
The discovery of tablets, syringes, strips of silver foil, small folded paper envelopes, strange pipes and various other items of paraphernalia associated with drug use may be no more than an indication of experiment rather than addiction.
Further, the repeated searching and worrying is intolerable and utterly destructive of normal family life and in any case it is not helpful in either preventing or in treating addictive disease.
The discovery that someone knows a great deal about the effects of drugs and has strong opinions or whether or not a particular drug or process is or is not addictive is a strong positive indicator of addictive disease.
The rest of the population, including many members of the medical profession, are simply not all that interested in drugs or in addiction to the extent of such preoccupation.
None of these individual factors is proof of addiction but any of them can be a cause for concern and a repeated pattern of one or more factors is an indication that professional assessment is indicated.
Now can employers identify those members of their staff who have addictive disease?
By looking for its consequences rather than trying to become expert in diagnosis.
How can employers identify those members of their staff who have addictive diseases?
By keeping in personnel files a clear record of all known episodes of: absenteeism and poor time-keeping. ii.
accidents at work.
iii.
accidents elsewhere (if known).
iv.
road accidents.
v. disputes and disturbed relationships with colleagues.
vi.
divorce and marital disturbances (if known).
vii drunk-driving offences.
viii other legal problems.
ix previous employment records of various problems.
x. failure to maintain professional standards, being at the same time pefectionistic in some things and amazingly casual in others.
xi.
disturbed relationships with suppliers, clients and other outside gencies. xii.
any concern expressed by colleagues, clients or other people on the individual's drinking habits or general behaviour.
xiii.
episodes of recurrent minor illness and mood disorders with"current recourse to medication.
xiv.
poor general health or fitness.
xv.
financial problems.
xvi.
erratic performance of work or failure to achieve the level of performance that could reasonably be expected from qualifications and experience.
xvii. tendency to become more involved in drink-related activities and also in other social activities.
xviii.
difficulties that the primary sufferer may have in concentration id in accuracy of memory.
It is important to note that any of these items can occur with anybody, en when there is no addictive disease, and that some people may even eve experienced several of them over the years.
It should be emphasised, however, that a recurrent and persistent pattern of many of these items is a much more accurate diagnostic indicator of addictive; ease than noticing the smell of alcohol, looking for episodes of unkennels or examining for constriction of the pupils or other signs drug use.
Doing routine drug screening on urine samples at pre-employment examinations — and even at other times as a matter of Company  policy — may produce surprisingly high positive results but this information is not as accurate an indicator of addictive disease in general as a consistently clear set of personnel records noting information that the Company already has readily at its disposal.
No.
In the first case the more accurate diagnosis becomes, the greater the number of employees would be dismissed and this would be exceedingly bad for morale and for industrial relations.
The alternative of deciding not to get involved in any but the most obvious and serious cases means that an enormous amount of damage can be done by each and every suffering individual both to himself or herself and to the Company while he or she progresses inexorably towards becoming a "serious case" .
The fact is that addictive disease is serious right from the start.
Would not the best course of action be for employers to dismiss anyone who has addictive disease?
No.
The difficulties and the sheer financial costs of compensation for dismissal and recruitment and training of a replacement are considerably greater than those of intervention and treatment.
No.
The earlier the intervention the less the damage done and the less the costs of treatment.
No.
The more that addiction comes to be understood and accepted as a disease beyond the control of the sufferer then the less acceptable or defensible will be dismissal.
Yes.
There comes a time when it is not in the best interests of the Company nor in the best interests of the employed for him or her to be protected in any way from the full consequences of addictive disease.
The "denial system" is the part of the addictive disease that tells the sufferer that he or she does not have it.
Sufferers will deny that their problems have any connection with alcohol or drugs or other addictive substances or behaviour and will protect their employment until it is almost the very last thing to go before the final total surrender to addiction.
But that surrender and the loss of employment may be exactly the necessary stimuli to break through the denial system and convince the sufferer to seek effective help.
Cannabis is as dangerous an addictive drug as alcohol for those who have addictive disease.
Should cannabis be made legal?
Cannabis, when smoked, has to be inhaled very deeply to get its mood-altering effects.
It is usually mixed with tobacco and therefore the risks of smoking cannabis compound those of smoking tobacco and, because of the deep inhalation, persistent users have significant health risks.
Cannabis also has other medical consequences of its own such as decreased motivation and possible damage to genetic material in semen and ova resulting in foetal abnormalities.
The prohibition of cannabis is no more effective now than the prohibition of alcohol has been in the past.
Perhaps by making cannabis legal our society would imply progressive sanction to the use of any mood-altering drug.
On the other hand perhaps by its continued prohibition, despite widespread social use, some people come to believe that other even more dangerous drugs are relatively harmless.
The issues are finely balanced and there is no simple answer to the question.
However, what is important to recognise is that addiction is in the person, not just in the drug.
The fact that one person may be able to use alcohol, cannabis or even more dangerous drugs without great damage or risk of addiction does not mean that others will necessarily be able to use any of those drugs without significant risks.
One of the arguments for legalisation of cannabis or, for that matter, cocaine or heroin, is that use should be the free choice of the individual user.
For someone suffering from addiction there is no such thing as free choice: he or she gets unconditional damage from the addictive use of drugs or alcohol.
Another argument for legalisation of cannabis and other drugs is that criminals will no longer benefit from trafficking and individual sufferers will no longer need to commit crimes in order to obtain the money for their supply.
This argument overlooks a feature of addictive disease that is often overlooked by those who currently advocate substitution with medically prescribed drugs: the addict will commonly take the prescribed drug and an additional illegal drug or may sell the prescribed drug in order to obtain a preferred illegal drug.
As "designer" , synthetic illegal drugs became progressively more powerful, there is no end to the argument of where one should draw the line between what should or should not be legally prescribed.
In any case, in addictive disease the ideal of a drug-free life should be the primary aim of true help for the primary sufferer and the legality or illegality of any particular drug is irrelevant to that primary aim.
Society may not through its laws be able to protect the sufferers from addictive disease from the consequences of their addiction nor he able to protect itself from the consequences of their actions even if the law is  applied universally to all addictive drugs including alcohol.
The way forward is not through the law but through the understanding of addictive disease.
Issuing free sterile needles may have some temporary effect on reducing the risks of AIDS but this does not reduce the effects of the addictive disease itself which has significant mortality risks irrespective of the risks of AIDS.
Further, to be wholly effective, the sterile supply would have to be sufficient to provide for each suffering individual's use on every occasion and even for potential first-time intravenous users and this would require a level of anticipatory responsibility that is improbable.
It might also be argued that this provision of free sterile needles might even encourage some drug users to experiment or continue with intravenous use.
How can the spread of AIDS be reduced among sufferers addicted to the use of intravenous drugs?
Providing oral substitutes such as Methadone perpetuates rather than reduces the addictive disease and all its attendant risks.
Furthermore, there are significant flaws in the use of such substitutes as Methadone: sufferers from addictive disease will commonly use other drugs including intravenous drugs in addition to their oral Methadone and when they do finally want to end their suffering and come off drugs altogether they commonly find that it is far harder to come off Methadone that to come off heroin.
Naltrexone is an anti-euphoriant which masks any pleasure from subsequent use of opiate drugs and it is said to be non-addictive.
For the sufferer from addictive disease it would not reduce cravings for addictive drugs and therefore the sufferer has the choice of continued cravings with Naltrexone or continued use of addictive drugs without it.
Unless there is insistence upon recovery through Narcotics Anonymous, the recommended use of Naltrexone thus fails to understand the nature of addictive disease.
The only sure method of reducing the risks of AIDS in the users of intravenous drugs and hence in others is to get the sufferers from addictive disease into continuing recovery through the Anonymous Fellowship of Narcotics Anonymous so that they have progressively less craving to use addictive drugs.
Focussing attention upon individual sufferers and their capacity for recovery from addictive disease and providing general education on addictive disease and its recovery processes, rather than solely upon  addictive drugs and their risks, is the best long term help for the individuals at risk and hence for society.
Early identification of those at risk from any form of addictive disease would be the best preventive measure of all.
Giving or taking repeated doses of any mood-altering drug, such as alcohol Or heroin, can result in the body becoming used to receiving that drug.
Suddenly stopping the drug may result in acute "withdrawal" effects such as delirium tremens for alcohol or "cold turkey" (which feels like a bad bout of influenza) for heroin.
These physical effects of withdrawal indicate that the physical body craves for more of the drug and that it is physiologically addicted.
What is physiological addiction?
Cocaine addiction does not invariably give rise to physiological addiction and there may be no significant physical effects of withdrawal.
This can give rise to the mistaken belief that cocaine is not an addictive drug.
There can, however, be significant psychological effects of cocaine use causing a psychosis with acute mental instability and there can be marked psychological effects of acute withdrawal.
Cannabis may have few immediate withdrawal effects and this again may give rise to the mistaken belief that it is not addictive.
The test of the addictive nature of a drug in a particular individual is not whether he or she can stop it but whether he or she can stay off it (and similar mood-altering drugs) indefinitely without any cravings to return.
Physiological addiction is not the same as addictive disease in which the sufferer finds himself or herself drawn back to the drug even against his or her will.
It is often thought that drug addiction is a failure of will-power and is evidence of a weak will or inadequate personality.
This is not so.
Sufferers from alcoholism or other forms of addiction in recovery through Alcoholics or Narcotics Anonymous or other Anonymous Fellowships show no deficiency of will in comparison with the non-addictive population.
If anything, while still using, they show the effects of excessive but futile use of strong will in trying to reduce or stop using alcohol or drugs in order to gain control of their lives.
Physiological addiction may occur after repeated use of analgesics for relief from chronic pain.
However, many sufferers from addictive disease confuse the pain of withdrawal from analgesic drugs with the physical pain of various medical conditions.
Therefore they may believe that their back pain, for example, is physical rather than addictive in origin.
Is it possible to predict which 10% of the Population have addictive disease?
Addictive disease runs in families and it is therefore tempting to assume that up-bringing and family and social background are the prime cause of addictive disease.
However, adoption studies where children of alcoholic parents have been brought up in non-alcoholic families show that genetic inheritance is a stronger predictor of addiction than is home or social background.
Sons of alcoholics are many times more likely to become alcoholics than are the sons of non-alcoholics.
An inherited predisposition to alcoholism has also been found in women and is evidently transmitted through the mother.
Sufferers from Chemical Dependency (Alcoholism or Drug Addiction) may have a specific abnormality in brain biochemistry.
Compounds containing a particular amino acid, tryptophan, do not appear to be dealt with in quite the same way in the brain of a sufferer from addictive disease as they are in other people.
A particular substance, tetra-hydro. iso-quinolone (THIQ), was thought at one time to be the active chemical "cause" of addiction but this is no longer thought to be precise cause.
A current theory is that in some individuals who have specific genetic predisposition, alcohol and other mood.altering drugs Progressively act upon brain tissue and distort its biochemical function to produce abnormal chemicals similar to THIQ.
These trigger the loss of control and obsession.
Thus, addictive disease may be genetically determined but becomes Progressively a disease of adaptation to the various damaging consequences of previous drinking or drug use.
Research work continues on various tryptophan.based products to see if there are such specific triggers.
If there are, it may be possible in future years to identify potential sufferers from addictive disease through a simple blood test.
Research work also continues on serotonin secretion by the brain and on drugs that may affect that process.
(Serotonin is one of the body's "natural" tranquillisers.)
The hope is that addictive disease of all kinds may be found to be due to a common biochemical dysfunction and that it can therefore be corrected.
This simple physical concept of addictive disease and recovery has an obvious superficial attraction but may be far from the full picture.
The question may then arise in the future as to what to do for those potential sufferers who are identified in this way and the answer is the same as for those currently identified through the MMPI and for many families in whom there is other genetically inherited disease: specifically educate to Protect.
Practical advice for these specifically identified potential sufferers from addictive disease would include: i. avoidance of intoxication or a specific "high" from any mood-altering substance or behaviour.
ii.
awareness of the cross-addictive nature of many substances, including mood-altering medications that are legally prescribed, dispensed or sold and including the possible cross-addictive nature of sugar and white flour, caffeine and nicotine.
iii.
awareness of the potentially addictive nature of some forms of behaviour or relationship.
It is appreciated that these recommendations may be difficult to accept but the ravages of addictive disease can be so severe that it must be sensible for those specifically at risk to be advised to do everything in their power to avoid awakening their potential.
Current educational programmes aimed at all school children on the risks of drug abuse may fail to emphasise the major risks of alcohol and of some prescribed medicines and they may make the false assumptions that: a. drug addiction is simply a product of repeated use of drugs rather than a specific risk of some particular individuals.
b. those who are specifically at risk from addictive disease will believe the evidence put to them on film or by teachers and adjust their behaviour accordingly.
The fact is that they know from their own experience that many of their contemporaries take drugs occasionally and do not become addicted.
They therefore tend to believe that they also have minimal risk of addiction.
At least it can be said that these educational programmes may diminish the occasional experimental use (which may be damaging in itself) by those who do not have addictive disease.
But for those who do have the tendency to addictive disease the damage of awakening that disease has commonly already been done by social, legal, alcohol.
2.
The Primary Disease
What sort of disease is the Primary Disease of Addiction?
Chemical dependency (drug addiction or alcoholism) is a disease of the human spirit, of the sense of life, of hope, trust, love, faith and all the spiritual values.
It has consequences in mental, emotional and physical aspects of life.
The mental and emotional consequences are frequently misdiagnosed as causes of the disease.
The spiritual values are not part of the intellect.
Someone may be very unintelligent and yet have a good sense of hope or trust or love whereas someone else who is highly intelligent may yet have a relatively poor facility in these senses.
Not in the customary manner of expression of encouragement or love.
The disease comes from within and is not a reaction to outside circumstances or people.
Only "tough love" is helpful, loving the sufferer but allowing him or her to take the full consequences of all actions caused by the disease.
This helps to break through the defensive "denial system" and encourages the sufferer to seek truly effective help.
Can recovery from the disease be helped through encouragement or love?
The sufferer has to want to seek help and will not want to do so if other people cover up the consequences of addictive disease.
Whatever the sufferer or family member may say at times of anger or despair, nobody causes addictive disease or can control it or cure it.
It is not caused by the absence of encouragement or love, nor prevented or helped by their presence.
Regardless of encouragement or love (or hostility or punishment), the disease progresses and, in the absence of appropriate treatment through Alcoholics or Narcotics Anonymous, is commonly fatal.
The earlier in the progress of the disease that "tough love" is practised  then the earlier will the sufferer be likely to seek recovery and, hope-fully, the less damaging will have been the consequences.
Dr Richard Neilman of the Nazelden Foundation in Minneapolis identifies the following eight characteristics: The sufferer thinks frequently of the next opportunity for use or may make specific resolutions not to use.
For example, someone who has a problem with alcohol may find himself or herself thinking progressively more during the day about the opportunity to drink in the evening.
Alternatively, he or she may have a self-imposed rule not to drink before a certain time of day or on particular days, weeks or months or even years.
Already there may be an awareness that, once started, it is difficult to stop drinking.
What are the characteristic features et addictive disease?
Preoccupation:
The sufferer may say that he or she uses alcohol or drugs for social reasons but is often just as comfortable, if not more so, using alone.
Even drinking in a public bar may be considered to be solitary if the principal reason for doing so is the consumption of alcohol rather than for specific social contact.
Use alone:
In the case of drugs this is obvious but in alcohol the sufferer may try to convince himself or herself and others that the purpose is the taste or the social sharing rather than the "feel" , the mood-altering effect.
Rapidly gulping down the first drink (or starting on spirits before changing to beer or wine) may be indicative of craving for the "feel" of alcohol.
Primarily the purpose and effect of the addictive use of any substance, process or relationship is to suppress uncomfortable emotional feelings.
Using for effect:
In the case of prescribed drugs this is obvious but alcohol or other drugs may also be used to "calm nerves" or "help sleep" or to provide other medicinal functions.
Using as a medicine:
The sufferer from alcoholism may or may not hide bottles but will very rarely run out of stock altogether "because you never know when you might need to entertain someone" — All sufferers from Chemical Dependency will tend to spend scarce money on alcohol or drugs rather than on food, clothing, housing or on unpaid bills.
Financial or other support given to sufferers from addictive disease by well-meaning family or friends will therefore simply tend to enable more drug or alcohol consumption.
Protection of supply:
This is the crucial diagnostic feature.
Once triggered, the sufferer's diseased spirit says "more" and there is no predicting when the spree of further alcohol or drug use will stop.
In later stages of the disease the sprees often end in unconsciousness.
Using more than planned:
In the earlier stages, social and other appointments (particularly for the time to return home) are repeatedly broken because "someone turned up." 
In the early stages of the disease sufferer from alcoholism may be still waiting for the "real" party to start when everyone else is already intoxicated after a much smaller intake.
In later stages of the disease this "tolerance" is lost as the liver loses its earlier prowess.
In drug addiction a sufferer may use a regular daily quantity of drug, a single dose of which might kill a non-addicted person.
After a period of abstinence during which "tolerance" is lost, the same quantity of drug that was previously used daily by that sufferer from addictive disease might now be fatal to him or her.
This occurs primarily with alcohol rather than with other drugs.
At the time of severe intoxication the memory function of brain ceases to work and later there is a hole or blank in the memory,(Perhaps "blankout" is a better term in order to avoid confusion with other forms of loss of consciousness such as faints or epileptic fits).
A sufferer from alcoholism may have no recollection of his or her behaviour the night before, nor of how he or she got home.
Tidying up the mess and helping him or her to get to bed is not the best thing to do.
To allow the primary sufferer to wake up in yesterday's clothes, reeking of vomit, may seem unkind and unpleasant but it is a good way of getting through the denial system which might otherwise lead him or her to think that a lot of fuss was being made over nothing.
Higher capacity then others:
 "Blackouts" 
These eight characteristics of Chemical Dependency are not absolute indications but giving positive answers to at least four questions can be used as a rough indicator of whether a particular individual requires further assessment.
If these characteristics are formulated as questions seeking the answer "yes" or "no" , the results may be totally unreliable.
The excessive user of alcohol or drugs may not perceive his or her true state.
Some other, highly anxious, people may over.estimate their potential problems.
Questions should therefore be framed to look for attitudes of mind rather than simple quantity and frequency of use.
The sufferer loses a sense of faith, trust, hope and love in himself or herself, in other people and in any form of benevolent God.
As a result of this loss of belief in the potential for good in the future, the sufferer comes to perceive himself or herself as having few choices of action in life.
The general sense of well-being in life is lost.
What are the consequences of Chemical Dependency?
Spiritual:
The sufferer may have significant mood swings, tending  always towards depression resulting from the damaged sense of hope and other damaged senses.
When the only choice appears to be between continuing depression or continuing the various problems associated with drink or drug use, it is small wonder that sufferers from Chemical Dependency constitute 30% of those people who commit suicide.
The disease has a fearful mortality rate from this cause alone.
Emotional:
Alcohol and other drugs have direct sedative and stimulant effects on the brain, both acting at the same time but over different periods of time.
The initial sedative effect of alcohol causes a drunken sleep but the sufferer is wide awake early the next morning from the longer-acting stimulant effect.
The consequent mix of anxiety and depression both in the short term and in the long term is frequently misdiagnosed as Manic Depression.
Behavioural: Previous values change as the sufferer becomes increasingly in the grip of the disease.
Old friendships are broken and replaced by new friends who find significant alcohol or drug use more tolerable and a perpetual round of drink and drug related activities more acceptable.
These behavioural consequences may be mirrored in changes in external appearances, in clothing and hairstyle and in various paraphernalia that tend to be associated with each particular form of addiction.
Care should be taken, however, to avoid the assumption that a change in physical appearance, especially during adolescence, necessarily implies addictive disease.
Social: Chemical Dependency is a disease of isolation.
It is not just that the sufferer loses friends from the disordered behaviour.
Remarkably, it is commonly the sufferer himself or herself who breaks off social relationships and activities because of a feeling of not being properly appreciated or understood.
There is an inner sense of shame that results in a feeling of alienation from one's own true self and from others.
Legal: Recurrent problems with the Law are commonplace.
The sufferer from alcoholism is so frequently involved in traffic offences that it has been said that just two drink-driving offences are a strong indication of alcoholism.
Sufferers from drug addiction are perpetually in trouble with the Law because their drugs of choice may be illegal and because they may have to steal or commit other offences in order to obtain their drugs or the money to buy them.
Marital: Marital problems are almost inevitable.
Wife- and child-battering and incest are sadly frequent occurrences in alcoholic homes.
Drug addiction may put severe strain upon married life even with another addict.
Stress problems in the family may be the first indicator of a sufferer's disease.
Professional: The trail of broken promises at home is mirrored by a trail of broken contracts at work.
Divorce at home may be mirrored by  changes of work or even of occupation.
The work record becomes progressively worse.
Absenteeism, recurrent minor illnesses, accidents at home and at work and disturbed relationships with colleagues are all commonplace.
However, most sufferers from addictive disease are nonetheless in full employment and often (in order to protect the supply of money for alcohol or drugs) they cling desperately to that employment while progressively losing everything else of value in their lives.
Intellectual: There is some evidence for "state-dependent learning" which results in the brain being best able to recall factual information and practical skills when it is in the same state as when that information was first learnt or skill first practised.
Thus, the student who regularly uses alcohol or cannabis in times of study may have poor recall if he or she has no cannabis or alcohol at the time of an examination.
Correspondingly, some practical skills, such as playing sports, may have to be re-learnt when sober or non-tranquillised if they were first learnt under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
It is small wonder that the sufferer from addictive disease comes to believe that his or her body and mind actually benefit from the use of their drug of choice.
But the long-term effects upon the brain are to dull its critical faculties and to impair its capacity for memory and accuracy in all its functions.
Fortunately, much of this is reversible in recovery, although sometimes, as in encephalopathy ( "wet brain" ), the damage may be permanent.
An acute effect of alcohol on the brain is that memory functions may be so disrupted that they temporarily fail altogether and this results in a "blankout" , as previously described.
Some sufferers tell hair-raising stories of how they drove long distances or even flew aeroplanes yet had no subsequent recall of having done so.
Furthermore, while these "blankouts" may distress other people, the primary sufferer may find them confusing but may go so far in denial as to accuse other people of having faulty memory for the things said or done while he or she was in a "blankout" .
Crimes committed during such a "blankout" lead to the most heated protestations of innocence.
Educational: Most examinations are tests of short-term memory and this is exactly what is damaged in alcohol or drug use.
Some high achievers survive high alcohol consumption for many years but the damaging effects of drugs tend to be quicker in their tendency to cause memory impairment.
Financial: The progressive effect of Chemical Dependency is loss of one thing after another: occupation, home, friends, family, possessions and finally life itself.
Throughout all of this progressive loss the increasing financial insecurity tortures the spirit and degrades each day, month or year more than the last.
Physical: Every system of the body is progressively damaged.
The liver and the digestive system take the initial and continuing onslaught of alcoholism.
Liver disease, peptic ulcers, oesophageal varices, pancreatitis and malabsorption are all progressive and potentially fatal while the addiction to alcohol continues.
The red blood cells become larger and less efficient, the white cells less effective against infections and the blood clotting mechanism is damaged.
The effects on body biochemistry affect the metabolism of sugar, uric acid and triglycerides giving the appearance and consequences of diabetes, gout possibly leading to kidney stones, and disorders of blood fats leading to arterial disease which secondarily affects the heart and lungs.
The heart muscle suffers direct damage and many heart attacks are due to this direct cause as well as to arterial disease causing raised blood pressure.
The effects on the immune system and on hormones, including the sex hormones, are further complicated by the effects on general care of the body, resulting in malnutrition or obesity (or both at the same time), inadequate bodily hygiene and poor physical fitness.
In the skin the natural defences against infection are reduced.
The muscles are directly weakened and the bones and joints suffer terrible damage from accidents, vast numbers of which are drink- or drug-related.
In drug addiction, infections such as hepatitis and septicaemia get into the blood stream through infected needles.
AIDS, entering the body by the same route, further attacks body immunity and leaves it prone to any passing infection.
A further complication in drug addiction is that powdered drugs are commonly "cut" (diluted) with other substances such as washing powder or brick dust in order to get more money for an apparent increased quantity.
These contaminants may themselves cause significant damage to the body if they are dissolved and injected.
The brain and the nervous system take the greatest strain of all and the most intricate functions are progressively damaged.
Many of these physical complications are reversible once the prime cause of the damage — alcohol and drug intake — is discontinued: the human body has amazing capacity to repair itself.
But enormous numbers of sufferers from Chemical Dependency, a treatable condition, die of these secondary physical consequences while their primary addictive disease remains undiagnosed or inappropriately-treated.
Observing a pattern of these various damaging consequences in the sufferer's life may give the suggestion that Chemical Dependency may be the underlying cause simply because there is only a limited number of other possible causes of such devastation.
Nonetheless, it is  important to recognise that these various "consequences" have many other causes when they occur singly.
It is only when they come together to form a pattern which gets progressively worse that the probability of Chemical Dependency increases.
If a man has lost his employment and his wife, he has been charged with drunk driving and his blood tests show damaged liver function, one hardly needs to ask questions on his alcohol consumption and the answers are unlikely to be fully truthful in any case.
If a once beautiful and honest young girl has become dishevelled and has dropped out of a promising educational course and is in perpetual trouble with the Police, then it is almost superfluous to ask questions on drug use or to look for physical signs of drug addiction, even though clinical accuracy demands this.
If a middle-aged housewife is incapable of managing her home-life because of perpetual problems with her "nerves" for which she is-on medicinal treatment from her doctor, she may well be chemically dependant on alcohol or prescription drugs or both.
The early phase is characterised by increased tolerance to the substance or process of addiction and the sufferer feels better for its use.
What are the phases of addictive disease?
The middle phase is where this tolerance is progressively lost so that there is decreased control over use and over associated behaviour.
There is decreased ability to stay away from the first use in any day of the substance or process of addiction.
The chronic phase shows progressive deterioration in emotional stability so that relationships become progressively damaged.
Intellectual function is damaged so that thought processes and the capacity to instill any form of order into personal and professional life progressively deteriorates.
At this time the primary need perceived by the sufferer is to protect the future capacity to use the addictive substance or behaviour and this dependence results in changes in beliefs and values.
Reality becomes so painful that the sufferer uses his or her substance or process of addiction in order to survive the emotional carnage.
As previously described, "state dependent learning" occurs when the brain will repeat learned functions only when in the same "drugged" state as when the subject matter or practical activity was first learnt.
Repeated use is perceived as necessary in order to survive, yet at the same time it contributes to further decline.
The sufferer genuinely believes that he or she is normal and that the world has problems and so do the people who "run" the world.
What are the personality traits of Chemical Dependency?
Conflict with authority:
The sufferer believes that if only other people would change then everything would be all right.
Blaming other people, while opting out of responsibility for his or her own condition, is the hallmark of a sufferer from addictive disease.
Criticism of others:
There is nothing that the disease likes more than a circuitous argument in search of absolute proof on precise definitions of addiction.
Feelings are suppressed while the head endlessly debates.
Intellectualisation:
Anger is so fundamental to the disease that it goes with the person rather than with specific events.
Anger and Resentment:
The disease is closed-minded and not open to persuasion.
Why should it be?— Other people are perceived to have the problem; not the sufferer.
Stubbornness:
Individual willpower, the absolute determination to control drinking or drug use, is exactly what keeps the disease going.
This emphasis on control, despite all the evidence that this is precisely what is being progressively lost, focusses the sufferer's mind all the time on self and not upon others.
The sufferer becomes the total centre of his or her own world, disregarding relationships with others in the past or in the future.
Self-centredness:
Determined belief in the capacity for self control results in pride that the sufferer has special standards and abilities that others lack.
This exaggeration of the sufferer's ability is in compensation for the inner lack of belief in self.
Pride:
The continuing need to demonstrate self control results in all lesser activities being put off for the time-being.
Procrastination:
The spiritual isolation, the feeling that the sufferer is "special and different" from other people and misunderstood by them, results in recurrent thoughts of victimisation.
Self pity:
The reason so many things are delayed is that they have to be perfect.
Criticising other people for their inadequacies puts a tremendous burden of perfectionism on the sufferer in his or her own activities.
Perfectionism:
The poor internal self-image is reflected outwards onto other people and onto external circumstances rather than being recognised as the diseased part of self.
Everything is the fault of things or people "out there" rather than "in here" .
Externalisation:
The fixed belief that the sufferer may have problems and that these may be a cause of drinking or drug use, but certainly not a consequence of it, is the central psycho-pathology of the disease.
This denial is so certain that other people close to the sufferer may even come to doubt their own certainty that there really are problems or they may even come to doubt their own sanity.
Denial:
Doctors spend enormous amounts of time on the consequences of Chemical Dependency in the sufferer and in family members and (in Industrial Medicine) in problems at work.
Spending time considering that Chemical Dependency might be the true cause of many of these secondary consequences is a better use of the doctor's time than trying to tidy up the same repeated consequences time and time again.
Is Chemical Dependency a real disease and should Doctors waste valuable time on something that is usually considered to be self induced?
Although the physical act of taking a drink or drug is technically self-induced, the spiritual disease that leads to this compulsion is a disease that has clearly identifiable characteristics and outcomes, that runs in families and may even be genetically inherited (this does not mean that if your parents have addictive disease then you will necessarily also have addictive disease, but it does mean that there is a higher chance of your having it) and therefore the existence of the disease may be totally beyond the control of the sufferer.
Cancers, infections and medical and surgical conditions are not the only "real" diseases.
Doctors already spend large amounts of time on conditions — such as bereavement and unemployment — that have significant medical consequences, on contraception, short sight and similar conditions that are not "real" diseases at all and on the common cold which is frequently misnamed influenza and which requires no treatment at all.
Heart attacks and lung cancer are directly linked with cigarette smoking.
A multitude of medical conditions are due to being overweight, which in many people may simply be the product of self-indulgence rather than food addiction.
Many accidents are caused by sports or by other activities whose risk are well known.
The acceptance of these conditions as being worthy of medical time an the tendency to resent scarce resources being used on drug addiction and alcoholism have more to do with fear or disgust than whether or not a condition is demonstrably self-induced.
As an ideal general principle, doctors do not moralise but simply deal with the medical condition or consequence in the patient in front of them.
However, because of their own fear or disgust and the general lack of understanding of addictive disease, this reluctance to moralise is frequently forgotten where alcoholism or drug addiction are concerned.
A fundamental clinical maxim is to listen to the patient.
Sufferers from Chemical Dependency say"I have tried repeatedly to give up but I find that I can not.
I am always drawn back to it as if I was under a compulsion"They are telling the truth.
The progression of understanding of various forms of disease can be traced throughout history: Short sight may not have been understood by stone-age man.
Entrusted to look after the fire or the children, let alone to go hunting, the myopic savage would have been a menace to group security.
There may have been no understanding whatever of the concept of not being able to see as well as other people.
Nowadays we fully accept short sight.
It limits some occupations but we have no thought that it significantly affects personality, trustworthiness or sanity.
Diabetes leads to increased sugar in the blood and this can lead to confusion and coma.
This will certainly have caused concern in the Middle Ages and some unfortunates may have been considered to be "possessed" of evil spirits and treated accordingly.
Nowadays, diabetes is understood and in general is accepted even though hypoglycaemic (too little sugar in the blood) attacks, from taking too much insulin relative to body requirements, can result in strange behaviour which may at times have tragic consequences, as indeed can misdiagnosis (usually as drunkenness) from hyperglycaemia (too much sugar in the blood) in untreated diabetes.
Nonetheless, one would not generally fear someone with diabetes, nor be unduly concerned to employ someone who has diabetes or be worried if one's daughter were to consider marrying such a person.
Epilepsy, despite the known medical facts that it commonly "burns out" after ten years and that it is not normally associated with disorders of personality, nonetheless still causes considerable concern in society.
Many people are reluctant to employ someone who has epilepsy and they might be very concerned if their daughter intended to marry such a person.
The situation is not helped by the writers of "soap operas" who "explain" the behaviour of a murderer, child molester or other deviant by saying that he or she had epilepsy or a brain tumour.
Epilepsy may be understood today but it is a long way from being accepted in the same way as diabetes, let alone short sight.
Addictive disease is simply the next in the progression from short sight to diabetes and on to epilepsy.
It is neither understood nor accepted today and is greatly feared.
In time it will be both understood and accepted as a disease that is not the fault of the sufferer and from which full recovery is possible.
Confusing: A sufferer may be highly intelligent, have a responsible job, be very caring and concerned for his or her family and yet still be drawn by this compulsion to use his or her drug of choice and, as a result, progressively to destroy everything of value.
What does if feel like to be Chemically Dependent?
Frightening: Sufferers are repeatedly shown the potential consequences by doctors and others but "in denial" do not understand or accept the connection between drink and drug use and these fearful consequences.
When, ultimately, they fail in their efforts to give up drink or drug use, they become exceedingly fearful and ashamed and may even believe themselves to be insane.
Many commit suicide because they see no possible hope for the future.
Lonely: The spiritual isolation of the disease is lonely enough but add to this the "Jekyll and Hyde" behaviour (depending upon whether or not a drink or drug has been taken that day) causing untold damage to family and other relationships and the loneliness becomes intense.
This loneliness then tends to be misdiagnosed as depression and medications may be prescribed which may make the disease even worse.
The external arrogance or bonhomie of the primary sufferer may be no more than a fearful mask.
Because the primary disease leads to a disorder of mood with a poor self-image and a sense of shame and unworthiness.
It is this disorder of the human spirit that leads the sufferer to seek mood-altering substances or behaviours.
How can Chemical Dependency justifiably be called a "Spiritual" disease?
Because it gets better with the "spiritual" treatment of Alcoholics or Narcotics Anonymous.
Meetings of these Anonymous Fellowships can be described but precisely why the process works is not known in scientific terms.
Similarly, science may describe what electricity, gravity or radiation do and we can use them reliably in practical applications, but we still may not be able to describe precisely what they are.
Because sufferers feel better and are temporarily relieved of their urge to use an addictive substance or behaviour after a meeting of an appropriate Anonymous Fellowship.
Involvement in a meeting is a "spiritual" process: it is not simply mental, educational, emotional or the process of providing group support, although there are elements of all of these.
Essentially, active involvement in a meeting reverses the characteristics of the disease, giving a sense of peace, hope, trust, love and other positive senses.
Repeated involvement in meetings leads to progressive erosion of the personality traits of the disease.
Discontinuation of involvement in meetings leads to their recurrence.
It is not primarily a mental disease because thought processes return to being perfectly intact in those who are in substantial recovery through the Anonymous Fellowships.
Thus the "stinking thinking" of addictive disease is reversible.
It does not respond to other forms of mental or emotional treatment such as analytical psychotherapy, behaviour therapy or general psychiatric group therapy, although any of these may possibly be helpful in dealing with other issues once the primarily disease is in recovery through the Anonymous Fellowships.
It has consequences in other aspects of life but treating these consequences has no effect on the primary "spiritual" disease.
Frequently, the consequences are misdiagnosed and treated as causes but this is no more justified than asking an educational psychologist to treat the disturbed thought processes of someone in pain from acute gout.
When the primary "spiritual" disease is treated through the Anonymous Fellowships the consequences of addictive disease gradually resolve.
bleAdoption studies show that nature is a stronger predictor of addictive disease than nature.
Why are other concepts on the cause of addiction inaccurate?
Addictive disease affects sufferers throughout the whole of society and is not related to social class, income, employment or privilege or lack of privilege of any kind.
There is no evidence that stress causes addiction as such although a stressful life event may trigger latent addictive disease.
There is no direct evidence that all people have the potential for addictive disease within them and, conversely, there is evidence that addictive disease seems only to affect particular people, albeit an enormous number.
There is no evidence that addictive disease arises from traumas of early childhood or that psycho-therapeutic techniques that explore the emotional and behavioural patterns established in these early years have any effect whatever in the understanding or treatment of addictive disease.
They may well provide insight and help for other behavioural disorders but not for addictive disease as such.
Thus, one would advise sufferers to deal first with their addictive disease through a 12 Step programme of recovery through the Anonymous Fellowships and later, while in the second stage of recovery, come to deal with other behavioural issues through whatever method may be individually appropriate.
Alcoholics Anonymous describe Alcoholism as being a physical allergy allied to a mental obsession, giving rise to a threefold illness: "…we have been not only mentally and physically ill, we have been spiritually sick." 
This description fits the observable characteristics and progress of the disease, although it might be more appropriate to substitute the social term "" sensitivity "" for the strictly clinical term "allergy" .
The Psychiatrist, Dr William Glasser, author of "Reality Therapy" and "Control Theory" holds that the search for unconditional love is at the heart of addictive disease.
Misunderstanding is as follows: blaming others for the condition of self is the psychological origin of the disease.
There may nonetheless be a genetic predisposition that leads to the mood-altering substance providing the perceived perfect solution to this quest for unconditional love.
However, other people do not accept the sufferer's determination that alcohol or other mood-altering substances are the solution to problems rather than a further cause of them.
Consequently, the sufferer increasingly cuts himself or herself off from the reality of life as presented by others and continues to blame them for their failure to provide unconditional love and "understanding" comparable to that experienced in the relationship with alcohol or with other substances or behaviour that lead to alteration of mood.
Ultimately this relationship with mood-altering substances or behaviour is the only relationship left.
Control Theory holds that the sufferer has the choice of "pictures" of perception in his or her mind giving images of how life "should" be.
Illness occurs when these pictures are refused the opportunity to conform with pictures of life as it actually is.
The sufferer attempts to gain control by changing his or her pictures of reality to conform to the  pictures of perception of how life should be.
Reality Therapy involves confronting the sufferer with the reality of life as perceived by others and helping him or her gradually to change the perception of how life should be so that it comes nearer to how life actually is.
Thus, alcohol and other mood altering substances come to be seen in reality as mood-altering chemicals rather than solely as a perceived solution to problems.
Further, Control Theory and Reality Therapy dictate that ultimately the sufferer is himself or herself responsible for changing the pictures in his or her own perceptions.
The sufferer has to learn to live in reality, blaming self rather than others for his or her own problems and recognising that unconditional love could only be received when it is equally freely given.
These concepts of Dr Glasser fit closely with the experience and understanding of the Anonymous Fellowships and with the practical treatment methods employed by treatment centres based upon their principles.
Unconditional love is precisely what is given and received in the Anonymous Fellowships and the application of reality as the standard by which sufferers need to live serves gradually to clear away the confusion caused by addictive disease.
The Anonymous Fellowships help sufferers to come to recognise that their problems lie primarily in their own perceptions and behaviour and that solutions lie in giving help to others and asking for help from them.
Alcoholism may progress quickly over a few years but commonly progresses over twenty years or even more from first intoxication until terminal chronic disease.
What is the normal course of progression of addictive disease?
Addiction to drugs may progress more rapidly over three to five years.
Different people have different severity of addictive disease.
(Compare X, Y and Z in fig i)— In some the progression is very rapid while in others it takes very many years and may only be triggered by an acute personal crisis such as retirement or when the children leave home (the "empty nest syndrome" ).
The gradual decline and progressively more severe consequences are not predictable.
They come and go and there will be times of definite improvement (see P in fig ii).
These times are used by the sufferer to prove to self and others that he or she has no problem with addictive disease but is in full control, provided that outside circumstances do not cause further upset.
The family and others also cling to these times of false hope.
But the time comes when control is lost again and on each occasion the disease and its consequences are worse than previously.
Each new pit is deeper than the one before.
(Compare I, 2,3 in fig iii).
The time between successive pits becomes progressively shorter (compare A with B in fig iv).
The disease accelerates so that the times of improvement become no longer measurable improvements but simply times of no further drastic decline (see Q in fig ii)…until the next time.
3.
Other Addictions
In addition to Chemical Dependency.
what other addictions are there?
The eating disorders, anorexia, bulimia and compulsive overeating.
Gambling and other forms of risk taking.
Addictive relationships.
Other drugs such as nicotine and caffeine.
Compulsive exercise taking, workaholism, compulsive overspending and similar behavioural addictions.
Yes, and they have real consequences.
The physical consequences of compulsive overeating, anorexia and bulimia can be severe and even fatal.
Are other addictions real addictions?
As with alcohol and similar major mood altering drugs, the addiction is in the individual more than in the drug or process.
Some people can take or leave cigarettes just as they can take Or leave an alcoholic drink — Others find that however hard they try to stop smoking and however much they may be aware of the damaging consequences of continuing to do so, they simply cannot stop but find themselves compelled to continue.
These people have addictive disease and their drug of choice is nicotine.
The same can happen for some people with caffeine, which is found particularly in coffee, tea, cocoa, chocolate and in smaller quantities in lemonade, cola and similar soft drinks.
The physical consequences of nicotine addiction (and of nicotine use, irrespective of addiction) are well known and dramatic but nonetheless frequently, denied on a day-to-day basis.
 "It couldn't happen to me and, even if it does, we have all got to die sometime" is a common self-justification  that almost belies belief when it is considered that a life threatening "pleasure" is nothing more than a mere cigarette.
There may be some pleasures for which it is worth risking one's life but to do so for a cigarette is an illustration of the sheer insanity of addictive disease.
Some habitual or excessive users can stop smoking when convinced by evidence of progressive respiratory and cardiovascular damage.
Conversely, the sufferer from addictive disease cannot stop and denies the causal connection even up to his or her own death while blaming environmental pollution, an influenza epidemic, stress or any other external factor as the cause of his or her increasing disability.
The physical consequences (dizziness, headaches, tremor, increased pulse rate and blood pressure and increased urinary output leading to relative dehydration) of caffeine habituation (taking the equivalent of six or more cups of tea or coffee daily)— or addiction (the inability to stop using caffeine despite these adverse consequences) are not as well known as those of nicotine habituation or addiction but nonetheless can be very debilitating and the constant stimulant effect can lead to significant withdrawal symptoms, particularly causing headaches and chronic tiredness.
The physical effects of compulsive exercise can lead, for example, to sufferers continuing to exercise despite fractures or other serious consequences of their illness.
The social consequences of compulsive gambling and risk-taking, workaholism, compulsive overspending and other behavioural addictions can be utterly destructive.
The mental, emotional and other consequences are similar for all addictive disease.
The spiritual origin of all addictive disease is identical.
Typically where there are damaging consequences and where the sufferer feels the compulsion to continue to use or return to the substance Or behaviour of addiction despite those damaging consequences.
Where is the dividing line between normal use and addiction?
Many damaging consequences can result from being a heavy drinker but alcoholism does not come simply from drinking too much.
Alcoholism and other forms of addictive disease are more probably born rather than made.
Similarly, there can be damaging consequences from repeated drug use, smoking, caffeine ingestion, gambling, excessive exercise, overwork, slimming, overeating, forced vomiting and from making inappropriate relationships but this does not mean that all  people who suffer damaging consequences are necessarily addicted to any of these processes.
Addictive use of any substance or behaviour is seen when the individual uses it in appropriately and compulsively to suppress uncomfortable emotions Or to gain a sense of elation in order to change a disordered mood rather than simply using it for its own sake.
No more than alcoholism is the drinker's disease.
Is it correct to refer to anorexia as the slimmer's disease?
Not all people who recurrently diet or who are excessively thin are necessarily anorexic just as not all people who drink regularly or excessively are necessarily alcoholic.
People do not become anorexic simply through slimming too much, nor alcoholic through drinking too much.
In each case the addictive disease is probably in-born in its fundamental tendency.
It is very similar to Chemical Dependency in that the sufferer primarily seeks control over his or her emotions.
(Anorexia does affect men but more commonly affects women).
What is the addictive nature of anorexia?
The sufferer from anorexia may be told by others that he or she is thin but has a distorted body image and believes himself or herself to be "fat" or "normal" regardless of body weight.
Correspondingly, compulsive overeaters may not see themselves as being disproportionately fat — When asked to identify their body shape from a range between the two extremes, the sufferers from anorexia and compulsive overeaters will each tend to choose shapes that are close to the normal body patterns from the middle of the range.
Even when presented with photographs showing obvious emaciation from starvation, the sufferer from anorexia may comply with forced feeding through intravenous or naso-gastric infusion in hospital but still continue to believe that this is all a lot of fuss and that other people are the ones who really have problems.
In this there is an exact parallel with sufferers from Chemical Dependency denying the severity of their illness.
No, they are probably the same condition in different manifestations  just as Chemical Dependency covers alcoholism and various forms of drug addiction all of which have similar mood-altering effects.
Are bulimia and compulsive overeating the opposite of anorexia?
Bulimia does not mean "to force vomit" , Some compulsive overeaters (all of whom could be termed sufferers from bulimia) use enforced vomiting further to control their emotional feelings and also to protect themselves against the consequence of obesity — but not all do so.
Not all people who use enforced vomiting as a method of avoiding the consequences of overeating (or who use it simply as a method of slimming in order to follow the dictates of fashion) are necessarily suffering from bulimia.
In fact very few of them are, just as very few of the total number of people who get drunk are alcoholic and very few of the total number of fat people are compulsive overeaters — many are simply fat as a result of greed or lack of care rather than as a result of compulsion.
The eight characteristics of Chemical Dependency (preoccupation, use alone, use for effect, use as a medicine, protection of supply, use more then planned, greater capacity than other people and blackouts) apply precisely to compulsive over-eating or bulimia, substituting food for alcohol or drugs.
Blackouts are described in extreme cases of overeating binges or starvation even though this feature is most commonly associated with alcohol.
The physical and other consequences of Chemical Dependency also have their equivalents in the eating disorders.
Some foods act as specific "drugs of choice." 
In the eating disorders sugar and white flour appear to be the specific equivalents to alcohol and other food-altering chemicals in Chemical Dependency.
Other binge foods of particular significance to individual sufferers may be salt and salty substances, butter and other dairy products and indeed almost anything can be a binge food.
Some foods — salty substances, raw vegetables and other specific foods — appeal particularly to sufferers from anorexia.
They may persuade themselves that they are eating large quantities of food even though the low calorie count ensures continued weight stability or loss.
In all the eating disorders the process of bingeing or starving results in an emotional "high" and is used as a method of suppressing other emotional feelings.
Anorexia and bulimia are not clearly distinct conditions.
The same individual may suffer from both conditions at different times or have some features of both conditions at the same time.
Thus, someone who is primarily in an anorexic phase, using starvation as his or her prime  method of control over emotions and relationships, may have episodes of bingeing and then starve again as a method of gaining further, illusory, control and in order to control the physical consequences of the binge.
Similarly, someone who is primarily in a bulimic phase of the disease may binge on lettuce or on other foodstuffs that have particularly low calorie value and weight-producing potential or may even control body weight by dramatically reducing fluid intake.
Therefore they may actually lose weight even though apparently consuming large quantities of food.
At both extremes of anorexia or bulimia the sufferers may use medications to induce vomiting or to reduce body fluid or to purge themselves either with laxatives or enemas or both.
The relationship between eating disorders and compulsive physical exercise may be totally intertwined.
Physical exercise also has the capacity to be used to attempt to control emotional feelings, to work off the calories consumed in food and to control body size.
Thus the compulsive relationship with physical exercise can become effectively part of the spectrum of eating disorder behaviour.
The acute starvation of anorexia may be life-threatening from malnutrition, disturbance of body fluid balance and decrease in defence against infections and should therefore be supervised in hospital or a specialist addiction unit —(This corresponds to the acute risks of epileptic fits or delirium tremens in withdrawal in alcoholism.)
Beyond being life-saving there is no further place for hospital treatment of anorexia as it is primarily an illness of the human spirit and the hospital is important only for the treatment of acute physical consequences.
Psychiatric hospital units for the treatment of anorexia commonly find that weight loss recurs after the patient is discharged from hospital.
The condition is more appropriately treated in specialist addiction units.
How are eating disorders treated appropriately?
Compulsive enforced vomiting may also cause acute disturbance of body fluid balance which may require treatment in a hospital or specialist addiction unit — The regurgitated acid from the stomach erodes the enamel of teeth and results in severe dental problems.
As with anorexia, the condition tends to recur after traditional forms of hospital treatment in medical or psychiatric units.
Wiring together the jaws of compulsive overeaters or performing surgical Operations to reduce the abdominal apron or reduce the length of the intestines, and hence reduce their capacity to absorb food, or inserting inflatable balloons through an endoscopic tube into the stomach, or performing liposuction to various parts of the body, all show no  understanding of the primary spiritual nature Of addictive disease.
By concentrating upon the physical consequences, the surgeons are deluding themselves and their patients into believing that they are helping the problem and that they are providing encouragement for the future.
In truth the exact opposite occurs —the compulsion continues as before and the physical problems return, sometimes worse than before and sometimes (particularly in the case of bowel surgery) coupled with medical complications from the previous operation.
Focussing attention on food is mistaken except in the requirement of the basic physical abstinence from sugar and white flour and specific binge foods and in acquiring the basic physical discipline of having three regular meals daily with nothing taken between meals.
This physical abstinence is the equivalent of the Chemically Dependent patient needing to abstain from all mood-altering chemicals including those medicinally prescribed or obtainable in pharmacies or supermarkets.
Taking three regular meals with nothing in between removes the risk of "grazing" like cattle all day long and begins to re-educate the eye and the stomach in what constitutes a "normal" portion of food.
Basic physical abstinence can be exceedingly difficult.
Residential care may be necessary not simply for the medical emergencies of starvation in anorexia or electrolyte imbalance in both anorexia arid bulimia but also to monitor adherence to the requirements of basic physical abstinence — This monitoring commonly may need to extend to patients initially being on "locked bathroom" status so that they may not use baths, basins or showers except under staff supervision, nor may they flush lavatories until after staff inspection.
This supervision may appear somewhat unpleasant but it is necessary to break into the compulsive dependence upon enforced vomiting in the same way as the physical detoxification process breaks into alcohol or drug dependence.
A specialist addiction unit based upon the principles of the Anonymous Fellowships will have knowledge of the compulsive nature of eating disorders and will also have an awareness of how family members and other well-intentioned helpers may unwittingly enable the disease to continue.
The basic spiritual treatment of eating disorders is the exact equivalent of that for Chemical Dependency.
The appropriate Anonymous Fellowships for anorexia, bulimia and compulsive overeating exist to help the primary spiritual recovery.
Learning to allow emotions to be felt and to be dealt with appropriately in human relationships may be helped by specialised counselling within a treatment centre specialising in addictive disease.
They can be.
Risk-taking, including taking gambles of one kind or another, is part of normal life.
As with other addictions, compulsive gambling and risk taking are seen when the sufferer is compelled to return despite repeated and increasing negative consequences and when the processes is used inappropriately and compulsively to suppress uncomfortable emotions or to gain a sense of elation in order to change a disordered mood.
Are gambling and other forms of risk taking true addictions?
There is an element of risk-taking in all addictive disease and the "buzz" that is felt from a surge of adrenalin in risk-taking is similar to the "buzz" felt from addictive drugs.
At the same time the adrenalin surge is itself a strong feeling and any strong feeling can be a trigger factor in stimulating the urge to use other mood-altering substances or processes — It is therefore advisable for people in recovery from any form of addictive disease that they should avoid gambling and other forms of risk-taking as far as possible.
The distress caused by compulsive gambling is very considerable.
In those who do not have addictive disease, the occasional flutter on a horse race or on the football pools is comparable to the occasional pint of beer and therefore unlikely to be the cause of any major problems.
But in the addictive disease of compulsive gambling the utter misery in the primary sufferer and in the family is every bit as devastating as in alcoholism.
It is easy to think of gambling as innocent pleasure.
The Bingo of the housewife or pensioner certainly has its social value but if the relation-ship is addictive even this can become just as consuming as a Poker school or greyhound race.
The consequences of compulsive gambling are comparable to those of any other addictive disease and are not simply those of financial loss.
It may appear paradoxical but the compulsive gambler may get the biggest adrenalin surge from the biggest loss and, like the proverbial fisherman, may boast of the "one that got away" .
Stealing (or not paying other debts) in order to gamble is commonplace and stories abound of any number of crimes — even murder — being committed for pitifully small amounts simply in order to gamble.
This is addictive disease the same as any other and needs to be treated as such.
Compulsive stealing may in itself be a form of gambling.
The coin-slot fruit machines of the amusement arcades may be joined nowadays by sophisticated video-games and the age of the gambler may progressively decrease but the addictive disease remains the same just as when the younger generation sometimes turns to solvents in place of the addictive use of alcohol or tranquillisers in their parents.
The financial markets are perhaps the biggest gamble of all and the dividing line between "normal" risk-taking and compulsive gambling, sharp practice and even criminality can become exceedingly thin.
This is not to say that all investors or brokers are compulsive gamblers any more than to say that all drinkers are alcoholic.
But it is to say that compulsive gambling with all its damaging consequences can be seen just as much in the reputable halls of commerce as in the street corner betting shop.
Gamblers Anonymous helps the primary spiritual disease.
When an individual returns to making the same type of relationship again and again despite repeated and increasing negative consequences or uses it inappropriately and compulsively to suppress uncomfortable emotions or to gain a sense of elation in order to change a disordered mood.
How can relationships be addictive?
Some addictive relationships can be disguised as normal.
Our society has tended to place women in a subservient relationship to men and some women find themselves drawn towards dominant or dependent partners and thus fail to assert their own needs as individuals.
Either the dominance or the recession or both may be addictive in their repetitive pattern.
Other addictive relationships such as some sexual practices may be branded by society as being definitely abnormal or even criminal, yet there is evidence that they may be part of the broad spectrum of addictive disease and therefore outside the personal control of the individual sufferer.
For example, there is evidence that child molestation runs in families and is not simply an individual quirk.
There is a very high incidence of alcoholism in families where incest occurs but it also appears that child molestation occurs in several generations in some families even when there is no other obvious sign of addictive disease.
This is not to argue that these practices should not be abhorred and punished by society but it is to say that the underlying tendency may be addictive in nature and may therefore require the specific treatment appropriate for any addictive disease.
Promiscuity may be used compulsively to suppress uncomfortable emotions or to gain a sense of elation in order to change a disordered mood and is a common cross-addiction with other forms of addictive disease.
Disordered relationships are the norm in any addictive disease and  working on the capacity to make open and honest relationships is part of the recovery programme of any Anonymous Fellowship.
For those not already helped in this way through other Anonymous Fellowships, Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous or Emotions Anonymous may provide the specific route to recovery.
It can reasonably be anticipated that whatever the addictive disease there will be an appropriate or near-appropriate Anonymous Fellowship.
The strength of personal identification that an individual may receive from a particular Anonymous Fellowship will depend upon how much he or she has in common with the specific disease of the other sufferers.
However, where there are small numbers of members of a particular Anonymous Fellowships it may be difficult to obtain sufficient numbers to get the maximum benefit from the group process.
For example, Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous has only just begun in the UK whereas Alcoholics Anonymous has been in the UK for over forty years.
There is therefore some potential disadvantage in trying to obtain maximum identification with other members of a particular Anonymous Fellowship and some advantage in recognising that all addictive disease — and all recovery programmes — have much that is fundamentally in common.
Nonetheless the closest possible identification with other sufferers is preferable not only for each individual sufferer but also for the health of each Anonymous Fellowship.
Nicotine and caffeine are mood-altering but they are not obviously fully cross-addictive with alcohol and the various drugs that lead to Chemical Dependency.
Therefore it does not seem to be necessary to encourage people who suffer from Chemical Dependency also to give up cigarette smoking (except on grounds of general health) for fear that it will spark off the compulsion to return to use of the original addictive drug of choice.
Nonetheless, for spiritual recovery to have the best opportunity for development, it must be true that sufferers from any form of addictive disease would ultimately be best advised to avoid all substances and behaviours that may have an inappropriate mood-altering effect.
Why do addiction treatment centres tend not to emphasise the possible cross-addictive nature of nicotine, caffeine, sugar and white flour for people with addictive disease?
It has until now been the general policy within treatment centres specialising in addictive disease that nicotine, caffeine, sugar and white flour have generally been ignored — or their use may even be encouraged — in the early stages of treatment while sufferers learn to do  without their prime drugs of choice in their recovery from Chemical Dependency.
This policy is currently in question because of the high incidence of cross addiction to these substances but there is still a long way to go before Treatment Centres generally recommend abstinence from all these substances from the first day of recovery.
The risk in doing so would be that new patients might well not see the need to do so and might feel that this would be an inappropriate intrusion into the realm of individual freedom of choice in their personal lives and, further, that life might not be much fun in the straitjacket of abstinence from all these substances as well as from their prime drugs of choice.
The denial system is strong enough without giving the addictive disease any additional opportunity to manifest itself by giving the patient further excuse to leave treatment.
These substances, that may in some people be of relatively minor cross-addictive potential, can always be tackled later when the head is more clear and the primary disease is in more secure recovery.
Treatment centres focus on first things first: alcohol and drugs may cause immediate threat to life itself in some sufferers, as can anorexia or bulimia or other forms of addiction in others.
In each case the greatest threat needs to be addressed first and where two or more addictions are equally strong, then each needs to be treated with equivalent concern.
First, recognise that cigarettes provide one with something to do with one's hands, a method of opening a conversation and an opportunity for giving and receiving.
There is even a sexual overtone in the use of hands and lips and in the dominance over fire and control of smoke.
Proof of this may be demonstrated by the relative lack of pleasure when smoking a cigarette with one's eyes shut.
To give all this up may initially cause one to feel relatively awkward and inept in company.
Perhaps this is one reason why cigarette smoking is so attractive in adolescence.
How do people addicted to nicotine give up smoking cigarettes?
Second, recognise the severe health risks to self and others.
Exhaling a cigarette through the fine tissues of a handkerchief gives graphic demonstration of what happens to the even finer tissues of the lungs.
Education on this and other health risks of cigarette smoking is often persuasive for the general population but would be ineffective for nicotine addiction just as education on other specific health risks is ineffective in other forms of addictive disease.
Nonetheless the reduction of health risks is the prime benefit once the nicotine addiction is in recovery.
Third, the gradual detoxification over a period of ten days, in order to avoid common withdrawal symptoms of tiredness, insomnia and  general irritability, may be helped by use of chewing gum containing nicotine.
Each piece of gum should be chewed firmly for twenty minutes to obtain the full effect.
The total number of pieces of gum used in the first day should be gradually reduced over a subsequent period of ten days.
Hypnosis, acupuncture and other "alternative" therapies may be helpful in covering the detoxification period in some people just as they can be helpful in detoxification in other forms of addiction.
Finally, recovery from the addictive urge to return to cigarette smoking can be obtained through the Anonymous Fellowships in the same way as for any other form of drug addiction as outlined later in this handbook.
Yes, any behaviour that is used inappropriately and compulsively to suppress uncomfortable emotions, or to gain a sense of elation in order to change a disordered mood, or to which someone repeatedly returns despite negative consequences, can be a form of addictive disease.
Are some forms of behaviour addictive?
Compulsive taking of exercise is one example already mentioned.
Some sufferers have been known to jog themselves literally to death, despite being told by doctors of the specific risks they would incur by taking further exercise.
Compulsive overspending in these days of credit cards and generally easy credit facilities is not merely the privilege of the rich but can be a devastating condition in which inappropriate grandiosity repeatedly causes havoc with all efforts towards financial prudence.
Compulsive overworking (workaholism) or overachieving (which is not necessarily the same thing at all) are conditions that lead to much debate.
The term "workaholic" may be used as a term of abuse but workaholism should not be confused with high energy and dedicated efforts towards a defined goal.
Nonetheless, workaholism does exist when the sufferer simply cannot stop doing his or her work in order to suppress uncomfortable emotions or change a disordered mood and despite severe negative consequences to his or her family and to the rest of a balanced life.
Similarly, overachieving can be an addiction if the achievement is to no purpose or gratification while at the same time the costs to other relationships may be so high as to be catastrophic.
Addictive behaviour is used just as addictive substances are used by people who are prone to addictive disease.
It is used to suppress emotional feelings and it serves to isolate the sufferer from other people and to make him or her feel "special and different" .
The total number of people who specifically have addictive disease is known and the total number of people whose lives are significantly affected by addictive disease of one kind or another in someone else is also unknown but it seems unlikely to be less than 25% of the total population.
The numbers are unbelievable until we see them for ourselves.
Addictive disease originates as a disease of the human spirit.
This predisposition may be genetically determined.
What is the overall picture of the process of addictive disease?
This leads to a disorder of mood.
Mood-altering substances or behaviours may be discovered by the individual sufferer specifically to alleviate the disorder of mood or to provide a sense of elation.
The use of these specific substances or behaviours may trigger the underlying addictive potential so that they come to be used inappropriately and compulsively.
The intensity of addictive disease will vary from one individual to another.
All mood-altering substances or behaviours may be cross-addictive.
Many individuals will have one particular "drug or behaviour of choice" and other substances or behaviours may be only mildly cross-addictive to them.
Others will have more than one "drug or behaviour of choice" and may find themselves to be significantly cross-addicted to many others.
In general, in any sufferer from addictive disease, recovery from addiction to one specific drug or behaviour may lead to activation of the addictive tendency towards another.
The continued addictive use of any substance or behaviour tends in time to lead to problems and to damaging consequences of use.
The causal connection between the addictive use and the damaging consequences may be denied.
The problems and damaging consequences of use will feed back to exacerbate further the underlying disorder of mood and this may lead to further use of addictive substances or behaviour.
Thus, the addictive cycle progressively intensifies (figure v).
4.
Denial
Why do people with addictive disease use mood-altering substances and behaviour despite their damaging consequences?
Because they work: they do alter the mood that was disordered by addictive disease.
Initially (figure vi) the mood is improved, the new sensation enjoyed and the return is to the starting position, with no negative over-swing in mood.
In time (figure vii) after repeated use, there may be a negative overswing in mood and the first damaging consequences of use.
Later (figure viii) after further repeated use, the base-line starting position may be shifted towards a more depressed state.
The mood-altering substances and behaviour are still continued because they still work: they still alter the mood.
External factors may be blamed for the general depression of mood and blamed for various damaging consequences but no connection may be made between the depressed mood and damaging consequences and the continuing use of the substance or behaviour of addiction.
Quite the reverse, these become the trusted friends that truly understand and can be of real help in time of trouble.
Any suggestion that they might be the cause of problems is simply denied: it is declared that they could not be.
Ultimately (figure ix) after even further repeated use, the base-line stating position is shifted so far towards a depressed state that even the trusted substances and behaviour of addiction cannot restore the mood to its original starting position from before they were ever used.
Yet still they work in improving the mood from where it is now and still there may be no perception that the depressed mood and damaging consequences of use could possibly be the responsibility of the very substances and processes that seem to be the only things that can make life better.
The causal connection between mood-altering substance or behaviour and the damaging consequences continues to be denied and the denial is intensified.
Denial is a psychological defence mechanism by which the sufferer simply does not believe that he or she has a problem, despite all the evidence.
What is denial?
Denial is found in any situation of acute stress and is, for example it is commonly seen in bereavement, redundancy, dismissal, divorce and in major disease or injury.
The five progressive stages of any grieving process are: i.
Denial: "It didn't happen" .
ii.
Anger: "It shouldn't have happened to me" .
iii.
Bargaining: "If I do this then maybe it won't hurt so much" .
iv.
Depression: "My efforts are useless and there is nothing I can do" v. Acceptance: "Perhaps this is just the way it is and my life must go on" .
The whole grief reaction often takes about two years to work through from initial denial to final acceptance.
i.
Simple denial — the straightforward refusal to accept that something is so and that problems exist at all or have a direct connection with alcohol or drug use: "I can handle it" .
ii.
Minimising — accepting that there are problems but denying that they are of any great significance or that they necessarily have any connection with alcohol or drug use: "An alcoholic is someone who drinks more than I do." 
iii.
Externalisation or blaming — accepting that there are significant problems but blaming anything other than alcohol or drug use for their cause: "If it weren't for you I'd be okay" .
iv.
Rationalisation — accepting the problems and the high alcohol consumption or drug use but providing alibis: "Next time will be different" .
v. Intellectualisation — accepting the problems and the high consumption or drug use but getting heavily involved in analysis of intellectual theories or precise definitions of Chemical Dependency.
and its causes and consequences: "'Yes, but…" vi.
Diversion — changing the subject to focus upon anything other than alcohol consumption or drug use and its consequences: "My real problem is…" vii Hostility — open attack at any mention of Chemical Dependency and its consequences, let alone mention of the words "alcoholism" , "drug addiction" , "alcoholic" or "addict" .
What are the features et denial in Chemical Dependency?
The various features of denial are — exactly the same for the eating disorders, compulsive gambling or risk taking, addictive relationships and all other addictive diseases as they are for alcoholism or drug addiction.
Simple substitution of the words "food" or "starvation" or "risk-taking" or "behaviour" or whatever else is appropriate in place of the words "alcohol" or "drugs" will give a clear picture of the denial relevant to each particular addictive disease.
What are the features of denial in the other Addictive Diseases?
Denial spreads to cover cross.addictions.
It is commonplace to find sufferers from alcoholism or drug addiction denying that they may themselves have food, nicotine or caffeine addictions or other compulsive behaviours and they may even deny that these other addictions are "real" addictions at all.
They may prefer to believe themselves to be special and different in their primary addictions rather than part of a wider group of sufferers from addictive disease.
The denial may persist  and even be intensified when they are in recovery from their primary addiction.
i.
Simple denial — refusal to see that there are any problems in the family.
ii.
Minimising — acceptance that the sufferer has a problem and that there are some consequences in the family but refusal to accept that any of this is of great significance or that the family cannot cope from within its own resources.
iii.
Externalisation or blaming — admitting that there are problems but saying that the causes are due to pressures at work or unemployment or due to social, financial or other stresses or due to doctors or "pushers" or due to the inadequacy of the police, customs officials or the Government.
Above all, family members frequently blame themselves — and they may be encouraged to do so by the primary sufferers.
iv.
Rationalization — admitting the problems but determinedly latching onto specific alternative reasons.
 "Depression" is a convenient portmanteau condition that frequently satisfies this purpose.
 "Bad company" is another.
Considerable resistance may be encountered by anyone challenging these rationalisations. v. Intellectualisation — interminable insistence upon precise definitions of terms and insistence upon pointing out minor differences rather than major similarities in the behaviour of the primary sufferers or family members when compared with others.
vi.
Diversion — bringing up any number of reasons why the treatment of the individual sufferer, or consideration of the secondary effects upon the family, is not the prime problem requiring consideration at this particular time.
vii.
Hostility — accusation that anyone mentioning alcoholism or drug addiction or having a different understanding of addictive disease from his or her own has a "bee in the bonnet" .
What are the features of denial in Family Members?
of course, any and all of these defences (particularly the last) may have an element of truth.
But when one sees the whole lot in full flower all at once in one individual or in the whole family, one comes to accept the concept of denial as a prime component of "the family illness" in which the family member is addicted to self-denial and caretaking for primary sufferer and even (amazingly and hotly denied) addicted to the continuation of the status-quo despite all its desperate features, just as the primary sufferer is addicted to the continuation of his or her own drinking or drug use despite its desperately damaging consequences.
i.
Simple denial — refusal to accept that any staff have problems with alcohol or drugs or other forms of addictive disease.
This simple denial is not the same as refusing to accept that addictive disease is a management responsibility.
That is a tenable argument as is the belief that in any case little that is practical can be done without help from outside agencies.
Simple denial is when the problem is not seen in the first place, regardless of responsibility or resources.
ii.
Minimising — admitting that one or two staff members drink a bit or perhaps use a bit of cannabis or maybe occasionally get into trouble with the consequences of drinking too much but insisting that the Company has more important problems to deal with and that it is not the Company rule nor responsibility to deal with these problems.
iii.
Externalisation or blaming — The stresses and strains of a particular job or having too much money, or alternatively too little, may be blamed for alcoholism or drug addiction or other form of addictive disease, despite the fact that these problems are widespread throughout the whole of society.
iv.
Rationalisation — The social stigma of Chemical Dependency is such that reasons for drinking or drug use have to be found.
Paradoxically, the disease concept (that Chemical Dependency is a disease that is not the fault of the sufferer) tends to be resisted by those who will happily accept "stress" or "depression" or "weak will" or "upbringing" as possible causes.
Similar rationalisations are found for other forms of addictive disease.
v. Intellectualisation — Again, the fear that leads to interminable intellectualisation is understandable because of the social stigma of alcoholism or drug addiction or other forms of addictive disease even though misdiagnosis has significant risks for the sufferer, for others in the workplace and for the Company itself.
vi.
Diversion is seen firstly in discussion on the costs of treatment rather than the costs of continuing as before.
Secondly, it is seen in a whole host of tactics and alternative strategies to the simple procedure of insisting that the sufferer goes for treatment just as he or she would do for any other disease.
vii.
Hostility.
The approach to the senior staff of a Company has to be very cautious when putting forward a policy for alcoholism, drug addiction or other forms of addictive disease in the work-place.
It may be interpreted as a slur upon the good name of the Company and upon the management skills of the directors.
i.
Simple denial — We see the tramps and drop-outs and may wrongly assume that they are necessarily addicted to alcohol or drugs.
We do not see that our own friends and colleagues have the same one-in-ten incidence of addictive disease as anyone else's friends or colleagues.
The eating disorders and other forms of addictive disease may not be seen at all except in their extreme forms.
What are the features of denial in the work-place?
What are the features of denial in society at large?
ii.
Minimizing — "Our area may have a problem but I've never seen it except for the pushers hanging about that dreadful housing estate" .
Meanwhile, the hordes beating a path to the pub or the off-licence are simply ignored and sympathy is given to those who take copious amounts of prescription drugs for their "nerves" or for "insomnia" .
iii.
Externalisation or blaming — "the Government ought to do something" is the almost universal cry but precisely what it ought to do varies with the beliefs and prejudices of the individual.
The "drug barons" , importing from Thailand, Pakistan, or Colombia, are seen as the real cause of increasing "hard" drug addiction in the UK, rather than the fact that they would have no market if there were no demand.
iv.
Rationalization — We all of us find plenty of reasons -parties, suppers, weddings and celebrations of any kind — for drinking.
We put our own reasons onto those who are addicted to alcohol in order to explain why they drink so much; "he's a good chap, enjoying himself, having a bit of fun, relaxing, celebrating — but on occasions he goes a bit over the top" .
Similar rationalizations are used to "explain" the behaviour of sufferers from eating disorders and other forms of addictive disease.
v. Intellectualization — the press and television are daily crammed with the opinions of the pundits.
There are perhaps two things upon which each of us is the indisputable world expert, firstly the function of our own bowels and hence those of everyone else and secondly the causes of and treatment for addiction.
vi.
Diversion — showing that one does have some practical experience of treating alcoholism and other forms of addiction can be guaranteed to result in a change in the topic of conversation.
vii.
Hostility — "I suppose you think that we're all alcoholics or addicts of some kind and that we all ought to give up everything we enjoy" .
Such anger and defensiveness is commonplace and understandable  because our society is accustomed to the stereotype pictures of alcoholism and drug or other addictions as disorders of weak-willed and immoral people who need to be taught firm lessons on how to behave themselves properly rather than as ill people who need to be helped to become well.
5.
The Family Disease
What is the Family Disease?
Partly it is the response of some family members to the addictive disease of the primary sufferer.
Partly it is a primary addictive disease of some family members who are addicted to "fixing" or "helping" other people regardless of the consequences to themselves or to those other people whom they seek to help.
Not necessarily — or, if they do, it appears to affect some considerably less than others.
Do all members of the family necessarily have the family disease?
Yes it is.
A family member who did not react to the craziness of Chemical Dependency or other addictive disease would be a very strange, unreactive, person who might well be considered to be at least odd if not ill or crazy himself or herself for not reacting.
Isn't it perfectly reasonable to react to having addictive disease in the family?
Anxiety for the primary sufferer and for other members of the family.
What are the normal reactions to addictive disease in any family?
Disgust at the actions of the primary sufferer and at the consequences of the disease.
A sense of inadequacy and frustration because one may not understand what one is observing nor know what on Earth one can do about it.
Fear for the future.
Anger with the primary sufferer, with one's self and with other members of the family and with anyone else who happens to be around.
Shame that such a thing could happen in one's own family.
Guilt that the family member himself or herself may possibly have been in part a cause of the problem in the primary sufferer either by something done or not done.
Blaming the primary sufferer, other members of the family and all those who are considered to have contributed to the problem.
Initial disbelief in the disease concept and determination to find or reinforce one's own ideas on the cause of addiction.
Determination to deal with the situation "properly and once and for all" but coupled with the confusion of not knowing precisely what to do for the best, particularly in the face of vast quantities of advice all of which seems perfectly clear — except that it directly conflicts with other equally vast and equally clear advice from other sources.
Love and concern for the primary sufferer and for other members of the family.
A sense of loss of mutually supportive family relationships.
The standard grief reaction going through the five phases of denial, anger, bargaining, depression and finally acceptance over a period of two years but sometimes with progressive insulation of emotions resulting in a sense of isolation.
Exactly the same as for the primary addictive disease of Chemical Dependency or any other form of addictive disease.
The object of the family addiction (or the "drug" ) is self-denial or caretaking for the primary sufferer himself or herself.
Thus, the addictive family disease is addiction to people who have primary addictive disease.
What are the indications of addictive family disease?
The family member is determined to "help" the primary sufferer:(a) regardless of whether this "helping" actually does help in the long term.
The family member will continue to do things for the primary sufferer (providing food and shelter and other necessities of life, tidying up the messes, telling lies or half-truths to "cover up" , paying off debts or fines, providing bail, apologising on his or her behalf and generally doing everything possible to protect the primary sufferer from the consequences of his or her disease) regardless of the demonstrable fact  that these actions do not help the sufferer to get into recovery.
The family member will say that these things should help, that they are only part of normal family commitment and civilised behaviour and that, if he or she did not do these things, then the primary sufferer might die.
The sad truth is that the primary sufferer is much more likely to die if this "enabling" support continues.
All help is simply converted by the primary sufferer into more opportunity to continue the addiction.
The heartfelt promises of the morning are frequently broken by nightfall.
The choice is not between life and death but between possible death and probable death.
(b) regardless of the price that the family member is paying in his or her own life.
Again the family member will argue that this is perfectly reasonable behaviour for any family: total commitment regardless of cost to self might be considered to be the moral basis of family life.
That might be so in the case of other illness or disaster but in addictive disease total commitment regardless of cost to self actually works against recovery.
Not only is there failure to confront the primary sufferer with the full consequences of addictive disease but also there is no significant contrast between the general behaviour and quality of life in the primary sufferer and in the family member.
Why should the primary sufferer want to seek recovery if the quality of life without alcohol or drugs or other addictive substance or process is going to be no better than that of the family member?
The primary sufferer continues his or her addiction regardless of consequences and so does the family member: the addictive disease is similar; only the object of the addiction differs.
Addictive disease is primary (not secondary to other conditions), progressive and relapsing.
The primary sufferer progressively adapts to the changes brought about by the disease.
The family member also progressively adapts so that the effects of the disease are largely the progressive effects of that adaptation — The disease always gets worse if it is not treated but nonetheless the family member develops ways in which he or she can somehow live with the disease.
Family routines are adjusted to accommodate the worsening disease.
The family member tends to react to crises brought about by the addictive disease as if addiction were just like any other acute disease.
Thus, he or she will tend to resolve the crisis rather than use it as a lever towards treatment.
The family members may come to blame external factors or blame each other for the addictive disease of the primary sufferer.
They fail to control his or her use of the substance or process of addiction so, next, they may attempt to control what they perceive as his or her "reasons" for use and come to protect him or her from its consequences.
They fail also in this.
Similar to those of the primary disease.
What are the characteristics of addictive family disease?
Preoccupation: The family member's life is haunted day and night by thoughts on what might be happening to the primary sufferer and what action might or might not be taken to help.
The family member is faced constantly with one dilemma after another.
Usa alone: The family member becomes progressively isolated from friends and from all social contact as the process of "helping" becomes more absorbing.
Use for effect: The family member avoids facing up to other problems by focussing attention on the problem of the primary sufferer's addictive disease.
Use as a medicine: The repeated episodes of anxiety stimulate secretion of adrenalin and this may be used subconsciously as a stimulant.
As with all stimulants, depression sets in when the initial stimulant effect wears off and a further dose of stimulant is required to counteract the depression.
Protecting supply: It is absolutely extraordinary to note how some family members will appear to do almost everything in their power to prevent the primary sufferer getting to recovery.
Not uncommonly, family members will pour scorn on the philosophy of Alcoholics Anonymous and related Fellowships even though(and perhaps even because) the programme works, whereas the family member's methods of treatment — time and time again — have failed to help the primary sufferer.
Pride may be hurt.
On some occasions family members will attempt to sabotage treatment saying that the primary sufferer is being brainwashed, ought to be at home, ought to learn to hold his or her alcohol like everybody else and ought to do all manner of things that have failed before and will fail again to help addictive disease.
On rare occasions family members have even been known to take alcohol or drugs into treatment centres "to lessen the suffering" or "because we were asked" .
By protecting the supply of alcohol or drugs for the primary sufferer, the family member protects his or her own supply of self denial and caretaking.
Using more than planned: Time and again the family member gives more time and money and other forms of support to the primary sufferer than he or she can afford or than was intended.
Higher capacity than others: The capacity of family members to absorb punishment and come up asking for more is simply phenomenal.
Any doubt there may be that the family disease is a genuine addictive disease is dispelled when the divorced wife of a primary sufferer promptly marries another or when the parents of young sufferers find themselves depressed and lonely and wondering what to do with their time and experience once their own primary sufferer is in recovery.
Again, similar to those of the primary illness.
What are the consequences of the family disease?
Spiritual: Damage to trust, hope, faith and love.
Emotional: Mood swings.
Recurrent anxiety and depression with progressive deterioration.
Behavioural: Changes in values so that other people's behaviour that would previously not have been accepted becomes progressively more tolerated if it relates to addictive disease.
Social: Progressive isolation from previous friends and social contacts.
Legal: Family members may get themselves into legal difficulties by "covering-up" for the actions of primary sufferers.
Marital: Many a parental marriage is broken by the amount of focus put on the problems of the child primary sufferer rather than Upon improving the marital relationship and giving each other support in the time of crisis.
In the situation where the family member is married to the primary sufferer, the family member may tolerate progressive destruction of all that he or she should reasonably expect from married life.
Instead of early insistence that no further deterioration in the relations ship will be tolerated, the family member may even collude with further decline and adopt a negative posture of blameless martyr.
Professional: The family member may give progressively less attention to his or her own work because of the problems at home and may even change employment in order to have more time or opportunity to supervise the worsening chaos at home.
Intellectual: Mental work requires a calm mind which is precisely what family members believe (understandably but wrongly) cannot be acquired while there is active Chemical Dependency or other addictive disease in the family.
Educational: The family member's own opportunities for further education become reduced almost to zero.
Financial: Paying for the consequences of the addictive disease of the primary sufferer can be exceedingly expensive and families may even be much more willing to pay Court fines than to pay towards the costs of treatment — The disgrace and deprivation of prison are commonly felt to  be consequences that are best avoided whereas they may in fact be the crucial turning point that bring the primary sufferer and the family member into full realisation of the seriousness of addictive disease and the need to seek recovery.
Physical: The deterioration of physical health in family members becomes obvious for all to see — as obvious as that of the primary sufferer.
Again, they correspond to those of the primary disease.
What are the personality traits of the family disease?
Conflict with authority: Family members may repeatedly try to cover up for the misdeeds of the primary sufferer and may be exceedingly angry with various authorities when they themselves are found out.
They claim, as do the primary sufferers, that the authorities "do not understand" .
Criticism of others: Understandable bitterness and envy of the apparently normal lives of other people frequently result in generalised criticism in all directions.
Intellectualisation: The family members usually have clearer heads than the primary sufferers and use them for even more determined discussion of "facts" rather than facing up to and discussing the emotional pain of their own position.
Anger and Resentment: Again these are felt to be justified but they are spiritual poisons nonetheless and they destroy the emotional life of the family member.
Stubbornness: The resistance to change in ideas on addictive disease tends to be considerably beyond what is required for normal intellectual scepticism.
Self-Centredness: Addictive disease may become the centre of all conversation and activity to the neglect of social needs and the needs of other, non-addicted, members of the family.
Pride: Pride causes much wilful action in pursuit of solutions to the problems of addictive disease.
The determination to find a personal, individual, solution is characteristic of being a "caretaker"  "or" fixer"which is itself the hallmark of the family disease.
Procrastination: Everything else other than the problems of addictive disease is put aside "for the time being" .
Self-pity: Having addictive disease in the family is a lonely situation but it is made more so by the spiritual isolation.
Self-pity tends to block  taking action that will be truly effective in reversing the downward spirals of primary and family diseases.
Perfectionism: Family members try desperately to get everything exactly right in their plans for the primary sufferer but still blame themselves when the smallest things go wrong.
Externalisation: Family members, like the primary sufferers, blame all manner of people, places and things for the problem caused by primary addictive disease but have little insight into their own condition.
Denial: As with the primary illness, family members cannot see their own addictive disease and may be exceedingly indignant if it is pointed out to them.
In time, through an appropriate Family Fellowship (for each primary addictive disease there is an Anonymous Fellowship and also a corresponding Family Fellowship, for example AL Anon corresponds to Alcoholics Anonymous) the sufferers from the family disease learn to see their own disease and recovery mirrored in the other members of that Anonymous Fellowship.
If there is no family Fellowship corresponding to the appropriate primary Anonymous Fellowship in a particular geographical area then attendance at meetings of A1 Anon of Families Anonymous are helpful by providing the nearest equivalent programme for recovery for family members.
You probably do not — because of denial — but it would be helpful initially to do the following self-assessment or go through it with a counsellor: The "drugs" of addictive "family disease" are self-denial and caretaking.
In order to help family members see past their own "denial" , for the purposes of this assessment, "addiction" means any form of repetitive or compulsive behaviour, "addict" refers to the person involved and "drug" refers to the substance or process of his or her "addiction." 
How do you know if you have "Family Disease" 
PROMIS Recovery Centre
Step 1 for families
1.
Write down examples of when you last (i) went to the cinema or theatre or a sporting event (ii) had some friends round for the evening (iii) had a holiday away from home  (iv) played a game of some kind (v) read a book for fun
A. Self-denial
2.
How much time would you spend on these preceding five things in an average week, month or year?
3.
Write down examples of when you last (i) read an article on addiction (ii) cancelled a social engagement or abandoned plans for something pleasurable.
(iii) stayed up late at night talking to someone who is under the influence of drugs.
(iv) stayed away from work or some important personal activity in order to do something "necessary" for the addict in your life.
(v) gave money or goods or services to the addict in your life when you could not really afford to part with these things.
4.
How often have you done these preceding five things in an average week, month or year?
5.
Write down further examples of where you yourself are aware of episodes of self-denial in order to help the addict in your life.
B Caretaking
1.
Write down a few examples of when you last (i) provided food, clothing or other "necessities" for the addict in your life because he or she cannot afford them.
(ii) gave money to the addict in your life because he or she would be in trouble if you did not.
(iii) provided accommodation to the addict in your life because he or she had nowhere else to go.
(iv) told a lie to someone else in order to protect the addict in your life from getting into even worse trouble.
(v) took a personal or financial responsibility for something that had been done by the addict in your life.
2.
How often have you done these things in an average week, month or year?
3.
Write down examples of when you last (i) took on extra work in order to provide something for the addict in your life.
(ii) tided up a significant physical mess left behind by the addict in your life.
(iii) tried to sooth down a damaged personal relationship of the addict in your life.
(iv) tried to protect a professional or educational relationship of the addict in your life.
(v) paid off debts or fines or loans incurred by the addict in your life.
4.
How often have you done these things in the last week, month or year?
5.
Write down further examples of where you yourself are aware of episodes of caretaking for the addict in your life in order to diminish the damaging consequences of his or her addictive disease and give "just one more chance" for him or her to get straight.
C. Powerlessness
1.
Write down examples of previous relationships that have followed similar patterns to the one that you now have with the addict in your life.
D. Unmanageability
1.
Write down examples of where in any of your present or previous relationships you have found that your own life has become significantly and progressively more chaotic and damaged.
These families are referred to as "dysfunctional" which means that they do not function in the "normal" manner of other families.
They have no idea what "normal" is and therefore they invent it for themselves and may be very wide of the mark that other families set for themselves.
Television "soap opera" families may be so "perfect" as to be distinctly abnormal.
What happens to children bought up in families in which there is an addictive disease?
There are various stereotype behavioural patterns that children in these families seem tend to adopt when one or other or both parents have primary addictive disease.
These are only stereotypes and each child in a family may have some characteristics of several of these behavioural patterns rather than fit one particular stereotype.
i Hero: This child believes that he or she can only obtain love and appreciation through achievement.
ii Delinquent or scape goat: This child gets his or her status from identification with similar "delinquent" children in other families.
iii Caretaker or lost child: This child takes responsibility for the family and looks after it by gently blending into the background and keeping the peace.
iv Comedian or mascot: This child, often the youngest of the family, is treated as a pet and is not meant to be bothered by "serious" matters.
In each case these children do not have any clear picture of reality and they are not able to express or receive full gratification for their own needs.
Whatever their personality type, these children have a significant risk of primary addictive disease and they will also tend to marry people with primary addictive disease.
As they grow into adult life they find that many of the conflicts and confusions of childhood are unresolved.
They have difficulty in feeling or expressing their own emotions and in making successful relationships.
Help for this is available through the Anonymous Fellowship of Adult Children of Alcoholics, which aims to assist the grown-up children of any addictive family.
Similar to that for continuing care for the primary addictive disease.
What is the treatment for the family disease?
Attend regular meetings of the appropriate Anonymous Fellowship for family members.
ii.
Read regularly the approved literature of that Fellowship.
iii.
Work the twelve steps for recovery suggested by that Fellowship.
Yes, in a way it is, it helps to clear the mind of all sorts of rubbish and to focus attention on improving the family member's own life.
This is done for its own sake but it is found that the primary sufferer will quite commonly seek treatment through his or her appropriate Anonymous Fellowship within a few months of the family member seeking his or her own recovery.
However, it should be emphasised that the Family Fellowships exist for the benefit of the family member, regardless of what may be happening to the primary sufferer.
Is this treatment brain-washing?
The Anonymous Fellowships do not give specific advice for individual problems.
Each member is free to decide whatever action is appropriate within the general guidelines of the twelve steps and twelve traditions of the Fellowship.
No dues or fees are required by the Family Fellowships, especially not from newcomers.
No donations are sought or accepted from outside sources and even gifts and legacies from members are restricted financially.
The God or Higher Power of the Anonymous Fellowships is strictly a  personal, private choice and there is no religious affliction.
Athesists, in religious terms, can and do follow the programme.
Anonymous guarantees that confidences are respected and there is no possible personal follow-up except at meetings at which attendance is obviously voluntary.
Only if the family member finds it helpful.
Is treatment for the family disease necessary at all?
The experience of the Anonymous Fellowships and of Treatment Centres based upon their principles is that the sufferers from primary addictive disease have a better chance of sustained recovery if the close family members attend corresponding appropriate Family Fellowships.
Treatment centres usually have family programmes, some of which are residential.
Family members attending appropriate Family Fellowships often find that the quality of their own lives improves significantly even if the primary sufferer is not in recovery.
Psychotherapy, Family Therapy, religious teaching and various other forms of "therapy" are not found to significantly helpful in the treatment of primary addictive disease nor in addictive family disease, although they may provide supplementary help to some individuals after they are in recovery through the Anonymous Fellowships.
The capacity to love the individual sufferer while confronting the disease and making the sufferer fully responsible for the consequences of all his or her actions.
What is tough love?
 "Tough love" should have equal emphasis on both words and the toughness applies as much to the family member as to the primary sufferer.
The tough love hurts the family member not simply because it involves allowing the primary sufferer to experience the full painful consequences of addictive disease but also because it involves the family member in resisting his or her own addictive urges to "fix" all the problems and manage the life of the primary sufferer.
Tough love should be kind, gentle and understanding to both the family member and the primary sufferer, while nonetheless allowing each to be  fully responsible for his or her own feelings and behaviour and for taking the full consequences of all choices of individual action.
Sometimes a family will believe that tough love involves refusal to help the suffer to seek recovery, for example by refusing to pay for specific 12 step programme counselling or in-patient treatment.
This is simply "black-belt Al Anon" behaviour: hoping to repay the primary sufferer for all the pain felt by the family member.
Further, a family member may find it difficult to "let go" of the primary sufferer while he or she is in treatment and may still want to find out everything that goes on in a treatment centre on a day-to-day basis and there by continue to "fix" by proxy.
Tough love requires that the family member "lets go" of the primary sufferer and seeks help for himself or herself from the appropriate Family Fellowship, concentrating primarily on his or her own recovery from the addictive urge to fix or control the lives of others.
This tough love in the family member is, more than anything else, what tends to bring the primary sufferers to seek their own recovery.
But, even then, it may fail and it should again be emphasised that family members benefit from their own sake from involvement in the Family Fellowships regardless of what may happen to the primary sufferer.
In alcoholism: Not clearing up physical messes caused by the primary sufferer.
Precisely what is involved in tough love in allowing the sufferer from addictive disease to take the full consequences of his or her disease?
Not apologising to other people for the behaviour of the primary sufferer.
Not telling lies to the employer, the courts or anyone else.
Not paying off the debts of the primary sufferer.
Not putting up bail or hiring lawyers to defend in any alcohol-related case.
Not allowing yourself or your children to be passengers in a car if the driver is the primary sufferer and he or she has been drinking.
Not altering your own social life and neglecting your own friendships.
Not taking on more work yourself in order to take over financial responsibility from the primary sufferer while he or she continues to drink.
Not going along with stories of depression or stress.
Not allowing children to suffer in any way: if one parent is the primary sufferer the inter-parental relationship can possibly be restored after the primary sufferer is in recovery.
Not doubting your own sanity or believing that the problems are all your fault.
Not allowing any illegal drugs in your own home: threaten to call the police if you do find drugs or have serious reason to suspect their use.
All threats must be carried out.
Give no second chances and accept no "explanation" .
In drug addiction
In adults and in children old enough to be independent, offer a straight choice: drugs or home — and stick to it.
Not paying fines, putting up bail or finding lawyers for any drug-related offences.
Not providing money to pay debts or even to buy "essentials" .
Any money given will either be spent directly on drugs or, alternatively, gifts in kind will either be sold or will enable other money to be spent on drugs.
Not obtaining addictive drugs or collecting prescriptions on behalf of the sufferer.
Reporting all thefts to the police.
Not involving yourself at all in anything whatever to do with"how or when or how much the primary sufferer eats or does not eat.
In eating disorders
Not allowing the primary sufferer to be inappropriately involved in food preparation.
Not allowing any form of inappropriate behaviour.
Not providing special foods or special portions.
Not taking responsibility yourself for any consequences of the behaviour of the primary sufferer.
In compulsive behaviour of any kind:
Not easing the burden of the consequences in any way.
Not failing to look after your own needs.
Not allowing the family member to take any form of responsibility that: should rightly belong to the primary sufferer or to someone else.
In Family disease
Not being taken in by the belief that "help" of one kind or another really is helpful: it may actually hinder someone else's growth towards maturity.
Recognise that he or she (whether suffering from the primary disease or the family disease) is in the grips of a disease that controls much of his or her words and actions.
Occasionally there will still be glimpses of the real person, pleading for help and desperately trying to be free.
But then the alien disease, like a parasite, takes hold again and for a time destroys everything in its path: all hope, all trust, all honesty, all love, all relationships.
And then again comes a glimpse of the suffering individual: confused, frightened and lonely.
And then the disease smashes in yet again, utterly arrogant in its demand for total control, determined to have all the answers in any discussion, determined to make everyone else feel helpless, frustrated, angry and isolated and determined to use words and actions of the sufferer to its own absolute advantage.
What can family members and others do to help someone who has addictive diseases?
Avoid trying to reason with the disease.
Stay quietly confident of your own knowledge of truth.
Seek the help of Al Anon of Families Anonymous or other appropriate Anonymous Family Groups in order to meet other people who have similar first-hand experience of the living hell of being at close quarters with the insanity of addictive disease.
Learn from them to love the sufferer while still hating his or her disease.
Learn from them the strength to risk to say no to the disease: refuse to cover up, tidy up or pay up but allow the sufferer to take the full consequences of the addiction.
Be assured that the risks taken now would later on be even greater as the disease progresses.
Learn from the Family Fellowship to allow your own sanity to redevelop by letting go of the self imposed stranglehold of trying to be a caretaker for some-one else.
Recognise that alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, LSD, heroin, Methadone, minor tranquillisers, sleeping tablets and many other mood-altering substances are all cross.addictive to sufferers from addictive disease and that all these drugs feed the disease regardless of whether they are legal, illegal or medicinally prescribed.
Recognise that there is no blame in addiction.
As with shortsight, diabetes, epilepsy and many other diseases or conditions, it happens in some people but not in others.
Addictive disease, as opposed to physiological addiction, it is not a significant potential risk for all human beings.
Recognise that addictive diseases affects different people in different ways and it is very variable in its intensity but that all share the denial of believing that they are not addicted: the crucial test of addiction is not whether one can stop the use of an addictive substance or behaviour but whether one can happily stay off and not be drawn back to it or to something equally addictive.
Recognize that although addictive disease, like short-sight, is probably genetically inherited and certainly runs in families, this does not mean that all parents or all -children of sufferers from addictive disease will necessarily have addictive disease themselves.
It helps the sufferer to know that while you hold him or her responsible for all actions, you do not hold him or her accountable for having addictive disease in the first place.
Learn to be things rather than do things for the sufferer.
A true friend would not do anything that would enable the disease to continue but would instead take the difficult and risky path of totally confronting it, while still loving the sufferer, despite all the harshness that the disease will cause the sufferer to throw in return.
The risk of confronting the disease may be the possible death of the sufferer; the risk of not doing so may be his or her almost certain death from the progression of the disease.
Recognise in time, perhaps only from the despair of repeated failure, that you yourself did not cause the disease, cannot control it and cannot cure it and that in time you may need to surrender the fight and hand over the care of the sufferer's addictive disease to his or her own appropriate Anonymous Fellowship.
In due course in recovery the primary sufferer and the family member can be reunited in a happier and more fulfilling relationship than ever before.
Interlude
Addictive disease has common characteristic features that are shared by many if not all sufferers.
Some of the features of alcoholism in its terminal phase are so well known that a cartoonist has only to draw a couple of lines for everyone to know that the subject is a "drunk" .
Similarly, many other forms of compulsive behaviour are easily recognised even though there may be considerable debate if one has the temerity to apply the term "addiction" .
Early diagnosis is difficult partly because the denial systems of primary sufferers, family members and others make it hard to get a clear picture, especially when there may be few adverse consequences.
Cross-addictions may be hotly denied because the subject matter may for some be too close for comfort.
Sometimes in truth they do not exist: not all human behaviour is addictive in nature and one has to keep a sense of balance.
The compulsive overeater may be mocked while the sufferer from anorexia may be pitied, the compulsive gambler scorned, the drug addict feared and the family member treated with half concern and half criticism.
These are simply the reactions of a fearful public, generally uninformed on the nature of addictive disease and unable to distinguish between the disease and the sufferer.
Yet all this is easily understood in comparison to grasping the concepts of recovery.
The progressive decline in the course of addictive disease follows similar patterns in differing individual sufferers.
But each person's recovery is unpredictable.
The analogy with short sight, so useful in considering the nature of the disease, is not nearly so helpful in considering recovery.
Certainly there are daily actions that help someone to stay in recovery just as the daily wearing of spectacles or contact lenses helps to overcome the effects of short sight.
But there the analysis ends: there is no clear parallel to the apparent inability of some sufferers to get into substantial recovery, if at all, and there is nothing to correspond to the process of relapse even when , on the face of it, all recommendations are being followed.
The plain fact is that one may learn something about features of recovery by looking at large numbers of individuals but the  converse does not wholly follow.
The generalisations are no more than that.
Nothertheless there are some general patterns that may be helpfully described even though any individual sufferer may rightly say that the entire pattern does not imply to him or her.
It is of course also true that no individual's disease is exactly like that of another.
But the individual variations in the patterns of disease are less widely unpredictable than those of recovery.
Indeed it has been postulated that the true process of recovery dates from when the sufferer first recognises that prhaps all is not in perfect control.
This recognition can pre-date the cessation of the substance or behaviour of addiction by some considerable time.
The continuing use after that time of recognition is a time of testing whether control is possible or whether it has indeed been lost.
Consequently, the boundry between the sufferer considers to be "normal" or "addictive" is repeatedly push further away.
During this time of testing, a sufferer from alcoholism mat say that he or she cannot be alcoholic because he or she does not drink in the mornings or is still in regular employment or still has a home and family or perhaps only drinks wine and beer but never spirits or only drinks at the weekends.
All these may be no more than attempts of testing control while there may be an underlying awareness that all is not well.
But as the disease progresses, the boundry between "normal" recedes beyond the level where other people are convinced about the normality of the sufferer.
They may be justifications such as "stress" or "depression" and indeed these factors do feature very significantly in the lives of sufferers from addictive disease but they are consequences and not causes.
Ultimately, only the strength of the denial system enables the sufferer to function at all.
Self worth diminishes and shame and fear increase as the disease progresses.
The progression of destructionn moves from affecting the capacity for a full range of emotional feelings and then into affecting intellectual processes and finally affecting physical health, although ther will of course have been many episodes of some damage to physical well-being throughout the progress of the disease.
The mirror of self-perception becomes progressively more distorted and inaccurate.
Relationships with self, with others and with God — or with spiritual values in life — become increasingly strained and impaired.
This is the nature and progression of addictive disease.
This is the picture of the pathetic mess of a human being ultimately, in desperation, seeks recovery.
The process of recovery involves the gradual reversal of all these processes of the disease.
The denile system is confronted.
An understanding of the nature and process of addictive disease helps to reduce  shame and fear and increase self-worth.
Through working the programme of recovery based upon the principles of the Anonymous Fellowships, there is gradual recovery of physical, intellectual, emotional and finally spiritual well-being.
In time, the recovering person, by actively working the twelve suggested steps of the recovery programme on a continuing daily basis, becomes progressively more secure in recovery.
Dealing with guilt for past behaviour by making direct amends to those who have been harmed, dealing with shame by accepting one's self as having an illness and therefore worthy of self-forgiveness, and dealing with damaged relationships by being honest, open-minded and willing, all help to reestablish the general sense of well-being that is the hallmark of someone in recovery.
But it is not easy.
The programme is simple but certainly not easy and most of all it is individual: nobody can give recovery to anyone else, each recovering person has to work for his or her own recovery.
Even a temporary relapse back to old behaviour and its damaging consequences may itself hopefully be a therapeutic process because it acts as a reminder that recovery is a continuing process that has to be worked for on a continuing basis by each and every recovering person.
The goals are worth the work.
Not only is the destructiveness of addictive disease replaced by the creativity of recovery but the progressive return of spiritual values such as faith, hope, love, trust, honesty, forgiveness, empathy, gratitude and the return of child-like innocence in the appreciation of the beauty of the world, make recovery synonymous with the treasure of life itself.
The understanding of recovery as a processes is still in its formative years.
Not only is each person's recovery a highly individual process but also the ideas and techniques of individual recovery, group processes and treatment centre programmes are all continuingly and progressively evolving.
The stimulus of individual and group recovery and of working in the professional field of addictive disease and recovery is that each new discovery brings not only its own understanding and rewards but also the promise of more.
What follows in this Promis Handbook is simply the statement of where we think we are now.
The important feature, however, is not the passing snap-shot but the journey itself.
Understanding recovery is itself a progressive and unending process that brings immeasurable rewards to all who share "the road less travelled" .
6.
Recovery
What is recovery?
The capacity to Sustain a potentially happy and fulfilled life without addictive recourse to mood…altering chemicals, foods or other substances and without addictive behaviours.
The alternative to the hopeless choice between continuing disorders of mood or continuing recourse to addictive substances or behaviours.
Consider the pattern of addictive disease: the initial disorder in addictive disease is a disorder of the spirit affecting the sense of life, love, hope, trust and other senses.
this leads to a disorder of mood.
this is temporarily relieved by recourse to mood-altering addictive substances or behaviours.
(fig x)
these bring problems of their own in their wake.
(fig xi).
These problems may further exacerbate the disorder of mood.
stopping the addictive substances or behaviours simply returns the sufferer to the starting position with increasing disorder of mood.
(fig xii)
In recovery the Anonymous Fellowships, based upon the principles of Alcoholics Anonymous, provide successful continuing treatment for the spiritual disease that led to those disorders of mood so that recourse to addictive substances or behaviours becomes unnecessary.
(fig xiii)
What is the first step to recovery in Chemical Dependency?
Stopping the use of the addictive substance or behaviour and seeking the help of the appropriate Anonymous Fellowship, most commonly Alcoholics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous.
Little if any spiritual recovery is possible without physical and behavioural abstinence.
For sufferers from Chemical Dependency this means stopping the use of all mood-altering chemicals and also means reconsidering all behaviour, relationships, special clothing, hairstyles or other paraphernalia that may be associated with an alcohol or drug oriented culture.
The sufferers from alcoholism or any form of drug addiction would therefore be recommended to abstain from: i. all forms of alcohol, including products that contain alcohol (such as some mouthwashes), communion wine that contains alcohol and food prepared with alcohol (unless it has all evaporated in the process).
ii.
deliberate inhalation of solvents, including lighter fuel, tippex and nail varnish and other similar household substances. iii.
cannabis in any form.
iv.
LSD, mescalin, "'magic mushrooms" , ecstasy and similar "designer"  "drugs that are synthetically manufactured hallucinogens. v amphetamines, amyl nitrite and other stimulants (" uppers").
vi.
minor tranquillisers, barbiturates and sleeping tablets (downers) vii.
pain killers, including codeine, DF118, Ritalin, Diconal, Pethidine, morphia, cocaine and "crack" , Heroin and all opiate derivatives.
Even aspirin and paracetamol although non addictive should be avoided if possible because they may perpetuate a pill-taking mentality and there are in any case other non-medical methods of relieving pain.
viii.
antihistamines which are often found in cough medicines, in decongestants such as Night Nurse and also in treatments for travel sickness.
ix.
prescribed "treatments" or "preventives" such as antabuse, heminevrin, antidepressants, Methadone and Naltrexone.
These may either be addictive themselves or may reinforce the view that there is a pill for every ill.
Again, there are other methods of treatment or prevention.
Particular care needs to be taken over: i. accidents or surgical procedures where anaesthetics and appropriate pain relief must be given.
Although there is a risk from the mood-altering properties of these substances, there is a greater risk of return to addictive use of drugs from unrelieved pain than there is from the strictly temporary appropriate use of these mood-altering chemicals.
ii.
chronic pain from some medical conditions.
This is best treated with trans-cutaneous nerve stimulators, acupuncture, chiropractic, nerve block injections or surgery, physiotherapy, relaxation therapy, Alexander therapy, meditation and other methods that do not use mood-altering chemicals.
A great many sufferers from addictive disease of any kind have chronic pain in the back and may have had extensive medical and other treatment including surgery.
However, this pain commonly resolves spontaneously within the first few months of recovery.
It was probably due to muscle spasm and ligament strain, possibly as a result of lack of general fitness and poor sleep.
It is best treated with gradually improved general fitness, relaxation therapy and physiotherapy.
iii.
insomnia, which is commonly a consequence of addictive disease and which resolves naturally in time as recovery progresses.
It is best treated with relaxation therapy and with just lying in bed, resting, even if sleep does not come.
ix.
Correspondingly, there may be much scepticism and sometimes open hostility from sufferers from addictive diseases, even those in early recovery, towards some doctors, psychiatrists and advisers on addictive disease.
This hostility at best would be similar to blaming someone because he or she does not speak a foreign language.
At worst it is the perpetuation of the addictive urges to blame others for the problems of self and to persist in considering one's self to be special and different.
What is the first step to recovery in other addictions?
As for Chemical Dependency, stopping the use of the addictive substance or behaviour and leaving behind all relationships and special associations with the substance or environment of the addiction.
In anorexia the first essential is for life-saving medical supervision.
However, this nutritional "recovery" is only tidying up the physical consequence of the disease.
True recovery begins with physical abstinence: i abstaining from sugar, white flour and specific "anorexic" foods such as salty substances and raw vegetables or binge foods that the sufferer knows may trigger a binge.
In time, after strictly avoiding sugar and white flour, the number of other "binge" foods may be found to be reduced to zero.
ii.
having three regular meals daily with nothing in between.
iii.
ensuring that those meals each comprise a balanced adequate nutritional meal.
iv.
avoiding artificial sweeteners.
v avoiding self-induced vomiting or purgation with emetics or laxatives or enemas, or the use of diuretics for "fluid reduction." 
vi.
avoiding excessive exercise.
and behavioural abstinence: i avoiding weighing yourself more frequently than once a month.
ii.
avoiding repeatedly observing your appearance in the mirror.
ii.
avoiding chunky clothing that disguises the true shape of the body.
v. avoiding working with food in its preparation or serving.
iv.
refusing the help of family members and others who prepare "special" meals but having the same meals at the same time and in the same place as everyone else.
vi.
learning to express feelings rather than suppress them through addictive processes.
It is of course easier said than done for someone suffering from anorexia simply to follow this recovery plan.
It is little if any easier for someone suffering from Chemical Dependency simply to stop using alcohol or drugs.
In each case the denial and the sense of compulsion of the addiction are almost insuperable difficulties for the individual to attempt alone.
It is for this reason that the Anonymous Fellowships are; o successful because they bring specific understanding and hope from previous sufferers who are now in recovery.
The longer-term recovering member is able to give the newcomer a sense of identification that someone really does understand the problem from the inside and also a sense of hope that recovery is possible.
This identification and sense of hope are technically possible in the home situation or in hospital but here is a serious risk that family members or medical and nursing staff will, by their own concerned actions intended to help the sufferer to eat, actually thereby enable the addictive disease to continue: there are few hinge the disease likes more than getting other people (rather than the primary sufferer) to take responsibility.
Consequently, treatment for anorexia, after the initial life-saving medical supervision, is best managed in a 12 Step treatment centre specializing in eating disorders.
In bulimia or compulsive over-eating the same physical and behavioural recommendations apply as for anorexia.
The need for medical supervision may be necessary for those sufferers who repeatedly enforce vomiting and thus disturb the fluid balance of heir bodies.
For others, recovery may be possible simply through the appropriate Anonymous Fellowship, with or without some specialist counselling and therapeutic group sessions, or through a 12 Step treatment centre.
For compulsive gamblers it is advisable to abstain from all activities hat involve risk-taking, other than the necessary activities of normal life such as crossing the road.
Any activity that causes the same physical emotional feelings as the particular addictive behaviour would be best avoided.
Gamblers Anonymous is usually the only help that is needed, although many sufferers also have other addictions and the physical and emotional "buzz" is common to all addictions.
The  12 Step treatment centres are therefore also capable of dealing with gambling problems.
The obsessive compulsive neuroses such as obsessive washing and the various phobias will require medical assessment but may receive particular help from Emotions Anonymous, which also covers a whole range of other emotional disorders that may be significantly disturbing to the life of the sufferer and be beyond personal control.
Problems with addictive relationships, compulsive exercise taking-workaholism, compulsive overspending, and similar behavioural addictions may also best be helped through Emotions Anonymous and possibly initially through a 12 Step treatment centre.
In each case, after any necessary life saving medical supervision, the initial steps are: i. abstain from the primary addictive behaviour.
ii.
avoid the circumstances and contacts associated with that addiction: iii.
seek identification and hope for recovery from the appropriate, Anonymous Fellowship.
iv.
consider specialist counselling or residential care in a 12 Step treatment centre if this is appropriate.
Addiction to (rather than simple excessive use of caffeine and nicotine can be considered along with other addictive drugs.
The caffeine addict or compulsive cigarette smoker may initially find it difficult to identify with someone addicted to Valium or Heroin but the stigma of addictive disease is inappropriate and the commonality of all addictions is considerable.
A 12 Step approach to treatment for addiction to these substances is as appropriate as for addiction to any other drug.
The Anonymous Fellowships generally correspond to individual groups of addictive disease.
For example, Narcotics Anonymous is open to users of any drug who wish to stop using and Over-eaters Anonymous is open to sufferers from any eating disorder.
More precise identification may be available in Cocaine Anonymous or in Bulimics Anonymous but the risk of these smaller Fellowships is that the meetings may become weaker through lack of numbers and relative inexperience of recovery.
A further risk is that the smaller Fellowships become so, "special and different" that they may lose the wider identification with all sufferers from addictive disease and they may therefore be less exposed to the common humility that is the essential basis for recovery.
Cross-addiction ensures that the weaker Fellowships receive support from members who have experience of stronger Fellowships but it may nonetheless at times be more helpful for a newcomer to receive slightly less individual identification but gain the experience of a stronger Fellowship.
The Family equivalents to the more recently established Anonymous Fellowships may not yet exist in this country or certainly be very rare outside major cities even if, as in anorexia, the primary problem may be life-threatening.
The family involvement may be as addictive in its own right as in the case of families in which there is addiction to drugs.
For these families, attendance at Al-Anon or Families Anonymous may be the best identification available and is therefore appropriate.
It is not known whether addictive disease is one disease that has different drugs or behaviours of choice according to each individual sufferer or group of sufferers or whether these groups correspond to one or another of a range of addictive diseases.
Consequently, it is not known whether the ideal recommendation to any sufferer from any addictive disease of any kind is that he or she should be abstinent from all potentially addictive substances and behaviours.
From evidence on cross-addiction it seems likely that addictive disease is one disease with many facets and that any sufferer from any addictive disease might benefit from following the recommendations for all addictions.
However, a practical consequence of this approach might be that few people would be prepared to consider such a sweeping initial recommendation.
Nonetheless, once in recovery, the opportunity remains for the recovering person to extend his or her range of physical abstinence and, by doing this, the relapse rate may in time come to be less than at present.
This does not mean that total abstinence from all potentially mood-altering substances and behaviours is necessary before one can even begin to experience any recovery.
Nor does it mean that failure to achieve total abstinence from all potentially mood-altering substances and behaviours means that one cannot achieve a considerable measure of recovery.
Nor again does this failure to achieve total abstinence mean that one is inevitably heading for relapse or that it is necessarily a significant factor in those who do relapse.
But it does mean that cross-addiction is a factor that may possibly be of some influence in all of this and that it is a factor that may need to be taken into consideration in the long term in attempting to improve the over all quality of recovery.
Initially, therefore, it is necessary to concentrate on the primary substance or process of addiction because this may be life-threatening.
Extending one's awareness of other addictive tendencies can usually wait for initial recovery to be reasonably secure, say, after two years.
How long does it take to recover from addictive disease?
A lifetime, one day at a time.
Projecting into the future, wondering what may or may not happen and being fearful of it, is a common  danger in addictive disease.
While still suffering, the negative feeling of fearful projection may result in craving for the addictive substance or behaviour.
In recovery, fearful projection can lead to relapse.
Similarly, the thought of having to do or not to do something "for life" can be overwhelming.
Therefore, people in early recovery are advised to take life one day — or, in moments of acute stress, one hour or even one minute — at a time.
The opposite of projection is to mull over the past with resentment and regret.
This is equally destructive of the time and creative opportunity of each new day.
Nobody can say that he or she has "recovered" from addictive disease.
There may be no further use of the substance of behaviour of addiction but recovery from the "spiritual" disease is a continuing daily process.
Just as someone has short sight, penicillin allergy or diabetes never recovers from these conditions but can nonetheless do or not do various things that diminish their effects or progress, similarly, sufferers from addictive disease even though they may no longer use the substance or behaviour of addiction.
They can nevertheless do or not do various things that diminish its effects or progress.
They are therefore described on a continuing daily basis as "recovering" .
What is the course of recovery?
Just as addictive illness progresses on an irregular wavy course and is not predictable (fig xiv), so also recovery progresses on an irregular wavy course and is not predicable (fig xv).
Just as in the progress of the disease there were times when things appear to be (and may be) getting worse.
Furthermore, in each case the sufferers or recovering persons may be the last people to be aware of these changes in themselves.
Just as the disease varies in intensity from one sufferer to another so also the pattern of recovery will vary considerably from one recovering person to another.
(See A, B, C in fig xvi).
Recovery gradually reverses all the characteristics of addictive disease.
The previous consequences gradually resolve on their own as new constructive behaviour is substituted.
It should be emphasised, however, that each person's recovery is idiosyncratic to him or her.
Treatment Centres tent to find that they cannot predict which people are most likely to obtain lasting recovery.
Some people who comply well with all that is suggested to them may have done little more than comply (incidentally, much of the "normal" first year of recovery is reckoned   to be little more than compliance) and think erroneously after a few weeks of treatment that they have learnt all they need to know and have done all they need to do to remain free from addictive disease.
They discover otherwise to their cost and this discovery itself may be an important learning process.
The individual experiences of recovery are so varied and the learning opportunities so diverse that there is a general maxim, "Where you are is where you are meant to be" , which implies that one can learn from any experience and put it to good use in recovery.
At all times when the need for active continuing recovery is neglected, the disease will tend to recur and the disorders of mood will tend to return.
Eventually these disorders of mood will tend to lead the sufferer back to the substance or processes of primary addiction.
What are the processes involved in continuing recovery?
Continued abstinence from the primary substance or process of addiction.
Continued avoidance of other substances or behaviours that may have a comparable, destructive, mood-altering effect on the individual sufferer.
For people who have any form of addictive disease, care must be taken that a normal, healthy, activity such as eating or physical exercise does not progressively became an obsession through inappropriate use of, and later reliance upon, its mood-altering effect.
Regular attendance at meetings of the appropriate Anonymous Fellowship.
Initially, ninety meetings in ninety days are recommended but later this may be reduced to a regular two meetings a week or however many the individual recovering person finds to be necessary to maintain a contented mood and a sense of peace of mind.
Regular commitment in practical ways to the continuing function of the Anonymous Fellowship.
Regular reading of approved literature of the appropriate Anonymous Fellowship.
Working the 12 Steps of Recovery of that Anonymous Fellowship.
Specifically working to gain insight into the characteristics of addictive disease and working to change one's understanding and behaviour in order to reverse them.
Maintaining Honesty, Open-mindedness and Willingness.
The initial letters spell the word H-O-W and serve as a reminder of how recovery is achieved through all one's relationships.
Seeking the guidance of a sponsor — someone further into recovery in the same Fellowship and customarily of the same sex — to provide encouragement, challenge and guidance on the journey towards recovery.
Applying the principles of the 12 Steps in all aspects of life so that they become a natural way of life and provide the capacity to live happily and confidently without the need for mood-altering substances or behaviours.
In Alcoholics Anonymous the recovery process has been summarised: "Don't drink, read the book, work the steps, get a sponsor, go to  meetings" thus emphasising the simplicity of the programme that is Freely available to all.
At meetings of the Anonymous Fellowships, continued recovery is sustained by sharing one's own experience, strength and hope and hearing others share how life was, what happened and how life is now.
This process not only gives identification and hope for the newcomer, it also reminds the old-timers that they forget at their peril how life used to be.
The disease appears to have a natural and selective "forgetting" mechanism, as is also the case in any major physical or emotional trauma.
This may lead the recovering person to remember the mood-altering effect of the addictive substance or behaviour but selectively forget the negative consequences.
If people in recovery do forget that they have a lifelong disease and — come to believe that they are "cured" , then the original disease reasserts itself once more, not simply very rapidly down to where it was before but, in most common experience, worse than it has ever been.
The real secret of the Anonymous Fellowships is the paradox that one receives only what one gives.
It is by helping newcomers, becoming a sponsor and by doing practical service of one kind or another for the group or for the Anonymous Fellowship as a whole that one gains greater insights into one's own disease and greater humility and security in one's own recovery.
In the long-term it is one's capacity to make open and honest relationships, outside the Fellowships as well as within, that makes the real difference to the quality of life and recovery.
The Fellowships have a primary end in themselves in providing the route to sustained abstinence from mood-altering substances and behaviours.
However, in doing this they also provide the basic opportunity to make happier and more fulfilled wider relationships.
To use an analogy from short sight: people who wear glasses are relieved of the effects of their short sight for as long as they continue to wear them and for as long as they remember that there are still some things (such as seeing clearly underwater) that they cannot do even if they are wearing glasses.
Furthermore, by wearing them, they do not become better people or become equipped with supra-normal powers.
They simply become ready to take their place alongside others, being neither special nor different, but at least no longer significantly handicapped.
Correspondingly the Anonymous Fellowships enable recovering people to surmount their handicap for as long as they continue to follow the recommendations of the Fellowships and not believe that they are "cured" for all time and can handle "responsibly" the substance or process of addiction once more.
People recovering from  addictive disease are not special and different from other people (although they are fortunate in having a positive programme by which to live) but they are now able to take their place alongside others.
They take their place in better shape than they themselves would have been without the privilege of working a 12 step programme.
Is there a risk that the Anonymous Fellowships can become a cult that takes over all life and leaves nothing else worth having?
Yes, the anonymous Fellowships, like any other group for people sharing a common interest, could become a cult.
The 12 traditions of each Anonymous Fellowship are all derived from those of Alcoholics Anonymous and they protect against this particular risk by emphasising that the most important member is the newcomer and that leaders are but trusted servants; they do not govern.
In early recovery it is easy to develop the enthusiasm equivalent to that of some religious converts and this can be boring or oppressive to other people.
However the continuation of active addictive disease is even more boring and oppressive and the initial enthusiasm usually matures gradually within the first year of recovery.
It is understandable that the previous isolation of the disease results in a sense of amazement in early recovery on the discovery that other people have not only shared similar experiences but also similar thoughts and feelings.
It is this sense of identification that gives hope to the newcomers that others will understand their fears and actions and show them the route to recovery.
This acute sense of identification can be the alternative to a continuing sense of despair with a significant risk of suicide and therefore one can understand its importance in early recovery.
Gradually, as recovery progresses, the sense of identification widens to include other members of the group and then others in the same Fellowship and then others in any Fellowship and then finally anyone at all.
from the isolation of being "special and different" , recovery is a gradual process of rejoining the human race.
Although there will always be particular identification with others who share the particular form of addictive disease, the progress of recovery can be measured by the breadth of relationships: the wider the circle of friendships, and the greater the awareness of commonality with others, the stronger the recovery.
The 12 step Programme becomes a positive addiction.
Its purpose is not simply to help suffers to leave behind their negative destructive addictions but also to help them to become enthusiastic about positive  aspects of a healthy physical, emotional and spiritual life.
The willingness to learn new things, practice new forms of behaviour and make new, constructive, relationships with one's family and friends are all part of the healthy re-channelling of time and energy that were formerly dissipated in addiction.
Working the 12 step Programme is not an end in itself but the method by which the sufferer is transformed from negativity to positively, from sickness to health and from a life of belligerence and blaming to a life that focuses upon creativity and an attitude of gratitude.
Can anyone recover from addictive diseases through the Anonymous Fellowship?
Yes, anyone can, but not all do.
The "Big Book" of alcoholics Anonymous describes some unfortunate people as being "naturally incapable of grasping and developing a manner of living which demands rigorous honesty" and says that "they are not at fault; they seem to have been born that way" .
For those who do not have addictive diseases it seems incongruous that some sufferers will pursue their addiction to death, either through the consequences of the addiction or through suicide at the sense of hopelessness that is the hallmark of sufferers from the primary disease,-but that is the nature of the addiction.
In the half century since the "Big Book" was written there has been continuing effort to reduce the number of people who fail to find recovery through the Anonymous Fellowships.
Even today, the toll of addictive disease is still terrible yet many of those who die were aware of the 12 Steps and of the other recommendations of the Anonymous Fellowships.
Whether they are "naturally incapable…" and "born that way" are the subjects of continuing study.
It certainly seems probable that addictive disease has a genetic element although the strength of that genetic component may vary considerably from one individual to another just as the intensity of short sight or other conditions that are genetically linked may vary in different individuals.
Whether "a manner of living which demands rigorous honesty" is all that is required is quite possibly true but there may be any number of blocks in the road towards that manner of living.
It is the function of sponsors or professional counsellors to reveal and demonstrate these blocks and help to guide the newly recovering member to deal with them appropriately.
Shame: the sense of hopelessness of the disease leads to a belief that the sufferer is not a worthwhile person.
The process of recovery involves understanding the disease concept and accepting responsibility for future action to keep the disease in remission.
This action involves making amends to self by coming to understand the power of the denial system that is the dominant feature of the disease.
Thus, by increased understanding and by positive action, the sufferer is helped to accept his or her right to an appropriate place in the world, no more but also no less.
Guilt: in early recovery (and in moments of lucidity in the active disease) the sense of guilt can be overwhelming and devastating.
Again, suicide is a major consequential risk.
People with addictive disease may do terrible things to themselves and to others in the course of their illness.
As the mind progressively clears in early recovery, the sense of guilt and remorse can be so powerful that the sufferer returns to the substance or process of addiction as the only known and practised method of suppressing unpleasant feelings.
The process of recovery involves making an inventory of one's previous wrongs and defects of characters, admitting them to one's self, to God and to another human being and making amends to those one has harmed, except when to do so would injure them or others.
This is the "rigorous honesty" to which the "Big Book" refers.
The reason for the need for this rigorous honesty is that a continuing sense of guilt and remorse will reduce the sense of self-worth and well-being.
This may result in further disturbance of mood and hence re-awaken the disease and increase the risk of return to the substance or process of addiction.
Grief: so much of life, its relationships and its creative opportunities are damaged or lost in the course of addictive disease that grief is universally a major factor in early recovery and also a major risk in the possibility of return to the substance or process of addiction.
Further, there is a significant grief reaction to giving up the substance or process of addiction itself.
This "trusted friend" (until it turned round on the sufferer: there is a Chinese saying "First man takes drink, then drink takes drink, then drink takes man" ) was the only known method of suppressing unpleasant feelings and, although maybe no longer trusted, is nonetheless sadly missed.
In recovery the grief reaction takes two years to work through and the various components of grief have to be addressed and processed.
Anger: in many ways anger is the most powerful of the emotions to come to the surface in early recovery.
There are feelings of anger and resentment at being singled out by the disease, at being unable to achieve the control one fought so hard to obtain, at being forced to accept defeat, at being forced towards recovery by the sheer weight of consequences and sometimes by the final threats of others who have at last truly come to the end of their patience and understanding, at having to give up the "trusted friend" , at having to face up to issues one most wanted to forget and at having to make an inventory, admit one's wrongs and make amends.
Each and every stage brings anger and with it the risk of relapse.
In recovery, the anger has to be acknowledged and then dealt with constructively through working the 12 Steps.
It is fundamentally important that these 12 Steps are actually worked rather than recited or merely thought to be nice in theory.
Absolutely perfect adherence to the 12 Steps is unobtainable but each and every sufferer has the capacity to make progress from whatever his or her starting position may have been and this is all that is required.
Grandiosity: the disease tells the sufferers that are in control, that they are "special and different" and that all the problems are "out there" , not "in here" .
The process of recovery is essentially one of reversing this process and of acquiring humility.
Is it necessary for family members to work an active programme of recovery?
Yes it is.
Family members who are actively addicted to self-denial and caretaking for the primary sufferer have as much addictive disease in themselves as do any primary sufferers.
Family members may suffer severe consequences from the active disease of the primary sufferer but similarly the primary sufferer may suffer severe consequences from the active "family disease" of the family member.
A family member who is addicted to "fixing" others and being a caretaker for them can hinder the chances or primary sufferers finding progress or recovery for themselves.
The need to feel wanted by or necessary to others is in all of us but this need can be magnified to immense proportions in those who suffer from the family disease.
Expectations of gratitude and indebtedness are the equivalent of taking hostages as if the family member is  saying "I have done this for you and therefore you are under an obligation to do that for me" .
These obligations can be a heavy burden.
The family disease can be just as difficult to live with as the primary disease and can be a significant contribution to the relapse of the disease of primary sufferers in early recovery.
 "Self-denial" and "Care-taking" have the opposite of the intended effect on the primary sufferer.
They tend to aggravate rather than improve the poor self-esteem, poor individual coping skills and poor emotional maturity in the primary sufferer.
In the family disease "self-denial" and "caretaking" are the equivalent of an addictive drug, used as a mood-altering process regardless of the observable (but denied) effects upon self or others.
How do family members recover?
First by recognising exactly the same addictive processes in themselves as in any primary sufferer.
 "Self-denial" and "caretaking" are their particular "drugs" but the mental, emotional and behavioural aspects of the family disease are similar to those of any primary addictive disease.
Sufferers from the family disease can no more control their addiction to "self-denial" and "caretaking" by themselves than any primary sufferer can control his or her use of the substance or behaviour of addiction in the absence of support from the Anonymous Fellowships.
Family members may have primary addictive disease of their own.
(These people who have both the primary disease and the family disease are somewhat less than ingenuously referred to as "double winners" .)
In this case it is advisable to deal with the primary disease first, although frequently these sufferers only become aware of their primary disease as a result of exposure to the recovery programmes for family members.
They have comparable recovery programmes to those for primary addictions and the processes, needs, risks and potential blocks are identical.
The capacity to achieve long-term recovery is also identical.
Attendance at meetings of the Family Fellowships, such as Al Anon or Families Anonymous, brings one among people who have had similar experiences and feelings and been equally confused, hurt, angry or depressed and taken similar actions out of confusion or despair.
This is comforting and helpful in itself but, as with the primary Anonymous Fellowships, the real benefit comes from active involvement in working the recovery programme together.
Step I of the Family Fellowships is "Admitted that we were powerless over alcohol (drugs and other peoples' lives)— that our lives had become unmanageable" .
The emphasis in recovery is that the  unmanageability of the family members' own life is a matter of personal choice: the actions of the primary sufferer do not inevitably dictate the reactions of the family member.
What is "Second Stage" Recovery?
The progress during the first year of recovery will vary from one person to another but for most people this first year in any Fellowship is spent mainly in compliance: doing what is suggested by people more experienced in the Anonymous Fellowships, attending meetings, contributing to them and giving practical service in them, progressively working the 12 Steps with the guidance of a sponsor and generally learning to use the various suggested techniques of staying away from one's primary addictive substance or behaviour and learning to deal with stressful situations in a more appropriate manner than previously.
One of the most significant recommendations in early recovery is that close emotional ties should be avoided.
Making a close relationship may lead to a false sense of self-sufficiency.
Happiness may be misinterpreted as a "cure" of addictive disease — with disastrous results.
Correspondingly, the break-up of such a relationship frequently causes such severe emotional pain that the old addictive substance or behaviour is sought in desperation for its mood-altering effect.
In the second year of recovery the recurrent cravings have mostly subsided and people in recovery develop progressively more insight into the nature of addictive disease in general and their own addictive disease in particular and also into the true, broader, meaning of recovery as something more than mere avoidance of previous addictive substances or behaviour.
Second stage recovery generally begins in the third year.
In this the focus is upon improving the capacity to make open and honest relationships.
Working the 2 Step programme becomes progressively more relevant on a daily basis in the recognition that it provides such a superb philosophy of life than many recovering people come to consider that they were fortunate to have addictive disease because it led them to the 12 Step Programme.
Also in second stage recovery people in recovery come to look — increasingly at cross-addictions and at family issues of "co dependence" in which the primary and the family disease feed off each other within a family or other close relationship.
They also look at wider issues such as their own up-bringing which may have been in an addictive family and may have led to many grief or abuse or other issues that may still need to be processed with a sponsor or a professional counsellor if there is to be further progress in recovery.
It is unwise to attempt to tackle these various aspects of second stage recovery in any  great depth before the completion of a full two years of recovery from primary or family disease because emotional and spiritual recovery may not yet be sufficiently secure to be able to take on these further challenges.
It is for this same reason that training programmes in treatment centres are not normally considered for potential counsellor trainees until they have been in recovery for at least two years and preferably longer.
A further reason is that it is commonly found that eighteen months into recovery is a particular period of disillusion and difficulty.
As one would anticipate from the standard grief reaction commonly lasting two years, the recovery process is itself a grief reaction to the loss of a former "friend" in the addictive substance or behaviour.
Through the help of this "friend" the sufferers dealt with the unpleasant feelings associated with the disappointments, disasters and challenges of life and now this "friend" has turned against them and the feelings have to be processed.
If one has significant cross-addictions, how many Anonymous Fellowships should one join?
Most people find that they have one primary substance or behaviour of addiction.
Consequently, they are best advised at least for the first two years of recovery to concentrate primarily on just the one relevant Anonymous Fellowship.
In second stage recovery there is value in occasional attendance at meetings of other Fellowships if one has a measure of cross-addiction.
Some people have two or more equally strong primary addictions, for example anorexia and addiction to tranquillisers.
In this case neither Anonymous Fellowship — Anorexics Anonymous or Narcotics Anonymous on its own would give sufficient identification and strength to be able to deal with both issues,— food and drugs.
Therefore for these people it may be sensible to attend both Fellowships right from the start.
The Family illness is perhaps not a cross-addiction so much as an addictive relationship and a mirror-image of the various primary illnesses.
While it is helpful for family members to gain a basic understanding of the illness of the primary sufferer, by going to occasional "open" meetings of a Fellowship for primary sufferers, so as to under-stand the disease concept and help to heal the blame and resentment that characterise active addictive family relationships, it is not helpful for family members to become regular attenders at the Fellowships for primary sufferers unless they themselves are "double winners" and have that primary addictive disease as well as the family disease.
The prime need for family members is to attend the appropriate Family Fellowship and focus their attention upon their own recovery.
7.
Relapse
What is relapse?
Relapse is the opposite of recovery.
Recovery and relapse are both continuing processes and not absolute states.
Relapse can be seen in changes of mood before it leads back to use of the addictive substance or behaviour.
Neither recovery nor relapse is a straight line.
Each follows a "wavy path" .
Just as the disease process has moments when things appear to be getting better even though in the long-term they are getting progressively worse, so also in relapse there will also be times when things appear to be getting better even though in the long-term they are getting  progressively worse, so also in relapse there will also be times when things appear to be getting better even though in the long-term they are getting progressively worse.
Relapse can occur at any time.
The most characteristic feature of addictive disease is that it is a relapsing condition.
It is never "cured" : recovery is a continuing active process.
If recovery is taken for granted, even after many years or even decades, the process switches over from recovery to relapse.
What are the signs of relapse?
Exactly the same as the mood disorders and behavioural characteristics of the primary disease.
The denial system is re-activated.
The sufferer's disease gets back into "the driving seat" and he or she comes to believe that life can be managed alone and that is questionable, despite all previous evidence, whether he or she truly has addictive disease after all.
Is there an element of "Catch 22" in this?— Agree with Fellowship ideas or risk being declared "In Denial" ; relapse and be declared "Not to have followed Fellowship principles" ?
No, each situation — recovery or relapse — can be verified by other people and has directly observable practical consequences.
It should be remembered that one can not relapse unless one has first been in recovery.
For example, a sufferer from alcoholism who still used sleeping tablets, a sufferer from any of the eating disorders who is not physically abstinent from sugar and white flour, a sufferer from workaholism who exchanges work for physical exercise in similar quantities and a sufferer from the family disease who still searches incessantly for treatment or other solutions to the problems of the primary sufferer rather than accept his or her own powerlessness over the lives of other people and accept the need for personal recovery, are all still in the active phase of the disease even if they are regularly attending meetings of an appropriate Anonymous Fellowship.
Their minds have never been sufficiently clear of the substance or process of addiction to be in  any significant degree of recovery.
When they get drunk, have a binge, take on yet another new project or make even more plans for someone else's recovery, they are not relapsing; they are still suffering, still believing that they can compromise with the concept of powerlessness over mind-altering substances or behaviours.
They have not yet accepted the defeat that is the essential component of the first of the 12 steps.
This does not mean that they should not attend the Anonymous Fellowships.
On the contrary, the only requirement for membership is a desire to stop the addiction.
Further, it is only in the Fellowships that they will get sufficient identification with other sufferers to be able to see that there is hope for recovery when they do finally admit defeat.
Some people never do admit defeat.
They never surrender but try to remain "in control" of their addiction before ever getting into substantial recovery.
Others may prefer to continue the addictive process rather than accept the need for personal change which they may perceive to be more painful than continuing the addiction.
This is not a "Catch 22" situation of "heads I win, tails you lose" : both the cause of death and the continuation of the addiction are observable independently by others outside the Anonymous Fellowship.
Comparing the previous experiences (prior to recovery) of those who recover and those who do not recover shows no significant difference.
Recovery is therefore possible through the Anonymous Fellowship for anyone who wants it, regardless of how much has been lost or damaged, short of physical damage to the brain itself.
Sufferers are never too young nor too old, too early in the disease nor too late to get into recovery when they truly want it: the "Big Books" of other Fellowships record many stories of recovery in sufferers who had been given up as hopeless.
Today the Fellowships have many members who have made recoveries that can only be described as miraculous.
There is nothing selective in their membership.
It has to be said, however, that some people continue their addiction to death even while making repeated attempts to follow the principles of the Anonymous Fellowship, yet still relapsing time and time again.
Often they choose suicide rather than the continuing pain of recurrent relapse.
To say that such people are unfortunate as does the "Big Book" of Alcoholics Anonymous (which it itself entitled "Alcoholics Anonymous" ) is true and indeed is an understatement.
To go on to say that "they are naturally incapable of grasping and developing a manner of living which demands rigorous honesty" is also true but this may not be the whole truth.
The preceding sentence, "They are not at fault; they " seem to have been born that way "is itself an honest acceptance that addictive disease is stronger in some people than in others and that the acceptance of defeat and the wish" to go to any lengths"to get into recovery is ultimately a personal decision for each sufferer and not something that can be imposed by anyone else.
Some people seem to find it impossible to make that personal decision.
This is not a "catch 22" : it is a statement of clinically observable experience.
The continuing work of the Anonymous Fellowships — and the definition of their prime purpose as stated in the 12 Traditions — is to carry the message of recovery to those who still suffer.
Specifically, this does not say that the message has to be received.
Quite the contrary, it is acknowledged that carrying the message is all one can do.
There is no claim that the message will be received by everybody.
It can be particularly difficult for family members to accept their own powerlessness in getting others to accept the message that they carry.
As part of the denial of their own "family disease" they may believe that they themselves or the way in which they attempt to help others is what is inadequate rather than the capacity of the primary sufferer to receive the message of recovery.
The accusation of "Catch 22" is most commonly made by those who do not accept the disease concept and who may themselves be working professionally in the field of addictive disease, commonly believing in the psycho-social model of the cause of and treatment for addiction.
The challenge in return is to ask the accusers to demonstrate long-term recovery from use of their own concepts and methods of treatment.
The belief that different treatment methods are needed for and tried on different populations of sufferers does not stand up to critical examination: the stories of those in recovery from addictive disease through the Anonymous Fellowships are so immensely varied that it is quite clear that this population has not been selected in any way.
Even the accusation that the Anonymous Fellowships require a religious understanding and belief is unfounded.
The "Big Book" of Alcoholics Anonymous specifically states "about half our original fellowship" were atheists or agnostics.
Nor is religious conversion required: the God of the Anonymous Fellowships is as each member understands (or does not understand) a personal concept of God; the only unacceptable God is self.
But in that there is common ground with Psychiatry: people who believe that they themselves are God are generally considered to be insane.
Step 2 of the Anonymous Fellowships states "Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity" .
This implies the recognition and the self-centredness of addictive disease and  the denial of its existence and of its consequences by the sufferer are forms of insanity.
There is nothing self-congratulatory in accepting one's own insanity.
The route to recovery is through humility.
Again there is nothing "catch 22" about this: it is observable clinically.
How can one detect the early signs of relapse?
First, by being aware that relapse is a process.
The return to use of the substance or behaviour of addiction is only the final stage of relapse.
A "slip" , a temporary recourse to the mood-altering substance or behaviour, may or may not lead on to a full-scale relapse.
An accident may happen — such as when a sufferer form alcoholism takes a sip of a drink that he or she was not aware contained alcohol — and this would not even be termed as a sip.
However, if he or she, after the initial surprise of the taste and the recognised "feel" of the alcohol, took another sip "just to make sure" , this would constitute a deliberate act and would therefore be counted as a sip.
This needs serious appraisal because it may indicate that recovery is far more fragile than might have been appreciated.
The early phases of relapse in Alcoholism are know as "The Relapse Syndrome" or "The Dry-Drunk Syndrome" .
Similar early phases in relapse exist for all the addictions, including the family disease.
This illustrates the behavioural commodity of all addictive disease.
For example, "Alcoholism" is not the drinking and its consequences but the disease and the disorder of mood that leads to it.
When this disorder of mood returns again in the Dry Drunk Syndrome one sees the clear distinction between the disease of Alcoholism itself and the consequences that follow it, if and when the sufferer later returns to drinking.
Thus, the difference between the effects of Alcoholism (the disease) and alcohol (the drug) can be clearly seen in the Dry Drunk Syndrome.
Correspondingly, all other addictive diseases can be seen in their primary form in the Relapse Syndrome phase before the sufferer returns (if he or she does return) to the use of the substance or behaviour of addiction.
The so-called "success" rate of substitution therapy such as Antabuse for alcohol, Naltrexone for heroin and minor tranquillisers for almost anything whatever, is because the prescriber may not understand the concept of the Dry Drunk Syndrome or because of the fact that minor tranquillisers and many other psychotropic drugs are cross-addictive with all mood-altering chemicals.
It is a strange form of "success" that disregards the mood of the sufferer but simply observes abstinence from a specific substance or behaviour.
The long term success of a "sensible drinking programme" can only occur in those who do not have addictive disease in the first place.
Indeed, the Big Book of Alcoholics Anonymous advises the unsure newcomer to try a sensible drinking programme in order to assess whether he or she is alcoholic or not.
If the individual can always predict what will happen after the first drink then he or she is probably not alcoholic and may have no need of a 12 Step recovery programme and therefore cannot be said to relapse if occasionally he or she gets drunk.
He or she may have emotional problems that result in occasional deliberate binges but that is not necessarily alcoholism.
By contrast, addictive disease is seen particularly when the alcoholic binge occurs unintentionally or even when there was every intention of avoiding it.
Such "success" as there may be from legal prohibition of alcohol or other addictive substances is gained at the expense of creating the suffering of "Dry Drunks" .
As emphasised, sufferers in relapse do not necessarily return to use of the substance or behaviour of addiction.
This "non-using" state is not a "cure" : it is simply a prolonged Dry Drunk.
The "white-knuckle" sufferer who stays away from the substance or behaviour of addiction by grim determination, sometimes aided and abetted by non-addictive, anti-euphoriant or aversion-therapy drugs or processes is a pitiful sight.
The spiritual riches of a full life are kept from the sufferer while the therapist colludes with the addictive disease itself.
For example, giving Antabuse to a sufferer from Alcoholism, Methadone or Naltrexone to a sufferer from Heroin addiction, anti-depressants or tranquillisers to sufferers from eating disorders or to sufferers from the family disease or other addictions or giving behaviour therapy or aversion therapy or electro-convulsive therapy to anyone suffering from addictive disease is not only most probably inappropriate but cruel as well .
Countless stories from the Anonymous Fellowships tell of barbaric (albeit well-meaning) treatment at the hands of the medical profession and other therapists.
The general lack of awareness in the medical profession of the nature of addictive disease and of the process of recovery through the"Anonymous Fellowships is Surely, a clinical scientist should observe first, postulate second and treat third, not the other way round.
The fact that the Anonymous Fellowships are not run by the medical profession does not mean that they do not exist or that they do not work except for a handful of rather strange zealots.
 "Open" meetings of any of the Anonymous Fellowships are there for all to observe who wish to do so and it is a scientific and academic disgrace that experience of this successful method of treatment for a major disease is not a compulsory (or even an acknowledged) part of standard undergraduate or postgraduate medical curricular.
The experience of witnessing psychosocially normal people from a wide range of abilities and backgrounds telling the stories of their individual experience and what has been done to them, would be the best method of ensuring that sufferers from addictive disease are not treated as dismissively in the future as they have tended to be in the past.
The fact that some sufferers die of their addictive disease regardless of their awareness of the Anonymous Fellowships is not an argument in favour of the use of other methods of treatment which were manifestly of no help to those who did recover and which can be observed to be of no help to those who still suffer.
Some of these other forms of treatment — even some that are advised and carried out by the medical profession — are the clinical equivalent of the extraordinarily inhuman (and ineffective) previous "treatment" of cancer patients by pulling out all their teeth.
How can the recovering person protect himself or herself from relapse?
First by learning about the nature of addictive disease as a naturally relapsing condition and therefore being aware of the need for continual monitoring.
By getting a Sponsor, one of whose functions may be to act as a mirror and reflect back the attitudes and behaviour of the sufferer, helping him or her to gain insight into self and establish goals for further improvement in recovery through guidance on the 12 Steps.
By listening, considering and making appropriate changes when others in the Fellowship give feed-back.
When family members, or other people close to the sufferer attempt to give feedback it may be resented and resisted by the reactivated denial system and lead to the opposite of the desired effect.
Nonetheless, those who wish for lasting secure recovery will need to learn to consider feedback from any source and family members who truly desire longterm recovery for their loved ones will need first to understand their own "family disease" and get into recovery from it before learning the techniques of giving open and honest non-judgemental feedback to others.
By avoiding substances and behaviours that are cross-addictive with those of one's own addictive disease.
Being aware that feelings of negativity or excessive inappropriate activity of any kind can trigger the reactivation of the disease process.
Common risks are when the recovering person becomes Hungry, Angry, Lonely or Tired (HA.LT).
By following simple recommendations consistently on a daily basis.
Again, a healthy example is the instruction commonly given to sufferers from alcoholism: "Don't drink, read the book, work the steps, get a" sponsor, go to meetings".
By establishing pre-designed recovery protection mechanisms as a form of insurance policy, such as arrangements with trusted friends who will give open and honest feedback when asked — and sometimes when not asked — and help the sufferer to get to meetings and do whatever else pay be constructive.
Nonetheless these friends will be aware that the sufferer ultimately has to make his or her own way back to recovery and that "helpful" actions should not serve to enable the sufferer to continue the recovery-threatening attitudes or behaviour without organising his or her own responsibility for the consequences.
How does one intervene in relapse?
With great difficulty, particularly in the "Dry Drunk" phase before return to use of the addictive substance or behaviour.
Clearly, the earlier the better, but here the problem is that recovery itself follows a "wavy path" and one may rush in inappropriately and cause justifiable upset.
One therefore needs to be sure of one's ground, exactly as for intervention in the primary disease, with documented evidence supported by others and expressed with humility and with care and understanding for the dignity of the sufferer.
8.
Counselling and Treatment
What makes a good counsellor
A thorough understanding of addictive disease and recovery, usually (but not exclusively) obtained by having the disease and recovery.
Usually potential counsellors will need to be in recovery for at least two years before being considered for a training post.
Issues relating to the counsellor's own personal and family life will need to have been processed thoroughly because counselling other people has to be impartial (rather than be affected by issues in the counsellor's own personal life) and because the counsellor himself or herself may become unsettled when an issued being discussed with a sufferer may be too close for comfort to the counsellor's personal experience.
Usually counsellor trainees will be at least twenty five years old and, most commonly, older than that.
Emotional maturation is arrested during the active phase of addictive disease and therefore the counsellor who is in recovery will need to have made up for this lost time for emotional development.
Intelligence is essential, although successful School or University examinations may not have been possible through damage to shore term memory (upon which facility most examinations are based throughout the phase of active addiction.
Whilst counselling is n essentially an intellectual process — mostly it depends upon a facility for empathy with a wide range of other human beings — it is nonetheless very demanding in the sheer volume of literature that has to be read and understood.
Further, a dim counsellor is easily outwitted by the "cunning, baffling and powerful" addictive disease, as described in the "Big Book" of Alcoholics Anonymous.
A natural aptitude for the work.
This is not the same as being someone to whom other people often bring their problems; that does not guarantee the instinctive knowledge of whether something is real or merely a "try-on" , or whether something that is being glosssed over is really something that should be dug out and gone into in depth, or whether the time has come to say and do nothing other than give encouragement to the sufferer to work something out for himself or  herself with the assistance of other sufferers in the group.
All these facilities — and many more — correspond to the natural musicianship of the professional singer or the natural physical co-ordination of the professional athlete.
One can learn the techniques of counselling just as one can learn to sing or to run but one will still be in a different league from those who were born with these skills.
The paradox of counselling is that almost everyone in the caring professions believes that he or she is a "natural" counsellor when in fact very few have that natural skill.
Frequently, the mistaken belief is that counselling involves telling people what to do in a nice friendly way and involves educating them with a few pertinent facts in a clear, easily memorable, style.
In practice much more of counselling focuses upon perceptions and feelings rather than upon facts and the end result most commonly is helping the sufferer to focus upon a question rather than an answer.
Confrontation of issues and attitudes will be polite and respectful in a professional manner but it may nonetheless be a very painful process that would not in customary terms be considered friendly, although in truth it is a most fundamental act of friendship from one human being to another.
Emotional resilience — to feel one's own pain or tiredness or loneliness or what-have-you and be able to deal with it without "going to pieces" — is a fundamental requirement.
 "Burnout" is the spiritual condition, with severe physical, emotional, behavioural and practical consequences, that occurs when counsellors are unable to look after themselves appropriately.
Sandwiched between the sufferers and the directors or managers of the institution in which they work (or overwhelmed by the pressures of survival if they work on their own) they may expect or be expected to carry and solve the burdens of both.
Thus, institutions have a responsibility to care for those who give care through establishing mechanisms to evaluate and process the stresses of their work.
The prime responsibility, however, rests with the individual counsellor to establish supportive relationships in which he or she is able to feel that stress is contained and processed and that feedback from those relationships is given in an honest and constructive manner.
Burnout is commonly seen when counsellors have "family disease" of their own and are inappropriately self.denying and caretaking for their patients.
The fundamental requirement of all counselling is the capacity to observe one"sown feelings, attitudes and behaviour by having open and honest interchange with others.
This capacity — for emotional honesty and willingness to risk being hurt and acceptance of the need to make changes as a result of appropriate feedback — is rare.
The counsellor has to be at peace with himself or herself before being able to do work of any value with people in the active phase of primary addictive disease or family disease or, later, at any stage of their recovery.
Father Martin, an internationally renowned speaker and director of a  treatment centre, summarises the requirements for counsellors in three C's: competence, charisma and commitment.
What are the prerequisites before counselling another human being?
Validation of the suffering individual, treating him or her with kindness, professional respect and dignity, being open and honest, separating the awareness of the disease from the understanding of the suffering human being, following the distorted reasoning and disturbed actions and accepting that they appeared to the sufferer to be most appropriate at the time they were committed.
Getting rid of "the bondage of self" .
The sufferer must know that he or she has your full attention and that you are on his or her "side" .
To be fully professional, one needs to express feelings and give responses to the feelings of the sufferer but nonetheless be aware that within that professional relationship it is not relevant that one should be personally liked or even appreciated.
There is no place for aloofness and cold detachment in counselling but equally no place in the counsellor for a sense of personal need or rejection.
Counselling is professional work, not merely a personal relationship.
Having no hidden agenda.
The sufferer must know that what you say is the whole of what you believe and want to transmit.
It is bad enough having the sufferer saying one thing but really meaning another without the counsellor getting caught up in the same macabre "game" .
How does anyone intervene constructively in someone else's addiction?
First by recognising that one is dealing with an illness and not a moral issue.
By becoming aware that one's own denial system and that of the primary sufferer will tend to collude together to delay diagnosis despite obvious evidence of recurrent damaging consequences.
By recognising that one cannot "fix" someone else and that addictive disease has "Jekyll and Hyde" changes in mood and behaviour.
Consequently one's own pleas and the sufferer's promises may all be well meant but nonetheless all equally ineffective in controlling the longer term progression of addictive disease.
By not feeling personally hurt or professionally inadequate when matters get worse despite one's best efforts.
That is sometimes the pattern of addictive disease.
By learning to let the sufferer take the full consequences of the use of addictive substances or behaviour.
The short term risk is great but the long-term risk of not following this course of action is even greater.
By accepting help in recognising one's own denial system and one"sown contribution to dysfunctional relationships.
In particular, one may need help to see that caretaking for other people, protecting them from damaging consequences and also doing everything one can to "help" , may be having the exact opposite of the desired effect.
Sometimes a formal "Intervention" may cut short many years of further suffering.
In a formal Intervention the people close to the sufferer — family members, a close friend, a close colleague, supervisor or employer, personnel staff or medical director — meet together to pool their information and rehearse their presentation to the sufferer.
Group support gives the participants the courage to stick to their individual guns and know that they cannot all be misguided, regardless of the protestations of the sufferer when confronted even in an understanding and supportive manner.
At the close of a formal Intervention when each member has said his or her piece, often in the manner"I care for you and I am concerned for you and therefore.
(avoiding the word "but" ), the sufferer is presented with clear choices that have been discussed and agreed by the participants in advance.
For example: "It is for you to choose between clinical or disciplinary action" .
 "It is for you to choose to seek professional help in the manner we recommend or alternatively terminate our relationship" .
To present such stark choices on one's own, rather than in a formal Intervention, is commonly ineffective.
The power of one mind and resolution pitted against one other is often insufficient and the simple passage of time usually weakens resolve and blurs the memory of precisely what was said or promised.
The need for rehearsal of a formal Intervention is to strengthen the group resolve to give real positive help to the sufferer despite all the protestations- convolutions and deceptions that will be tried on by his or her disease.
In order to confront the denial system of the sufferer, but at the same time not cause it to be so aroused as to be counter productive, it may be helpful to avoid specific terms such as "alcoholic" , "drug addict" , "anorexic" , "alcoholism" , "drug addiction" , "anorexia" and substitute a phrase such as  "stress and depression and problems with alcohol (or drugs or food etc)" or simply "problems in your life" .
In this way the primary sufferer — and the family members — may more readily accept the need for treatment even though they will subsequently learn that stress and depression are consequences rather than causes of addictive disease.
The timing of an Intervention is often most helpful at a moment when the primary sufferer is in a "circle of confusion" ".
In this state he or she is putting out the mixed messages, "I need you to help me…get away from me" .
This most clearly illustrates the Jekyll and Hyde nature of the disease and gives one insight into the concept of a disease of the human spirit parasitising the suffering individual.
As a general principle the earlier the better for an Intervention because less damage will have been caused by the disease and the denial system will be less entrenched.
The disease does not go away if one ignores it: progressive decline is inexorable.
Perhaps the most important feature of an Intervention, in addition to giving an understanding of the distinction between the disease and the suffering individual, is to give a sense of confident hope for recovery.
What can doctors do to help intervene in addictive disease?
First acquire an understanding of addictive disease and recovery by attending six "open" meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or one of the other Anonymous Fellowships and two or more "open" meetings of Al Anon or Families Anonymous.
Observe that hypnotics, minor tranquillisers, pain killers and many other mood-altering drugs are cross-addictive with alcohol and with the various illegal addictive drugs.
Extreme care should therefore be taken in prescribing them at all: if the recipient has addictive disease these drugs will make it worse.
Refuse in professional communications to use euphemisms or rationalisations: drunkenness or addiction should be termed as such and not covered up as "stress" or "depression" .
However, when dealing with the primary sufferer and attempting to get him or her to seek appropriate treatment through a 12 Step programme it is best to avoid antagonising the denial system by being too direct.
This would simply result in a battle of wills and the sufferer will always "win" that battle.
Do not provide spurious sickness certificates: these prolong the illness.
If the sufferer loses his or her employment, this may be exactly the stimulus that ultimately leads him or her to seek recovery.
Use the help of members of the Anonymous Fellowships to help intervene in addiction in primary sufferers or in family members.
Recognise that the medical profession already sees the consequences of addictive disease in enormous quantity but frequently fails to perceive them as such.
This professional "denial" can lead to the prolongation of suffering due to addictive disease in very many patients.
What can a Company do to formulate an Alcohol and Drugs policy for the workplace?
Obtain the support of the most senior person in the Company and also of the Trades Unions.
Ensure that any policy applies equally throughout the entire Company from shop floor to Chairman of the board.
Obtain advice and support from local contacts in the Anonymous Fellowships, including the Family Fellowships.
Become aware of the experience of major corporations throughout the world who already have such a policy and who may have established Employee Assistance Programmes.
How does one intervene in the Family Disease?
In exactly the same way as for the primary disease.
A group of friends, sometimes in conjunction with professionals, with an understanding of the family disease and familiar with the principles of the various Family Fellowships will confront the family member.
1.
With understanding of his or her predicament.
ii.
With observation that the primary sufferer has not been helped by the previous well-meaning actions of the family member while at the same time the life of the family member has definitely been harmed by various attempts to help or control the disease of the primary sufferer.
ii;.
With explanation of the disease concept of the primary disease and the family disease and with a clear message of hope for recovery and explanation on how to get help.
What does counselling in an individual or group context actually involve?
Imparting some factual information but more commonly referring the sufferer to resources from which he or she may find it for himself or herself.
Using a variety of communicative skills to transmit knowledge, understanding and feelings.
Being imaginative in presentation of ideas and practical exercises.
Being sensitive to non-verbal communication and aware of its significance.
Helping the sufferer to become actively involved in and responsible for his or her own recovery.
Helping the sufferer to see the pattern of previous illness and the principles of future recovery.
Confronting and challenging distortions of perception.
Probing, listening and reacting in a constructive, professional, nonjudgemental manner.
Helping the sufferer to take the risks of self-disclosure and to acknowledge the need for emotional and practical support and help from others.
Helping the sufferer to recognise feelings that were previously suppressed by addictive substances or behaviours and to learn new methods for dealing with those feelings.
Helping the sufferer to develop an integrated sense of self.
Helping the sufferer to establish clear goals and to be oriented towards positive action, applying theory to practice.
Being aware of the nature of addictive disease and cross-addiction and its consequences and not frightened or shocked by it.
Being capable of crisis management.
Being clear-headed and aware of his or her own feelings, needs and resources, skills and deficiencies.
Having the insight and ability to share his or her own experiences, thoughts and feelings in a professional and personal manner that gives empathy and hope.
Being an example of spiritual growth and practical progress In recovery.
Remembering at all times how difficult is the demand and process of change.
Being capable of risking showing one's own personal vulnerability while still maintaining professional standards.
Acknowledging the concept of the wounded helper being more effective than the strong.
Helping to facilitate group processes in an involved but non-directive manner, encouraging the group to take concerned responsibility for its own development and that of all its members.
Continually assessing the sufferer's knowledge, skills, blocks to recovery, attitudes and feelings and reflecting these back to the sufferer with the suggestion that he or she may wish to verify them with other members of the group.
Even in one-to-one counselling the emphasis is placed upon group rather than individual awareness and support.
No professional counsellor can "fix" or "caretaker for" a sufferer any  more than a family member or other concerned person can do so.
Indeed, it would damage that person's recovery if he or she could be "fixed" ; the recovery would be insecure and might be based upon the fragile integrity and perception of one counsellor.
The art of counselling is to do one's work professionally with respect for the dignity of the sufferer and then simply trust the process of the 12 Step programme and the effectiveness of the group, rather than try -to manipulate, control or fix.
The essence of counselling in the "Minnesota model" , used in treatment centres that follow the principles of the Anonymous Fellowships, is that each counsellor or other staff member is able to identify with a particular facet of an individual sufferer.
Putting all the staff pictures together gives a more clear overall picture of that individual than any -staff member could achieve alone.
This collective picture is then reflected back to the sufferer with the recommendation that he or she finds out whether his or her contemporaries in treatment observe the same picture.
(fig xxiii)
Thus, the essence of counselling in the Minnesota Method is not so much "I shall help you" but "our group see this in you, what does your  group see?" 
The "healing" is therefore done between sufferers rather than from staff to patients and is the equivalent of the group insight and support that comes in the Anonymous Fellowships.
The sufferers may not be able to see themselves but they can see each other and, by identifying features of themselves in the others, they gain insight into themselves and into their own disease.
Equally, they also see the capacity for recovery in others and hence in themselves.
Specific issues may be processed in individual counselling.
Grief, sexual abuse or other sexual problems and issues of sexuality, anger and resentment, shame and guilt and many individual blocks to recovery will need to be examined and discussed.
 "Processing" is the open and honest discussion of events and the feelings associated with them in counselling.
It may — or may not — be appropriate to recommend the sufferer to refer these issues for group assessment.
Sometimes "'mini-groups" (which may be unsupervised by counselling staff) may be formed to discuss specific issues of common concern, such as issues particularly appropriate for women.
Many women have difficulty becoming appropriately assertive, rather than submissive or domineering, in our male-orientated society and may find a mini-group of women helpful to examine this problem and process their reactions to it.
For these reasons the sexes are often segregated in treatment centres.
What is the customary programme in a "Minnesota model" treatment centre?
Initial assessment to see whether the sufferer has addictive disease at all.
Sometimes this may be difficult to assess, particularly when there may be psychiatric or behavioural problems distinct from addictive disease.
It may be recommended that independent psychiatric or psychological assessment is made or that the sufferer is admitted for prolonged assessment over a period of time (ten days or so) in daily contact with the group of patients already in treatment.
Detoxification from alcohol or drugs and weaning from other addictive substances or behaviours.
This may require close clinical supervision but, given that supervision, is generally much less demanding and fearful than is commonly supposed.
Normally, patients will continue to come to the nursing station for periodic assessment during the first ten days of treatment but already by the second day they attend lectures and individual and group counselling sessions.
Hopefully, by the time the lingering effects of physical addiction have worn off, there will be sufficient group cohesion and peer pressure to persuade the sufferer to stay in treatment and thereby counter-act the urge to believe that the problems were all a lot of fuss about nothing.
Technical assessments by medical, nursing, counselling, psychological  and clergy members of staff giving a composite picture of the sufferer's clinical history and of his or her assets and deficiencies.
Throughout treatment there will be individual counselling and group sessions as well as lectures and other special processes such as relaxation therapy.
Further attention will be focussed upon general physical and nutritional health as well as On emotional and spiritual recovery.
Throughout treatment Reality Therapy is applied.
The sufferer is con-fronted with truth — as seen by the peer group of patients — rather than the version of it that corresponds to a false picture that only he or she perceives and finds acceptable.
The techniques of Rational Emotive Therapy are applied in which sufferers come to recognise that their thoughts (A) lead to feelings (B) which determine their actions (C) and that if they wish to change thus progression they must learn to challenge the faulty reasoning in (A) and hence develop more appropriate feelings (B) and subsequent actions(C).
The fundamental belief of Dr William Glasser's Control Theory is similarly that feelings are the product of choice of perception.
In clinical practice the sufferer is helped to see that there are other choices, other "pictures" that can be put into the mental library of how life is or could be, and that there is no need to attempt to control one's life by clinging to a fixed perception of reality that may have some validity for the sufferer but little validity for others.
A light prism gives a practical example of how the same object viewed from different standpoints gives different images: one person may see only white light while others see all the colours of the rainbow, yet both perceptions are true to reality and not figments of distorted imagination.
The sufferer from addictive disease, as his or her world progressively falls apart, may have clung desperately to some very individual interpretations of reality simply in order to survive.
The insanity of the disease — being compelled repeatedly to do things that are utterly self-destructive — requires constant readjustments to the "'pictures'" of reality.
There is intense perceived pain in contemplating giving up the mood-altering substance or behaviour and making further major changes in these "pictures" of reality.
By learning to go through the pain in a supportive environment, the sufferer learns to create new positive "pictures" and not to run away from emotional challenges by resorting to mood-altering substances or behaviour.
He or she learns to listen to the other members of the group describe their "" pictures'"and this gives a wider perspective on reality than is possible for one individual in isolation.
The sufferer's previous "pictures" tended to lead repeatedly to the same emotional responses to outside stimuli.
New group "pictures" give him or her a new range of emotional responses.
Dr William Glasser's own model for addiction and recovery in alcoholism (outlined in the manuscript of a forthcoming book on alcoholism) is that the sufferer tries in vain to gain unconditional acceptance from other people.
Dr Glasser identifies four primary needs (apart from survival through reproducing) in all human-beings: i. power.
(competing; achieving; gaining importance.) ii.
freedom.
(moving; choosing.) iii.
fun.
(learning; playing.) iv.
belonging.
(loving; cooperating.)
Dr Glasser argues that unconditional acceptance is an illusion simply because we have to interact with other people who are just like ourselves and who share the same primary needs.
Therefore there are inevitable limitations and conditions when we attempt to gain unconditional acceptance from other people.
The false sensation of unconditional acceptance may come, however, when the sufferers from addictive disease are under the influence of alcohol so that the state of mind produced by mood-altering substances or behaviour is indistinguishable from the unconditional acceptance that they seek.
This positive reinforcement of feelings in association with specific substances or behaviour becomes the basis for subsequent addiction.
Dr Glasser himself believes that this specific susceptibility of the state of mind to mood-altering substances or behaviour in the sufferer from alcoholism may be genetically determined.
Whilst other people recognise that the alcohol-induced sense of unconditioned acceptance is a false sensation, the sufferers from addictive disease may cling to it even to death rather than face up to the reality of the need to accept any conditions in life.
In recovery, however, they find unconditional acceptance in the concept of a Higher Power, and in the relationship with others in the Anonymous Fellowships and come to accept that real life in the world outside the Anonymous Fellowships inevitably imposes conditions.
Dr Glasser holds that alcoholism is a very real, concrete, disease rather than a disease of the human spirit or of the abstract senses but his understanding of alcoholism, based upon his practical experience as a general clinical psychiatrist, with no specific interest in the subject of alcoholism more than in any other, again fits closely with the expressed understanding in "Alcoholics Anonymous" and the experience of treatment centres using the Minnesota Method.
As it says in the "Big Book" of Alcoholics Anonymous,"So our troubles, we think, are basically of our own making.
They arise out of ourselves, and the alcoholic is an extreme example of self-will run riot, though he usually does not think so.
Above everything, we alcoholics must be rid of this selfishness.
We must or it kills us!"
Dr. Glasser's Control Theory holds that people can be shown that they do have the choice of control over their thoughts and actions even though awareness of that choice may initially elude them.
From exercising this choice they can influence their feelings and the physiological associations.
Alcoholism is not the type of disease that is inevitably fatal: recovery is possible.
Correspondingly, Alcoholics Anonymous emphasizes that the choice of understanding and action involved in working the suggested twelve step programme of recovery will have definite beneficial emotional consequences as well as the obvious physiological improvements resulting from abstinence.
Help for problems in relationships comes from recognising that one needs to learn to go through the pain of disillusion, that follows initial idealisation, in order to reach the enlightenment of a mutually respectful lasting relationship, rather than following the repeated pattern of giving up and then renewing the search for a fresh "ideal" .
The first two weeks of treatment focus upon the acceptance of Step I "We admitted we were powerless over alcohol (drugs, food, gambling, emotions etc) and that our lives had become unmanageable" .
Sometimes the mental and emotional fog is so thick and the denial system so intense that this Step 1 process takes significantly longer than two weeks.
Needless to say, the sufferers in whom it takes longer tend to be those in whom the disease and its consequences are most intense and most obvious to everyone else.
It should be remembered that recovery is a process of improving perception and is not merely an intellectual process: if sufferers could fully see and understand what they were doing to themselves, they would not have done it in the first place.
The facts that they do fearful things to themselves and to others regardless of consequence and that they are unaware of the connection between cause and consequence are the essential psycho-pathological nature of addictive disease and denial.
During these first two weeks the sufferer makes an appraisal of his or her previous life and use of addictive substance or behaviour.
This "life story" is written down by the sufferer and then read out to the group.
There is no need at this stage to give explicit gory or shameful details but only to begin to recognise that the simple facts of the previous behaviour and consequences do not fit with the previous belief that all this could be managed satisfactorily alone and without outside help.
The group reflect what they see of the sufferer's assets and defects (never defects alone) and he or she is helped towards the recognition that his or her previous life truly had become unmanageable and that he or she had tried desperately to control everything but was finally having to admit defeat and accept powerlessness.
The advantage of telling the story to the group is that a group of sufferers from the same disease  cannot easily be fooled, nor can they be harshly judgemental.
You cannot pretend to people who, like you, have been pretending for as long as they can remember: they do not let you get away with it.
The essential processes of Step 1 is surrender: the recognition that one is beaten, that one's own perceptions of reality are inappropriate and that one's life has become unmanageable and that one's own attempts to control one's emotions and use of addictive substances or behaviour have totally failed and always will fail.
It is reckoned that Step 1 normally takes about one year to grasp and accept in its full significance.
Treatment Centres take the sufferers through the first five steps of the recovery programme in as many weeks in order to lessen their dread in anticipation in the future and not because they believe that it is really possible to recover at that speed.
The true pace of recovery in alcoholism is reckoned to be one month for every year of use.
In drug addiction and in the eating disorders the processes may be even slower because the drugs or the distorted eating pattern may cause more confusion and damage to thought processes and also because the sufferers may be young and may need to live through the emotional pain of adolescence that is necessary for maturity and which they earlier avoided by recourse to mood-altering chemicals, substances or behaviour.
Each person will recover at his or her own pace, with the same individual variation as for any other illness, but generally the next week is spent on Step 2.
 "Came to believe that a Power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity" .
To take away false self-reliance is constructive but even self-deception may be better than having nothing to put in its place.
To expect a sudden conversion to spiritual belief is to expect too much (although it does sometimes happen) and fortunately it is completely unnecessary.
The group itself is usually already perceived by this time as a source of comfort, strength, wisdom and support even though only a few weeks previously all its members were lost in active addictive disease.
The group itself is commonly adopted as the "Higher Power" (Group of Drunks 0.0.
D.) although some people may develop a more personalised individual concept of God or a Higher Power.
Subsequently, Step 3, "Made a decision to turn our will and our lives over to the care of God as we understood Him" is more demanding of one's resources of humility (as indeed are all the Steps) but it is really a logical progression from Steps I and 2.
However, the capacity and temptation to take back this decision remain throughout the whole of recovery.
The strength of subsequent recovery will depend largely upon the willingness truly to hand over one's will and the outcome of one's life to a non-individual-human God.
As Earnest Kurtz argues in "Not-God" (published by Hazelden), which gives the history of Alcoholics  Anonymous, the process of recovery is essentially the recognition that one is not one's self in control of the Universe, nor even of much of one's own life, and that one is therefore Not God and nor are the mood-altering chemicals and behaviours that one previously "worshipped" .
One has responsibility for one's thoughts, feelings and actions but the outcome is in the hands of God.
The self-centredness of addictive disease has to be changed to a life that is God- and other-people- centred if recovery is to have any lasting substance.
Step IV "Made a searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves" is the first of the steps involved in "cleaning house" and in learning to see one's self as one really is — the good as well as the bad.
This takes up much of the last week or more and is written out in precise detail.
This is the time to make up for the imprecision of the life story in Step 1.
Finally, Step V "Admitted to God, to ourselves and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs" involves a lengthy (usually several hours) session with another human-being (commonly a clergyman, specifically trained to be non-judgemental and non-denominational in the process, but sometimes a counsellor or some -other person) to rid one's self of the continuing sole burden of shame and guilt.
It is not the function of the listener to provide absolution, forgiveness or even "understanding" but merely to encourage the sufferer to admit to all the deeds that poison his or her memory and continuing poor self-image.
The process of making amends to others is in Step 9 and is not normally covered within a residential treatment centre but is left for later work with the support of the Anonymous Fellowship and guidance of a sponsor.
It should be stressed that all the 12 Steps were established and practised long before the first residential treatment centre came into being and that many people today get better without the help of treatment centres or professional counsellors but simply by depending upon the Anonymous Fellowships.
Furthermore, without the Anonymous Fellowships, the treatment centres and counsellors would achieve little or nothing.
Sufferers get better in the Fellowships; treatment centres and counsellors are of value only in so far as they help sufferers towards an understanding of the principles and processes of the Fellowships.
The value of treatment centres is in establishing safe, trusting and caring residential environments in which first exposure to the principles of the Anonymous Fellowships can take place.
The introduction to the first five steps of the Anonymous Fellowships while in a residential treatment centre is only an introduction.
These same steps can be taken again with less apprehension and at a more  studied pace under the guidance of a sponsor in the Anonymous Fellowships.
A few weeks of residential treatment are merely a scratch on the surface of the disease — but it is a deep scratch and it may help many more sufferers into recovery than might otherwise be successful through depending upon the AnonymouS Fellowships alone.
There are those who believe that hitting a real "rock bottom" , losing absolutely everything and then struggling back solely with the aid of the Anonymous Fellowships, is the only true recovery.
However, the "Big Book" of Alcoholics Anonymous, written a mere four years after the birth of that Fellowship, says "to be gravely affected, one does not necessarily have to drink a long time, nor take the quantities some of us have." 
In "Step One" of the "Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions" of Alcoholics Anonymous it says "The first edition of the book" Alcoholics Anonymous', published when our membership was small, dealt with low-bottom cases only.
Many less desperate alcoholics tried AA, but did not succeed because they could not make the admission of hopelessness.
It is a tremendous satisfaction to record that in the following years this changed.
Alcoholics who still had their health, their families, their jobs, and even two cars in the garage, began to recognise their alcoholism.
As this trend grew, they were joined by young people who were scarcely more than potential alcoholics.
They were spared that last ten or fifteen years of literal hell the rest of us had gone through".
Thus it is possible to hit a spiritual "rock bottom" in addictive disease while still having employment, family and possessions: each person's disease and recovery is unique to him or her.
What happens after recovering people leave treatment?
Again it should be emphasised that many sufferers never receive counselling (except from a sponsor) or go into residential treatment in the first place and that residential treatment centres have no place other than to help sufferers remove blocks to their understanding of the principles of recovery of the.
Anonymous Fellowships.
Thus, during treatment there are visits to some meetings of appropriate Anonymous Fellowships outside the treatment centre so that there is preparation for long-term commitment to recovery through the Anonymous Fellowships.
Most sufferers are able to return to their own homes and employment after the completion of four or five weeks of residential treatment.
Some sufferers, notably juveniles addicted to many drugs, commonly take six to eight weeks because their minds are still fogged from the drugs during the first week or two and because they have not been accustomed in their earlier lives to dealing with emotional pain except by recourse to mood-altering chemicals.
New skills and basic trust in new processes take time to acquire.
Quite frequently a sufferer in early recovery will "slip" , having a temporary "experiment" with the substance or behaviour of addiction.
This "field research" is commonplace and is simply the sufferer testing whether what he or she has learnt in treatment is really true in the outside world.
The discovery that it is true can be a frightening and instructive process.
Sadly, in the case of sufferers whose addiction is to heroin or similar drugs, a "slip" may be fatal from overdose.
During the time of abstinence while in treatment, the body loses the tolerance to the high doses of drugs to which it was previously accustomed.
 "Slips" can occur at any time in recovery, even after many years or decades and can be much more distressing than the simple term implies.
Often they result from particularly stressful circumstances but they may simply be a moment of carelessness.
Repeated slips may mean that recovery was never clearly established in the first place or they may be an indication of the beginning of a full-scale relapse.
Some sufferers have such intense addictive disease or have sustained such significant emotional and other damage that they may require extended primary care lasting many weeks or months to gain gradual, gentle understanding of the disease process and of the beginnings of recovery.
Some sufferers, again particularly the juveniles and also those suffering severely from eating disorders — compulsive over-eating, anorexia or bulimia — may require long-term (from a minimum of three months to more than a year) support in a half-way house.
These establishments are sited in the community at large and are half-way between continuing treatment and a full return to the outside world.
These sufferers in early recovery continue to live in a group, receiving some counselling and giving each other support and feedback and often going together to meetings of the Anonymous Fellowships.
Often they will take up voluntary or paid employment during most of the day as part of gradual re-integration into society.
The employment they take may have no connection With their previous skills or employment but serves as a temporary measure to raise self-esteem by doing something positive.
After-care sessions initially on a weekly basis but later less frequently, are recommended for up to two years.
In these groups, particular difficulties are discussed with the group and with the counsellor.
However, it is important that after-care does not become a substitute for attendance at meetings of the Anonymous Fellowships or for actually working the suggested 12 Steps of recovery or for establishing a continuing relationship with a sponsor.
Recovery takes place in the Fellowships; after-care counselling is a bonus.
Do family members ever require residential treatment?
Yes, family members can have addictive disease that is life.threatening: their own "family disease" can drive them to distraction and despair  (frequently misdiagnosed simply as a reactive depression) and they may even commit suicide.
Residential programmes for family members normally last five days and are separate from the recovery programmes for sufferers from the primary disease.
Some conjoint therapy sessions between primary sufferers and family members are helpful to show each side the true feelings of the other, the need to accept and work upon one's own disease, and the need to separate in one's mind the disease from the suffering individual.
Vast numbers of sufferers from the "family disease" are given tranquillisers, antidepressants and sleeping tablets and these can have a cumulative physiological addictive effect — and cause serious withdrawal problems even when there is no primary addictive disease.
Further, these prescribed medications prevent emotional maturation through inhibiting the capacity to feel emotions and deal with them appropriately.
As in the case of primary sufferers, these drugs tend to be significantly over-prescribed.
Only in the case of sufferers from the "family disease" who genuinely have both psychiatric and addictive disease are specific psychiatric drugs of any value and not in this case a definite hindrance to recovery.
Any family member of someone suffering from primary addictive disease may benefit from attendance at meetings of appropriate Anonymous Fellowships and may even benefit from residential care.
The truth is that probably anyone at all can benefit from attendance at open meetings of any Anonymous Fellowship and from working a 12 Step programme.
Anyone can benefit from the Opportunity to work a programme that focuses upon honesty, open-mindedness and willingness and whose goal is the attainment of spirituality.
It is commonly found that there is an interval of about six months between, firstly, the family member getting into recovery from his or her own "family disease" and learning to practise "tough love" and cease "enabling" the disease to continue by covering up its consequences and, secondly, the primary sufferer coming to seek recovery.
Nonetheless, the purpose of the Family Fellowships is to help family members with their own feelings and recovery, regardless of whatever may happen to the primary sufferer.
What other help may be available in parallel to a 12 Step recovery programme?
Sometimes individual counselling may be helpful to observe and counter specific blocks to recovery.
However, care should be taken not to use a professional counsellor as a "fixer" who enables one to avoid doing any real work of one's own.
Behaviour therapy, Gestalt therapy, Art Therapy, Music Therapy, Transactional Analysis, Psychotherapy, Psychosynthesis, Psycho Drama and any number of other techniques may help some people who have problems with the process of moving rationally from thoughts to feelings and on to actions, even though these techniques have nothing to offer to the specific recovery process from addictive disease itself.
 "Feelings Groups" in which a regular group of people in early recovery meet in a group, supervised by a professional counsellor, to discover and express their feelings in a safe environment and thereby gain awareness and practice for the awareness and expression of those feelings in the "real" world.
Feelings that may have poisoned one's perceptions and coloured one's actions since childhood may be found inappropriate to be carried around continually in adult life.