

6 Sampling and the Market Research Process
INTRODUCTION
This third chapter on market research commences with an analysis of sampling.
Surveys carried out for market research purposes cannot normally cover the whole of the relevant population, so a representative sample of it has to be taken.
Such samples are either based on a random, quota or judgement basis, and each type is illustrated, explained and compared.
The statistical viability of random sampling is then compared with the non or semi-statistical viability of the other two techniques, which, in turn, may be more cost effective relative to market research objectives.
The overall process of market research is summarised, and emphasis is placed upon the relationship between the approach and method to be used, and the marketing objective and budgeted cost of the investigation.
Finally, some examples of Information Technology in market research are given, anticipating a later chapter on Marketing and Information Technology.
1) The choice of sample 1.1) Random samples 1.2) Quota samples 1.3) Judgement samples
CHAPTER CONTENTS
2) The market research process
3) Market research and information technology
4) Summary
Recommended Reading
Questions for self-review
7) Examination Questions
Surveys carried out for market research purposes cannot (usually) realistically cover the whole of the relevant  population, so a "sample" of it has to be taken.
The objective is to achieve a selection of individuals from the total relevant population that is representative of it.
The "relevant population" might be consumers, industrial buyers, retail outlets, government buying agencies etc.
The "population" can be very large (eg: all purchasers of consumer durable goods in Hong Kong), or it can be very small (eg: all institutional buyers of kidney dialysis machines in Belgium).
1) THE CHOICE OF SAMPLE
The sample chosen should exhibit the characteristics and variations in attitude, behaviour, purchasing capability (etc) that are relevant to the line of enquiry being undertaken by the market research (and to its marketing objective).
And the sample should exhibit these characteristics and variations in much the same proportions as in the total population from which the sample has been drawn.
There are two main ways in which such a representative sample can be constructed.
These are: random samples.
quota samples.
Each is described in turn, below.
These are samples of the relevant population chosen completely at random.
Random samples are objectively determined and their "sampling error" can be calculated to indicate the degree to which they are representative of the relevant population.
They will be used where a high degree of statistical accuracy is needed, such as in substantiating claims for market share, or in the development of new products that are to be positioned (targeted) accurately on relatively small market segments.
Such products may have to contain specific properties (attributes) that match exactly the demand pattern of a specific group of customers.
It will be necessary to determine in detail what are the constituents of this demand pattern.
Carefully constructed random samples may yield such an accurate response.
1.1) Random samples
Random sampling, as a method, however faces a major problem.
This is the problem of making such samples manageable where the relevant population is large or widely dispersed.
A full scale sample, to be representative, may mean carrying out many interviews over a geographically dispersed  area.
This may not be cost effective.
The solution is to restrict the sample in one or both of two ways, as follows: a) stratified samples: in this case, a random sample is taken of a particular "strata" (or part) of the total relevant population.
This is viable because the statistical proportions of such strata are well known, the information coming from basic sources like the Census of Population and, in the UK, the Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods (ACORN — see later chapter).
For instance, a car manufacturer who wished to find out about UK attitudes towards diesel engines might research only those strata from which it already knows that it derives (say) 80% of its sales.
In the case of Mercedes Benz, BMW and Volvo, this might mean restricting the investigation to the population strata categorised on socioeconomic grounds as: A Higher managerial, administrative or professional.
B Intermediate managerial administrative or professional.
(This classification will be explained more fully in a later chapter.)
These two categories make up about 15% of the total UK population.
But the sample might be restricted to males only (say 7 ½ %) if these companies knew that most of their sales were made to male customers.
The example might be further refined if these manufacturers knew that most of their cars were sold to men between the ages of (say) 35 and 55.
The chosen strata might then comprise: Males aged 35 to 55 in socioeconomic classes A and B.
A random sample of this strata might then be carried out.
b) cluster samples: Cluster samples are a means by which random sampling may be made even more manageable in terms of administrative effort and cost-effectiveness.
The relevant population is divided up into manageable groupings (or "clusters" ) and then randomly sampled, perhaps on a strata-only basis as in (a) above.
Clusters may be based on geographical variables such as: county, city, district or parish boundaries.
commercial television franchise regions.
electoral constituencies.
classifications of residential neighbourhoods.
The statistical significance of the area chosen must, of course, be known.
The total population and its distribution into socioeconomic classes, income or occupational categories must be known.
This information will, again, come from government census statistics, classifications of residential neighbourhoods etc.
In the case of UK commercial television franchise regions, accurate economic and demographic (population) data is available and there are specialist agencies who monitor and publish details of television viewing behaviour within these regions.
So, the cluster is based upon a proportion of a population, or a strata of it, whose "vital statistics" (in demographic terms) are already known.
Here are some examples: a cluster based on a random sample of the entire population in the counties of Shropshire, Staffordshire and Cheshire.
a cluster based on a national market segment.
For instance, this might be all organisational buyers of cars for own fleet use only, or all organisational buyers of cars for fleet and individual hire only.
a cluster based on a variety of factors.
For instance, to return to our Mercedes Benz, BMW and Volvo example (paragraph 1.1(a) above), the market researcher might know that (say) at least 50% of UK sales are made in London and the South East of England (since this is the wealthiest part of the country).
The final choice, based on a regional cluster, might be: Males aged 35 to 55 in socioeconomic classes A and B resident only in (i) areas of recent growth (modern middle status housing);(ii) high status inner city areas of multi-occupancy;(iii) traditional high status suburban areas;(iv) seaside and retirement resorts;(v) rural areas; all within the boroughs of London and the counties of Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire, Essex, Kent, Surrey, Sussex and Wiltshire.
A random sample of the clustered strata might then be carried out.
c) Information Technology There are now available in the UK computer programs (for instance based on ACORN) that ensure that, when sampling locations are chosen, the sample generated has the requisite variety in economic and social circumstances.
That is, it is statistically representative to the required degree.
Quota sampling is widely used in market research as it is cost-effective.
The method of sampling, however, is not based on random chance, and no quantification of statistical sampling error is possible.
In other words, a quota sample is not statistically representative of the relevant population.
1.2 Quota Samples
However, the method is viable because the sample may be matched to objective criteria or proportions in a manner that is appropriate to the particular research exercise.
As we have already seen above, in countries like the UK, West Germany, Singapore (etc) a good deal is known about the population structure, and records are regularly updated by government agencies and professional, industrial and trade associations.
So, an attempt can be made to introduce "representativeness" by stratifying the quota sample in terms of objective and known population characteristics such as: age, sex and family status; socioeconomic group; occupation; income level; ethnic background; householder/houseowner status;(etc)
Indeed, quota samples may now be accurately constructed on the basis of classifications like ACORN using computer programs, simply because such classifications are based on objective distributions of statistical variation in demographic, housing and occupational factors.
Here is a very simple example: i) As part of a wider market research exercise, a UK bread manufacturer wishes to find out more about peoples'  preferences between white, brown and wholemeal bread.
He knows, from objective statistics, the relative demographic proportions of each socioeconomic strata.
He also knows, from trade statistics, the approximate proportions of each loaf type purchased by housewives in each socioeconomic category.
He also knows of the existence of at least half a dozen hypermarkets which have a shoppers' profile that includes every socioeconomic category, and which sell all three types of bread.
His calculations might be as shown in Figure 6.1.
The calculations assume that a total of respondents from five hypermarkets is deemed to be adequate, that is 380.
The distribution of the five hypermarkets is itself a variable.
A national orientation would be obtained if each of the five outlets were located in (say) the South, the Midlands, the North, Scotland and Wales.
Alternatively, regional preferences would dominate the findings if the survey was restricted to only one of these regions.
Such a sample of 380 housewives should yield a useful cross section of attitudes towards the purchase and consumption of the different types of bread.
Although it is not statistically valid, it is based on objective data.
And it may well fit the budget of the bread manufacturer, who could have other lines of market research enquiry which it would also like to pursue, for which funding must also be made available.
A variation on the quota method is called the "judgement" sample.
This is used in trade and industrial market research.
The method is not statistically valid, but is viable in the same way as quota sampling, in that it may be based on objective proportions.
For instance, the basic variable in an industrial market research enquiry might be the output or turnover of the firms in that trade.
It would not be the number of establishments, since many of these will account for only a relatively small proportion of the total output.
ICI and Du Font are only two of the firms in the chemical industry, but their output is rather more significant than their number would suggest!
1.3 Judgement samples
A judgement sample, therefore, would be based on a selection of companies representing the different scales of    operation (or strata) within the industry as a whole.
For instance: 20 buyers in a trade comprising 100 firms purchase 80% of the output of industry "X" sold into that trade.
A judgement sample might therefore include 5 of these 20 major companies, plus 20 buyers from the remaining 80 firms.
These 20 buyers would be chosen from a representative cross section of firms, according to the numbers in each level of output category.
This total sample of 25 buyers should give a reasonably representative view of events in this particular market for product "X" , since between them they purchase 25% of the total, but in order sizes varying from large to small, in proportion to the structure of the trade.
Market research investigations will tend to follow a series of stages.
These stages are described below, and are summarised in Figure 6.2.
2) THE MARKET RESEARCH PROCESS
a) objective and approach: The objective of the research will follow from the particular requirement for information identified by the marketing function.
The objective will show in detail how the information is to be obtained within the cost constraints imposed by the marketing budget.
Thus, terms of reference for the study will be established, and the scope and extent of the investigation defined.
The process of establishing objective and approach may be assisted by the carrying out of a preliminary investigation, particularly where the investigation will be complex and resource constraints make it important to follow only the most promising lines of enquiry.
It is essential that both the person authorising the research, and the individual or agency carrying it out, are in agreement about the objectives of the exercise and the approach to be taken to carry it out within the requisite cost constraints.
b) collection and classification of information: One part of this process is the obtaining of information by Desk Research, which was described in Chapter 4.
The other part involves Field Research, described in detail in Chapters 4 and 5.
It may be important to carry out a preliminary field research exercise to identify: who are the "relevant population" and what they are like in general terms; what type of research method will prove most cost-effective; what should be the structure and content of the questionnaire, and how researchers should use it; how the information collected is to be collated and classified.
Once this preliminary or "pilot" research has been carried out, the main field investigation can be constructed and then carried out, using the various techniques already described in Chapter 3 and in this chapter.
c) Collation and analysis of information Once information starts to flow in, it will be combined, compiled and summarised, so that market intelligence or knowledge can emerge under the various category headings used to classify the data.
It is at this stage that a useful picture of the market should emerge, that picture being appropriate to the particular requirements of the marketing objective established in (a) above.
Typically, much of this classification, compilation and summary will be carried out on computer packages specially written for market and statistical research purposes.
d) presentation of market research findings: The final step will be the presentation of the findings of the investigation.
A written (and usually also a formal verbal) report will state: Objectives and terms of reference; Summary of main findings and conclusions; Detailed analysis of main findings; Detailed reasoning behind main conclusions; Appendices, tables, detailed supporting data and results (etc).
A final point of note here is that the purpose of market research in consumer and industrial markets is the same.
However, given the differences between the two types of market, there will be variations in the techniques, detail and points of emphasis.
For example, researchers may    attempt to obtain a series of lengthy in-depth interviews with senior buyers or decision-makers in industrial organisations, whilst consumer market research might concentrate on getting a limited amount of specific information from as large a sample as possible from the relevant population.
The impact of Information Technology on marketing will also be dealt with in a later chapter.
As far as market research is concerned, a brief mention of three items can be made, thus: a) electronic data processing (EDP) of market research results: EDP is frequently used for compiling, categorising and summarising the results of survey investigations.
This has two advantages.
One is that relatively lengthy questionnaires can be used to increase the quantity or detail of information obtained.
The other is the potential for numerically large surveys, assuming that the interviewer resources are available.
EDP does put a premium on questionnaires which are constructed of direct closed questions which can be coded for data entry.
3) MARKET RESEARCH AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
b) electronic interviewing: where direct interactive systems based upon telecommunication networks (or cable television) are available, market research based on direct, closed questions is possible.
The value of such systems would perhaps lie in their immediacy, for instance in assessing reaction to a television advertising campaign whilst it was actually being carried out.
Needless to say, electronic interviewing remains at an early stage in its development.
It is expensive to operate because of the hardware involved.
Additionally, respondents must be both television subscribers and telephone subscribers.
c) databases for desk research: databases are briefly dealt with in the chapter on marketing and Information Technology.
Databases have an obvious use as an information source for desk research.
The weekly UK journal "Marketing" noted that"computer power…takes larger, geographically organised databases, of which published Census statistics are the most important, and links them to other sets of marketing information, intelligence and research data.
The result is computer systems that can  provide new insights into marketing patterns and marketing opportunities.
(For instance) over the years retailers have accessed Census statistics with increasing sophistication to evaluate site and market potential and to target new and expensively developed retail propositions.
Demographics permit local market sizes to be quantified with a precision that was previously impossible.
Databases detailing the size and distribution of retail competitors can then build an even more complete picture of the market place.
Large grocery multiples and the oil companies have led the way in retail modelling, and some now reckon to be able to predict new store or site performance to within a few percentage points."
The contents of this chapter are summarised in table 6.3.
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
The choice of sample Market research surveys cannot realistically cover the whole of the relevant population, so a "sample" of it has to be taken.
This sample must be "representative" ie exhibit characteristics and variations in attitude, behaviour, purchasing capability (etc)(i) relevant to the line of market research enquiry;(ii) in much the same proportions as the total population from which the sample is drawn.
Sampling may be "random" .
Such samples are objectively determined and the sampling error can be calculated (ie their degree of statistical representativeness of the population can be indicated).
Such samples may be "stratified" , based on population groupings or "clusters" to make them  more manageable.
Sampling may instead be based on "quotas" .
Quota samples are not based on random choice and so they are not statistically objective.
Quota samples are, however, used because the sample can be matched to the objective proportions that are appropriate to the objective of the investigation.
As such, they are cost-effective, since their construction can be tailor made to fit the relevant population and its geographical distribution, the budget available (etc).
A variation on quota sampling is the "judgement" sample, which is based on objective proportions within industrial markets.
4) SUMMARY
TABLE 6.3
Summary: Chapter Six
2.
The market research The market research process follows process these stages;(i) set objective and agree approach;(ii) carry out pilot survey;(iii) collect and classify information;(iv) collate and analyse information;(v) present findings.
Crimp M. The Marketing Research Process.
Prentice Hall International.
RECOMMENDED READING
1.
What is market research, and why does it play an important role in the marketing function?
QUESTIONS FOR SELF REVIEW
2.
List, describe and compare the main sources of information from which desk research may be carried out.
What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of these different sources?
3.
What is the role of field research within the market research process?
4.
Describe and compare the four main methods by which field research may be carried out.
What factors will influence the researcher's choice amongst the methods actually available to him or her?
5.
What major factors are relevant to the design and construction of a market research questionnaire?
6.
What are the relative advantages and disadvantages in questionnaire construction of closed and open questions?
7.
What are the relative advantages and disadvantages in questionnaire construction of direct and indirect questions?
8.
What are the "attitudes" and "opinions" ?
What are the particular problems in market research of recording respondent attitudes and opinions?
How may the market researcher overcome these difficulties?
9.
Why do market researchers make use of "samples" of the "relevant population" ?
How might the relevant population be defined?
10.
Describe and comment on the technique of random sampling.
What are its advantages and disadvantages?
11.
Describe and comment on the techniques of quota and judgement sampling.
What are their advantages and disadvantages?
12.
Compare and contrast random and quota sampling methods in market research.
13.
Compare and contrast random and quota sampling methods in consumer goods market research.
14.
Compare and contrast random and quota sampling methods in industrial goods market research.
Q6 What is Market Research and how is it carried out?
Why is it an important input to setting objectives and judging enterprise performance?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
Q7 "A firm cannot be considered to be genuinely marketing-orientated unless it has a thorough understanding of its markets, its customers and their problems." 
Comment with reference to the role of market research within the business firm.
Describe the four basic research methods in common use.
Q8 Identify the major steps involved in carrying out a marketing research exercise, briefly identifying the problems associated with each stage.
Q9 What factors should be taken into account when designing questionnaires so that they may be efficiently and accurately analysed?
Q10 Why is quota sampling used in survey research extensively, in preference to the theoretically superior random sampling?
Q11 In what ways do techniques of market research differ between capital goods and consumer goods markets?
How are these differences accounted for?
Sales and Market Forecasting
"When you can measure what you are speaking of, and express it in numbers, you know that on which you are discoursing.
But when you cannot measure it and express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a very meagre and unsatisfying kind."
Lord Kelvin
This section begins by looking at the role of sales and market forecasting in the operation of the business.
It continues by putting sales and market forecasting into the wider context of the role and purpose of company planning and forecasting.
Forecasting techniques can be divided into two main types, namely quantitative and qualitative.
Each category is explained and analysed within the context of marketing and business planning, and their application is illustrated by a variety of examples.
7 Sales Market Forecasting
INTRODUCTION
This chapter commences by putting sales and market forecasting into the wider context of the role and purpose of forecasting within the business enterprise.
Planning assumptions and future expectations are compared, and the relationship between the two is analysed.
The advantages to a business of making use of planning and forecasting techniques are then described.
The role of the sales or market forecast in the operation of the business is also explained, particularly within the context of the budgetary planning and control process.
Other issues in sales and market forecasting are dealt with in Chapters Eight and Nine.
1) The role and purpose of forecasting.
1.1) Planning assumptions and future expectations 1.2) The advantages of planning and forecasting
CHAPTER CONTENTS
2) Sales and market forecasting
3) Summary
Forecasting is a basic ingredient of business and marketing planning.
A business cannot plan without making forecasts, and it cannot make forecasts without having some kind of plan to act as a framework for forecasters to use.
1) THE ROLE AND PURPOSE OF FORECASTING
Forecasting is an attempt to visualise or anticipate the kind of future environment in which company plans and actions are likely to be implemented.
It makes assumptions about known and unknown future conditions that are likely to determine the success of these plans.
And it will attempt to predict the specific outcome from the implementation of company plans.
For instance, will the introduction of fuel efficient petrol engines by some car manufacturers mean that car buyers will come to insist on fuel efficiency as the norm in future years?
What will be the effect on other manufacturers who will have to commit substantial funds to developing new  engines, or to buy-in new engines from other makers (so losing control over a major item of added value in their profit creation process)
Planners will distinguish between forecasts that are planning assumptions, and those that are future expectations.
Planning assumptions are predictions about the probable environments in which plans are expected to operate.
Indeed, such predictions might be described in terms of the probability with which their occurrence may be estimated.
For instance, planners might attempt to estimate the probability of the following: further significant increases/decreases in the price of crude oil; increases in the number of terrorist attacks on civilian airliners in those Mediterranean countries which have large tourist trades; the likelihood of political change in South Africa, and the chances of continuing economic stability in that country.
1.1 Planning assumptions and future expectations.
These planning assumptions, therefore, are an attempt to predict future business conditions and the sales volumes that might be obtained from them.
However, decisions based upon these assumptions may then lead to forecasts of future expectations, for example in terms of probable ranges of costs, revenues, profits and cashflows.
For instance, investment decisions taken in response to planning assumptions will yield future expectations about financial viability and success.
In this case, planning assumptions are a prerequisite of planning, and forecasts of future expectations are a result of planning.
It is not enough for a business to be responsive only to its present environment.
A business must plan for the future.
Effective management will attempt to anticipate the environment in which its plans will operate.
This means forecasting what elements in that environment will affect such plans.
It also means being prepared to alter plan, or course, as circumstances develop.
Clearly, those businesses that foresee the critical  changes that will affect plans, and are flexible enough to do something about them, will have a far better chance of being successful than those who cannot or will not.
1.2 The advantages of planning and forecasting.
The advantages to be gained from effective planning and forecasting, and a company willingness to adapt to changing circumstances, stems from three main factors; as follows: a) The making of forecasts, and their eventual review, forces managers to think ahead, to look to the future, and to use their experience to provide for it.
Decision-making is often about future plans and events, yet nobody knows with certainty what will happen in the future.
An effective and systematic attempt at forecasting may reduce some of this uncertainty, and render the future more manageable.
After all, experienced marketers and managers know what has happened in the past.
They should, as a result, be able to predict the probability of occurrence of at least some future events, and their consequences.
The company should know what are the future consequences of its existing investments and commitments, and ought to be able to describe, at least in broad terms, some of the most probable scenarios it is likely to face during the next few years.
There is no reason why it should not limit the uncertainty contained in the future to those most unpredictable or surprising events, which will almost always be impossible to forecast.
b) The making of explicit forecasts will involve systematic thought and analysis.
Such an intellectual process is likely to be of great value in business organisations which have a tendency to be long on action, but short on thought!
Sales and market forecasting will focus attention upon the basic influences on the marketplace, and on the relationships within it.
For instance, how valid are the company's assumptions about: customer sensitivity to price changes (price elasticity of demand); the effectiveness of its advertising in stimulating customer demand, and in maintaining its share of the total market; the relationship of per capita real income to demand for its products (for instance , people with increasing incomes tend to eat a wider variety of foodstuffs than  hitherto, yet their per capita expenditure on food tends to decline as a proportion of their total personal expenditure).
The forecasting process opens up basic assumptions, and past marketing strategies, for review, appraisal and criticism.
c) systematic forecasting will help to unify and co-ordinate the wider process of market research and planning.
There will have to be agreement about the significance and relationship between the variables involved in the planning process, before these variables can be accepted as those for which research must be carried out, and forecasts made.
For instance, the relatively high costs of a quality orientated operation can only be justified if forecasts of market demand show that customers will remain insensitive to price increases, but sensitive to variations in product quality.
This, for example, is a problem for tyre manufacturers.
Will commercial vehicle operators buy long-lasting, reliable but expensive quality tyres, or cheap, short-life imports and re-moulds?
What are the different types of market demand (or segments — see later chapter) to be forecasted, and is there agreement about the basic reasons for that demand?
The sales forecast is a key part of the company's plans.
It is important both in long term or "corporate" (company wide) planning, and in the budgetary planning and control process which is carried out on an annual basis.
Budgetary planning and control is used as the framework for detailed operational planning and control.
2) SALES AND MARKET FORECASTING
a budget may be defined as a quantitative and financial plan of the activity to be pursued during the financial year to achieve that year's objectives.
* the budgetary planning and control process may be defined as the establishment of budgets which relate the responsibilities of departments and employees to the requirements of plans and policies; and the continuous comparison of actual results with the budgeted targets, so that the latter may be achieved, or amendments made to the objectives upon which they were based.
The preparation and compilation of budgetary plans will require the development of a set of estimates of future revenues and costs.
These estimates will be used to construct a series of co-ordinated departmental, functional and financial budgets, which will also serve as standards for cost control.
Whilst cost budgets may be based on internal standards, they may depend on the sales volume of the business activity.
So, even here the role of the sales forecast can be seen as crucial.
And it is the direct source of the revenue budget.
The process is illustrated in a simplified form in Figure 7.1.
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 7.2.
3) SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1 & 1.1 Role and A business cannot plan without making purpose of forecasting forecasts, and cannot forecast without having some kind of plan to act as a framework.
Forecasting is an attempt to visualise or anticipate the kind of future environment in which company plans and actions are likely to be implemented.
It makes assumptions about known and unknown future conditions likely to determine the success of these plans.
It is used to predict the specific expected outcomes from the implementation of company plans.
TABLE 7.2
Summary: Chapter Seven
1.2 Advantages and It is not enough for a business to be disadvantages of responsive only to its present forecasting environment.
A business must plan for the future.
Effective management means attempting to anticipate the environment in which its plans will operate.
It needs to think ahead on a systematic basis.
And forecasting also helps to unify and co-ordinate the wider process of market research and market planning.
2 Sales and market Sales and market forecasting plays an forecasting essential part in budgetary planning and control, which is "driven" by annual sales forecasts and periodic amendments thereto.
It is also an important ingredient of company-wide or "corporate" planning.
8 Quantitative Forecasting Techniques
INTRODUCTION
This second chapter on sales and market forecasting deals with quantitative forecasting techniques.
These techniques are based on subjective, statistical and explanatory methods.
Whatever the method chosen, these quantitative techniques are used for the construction of specific sales and market forecasts, whether it be at the level of the sales territory, market segment, national or even international market.
The time scale for which such forecasts may be calculated may vary from one month to several years ahead.
1) Forecasting techniques
CHAPTER CONTENTS
2) Quantitative forecasting techniques
3) Subjective forecasting techniques 3.1) Sales force composite method 3.2) Juries of executive opinion 3.3) Surveys of buyer intentions
4) Statistical forecasting techniques 4.1) Moving averages 4.2) Exponential smoothing 4.3) Decomposition or time-series analysis 4.4) Trend extrapolation and curve fitting
5) Explanatory forecasting techniques 5.1) Operational research models 5.2) Management System Dynamics 5.3) Macroeconomic and econometric forecasting
6) Summary
There is a wide variety of forecasting techniques, which can usefully be divided into two categories, namely quantitative and qualitative.
Each will be analysed separately.
The point  should also be made that many of these techniques are statistically and technically complex, often requiring computerised operation.
A detailed analysis of such techniques is beyond the scope of this book, and so the coverage given to them will be generally limited to their marketing applications.
The techniques to be considered are listed in Table 8.1.
Qualitative techniques are analysed in Chapter Nine.
QUANTITATIVE QUALITATIVE Subjective methods Technological forecasting
1) FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
Table 8.1
Forecasting Techniques
sales force method Social Forecasting
juries of executive opinion surveys of buyer intentions
Political forecasting
Statistical methods moving averages Methods include exponential smoothing scenario development decomposition analysis Delphi techniques trend extrapolation and cross-impact analysis curve fitting
value profiles
Explanatory techniques operational research management system dynamics macroeconomic and econometric forecasting
Quantitative forecasting techniques comprise three main groups, each of which will be considered in turn.
These groups are: Subjective Statistical Causal
2) QUANTITATIVE FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
Whatever the method chosen, these techniques are used for the construction of specific sales and market forecasts, whether it be at the level of the sales territory, market segment (see later chapter), national or even international market.
The time scale for which such forecasts may be calculated may vary from one month to several years ahead.
One of the more commonly used methods of sales forecasting is to obtain from salesforce personnel and sales managers their combined view of sales to be expected during the forecast period.
Before making their individual territory estimates, the salesforce may be briefed on past trends, and on significant factors that the company thinks are likely to affect total sales during the forthcoming period.
The estimates made by each salesperson for his or her territory are then aggregated and reviewed by regional and head office sales managers, marketing managers associated with particular products or brands, and advertising staff.
3) SUBJECTIVE FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
3.1) Sales force composite method.
After all, salesforce personnel are in close contact with the people who actually make up the market, and ought to have the most detailed knowledge about how it is likely to behave in the near future.
Indeed, many sales personnel would be offended if sales forecasts were made without any attention being paid to their knowledge and opinion!
However, the salesforce composite method also has a number of disadvantages, which include: limited perspectives — salesforce estimates may tend to over-emphasise prevailing conditions, reacting (or overreacting) to localised or short run trends.
They may also be shaped by personal reaction to the passage of events.
This may take the form of individual optimism or pessimism about likely future events within the territory.
Such feeling, however, may not accurately represent the movement of trends.
Indeed, they may (unwittingly) hide the reality so that no account is taken of it in the forecast.
Similarly, individual members of the salesforce may be too close to their territory to perceive wider pattern within marketplace trends, and there will be a need for an overview to balance this intimate and territory based view.
* lack of knowledge of regional, national or international trends — individual salespeople are not likely to be in a position to possess a toad knowledge of the market.
The value of their estimates lies in specificity and detail.
But this must be balanced by an overview about trends in customer behaviour, economic conditions (etc) that are likely to affect loner term market conditions.
The  provision of such an overview is the responsibility of the company's marketing and corporate planning functions.
* forecasts and targets — individual territory forecasts may be viewed with scepticism when an individual salesperson suspects that his forecast will become his sales target.
In this case, the figure may be adjusted downwards so that it may more easily be achieved, especially when commission payments are based on the full achievement of sales target or quota.
Despite these disadvantages, forecasts submitted by the salesforce are an essential grass-roots starting point to the forecasting process.
Sales territory forecasting is also dealt with in later chapters.
These are groups of senior managers and/or outside trade representatives brought together to offer a combined judgement about market trends and the viability of internal and external sales and market forecasts.
Such juries bring together on an integrated basis a variety of relevant experience and opinion.
They may question and qualify the company's internal sale forecast, however it is formulated.
They may advise or wan the forecasters-about trends or events that are likely to influence sales performance.
They may be asked to react to the implications of the forecast and the means to be employed by the enterprise to achieve it.
And they may be asked to play the role of "devil's advocate" , preventing forecasters and marketers a like from becoming complacent and insular, losing sight of the continuous impact of the external environment on the business.
3.2) Juries of executive opinion.
Suppliers operating in industrial markets dominated by a small number of large companies may find it possible to base their annual and long term forecasts on the expected purchases of these customers.
After all, the number of such buyers is small and past purchase patter's may be known in great detail (from internal sales information, and from trade association statistics covering the whole market).
And where there is a stable and well established relationship between buyer and supplier, it may be in the interest of both to allow the supplier  to build up an accurate sales forecast.
This way the buyer need not fear a situation in which the supplier will run out of essential stock, and the supplier can plan on the long term to optimise his conditions of supply.
Stable contracts will permit cost reductions and capital investment to improve the quality and reliability of supply.
Contract marketing is dealt with in a later chapter.
More generalised surveys of industrial buyer intentions can also be useful.
For instance, in the UK the Confederation of British Industry publishes a four monthly basis a national survey of the opinions of a lab sample of companies whether they expect their sales, exports, production, employment and investment to remain stable or change.
Similar opinion surveys are carried out throughout the European Economic Community and are published by the European Commission.
3.3) Surveys of buyer intentions.
Regular surveys of industrial and consumer confidence are also published by the Financial Times in the UK, and by other specialist media such as the trade press and market research organisations.
In so other countries, these kinds of surveys are carried out and published by Chambers of Commerce, government ministries (etc).
This is a particularly complex issue, largely beyond the scope of this book.
Readers might wish to consult Quantitative Techniques by T. Lucey (D Publications); whilst a useful summary of the marketing applications of statistical forecasting techniques will be found in the article by Makridakis and Wheelwright, entitled "Forecasting: Issues and challenges for Marketing Management" Joint of Marketing Vol 41 No. 4 October 1977.
A number of techniques are briefly summarised below.
4) STATISTICAL FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
Where it is unreasonable assume that sales in period t+1 will be the same as at time t (the present), or that the increase/decrease in sales over period t to t+1 will be the same as during the period t-1 to t, a moving average may be calculated.
This bases the fore for time t+J on the average of several past values of the actual sales figure achieved.
For instance, a forecast for sales month t+1 might be based on the actual figures for months t-4 to t-1 inclusive.
Each of these values would be given a weight of ¼ and the sum of these values  would be the forecast.
If sales for the last four months were 42, 36, 41, 45 units respectively, the forecast for next month would be ((42+36+41+45) divided by 4) =41 units.
4.1) Moving averages.
As each new actual value becomes available, it is then incorporated into the averaging formula, so that the value calculated "moves" through time.
Moving averages would normally be used for short term forecasting, perhaps up to a maximum of a few (say 3 to 6) months ahead.
This differs from the moving average in that it does not use equal weightings for the past values chosen.
Rather, an exponentially decreasing set of weights is used so that the more recent values receive more weight than older ones.
Common sense (or observation) may show that the pattern of behaviour requires the forecaster to give progressively less weight to values the further back in time they occur.
4.2) Exponential smoothing.
Exponential smoothing would again normally be used for short term forecasting, for periods up to six months ahead.
This assumes that patterns and trends which can be identified in past (historical) sets of data may be projected forward, especially under stable economic, market and organisational conditions, for the purpose of forecasting perhaps up to one year ahead.
The forecaster would search past time-series of data for consistent evidence of: * seasonal variations (which are for instance marked in the case of holiday or toy sales) over a period of a year.
* cyclical variations, which are longer term and may lack the consistency and predictability of seasonal variations.
Nevertheless, many sales forecasters will need to predict the general movement of the relevant cycle during the forthcoming year.
* variations which can be attributed to the occurrence of identifiable and non-random events, such as bad weather, strikes or adverse publicity.
The forecaster must decide whether to exclude such events from the analysis of trends where these are being used to forecast for the future.
* longer term (or "secular" ) trends indicated by past time-series of data.
These might include market growth or decline.
A forecaster would be interested in their source (for instance growth in personal disposable income combined with long-term taste changes favouring a new product type), and their likely degree of permanence or duration, before fully accepting them.
4.3) Decomposition or time series analysis.
These are techniques that may be used for longer term forecasting, perhaps for periods of two or more years ahead.
They are in part based upon the statistical techniques described above, but use whatever mathematical form of extrapolation (forward projection) that the forecaster considers will be most valid in achieving a prediction.
The projection may be linear or exponential, or may incorporate more complex calculations which make allowance for variation in the basic parameters assumed to remain constant in the simpler equations.
Or they may incorporate values for the degree of error of past forecasts when compared with actual results achieved.
4.4) Trend extrapolation and curve fitting.
Methods of correlation and regression analysis may be incorporated, along with variations in outcome probability.
A variety of techniques are also available to produce curves that "fit" data and extrapolate it forwards for forecasting purposes.
There are two main categories of explanatory (or "causal" ) forecasting techniques.
These are based on: * operational research models, including management system dynamics; * macroeconomic/econometric models.
5) EXPLANATORY FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
These techniques are normally used to assist, augment and inform the quantitative forecasting process.
Their role is to give depth, colour and understanding to the issues at hand, and to provide a broad context (or "environment" ) by which to guide the more specific calculation of quantitative forecasts described above.
These are an abstraction of real systems or processes which are used to represent the basic variable and constant features.
The purpose is to allow exploration and explanation of the behaviour of the system or process, for instance: * as the values of its variables are changed, for instance on a "what if?" basis; * as the system or process operates through time; * as it is affected by the incorporation of probabilistic measures of outcome risk and uncertainty.
5.1) Operational research models.
Operational Research (OR) models are used to simulate the workings of a real life system, so that the model builder, planner or manager can "experiment" with alternative processes, policies and plans.
Two main approaches can be used.
The first is called algorithmic, which comprises a procedure or series of instructions used to solve a specific type of problem.
The second is called heuristic, which is an exploratory approach to problem solving and simulation that uses repeated (iterative) trial and error, each solution being assessed and used to modify successive attempts, until a final solution is achieved.
This solution must satisfy specific criteria of outcome viability.
Both approaches will incorporate controllable and uncontrollable variables, the proportion and relative importance of each type varying with the type of system or process being modelled.
This may be described in the general formula u=J (x, Y) where U is the decision function, which has to be operated in conjunction with controllable variables X and uncontrollable variables Y.
Where OR models are used in sales and market forecasting, it is likely that there will be more relevant uncontrollable variables Y than in, say, a production line scheduling problem comprising controllable variables X.
R. L. Ackoff and others have classified OR techniques in terms of the general applications for which they may be used.
These applications include: queuing problems allocation problems inventory problems search problems replacement and maintenance competition problems problems scheduling and routing problems
Several of these applications will be relevant to specific sales and market forecasting requirements.
For instance, annual sales forecasting for a manufacturing activity undertaking a wide variety of large complex engineering work on a unit and small batch basis may be carried out using a combination of queuing, scheduling and inventory based methods.
More specifically, four main categories of OR models can be identified on the basis of their general objective.
Each is listed below, together with a sales forecasting example.
5.1 a) Models used to describe and analyse the structure, interrelationships, functioning and behaviour of systems.
For instance, a model may be constructed to represent the main factors determining a Company's proportionate share of a specific market.
If operation of the model can, to some degree, accurately represent the workings of the market then an individual company may be able to gain a deeper understanding of the relative position that it has in that market.
It may then be able to forecast more clearly the outcome of variations in its product and marketing policies-advertising expenditures (etc) in terms of possible sales.
5.1 b) Models used to make predictions under given sets of probabilities and assumptions about the basic relationships between variables, and their relative influence on each other.
An obvious example is that of pricing policy.
A company may attempt to measure the degree to which the market is sensitive to price changes, that is to understand its price elasticity.
Where it knows that it will suffer increases in its costs, it may wish to use a model to predict what will be the effect of a series of increasingly large price rises upon its sales.
To do this it will have to make assumptions about the price elasticity of demand for competitors' products again under a series of increasing price rises.
This, of course, will involve the modeller in finding out about how price competitive the market is, SO that reasonable assumptions can be made about the influence of price competition on the sales of any one supplier, and on sales in the market as a whole.
5.1 c) Models used to calculate the optimum outcomes from a specific set of variables.
These are called "optimising models" and are best known from their application to queuing, scheduling and routing problems.
Such a model  could be used for sales forecasting purposes in the following way.
A company might wish to study the specific effect of its promotional activities (dealt with in detail in a later chapter) on its sales.
At any given level of expenditure £n it may wish to optimise its "mix" of expenditure on the various promotional methods available to it, so as to maximise the level of sales to be obtained at the level of promotional expenditure £n.
The model might be represented thus:  where S = sales level to be optimised Tvad = television advertising Psad = press advertising Slsfce = Salesforce size and deployment Slsfcecomm = sales commission paid to salesforce Dsincve = distributor discounts and incentives C = factors assumed to remain constant for the purpose of the exercise.
Constant factors "C" might include the activities of competitors and company price competitiveness and product acceptability.
The model might be illustrated as in Figure 8.2.
5.1 d) Models used to indicate time — dependent behaviour.
For instance a dynamic model may be used to show the effect of changes in advertising expenditure on sales.
One example of such a model is that of Vidale and Wolfe who related the rate of change of sales to advertising by the equation:  where S = sales at time t ds/dt = rate of change of sales at time A = advertising expenditure at time r = sales response factor (sales generated per unit of advertising expenditure) M = saturation level of sales (sales maximum)
This simple model shows an exponential increase ii sales during the period of the advertising campaign, and an exponential decay after it has ended.
It is, of course, assumed that all other marketing factors remain constant in their impact on sales.
It is illustrated in Figure 8.3.
This is an underused but powerful and versatile OR tool.
Management system dynamics is mainly concerned with the time-varying behaviour of processes or systems, but it may be used to carry out modelling and investigation under any of the four OR categories described in section (5.1) above.
Its particular advantage to the marketer is that it may be used without extensive training in mathematics or computer programming, since programming is done by the package itself when in operation.
The user, therefore, can concentrate on the structure and behaviour of the system under consideration, rather than on the technical aspects of the modelling process.
5.2) Management System Dynamics.
The technique is based on the University of Bradford DYSMAP package.
Dysmap compiles and carries out continuous simulation models and is particularly suited to modelling situations whose dynamic nature is based on feedback  processes.
Dysmap works by solving a large number of simultaneous equations at specified time intervals, using the information already calculated for the previous time interval as the basis for the current series of calculations.
This means that initial conditions need to be specified so as to provide the data for the first set of calculations.
Whilst a detailed analysis of system dynamics is beyond the scope of this book, its application to sales forecasting is illustrated by an example, below.
The example to be used is a variation of the example given in paragraph (5.1 c) and Figure 8.2 (a promotional Mix Model) above.
Purchases by customers are assumed to be a function of advertising and promotional expenditure, salesforce effort and commission, and retailer sales effort.
The process also incorporates feedback, for instance in the relationship between the rate at which customers purchase and the rate of purchases for stock by retailers.
Figure 8.4 shows some of the relevant variables and feedback in a system dynamics flowchart.
This may be used at a variety of levels of sophistication and economic generality, thus: 5.3 i) Models at company level may be based on econometric equations for instance to analyse the relationship between price and demand, perhaps using the model.
Q=aP (or log Q = log a-b log P) where Q = demand P = price b = price elasticity
5.3) Macroeconomic and econometric forecasting.
Another example is quoted by Milne (T.E.
Milne Business Forecasting: a managerial approach.
Longman) of the owner of a chain of ten shops who suspected that his level of sales was a function of the number of shoppers per hour passing by in the street, and the floor area of a given store.
The owner wished to find out whether such a relationship could be formulated and used to predict sales in other shops which he was considering adding to his chain.
Data was collected on the three variables for the existing shops and the following model emerged: £ Sales per week = 193 + 0.23 x shoppers + 0.118 x floor area
5.3 ii) leading indicators: a company may maintain a continuous scrutiny of those indicators, such as levels of consumer spending, new car registrations, engineering orders obtained, housebuilding starts (etc) which have an established relationship to its own level of sales.
For instance, a manufacturer of fitted furniture may be interested in trends for housebuilding starts, mortgage interest rates, house price movements and localised levels of employment, since these factors will have an impact on sales of its products.
5.3 (iii) macroeconomic forecasts: generalised national forecasts for trends in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), investment, consumption and employment are produced in the UK by the National Institute for Economic and Social Research (NIESR), by the Bank of England, the Henley Centre for Forecasting, the London Business School, and by stockbroking firms, other universities etc.
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 8.5.
SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
Forecasting techniques These can be divided into quantitative and qualitative categories summarised in Table 8.1
TABLE 8.5
Summary: Chapter Eight
2.
Quantitative forecasting These can be divided into three techniques categories, namely subjective, statistical, causal.
3.
Subjective forecasting There are three main types:(i) techniques salesforce composite method which uses estimates of future sales made by salesforce and sales management personnel;(ii) juries of executive opinion are groups of senior managers and/or outside trade representatives brought together to offer a combined judgement about market trends and existing/proposed sales forecasts;(iii) surveys of buyer intentions are taken from industrial markets dominated by small numbers of large buyers, whose expected or forecast purchases provide the basis for the survey.
4.
Statistical forecasting Comprise (i) moving averages;(ii) casting techniques exponential smoothing;(iii) decomposition or time-series analysis;(iv) trend extrapolation and curve fitting.
Mainly used for short-term forecasting.
5.
Explanatory forecasting These techniques are used to assist, techniques augment and inform the quantitative forecasting process, giving depth, colour and understanding to the issues at hand.
They provide a broad context by which to guide the more specific calculations and assumptions made by other quantitative techniques.
Two main types:(i) Operations Research models, which are an abstraction of real systems or processes which are used to represent the basic variable and constant features of the reality, so that its behaviour or process can be explored, explained and simulated;(ii) Macroeconomic and econometric models which may be used at a company level, or at a more general industry or economy level.
9 Qualitative Forecasting Techniques
INTRODUCTION
This third chapter on sales and market forecasting deals with qualitative forecasting techniques.
Qualitative forecasting techniques are used to assist and augment the quantitative forecasting process described in the previous chapter.
Their role is to give depth and colour to the issues at hand, and to provide a broad context or environment by which to guide the more specific calculation of quantitative forecasts.
Consideration is then given to the marketer's choice of forecasting method, and the chapter concludes by examining an alternative forecasting basis, that of market share.
This will require the forecasting of both the size of the total market into which the enterprise trades, and its likely share of that market.
Target customer forecasting is dealt with in a later chapter.
1) Qualitative forecasting techniques 1.1) Scenario development 1.2) Delphi techniques 1.3) Cross-impact analysis 1.4) Value profiles 2) Choice of forecasting method 3) Forecast of market share 4) Summary Questions for self-review Examination questions
CHAPTER CONTENTS
1) QUALITATIVE FORECASTING TECHNIQUES
The application of qualitative techniques is a recognition that sales or market forecasting is not carried out in isolation from the external environment in which the enterprise operates.
Indeed, qualitative forecasting is often termed environmental forecasting.
It involves an analysis of environmental trends likely to affect sales levels, and a detailed examination of those  environmental conditions (such as changes in people's life-style, standard of  education (etc)) for which specific forecasts have to be constructed.
Environmental forecasting may be used to inform"the market forecasting process, or to provide the basis for more detailed quantification.
It is more likely to be relevant to medium and long term planning and forecasting, especially (as far as this book is concerned) as regards market development, growth and decline.
The areas for which environmental forecasting may be carried out are described in Figure 9.1.
Forecasts of the economic environment have already been analysed in the previous chapter.
Technological forecasting deals with the projected impact of scientific developments on the future state of technology, and attempts specifically to examine how these developments will affect the company's products, processes or markets.
For instance, the high rate of scientific and technological development in the field of semiconductors during the past two or three decades has meant that technological forecasting has become a crucial part of sales and market forecasting for companies manufacturing electronic and telecommunication products, computers etc.
There is a direct link between technological development, new product design and performance, price, and a company's standing in such markets.
Social and political forecasting involves a company in attempting to predict how changes in social, ethical and political attitudes will have direct market effects on the enterprise.
Such market effects may be caused by changing consumer attitudes, for instance in the UK to the wearing of fur or seal-skin clothing; or by direct legislative interference.
As one example of the latter, social disapproval of cigarette smoking has led to advertising restrictions and mandatory warnings on cigarette packets in the UK; whilst many third world governments control the manufacture or supply of tobacco products and (for financial reasons) almost encourage people to smoke!
A variety of techniques are used in qualitative or environmental forecasting.
These include: * scenario development * Delphi techniques * cross-impact analysis * value profiles
1.1) Scenario development.
This involves the construction or simulation of a number of alternative possible "futures" .
These future scenarios should permit deductions to be made about the particular environmental variable in view, whether this be technological, economic or whatever.
Because common sense (and cost) suggest that there will be a limit to the number of scenarios that are worth developing, the number may be restricted to three.
The first will be based on a projection of known and stable trends, using statistical extrapolation (as described in the previous chapter), and will represent a "surprise-free" scenario.
The other two scenarios will be developed around this first one, one being optimistic and the other pessimistic.
Each will incorporate various measures of probability of the forecasted events occurring.
1.2) Delphi techniques.
These are based on the views of a panel of experts, perhaps drawn both from inside and outside of the ranks of the organisation.
This panel provides views about the issue to be forecast, each member working independently from hid or her colleagues.
The initial opinions are collated and compiled, and then fed back to the panel.
With the information to hand, each member makes a further assessment until, after the process has been repeated perhaps three times, some convergence of opinion may appear.
The forecast may then be based on this synthesis of informed and developed opinion, perhaps reformulated on a quantitative basis.
1.3) Cross-impact analysis.
This is an attempt to explore and analyse the potential interaction between events.
Social changes or technological developments necessarily create market opportunities in all sorts of different directions, some established and some completely new.
Here are a couple of examples: * The development of computer technology called for parallel developments in printer technology.
At the personal computer level, Epson has specialised in the economy printer market and has become one of the market leaders.
* Changes in the UK population structure may had radical effects on the markets for housing, accommodation and personal pension finance, as the age structure of the population becomes dominated by more and more people aged 40 plus.
1.4) Value profiles.
Of considerable current interest to forecasters are the values that inspire the attitudes and consumption patterns of the people who make up society.
As we shall see in the next few chapters, changes in values and attitudes will cause changes in the kinds of products that people buy.
Forecasters may attempt to identify shifts as between, say: * preferences towards work and leisure orientations; * preferences for individually determined as opposed to governmentally determined expenditure (eg pressure for tax reductions, restricting local government expenditure etc); * traditional authority/religious personal ethics as opposed to personal freedom and individualistic behaviour.
There is no doubt that enormous changes have occurred in the social and cultural values of the western world, for instance emphasising individual freedom and material well-being.
Whilst the consequences of these changes may be hotly debated, their marketing impact on business enterprises has been immense.
Hence the need for general forecasts about them to be included in the marketing process.
2) CHOICE OF FORECASTING METHOD
The choice of sales and market forecasting method will — depend on a number of factors, including: a) Forecasting objectives: within the context of this book, the objective of the forecasting process will mainly be to assist marketing planning and, as outlined in Chapter Seven, to co-ordinate operational and budgetary planning with anticipated levels of sales.
Sales and market planning will also, of course, form a crucial part of the corporate planning and strategic management process.
b) Time scale: different forecasting methods will have different value according to the time scale for which they  are being applied.
Commonly, sales forecasting for a period of up to one year ahead is differentiated from sales and market forecasting for longer periods.
Forecasting for periods of three to five years ahead is as much a part of the corporate planning activity.
c) The importance of the forecast: the more important the forecast, the more informed must be the choice of method, and the more likely will be the need to use several forecasting methods.
In particular, annual sales forecasts may be based on a series of different methods, whether these be subjective, statistical or qualitative.
The relative importance of a forecast can be gauged in terms of the consequences of its degree of error.
This is why the annual sales forecast that "drives" operational and budgetary planning may be subject to monthly revisions, thereby minimising the impact of forecasting error.
This is related to:
d) The degree of accuracy required: the sophistication (and cost) of a single or composite forecasting process will determine the resulting accuracy.
Accuracy must be defined within the forecasting objective in terms of methods to be used, time scale and the relative importance of the forecast.
e) Type of data required: will be determined by the forecasting methods to be employed and the budget available for finding and assembling such information.
f) Availability of data: there will be limits to the kind of information that is readily accessible, and to the finance available to obtain it.
As in all business calculations, the cost of obtaining such information needs to be balanced against its benefits,(and against the consequences of limiting the search to a point where the forecaster does not know whether the information foregone is more or less than marginally useful).
g) access to forecasting skills and methods: the quality and accuracy of the forecasting process will in part be a function of skills and methods available.
Larger scale enterprises are likely to be in a better position than smaller ones in this respect, although the forecasting situation they face will, correspondingly, be more complex.
h) company experience with forecasting: the more that a company, large or small, can build up forecasting  information and experience, the more successful it is like to be in achieving effective forecasts.
Experience may offset a lack of access to sophisticated and costly specialist skills.
However, since experience is person-centred the enterprise will have to reward and retain the loyalty of those company specialists or managers who have built up this expertise.
Small companies do not have the option of "buying-in" specialist skills to which their larger brethren can resort.
3) FORECAST OF MARKET SHARE
So far, the assumption has been made that the forecasting process is concerned directly with sales.
The sales forecast is then used to "drive" the annual marketing, operational and budgetary planning process.
These direct sales forecasts may be constructed using the methods described in this chapter, and Chapter Eight.
An alternative approach (which will, of course, have the same organisational role) is to prepare a forecast of the company's likely market share for the forecast period in view.
From this forecast market share a sales figure may be derived for operational and budgetary planning purposes.
The alternative approach has two stages, thus: i) forecast the likely total available market for the period; ii) forecast the likely share of this total market to be obtained by the company.
A forecast of the likely total available market for the period can be achieved in one of two ways, thus: a) the total market: may be estimated from statistics made available by trade associations, government statistical publications and specialist market research agencies.
These estimates may be adjusted upwards, using judgement and experience, where they are not thought exactly to represent the total potential available market.
For instance, increased advertising and improved product availability through distributors or retailers may have led to an increase in the total potential market since the initial statistics were published.
Alternatively, where published statistics are not available, the forecaster may attempt to construct estimates of the total available market.
Such estimates  may be based on calculations which use the determining variables.
For instance, the value of the total toy market is a function of the number of children of the relevant ages, the access of these children (as permitted by their parents) to retail outlets, and industry or market research figures for per capita expenditure per child on toys, suitably adjusted for inflation, increased in personal disposable income (etc).
b) individual market segments: market segmentation is a major issue in the study of marketing and marketing management, and is the subject of a later chapter.
Market segments are distinct groupings of different customer types, each with different demand patterns and behaviour.
Estimates of the total market value of each segment may be compiled on the basis of those determining variables used to define and quantify the segment.
For instance, forecasts for the total sales of bread, cakes and other bakery products in the UK can be calculated for any particular segment on the basis of trade and census data on the number of people in different socioeconomic classes (see later chapters), their per capita consumption of bakery products, and trends in the consumption pattern as between standard lines, such as wrapped white bread, and value added lines such as wholemeal bread, cream cakes, crispbread etc.
Once a forecast for the likely total available market has been prepared, company sales for the forecast period may then be calculated from either: * the expected market share, which should result from the various selling and marketing activities to be implemented during the period; or * the target market share, which will be used to determine the level of activity of the sales and marketing function, and take into account the impact of competitors in the marketplace.
Customer targeting is dealt with in a later chapter.
In both of these cases, the forecaster must have a clear understanding about the workings and relationship of those variables which will determine a company's relative market share.
The forecaster and the marketing manager must be clear about, for instance, the impact on market share of advertising, pricing policy, levels of distribution, and customer access to  products, salesforce efforts, and the need for segment-specific products.
Each of these issues will be dealt with in detail in later chapters.
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 9.2.
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
Qualitative forecasting This involves the analysis of environmental trends likely to affect market sales levels, and a detailed examination of those environmental conditions for which specific forecasts have to be constructed.
This kind of "environmental" forecasting may be used to inform the marketing forecasting process, or provide the basis for more detailed quantification.
It is more likely to be relevant to medium and long term forecasting and planning than quantitative techniques.
Qualitative forecasting includes economic forecasts (dealt with in Chapter Eight), and technological, social and political forecasting.
The actual techniques for the latter three include (i) scenario development;(ii) Delphi techniques;(iii) cross-impact analysis;(iv) value profiles.
4) SUMMARY
Table 9.2
Summary: Chapter Nine
2.
Choice of forecasting The choice of method will depend on method (i) forecasting objectives;(ii) time scales required;(iii) the relative importance of the forecast;(iv) the degree of accuracy required;(v) the type of data required;(vi) the availability of data;(vii) access to forecasting skills and methods;(viii) company experience with forecasting.
3.
Forecast of market share This involves two stages.
The first is to forecast the likely total available market for the period (on a total or segment basis).
The second is to forecast the likely share of this total market to be obtained by the company.
1) Why must a business plan ahead, making use of sales and market forecasts?
QUESTIONS FOR SELF REVIEW
2) Describe and comment on the role of the sales forecast in the operation of a business.
3) Compare and contrast quantitative and qualitative approaches to sales and market forecasting.
4) Analyse and compare the main techniques of quantitative forecasting.
5) Analyse and compare the main techniques of qualitative forecasting.
6) What is the purpose of qualitative forecasting when taken in a sales and marketing context?
7) Describe and explain some of the factors which will determine the choice or combination of forecasting methods used by a company for constructing sales and market forecasts.
8) How might a company construct a forecast of its likely share of the market in which it trades?
9)"Planning ahead is as much a waste of time for my business as it is for me.
I live and work for today!"
Comment on this statement.
Q12 Comment on the role of forecasting in the marketing planning process.
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
Q13 "Realistic annual forecasts of sales are essential for the successful compilation of budgets throughout the enterprise" .
Describe the methods which could be used to arrive at an annual forecast of sales.
Q14 Why would it be dangerous to base a Marketing Plan upon statistical sales forecasts alone?
What other information should be used to supplement such forecasts?
Q15 What are the advantages and shortcomings of statistical approaches to sales forecasting?
What should management do in order to compensate for the shortcomings?
Q16 Exponential smoothing and time series analysis generally have one set of applications in forecasting, whilst econometric modelling and scenario writing have another.
Describe the two sets of situations to which each set of techniques is appropriate, showing why this should be so.
Q17 Identify the major environmental factors which are responsible for producing change in markets.
Explain the potential significance of each factor, illustrating your answer by reference to products and/or markets of your own choice.
Consumer Behaviour
The study of consumer behaviour is a crucial issue in marketing.
It is essential for the marketer to understand the behavioural determinants of people's attitudes and purchase behaviour.
These determinants include motivation, culture, social class, the family and so on.
This section contains a detailed analysis of the behavioural determinants.
This analysis is extended by the examination of theoretical models of buying behaviour, and is illustrated by a major case study.
This is concerned with the consumer behaviour associated with the purchase and use of cotton wool.
10 CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR
INTRODUCTION
Chapter Ten begins with a brief outline of the economic determinants of consumer demand.
An extensive treatment of this issue is not the concern of this book, and it is assumed that the reader has already made a study of it elsewhere, usually in some introductory study of economics.
The chapter then turns to a detailed analysis of the behavioural determinants of consumer demand.
Firstly, the role of individual personal motivation is examined by means of the "Hierarchy of Needs" and "Self-Image Theory" .
Secondly, the impact of individual personality traits are considered.
Thirdly, the significance of culture is analysed.
Culture is generally regarded as a key determinant of consumer demand and purchase pattern.
Finally, life-style is given brief consideration.
The significance and measurability of life-style as a determinant of demand is a controversial issue, and so its discussion is kept to an introductory level.
The analysis of behavioural determinants of consumer demand is continued in Chapters eleven, twelve and thirteen.
1) Determinants of demand 1.1) Economic determinants of consumer demand 1.2) Behavioural determinants of consumer demand 2) Behavioural determinants of demand 2.1) Individual motivation 2.2) Individual personality 2.3) Culture 2.4) Life-style 3) Summary
CHASER CONTENTS
Markets are not inanimate objects or systems, although at one time it was fashionable to regard them as being so.
Markets, in reality, comprise the interactions and behaviour of people.
The publisher of this book estimates that there will be a market for this book, having carried out market research.
He has done his market forecasts and commissioned the author to write the book.
It has been stocked by booksellers, and it has been purchased by a variety of people.
Different readers have purchased this book for different reasons, whether it be to pass a professional examination, to commence undergraduate studies in marketing, or to train for a new job in the company's sales or marketing department.
1) DETERMINANTS OF DEMAND
It is essential, therefore, for the marketer to understand some of the reasons which cause people in the market to behave as they do.
Why do people buy some kinds of products, and not others What are the reasons for buyer behaviour?
These four chapters concentrate on buyer behaviour in consumer markets, and chapters fourteen and fifteen deal with purchase behaviour in industrial markets.
People's purchase behaviour will, in part, be determined by basic economic factors such as : * the real disposable income available to them for expenditure on consumer goods and services; * the price of the available products; * basic personal perceptions of what constitutes good "value for money" ; * the relative prices of "substitute" products, whose purchase might become preferred; * the relative prices of "complementary" products (whose purchase is in some way related to the original purchase).
For instance, colour films and processing are relatively expensive in comparison with the original expenditure on a basic camera.
1.1) Economic determinants of consumer demand.
People's purchase behaviour will also be determined by a whole series of behavioural factors, which are used to explain why buyers need or want certain products.
The marketer must understand why people want or need products, so that he or she can: * group (or "segment" ) different people according to those reasons for purchase (see chapter sixteen); * design and distribute products which will deliver the required "satisfactions" for these needs or wants; * target promotional activities on these different people so that they become aware of the satisfactions on offer from the supplier, and are encouraged to make the actual purchase.
1.2) Behavioural determinants of consumer demand.
Behavioural determinants of consumer demand include: * individual motivation; * individual personality; * culture; * life-style; * social class; * groups and reference groups; * family life cycle.
Each of these are considered in some detail in section two, below.
The analysis is continued in chapter eleven.
To study individual motivation means studying those forces that move a person to behave in a particular way.
Motivation links needs and personal objectives, thus: Need or want — motivation — attitude — behaviour pattern — objective (to satisfy the need or want)
2) BEHAVIOURAL DETERMINANTS OF DEMAND
2.1) Individual motivation.
For instance, a married couple may want a bigger and better house, so they are motivated into purchasing one.
This may involve the following behavioural changes: * the wife may return to full-time work to increase the family's total income; * expenditure on other items, such as cars or holidays, may for the time be reduced; the couple may place an increased value on the enhanced personal prestige attached to the ownership of the larger property, and will be prepared to accept the financial consequences of enjoying this enhanced prestige.
This may involve a change of attitude towards the kind of housing that interests them.
The marketer, therefore, needs to understand the needs or wants that inspire individual motivation, and give rise to particular forms of purchase behaviour.
There are a number of ways in which this can be done, and they include: a) A. H. Maslow's HIERARCHY OF NEEDS: which is illustrated in Figure 10.1.
In this theory, wants and needs are "pre-potent" , that is potential higher level needs emerge and influence purchase behaviour only after there has been an opportunity for the satisfaction of lower level needs.
Purchase behaviour is motivated by a series of different levels of need or want.
The most basic motivations stem from needs to eat, rest, have a home, feel secure and wanted, and to have the company of one's fellow men.
For these reasons, people buy food and drink, pay rent or buy a house, purchase insurance, and meet up with their friends in clubs, pubs, churches, professional institutions and so on.
Once these kinds of needs are satisfied, the theory suggests that individual motivations will be shaped by behaviour that is associated with: The need to gain self-esteem in the eyes of other people, for instance through the possession of prestigious  objects, taking expensive holidays, making donations to charity, etc. * the need to know and understand what is going on around them.
This perhaps accounts for the expenditure on news media such as newspapers, teletext etc, and the continuous radio and television news programmes operated commercially in the USA, and planned for the UK. * the need to have an aesthetically pleasing environment, and to get rid of ugliness, pollution etc.
This need has considerable implications for those activities which affect our environment, for instance by polluting it or creating visual eyesores.
And it has meant that product design has become a major factor in product management.
This issue is dealt with in later chapters.
* the need to achieve independence and self-fulfilment.
The purchase of the motor car is a prime example, for its ownership offers freedom and an escape from the regimentation (and sometimes squalor) of public transport.
Similarly, home ownership offers freedom from interference by others, since the home owner does not have a landlord to worry about, nor local government bureaucrats controlling his destiny.
Self-fulfilment may be obtained in many ways.
It may come from a beautiful home, leisure activities or sport, hobbies or continuing education,(etc).
Maslow's hierarchy isolates needs for self-esteem as a separate motivating category.
Self-esteem is important in western culture for two reasons.
Firstly, western culture places a high value on material acquisition and its display, because this reflects hard work and thrift.
Hard work, thrift, and the enjoyment of income earned are the hallmark of the "protestant work ethic" that is still characteristic of many western societies.
b) SELF IMAGE THEORY:
Secondly, the achievement of self-esteem involves earning the respect of others.
It is characteristic of our society that a high value is placed upon achieving self-respect and prestige.
Whilst there are many ways in which prestige and respect can be obtained, the possession or use of certain types of goods and services are likely to increase individual status.
Such goods or services might include homes and cars, private education or  higher degrees, holidays in the Caribbean, objets d'art, eating out or membership of the golf-club.
This emphasis on self-respect, and self-esteem leads to the concept of self-image.
Consumers self-image is an important clue to purchase behaviour, for around it cluster wants and needs that serve to defend and enhance the idealised perceptions that most individuals have about themselves.
Self-image theory accepts that purchase behaviour will in part be determined by the need to satisfy physiological, safety and social needs.
But it also recognises a series of emotional and psychological needs concerned with bolstering self-image and obtaining self-respect relative to others.
The "self" is an individual person's image of himself or herself.
Within this self are various drives and motivations, the most important of which serve to maintain and enhance this image.
Goods and services may be purchased because they "fit" these particular motivations.
For instance many products are promoted as being the "in thing" , whose consumption will make you "one of the crowd" .
Others are purchased because the buyer feels that ownership will confer separateness and status.
The individual will also interpret his or her environment in terms that suit or enhance the self-image.
The choice of clothing, Music or even places to shop will be made so that the individual's interaction with the external environment is structured in a particular way.
This personal interaction with the environment can easily be illustrated by the success of clothing retail chains like "Next" , "Chelsea Girl" and "Top Shop" in the UK, and international companies like Laura Ashley, C. and A. Modes, and Marks and Spencer.
Each company sells clothes which have a clear identity allowing the wearer to convey a particular image to the outside world.
Thus, purchase behaviour and shopping patterns are seen under this motivation theory to support and enhance personal self-identity.
The manufacturer, marketer and retailer will need to design, promote and retail products in such a way that images are produced which are consistent with those sought by prospective customers.
The components of the self-image are illustrated in Figure 10.2.
An individual's personality is the sum total of those traits which define his or her individuality, and which cause one person to be different from another.
Personality traits are particular characteristics or aspects of this total personality.
They give rise to behavioural responses to external stimuli that are enduring and consistent within a person's psychological constitution.
These traits are, in fact, ingrained and stable dispositions to respond to certain situations in particular ways characteristic of the personality.
For instance, personality variations account for the wide range of reactions towards a salesperson.
Some people will act in a submissive and respectful manner, automatically accepting that the salesperson is honest and trustworthy.
Others will be hostile and critical; whilst those readers who have bargained in the bazaars of North Africa or the East will have recognised that the customer and the shopkeeper are expected to play a negotiating game, jousting with each other until there is agreement and mutual respect.
Some people's natural politeness makes such bargaining difficult or "embarrassing" .
2.2) Individual Personality.
The traits which make up the individual's personality have two main sources.
Some of them are inherent, coming from our parents.
(This was the viewpoint of Freud and Jung).
Others come from social conditioning and personal experience.
(This was the viewpoint of Adler).
The emergence of the personality is a lengthy process which continues throughout maturity into old age, with some traits becoming more developed or pronounced, whilst others mellow.
A description of personality traits is beyond the scope of this book, but they may be categorised in a simple manner under three headings, thus: * role traits: which are those parts of the personality which determine how an individual will react or behave in particular situations, and will react to the expectations of others in that situation.
* sociometric traits: which are those parts of the personality which will shape individual reactions to the behaviour of other people, and their relationship to them.
* expressive disposition: which will determine an individual's self-expression, both in response to particular situations, and towards other people.
The marketer may take account of personality variables in the following way.
Many people will have similar types of personality, or similar sets of traits.
The market can be divided (or "segmented" ) on the basis of these "typical" personalities or stereotypes, and products and promotional activities targeted upon them.
The marketer may well expect that there will be a sufficient number of people who conform to these stereotypes to make this course of action viable.
For instance: i) products may be consistent with widely accepted behaviour patterns which maintain or enhance the traits associated with self image.
This is most certainly the case with the purchase of clothing and drinks, and the following of a particular style of life (see below).
ii) products or services may be consistent with traits associated with compliance.
The air inclusive package tour holiday requires a certain amount of compliant behaviour in order to work.
Customers must adhere to the laid down schedule for travel, and accept the accommodation offered.
The package tour is particularly appropriate to the  personality traits of compliance and sociability which make up the typically British temperament.
iii) suppliers may market products or services which are widely consistent with personality traits associated with extra version (outward going and highly visible behaviour) and aggression.
Sports cars, pop music and sporting products and services are all attractive to these personality traits.
iv) suppliers may market products or services which are widely consistent with personality traits associated with introversion (inward looking and self.sufficient behaviour) and personal detachment.
Music, Self-catering and "get away from it all" holidays, book publishing, and creative pastimes such as painting, model building (etc) are all attractive to these personality traits.
Culture will play an important part in shaping purchase behaviour, because culture determines many of our patterns and standards ( "norms" ) of behaviour.
For instance, the purchase and consumption of alcohol is an important feature of western life.
Indeed, the symbolic consumption of wine lies at the heart of Christianity, in the form of Communion and Mass.
Alcohol, on the other hand, is forbidden to Muslims, and islamic societies are often characterised by an absence of the alcoholic averages which are so familiar elsewhere.
2.3) Culture.
a) Culture and its impact: culture can be defined as distinctive patterns of behaviour which result from basic beliefs and traditions.
The impact of culture on individual behaviour is summarised in Figure 10.3.
Culture stems from a society or community's experience traditions, basic beliefs, aspirations and ambitions.
Any one individual is socialised into the prevailing culture, whose values and standards are integrated into that person's motivation, personality and life-style (see below).
Socialisation is thus a process that integrates the individual into the ways and standards of the community of which he or she is a part.
And that person's consumption habits and purchase behaviour will be as much affected by this socialisation process as any other form of individual and social behaviour.
For instance, the acceptance of new types or brands of product may, in part , depend on the cultural implications involved in changing patterns of consumption.
For example, thrift, saving and economy were the traditional hallmarks of western cultures.
These cultures have gone through a major change such that the use of credit is now an accepted feature in managing personal expenditure patterns.
Similarly, conspicuous consumption or display is now regarded as an acceptable form of behaviour.
Victorian propriety would have frowned upon such individual excesses.
It was then better to display -personal wealth by endowing a church or school, or funding some charitable enterprise.
b) culture and sub-culture: the behaviour and standards of a nation or society may be determined by one culture.
Or instead there may be a major or dominant culture, with a series of sub-cultures clustering around it.
These subcultures may have distinct characteristics, being based on ethnic, religious, geographical, social or age factors (etc).
Their behaviour patterns may be consistent with the dominant culture or may differ from it.
Sub-cultures may be important to the marketer because of their effect on the type and brands of products and services demanded by those that adhere to the values of the sub-culture.
Indeed, markets may be divided or "segmented" (see chapter sixteen) on the basis of cultural differences, as in the case of: * youth markets (also see below); * senior citizen markets; * ethnic minorities; * religious sub-cultures; * identifiable sub-culture "life style" (see below);
It will be particularly important for exporters involved in international trade to research those cultural factors influencing consumer demand patterns in target overseas markets.
Ignoring or actually offending local culture is hardly likely to be conducive to success!
Beautiful girls and champagne may be powerful western symbols, but they are useless in a Middle Eastern context.
Similarly, wholesale buyers may only deal with those who can speak the local language, refusing in principle to use an international language like English, French or Chinese.
c) culture and language: culture finds its expression in the language used by adherents to that culture or sub.culture.
Indeed, language is the tool of culture.
The marketer will have to understand and use the "right" language if he is to achieve an effective communication to the market.
This choice of language is for example particularly important in communicating to youth and senior citizen markets.
Both cultures are easily encouraged or bored by language and concepts that they perceive as unfashionable trendy, patronising, disturbing or just plain out of date!
d) Traditional, achieving and affluent cultures: one way in which cultures can be Categorised for marketing purposes is to differentiate between traditional, achieving and affluent cultures, thus: * Traditional cultures are rooted in the past.
They will often be characterised by a strong deference to religious and moral customs; traditional hierarchies of authority and family relationships, social stratification and class structures; and low levels of per capita gross national product.
Purchase and consumption habits will be firmly anchored in customary patterns, which it will be difficult to break.
attacking such cultures can have unpredictable results, for instance as in Iran where the breakdown of traditional patterns and the establishment of western customs has been suppressed, and a form of religious dictatorship established.
* Achieving cultures are cultures that have begun to break away from the traditions of the past, in order to develop and grow.
Achieving cultures, based on principles of Self-help and free enterprise, were characteristic of the USA and north Europe during the period 1800 to 1960. purchasing patterns may alter significantly from the traditional roots, emphasising personal material possession and display, the possession of prestigious homes and objects, "one-upmanship" etc.
Where achieving cultures are growing out of traditional ones there will inevitably be tension between the two, and the occasional conflicts will affect marketing development and growth.
* Affluent cultures include the post second world war industrial societies of the USA, Japan and Western Europe.
Whilst personal achievement and material  possession remain important, such societies can afford sophisticated social welfare systems, providing a minimum welfare "safety net" for all of the population, rich or poor.
This means that in addition to personal expenditure on goods and services, there are major opportunities for marketing products and services associated with health and welfare provision.
e) cultural trends: culture is generally a dynamic phenonemon.
This accounts for the attempts of fiercely traditional societies, for instance those based upon fundamental islamic principles, to turn the clock back to the past.
In general, cultures undergo a slow evolution and development.
This will have an effect on consumption and expenditure patterns.
For instance, in western societies women have become economically more important than hitherto.
Many women are equal (in economic terms) with men as earners and consumers.
Similarly, cultural and population dynamics have meant that there is now a major youth culture, with its associated markets.
Later on during this century a massive senior citizen culture is likely to emerge in the west, and this again will present its marketing opportunities.
Life-style refers to distinctive ways of living adopted by particular communities or sub-sections of society.
Life-style is a manifestation of a number of behavioural factors, such as motivation, personality and culture, and depends on the economic status of the people in question.
If a lifestyle can be accurately described, and the numbers of people following it quantified, then marketers can assign and target products and promotion upon this particular target life.style group.
Life-style is a controversial issue, and a full analysis of the arguments is beyond the scope of this book.
The implications of life-style for marketing, and the problems of definition involved, can perhaps best be illustrated by some examples.
2.4) Life-style.
One simple example generalises life-style in terms of four categories, thus: i) upwardly mobile, ambitious: seeking a better and more affluent life-style, principally through better paid and more interesting work, and a higher material standard of living.
Such a life-style will be prepared to try new products.
ii) traditional and sociable: compliance and conformity to group norms bring social approval and reassurance to the individual.
purchasing patterns will therefore be "conformist" .
iii) security and status seeking: stressing "safety" needs and "ego-defensive" needs.
This life-style links status, income and security.
It encourages the purchase of strong and well known products and brands, and emphasises those products and services which confer status and make life as secure and predictable as possible.
These would include insurance, membership of the AA or RAC etc.
Products that are well established and familiar inspire more confidence than new products, which will be resisted.
iv) hedonistic preference: placing emphasis on "enjoying life now" and the immediate satisfaction of wants and needs.
Little thought is taken for the future.
Two more complex life-style analyses are shown in Box 10.4.
These sets of analysis are based on empirical attitude research, and the agencies that have constructed them use them to advise their clients on how best to design and position existing and new products on target segments made up of people who have similar life-style patterns.
McCann-Erickson Women Avant Guardians.
Concerned with Avant Guardians.
 "Liberal left" change and well-being of others, opinions, trendy attitudes.
But outgoing, rather than possessions.
Well active, sociable.
Box 10.4
Life-style categories
educated, prone to self-righteousness.
Pontificators.
Strongly held, Lady Righteous.
Traditional, traditional opinions.
Very "right-minded" opinions.
Happy, British, and concerned about complacent, with strong family keeping others on the right orientation.
path.
Chameleons.
Want to be Hopeful seekers.
Need to be liked, contemporary to win approval.
want to do "right" .
Like new things, Act like barometers of social want to be trendy.
change, but copiers not leaders.
Self-admirers.
At the young end Lively ladies.
Younger than above, of the spectrum.
Intolerant of sensual, materialistic, ambitious and others and strongly motivated by competitive.
success and concerned about self-image.
Self-exploiters.
The "doers" and New unromantic.
Generally young "self-starters" , competitive but and single, adopting a hard-headed always under pressure and often and unsentimental approach to life.
pessimistic.
Possessions are Independent, self-centred.
important.
Token triers.
Always willing to Lack-a-daisy.
Unassertive and try new things to"improve their easy-going.
Try to cope but often luck", but apparently on a fail.
Not very interested in the permanent try-and-fail cycle.
new.
Includes an above average proportion of unemployed.
Sleepwalkers.
Contented Blinkered.
Negative, do not want to under-achievers.
Don't care about be disturbed.
Uninterested in most things, and actively opt out.
conventional success — in fact, Traditional macho views.
few interests except TV and radio.
Passive endurers.
Biased towards Down-trodden.
This group is shy, the elderly, they are often introverted, but put-upon.
Would economically and socially like to do better.
Often unhappy disenfranchised.
Expect little and pressurised in personal of life, and give little.
relationships.
Taylor Nelson Self-explorers.
Motivated by self-expression and self-realisation.
Less materialistic than other groups, and showing high tolerance levels.
Social resistors.
The caring group, concerned with fairness and social values, but often appearing intolerant and moralistic.
Experimentalists.
Highly individualistic, motivated by fast-moving enjoyment.
They are materialistic, pro-technology but anti-traditional authority.
Conspicuous consumers.
They are materialistic and pushy, motivated by acquisition, competition, and getting ahead.
Pro-authority, law and order.
Belongers.
What they seek is a quiet, undisturbed family life.
They are conservative, conventional rule followers.
Survivors.
Strongly class-conscious, and community spirited, their motivation is to "get by" .
Aimless.
Comprises two groups,(a) the young unemployed, who are often anti- authority, and (b) the old, whose motivation is day-to-day existence.
Source: Marketing a) the "Yuppy" — myth or reality?
The difficulty of applying life-style to marketing decisions is best illustrated by the "Yuppy" .
The UK Yuppy is supposed to be a young (24-35), well educated and upwardly mobile professional (male or female).
He or she is urban, trendy and affluent.
This affluence comes from hard work in a well paid job, and permits the beneficiary to "spend hard" on expensive clothes, homes in high status districts, BMW's and the like.
But can the numbers and  purchasing power of those following the Yuppy life-style be quantified?
To be sure, there are more young men and women in this age group because of the 1960's baby boom.
And many of these young people are well qualified and well paid.
But whether a significant proportion actually behave like Yuppies is another matter.
Critics of the concept suggest that Yuppies are the figment of the imagination of media, agency and marketing people, looking at themselves in a mirror in their expensive homes in the capital city.
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 10.5.
SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.1 Economic determinants of Include real disposable income, product consumer demand price, price of substitute and complementary goods, basic personal perceptions of what constitutes "value for money" .
Table 10.5
Summary: Chapter Ten
2.1 Individual motivation To study individual motivation means studying the forces that move a person to behave in a particular way.
Motivation links needs and personal objectives, thus:-need/want — motivation — attitude — behaviour pattern — objective.
Motivation is then analysed by using Maslow's "Hierarchy of Needs" , and "Self-image" theory.
Purchase behaviour is a key behavioural pattern and can, in part, be explained by these theories.
2.2 Individual personality This is the sum total of those "traits" which define individual character.
Personality traits are particular aspects of the total character.
These traits are ingrained and stable dispositions to respond to certain situations  in particular ways characteristic of the personality.
The marketer can take account of personality variables by grouping personality types as "stereotypes" , and targeting products and promotion on them.
2.3 Culture Culture determines patterns and standards ( "norms" ) of behaviour.
It derives from basic beliefs and traditions.
Individuals are socialised into the prevailing culture, and its values and norms are integrated into the person's motivation, personality and life-style.
This will affect consumption habits and purchase behaviour.
Sub-cultures often cluster around the main culture.
Language is the tool of culture.
Cultures may be traditional, achieving or affluent, since culture is a dynamic phenomenon.
2.4 Life-style Life-style refers to distinctive ways of living, purchase and consumption habits (etc) adopted by particular groups in society.
Life-styles can be upwardly mobile; traditional and sociable; security and status-seeking; hedonistic.
The difficulty of defining and quantifying life-styles is illustrated by the example of the so-called "yuppy" .
11 Behavioral Determinants of Demand
Introduction
This chapter continues the analysis of consumer behaviour commenced during the previous chapter.
It continues the examination of the behavioural determinants of demand, by looking first at the role and significance of social class.
Social class and social stratification are major influences on consumer purchase behaviour.
Groups and their influence on the individual are considered next.
Thirdly, the family constitutes a major determinant of consumer behaviour, whether in terms of its influence on the individual, direct family purchasing, or through the movement of individuals across the family life cycle.
Reference groups and opinion leaders are discussed, and their influence on purchase behaviour illustrated by youth culture and other age-related examples.
The chapter then moves on to consider multi-individual buying behaviour.
Here, purchase decisions are influenced by a variety of different roles, each of whose relative importance needs to be understood by the marketer selling goods and services subject to such multiple influences.
1) Behavioural determinants of demand (continued) 1.1) Social class 1.2) Groups 1.3) The Family 1.4) Reference groups 1.5) Opinion leaders 1.6) The family life cycle 2) Multi-individual buying behaviour 3) Summary
CHAPTER CONTENTS
This chapter continues the analysis of consumer behaviour, commenced in Chapter Ten.
Chapter Ten commenced with a brief examination of the economic determinants of consumer demand, and then turned to a detailed analysis of the following behavioural determinants of consumer demand, namely: * individual motivation; * individual personality; * culture; * life-style.
Social class is a major behavioural determinant of consumer buying behaviour, and its importance is widely acknowledged by marketers.
Marketers will have to take into account the fact that expenditure and consumption patterns are often differentiated by the membership of social classes.
1) BEHAVIOURAL DETERMINANTS OF DEMAND
1.1) Social class
It is normal for societies to be divided up into different social groups or classes.
This division is called social stratification.
One cause of such stratification can be illustrated By a simple example.
As societies developed, so did the need for particular occupations and trades, such as the warrior, the priest, the merchant trader, the doctor, the farmer and the lawyer.
These occupations called for specialised skill, training and personal persistence.
They had a major impact on the community, and attracted authority, wealth and prestige.
They became the traditional "upper" or "professional" classes.
A social class may be defined as a psychological-social grouping, within which social, economic, educational and political interests tend to coincide.
These interests may be different from other social classes, in which case the society may become stratified, that is, made up of a series of social classes differentiated by status and prestige.
The "membership" of any one social class may be determined by such factors as: traditions family beliefs, values, and attitudes occupation education wealth or income personal aspirations
The social stratification that results may be ill-defined (as in North American societies) or may be fully institutionalised, as in India where a rigid "caste" system operates.
In some  countries it may in part be based on social/ethnic background.
In South America the upper classes tend to be European in origin, whilst the lower classes tend to be the negro descendants of slaves.
In between is the mulatto, the product of centuries of inter-marriage between the white and coloured races.
Social classes often have their own particular behaviour, purchase and consumption patterns, and tend to limit their closest relationships, social intercourse and friendship to their own kind.
This serves to reinforce group standards and norms, confers a feeling of identity, solidarity and belonging and permits the achievement of psychological and physical protection.
It also means that they will favour particular types of product, service or shopping, and will constitute a viable market for these particular products or retail outlets.
a) A UK classification of social class: one of the best known classifications divides the UK population as follows:
This classification has been simplified for use by the UK General Household Survey, which uses the following categories: 1 Professional 2 Employers and managers 3 Intermediate and junior non-manual 4 Skilled manual 5 Semi-skilled manual and personal service 6 Unskilled manual; unemployed; those who have not worked.
Whilst a detailed discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of such classifications is beyond the scope of this book, their widespread use shows that: * they give a generally reliable picture of the relationship between occupation and income; * they do indicate differences in purchase and consumption patterns, although the total disposable income as between any two categories may be similar (especially where husband and wife are both working); * those categories are stable and enduring.
Some examples of social class-related expenditure priorities in the UK might include: private health care and private education A. B caravans and caravanning C1, C2 air inclusive package tours to the Costa Brava and the Costa del Sol in Spain C1, C2, D membership of working mens' clubs C2, D, E
b) Social mobility: in western societies it is common to find that individuals aspire to "move up" to the next social class above.
This social mobility is a characteristic feature, and has two implications.
The first is that if a country's economy can support a widespread increase in per capita income, then people will move out of the "lower" classes and these may become less significant in population and marketing terms.
Some European and Middle Eastern countries have for many years responded to the resultant labour shortages by "importing" immigrant labour to perform relatively menial and unskilled tasks.
These immigrant groups then tend to become part of the lower classes, unless there are so many that they form a separate sub-culture (as is the case with Turks in West Germany).
Eventually, immigrant workers (like the Irish, Poles and Germans in the UK) tend to become assimilated, lose their separate identity, and move upwards in the social scale.
Secondly, those people who have the means to achieve upward mobility will exhibit purchase and consumption patterns similar to the social class to which they aspire.
This may increase the size and value of the market higher up the scale.
For instance, there may be an increase in demand for: owned homes, as opposed to rented ones (which will affect both the market for dousing and mortgage finance); prestigious foreign saloon cars (in the UK the demand for prestige an cars has had a significant effect on prestige German produced saloon cars, the sales of luxury UK such as triumph (now extinct) and Rover); private education, for which UK demand is now very high; air inclusive package tours to resorts that were exclusive (such as Marbella in Spain, the French Caribbean, the Greek Islands etc).
Within any particular society, with its cultures, social classes and life-styles, there will be many different social groupings.
A social group comprises any number of people who interact with each in some way, and whose behaviour is a composite of both individual and group influences.
Group members will tend to conform to group standards or norms, especially where such conformity is the result of a general acceptance of the basic beliefs, attitudes and values of the group.
This level of conformity is likely to be a function of two factors: * the level of dependence on the group; * the benefits (or acceptance) of conformity, and the risk of sanction (or loss of benefits) arising from non-conformity.
1.2) Groups
It should be self-evident, therefore, that where individual behaviour can be so extensively influenced by conformity to the standards of the social groups that make up our community and its social strata, then there will be major implications for the marketer.
Purchase and consumption behaviour will be as much influenced by social groups as by any other form, of behavioural determinant.
But given the considerable importance of purchase behaviour, this relative influence may be particularly great.
If you are not sure about this influence, think about the clothes you wear at work and at leisure.
Ask yourself why you wear such clothes.
Was it purely your choice?
How might your boss react if you turned up to work in your best disco gear?
Why not buy a dress with this year's fashion colour!
The influence of the group on purchase behaviour can be studied in two ways.
The first deals with the role of the family (section 1.3 below).
The second looks at the influence of "reference groups" (section 1.4 below).
The family is a basic social grouping, and it has an all pervading influence over its members.
The families of a nation have an enormous collective purchasing power over a very wide range of products and services.
Indeed, some goods are usually only purchased within a family context.
Such goods include suites of furniture, children's clothing and children's foodstuffs.
So how is a "family" defined?
Let us look at Phil and Maggie Jones, who have just got married.
Maggie's maiden name was Smith.
1.3 The Family
a) family of origin: Phil is a member of the Jones family, and Maggie is a member of the Smith family.
Both families will retain some influence over Phil and Maggie.
b) family of marriage: the Jones (Phil and Maggie) are now a family of marriage.
The creation of a family of marriage usually means that, in Western societies at least, a "household" will be established.
This has major marketing implications, for the Jones will now become active members in the markets for housing, mortgage finance, furniture and home appliances, do-it-yourself and gardening products insurance (etc).
c) nuclear family: once the Jones have children, the family becomes a "nuclear" one.
Phil and Maggie are the nucleus of a new Jones family.
This also has major marketing implications as the Jones will become active members of the markets for larger housing, washing machines, children'S foodstuffs, clothes, toys and books, family holidays (etc).
d) extended family: Phil and Maggie Jones, plus offspring, are part of the wider Jones clan, comprising Phil's parents (and grandparents if they are still alive), brothers and sisters (and their families) and other relatives.
A large extended family may have a few dozen members.
The family situation will have specific marketing implications, as in the purchase of housing, washing machines or children's clothes.
But family purchase behaviour will also be  subject to family influence (or even interference) over the choice and direction of the expenditure of any one individual.
For instance: i) The influence of children on family purchases may be product or service specific.
They may choose what breakfast cereals or brand of baked beans they will eat, and have some discretionary expenditure within their pocket money.
Nevertheless, parents will often impose their judgement, for instance condemning some pop music as "decadent" or just plain crude, and insisting that some children's food brands are a rip-off!
ii) The influence of teenagers, especially within "Youth" culture, is harder to discern.
The family will have to decide on how much its teenage members will be allowed to spend, and how much discretion they have in making their own choice of clothes, records, holidays or motor cycles.
Many readers will readily recognise that such purchase decisions are often fraught with difficulty and argument.
The seventeen year old does not always want to listen to the views of his father and mother, particularly if he has his heart set upon a motorbike!
iii) The young housewife will be subject to a whole variety of influence and advice.
Notwithstanding her relationship to her husband, the young housewife is likely to pay particular heed to the views of her own mother, especially in expenditures on housewares and domestic consumer durables like cookers, freezers (etc).
This maternal influence on the housewife is likely to decline with age, experience and maturity, but, as far as marketers are concerned, its influence is strongest at a point in the couple's life when heavy expenditure may be incurred to establish the "household" .
iv) The mother in a nuclear family may come to play a pivotal role in all major expenditure decisions, especially if the husband relies upon her to manage the household budget.
Purchase decisions will be referred to her, and discussion of them will take place around her.
In many cases she will have the last word.
This pivotal role is much more obvious in matriarchical societies in which it is accepted that the mother or grandmother must make the final decision about such expenditures.
v) The experience of older family members may be deferred to before purchase decisions are made.
Grandfather or grandmother's opinion may be communicated in a subtle manner, but even in today's western society the opinion of the elders still carries great weight.
The older generation can ask the most awkward questions whilst giving less offence than younger members, who may feel it incumbent upon themselves to appear more reticent in giving advice.
Indeed, the younger generation may look to its elders to play "the devil's advocate" before important decisions are made.
Reference groups are groups with which an individual closely identifies.
Depending on the strength of identification with the reference groups an individual may conform to its standards and norms.
Purchase behaviour will, again, be altered so as to come into line with the customary behaviour of the reference group.
specifically, a reference group may influence an individual person's behaviour: * by establishing "conventional" patterns of behaviour and purchase satisfaction; * by influencing individual expectations and aspirations, which will shape people's attitude towards consumption and satisfaction; * by defining and shaping individual personal taste; * by supplying the consumer with information about particular products or services, in situations where the individual has minimal prior knowledge.
Reference group and "word of mouth" recommendation is highly influential.
Advertisers know this, and attempt to use promotional messages to shape the general attitude and opinion of the target reference group.
1.4 Reference Groups
An illustration should make this influence clear.
Once they have an adequate income, many British men and women aged, say, between thirty five and fifty, tend to adopt reference-group orientated life-styles.
They buy the "right" type of car (currently the BMW or Jaguar!) go to particular resorts in Spain or Greece, play golf, eat out at certain types of restaurant, and read the"Sunday Times' on Sunday.
They are identifying with the type of people who lead a life-style which is attractive to them.
Earlier influences on their expenditure pattern (family etc-become less important.
But, above all, the impact of the reference group is seen most clearly in the life-style adopted by youth.
Here, the conformity can be zealous or even excessive.
Marketers have proved adept at catching the mood of the age range sixteen to twenty four, supplying products like jeans, cola drinks, music, cars and motorcycles which become the mode, the "in thing" , the product to have.
Here, the reference group can be all powerful in influencing purchase behaviour.
Reference groups may contain individuals who as "opinion leaders" appear to exercise a disproportionate influence in forming and shaping the opinions of those other people who orientate their behaviour towards that of the reference group.
Such individuals may be expert in a limited field, or expert across a variety of fields of interest relevant to those who will as a result, tend to follow the opinion leader.
Opinion leaders are influential for two reasons: * They are psychologically "open" or receptive to new ideas, wherever these come from.
They are less resistant to innovation than the average person, who tends (at least initially) to put up barriers to the adoption and assimilation of new ideas.
1.5 Opinion leaders
* they are perceived as authoritative.
This personal authority can come from the holding of a traditionally authoritative role, or it can come from age, experience, personality and qualification.
The views of opinion leaders are often taken very seriously by reference group members, and "word of mouth" recommendation is regarded as just about the most powerful tool of promotion (or condemnation) that there is.
Marketers interested in the development and introduction of new products will be particularly interested in the attitude of opinion leaders to these products, for their general market acceptance can be slowed down or speeded up by the views of such people.
This issue is dealt with in a later chapter.
It may also be true that social and market changes may "filter down" from the higher social classes (such as the AB's in the UK) who are often first to perceive the need or desirability  for a particular change.
These higher social classes may themselves act as opinion leaders for the other social classes, who, over a period of time, may adopt the change.
This filtering down more "healthy" eating patterns.
This development is not a fad, but has been an established trend indicated by objective demographic and food survey statistics.
As time has gone by, the desirability of an improved diet, less smoking (etc) has filtered down throughout the social class structure, after originating with people whose opinions and experience (for instance in the medical and other professions, the media and senior business management) is, in any case, likely to be authoritative.
Quite apart from the influence of reference groups, opinion leaders and family members, purchase behaviour will be shaped by the stage reached by individuals and families within the family life cycle.
Table 11.1 shows the nine suggested stages of this life cycle, and analyses some of the changing income and expenditure patterns across these stages.
Put simply, purchase behaviour will be a function of the different variables already analysed in this and the previous chapter, but will vary in emphasis and priority according to the stage reached by individual and family.
1.6 The family life cycle
This and the previous chapter have concentrated on an analysis of some of the major behavioural influences and  This and the previous chapter have concentrated on an analysis of some of the major behavioural influences and determinants of individual demand.
The study of individual purchase motivations and behaviour may, however, be complicated where a number of individuals become involved in the purchase decision.
In this case, a wider variety of the kinds of influences dealt with in these two chapters will come into play.
The marketer will, therefore, have to adapt his promotional and distribution arrangements (etc) to meet this additional complication.
Three examples are given in Table 11.2.
The various multi-individual influences on the purchase decision take the form of a number of roles which are: *the initiator — who originates the purchase process, having given expression to the need or want that motivates it.
2) MULTI-INDIVIDUAL BUYING BEHAVIOUR
MULTI-INDIVIDUAL BUYING BEHAVIOUR
*the influencer — individuals whose influence over the purchase decision is in some way significant or authoritative.
The influencer may, for instance, change the purchase objective, or act as a catalyst to render the original purchase motivation more practical or feasible.
*the decider — who actually determines what the outcome of the purchase motivation will be.
*the purchaser — who physically carries out the purchase transaction.
*the user — who receives and uses the product or service.
Any number of people may be involved in these roles, whilst it would be quite normal for one person to fulfil more than one of these roles.
The contents of this chapter are summarized in Table 11.3  
3) SUMMARY
12 Models of Buying Behaviour
INTRODUCTION
This third chapter on consumer behaviour concentrates on conceptual and theoretical models of buying behaviour.
Such models comprise theoretical constructs of variables which are interrelated, and significant in influencing the outcome of a purchase motivation.
They are used to clarify the relationships that exist between the variables that influence the buying situation, and to predict the outcome of change to these variables.
1) Models of buying behaviour 1.1) Decision process models 1.2) A theoretical model the Howard and Sheth model 2) Summary Recommended Reading Questions for self-review Examination Questions
CHAPTER CONTENTS
It should by now be clear to the reader that the purchase decision may turn out to be a highly complex one, subject to a wide variety of inter-related economic and behavioural influences.
One way of recognizing and analysing this complexity is that of constructing models of buying behaviour.
Such models comprise theoretical constructs of variables which are interrelated and significant in influencing the outcome of a purchase motivation.
These models may be of use to marketers in dealing with particular problems, such as the relative importance of advertising or price in influencing consumer purchase behaviour.
A model attempts to clarify the relationship between variables influencing the buying situation, and may assist the marketer to predict the outcome from some planned change, such as the introduction of a new brand, or a change in advertising policy.
Two approaches to the construction of buying behaviour models will be considered.
1) MODELS OF BUYING BEHAVIOUR
Decision process models analyze the buying process as a series of sequential steps.
Since there will be distinct patterns of behaviour at each step, the marketer can identify specific opportunities or activities that will assist the decision-making process and orientate the would-be buyer towards his particular product of brand.
A simple decision process model might contain the following steps:
1.1) Decision process models
The model assumes that the buyer will pass through this series of steps, whether it be consciously or unconsciously, until the purchase is (or is not) made.
It also assumes (reasonably enough) that since the average consumer is not stupid, he or she will learn on an accumulative basis from the purchase experience.
This learning process will focus in particular on a comparison of: * the evaluation of the alternatives made prior to the purchase; * the claims made by the supplier for the product that was eventually purchased; * the performance or acceptability of the product actually purchased- relative to the purchase motivation and the needs/wants that gave rise to it.
In other words, consumers will learn from their buying successes and failures and this experience will inform future buying decisions.
It will be important for marketers to assess the experience of customers with their particular products in case it possesses some unsatisfactory performance or operating characteristic to which customers will eventually build up resistance.
Market research should assess consumer satisfaction, whilst consumer likes and preferences that stem from use or consumption of the product should be fed back into the advertising, promotion and product differentiation that are important inputs at the information search and evaluation of alternatives stages in the model.
Advertising and promotional activity will be important at the information search stage, since this will ensure that the potential customer is kept aware of the existence of the product or brand.
advertising and promotion will also be used to influence the evaluation of alternatives, and will be used to build up particular preferences in the mind of the potential purchaser.
Product differentiation will also be important at this stage in the model.
Product differentiation is the process by which specific features, characteristics and attributes are built in to the product or service So that the consumer perceives it to be in some way different from (and preferably superior to) competing products.
for instance, the first Japanese cars imported for sale in the UK market were differentiate, d from much of the competition by including optional extras in the basic specification and price.
At that time, customers for British.made cars had to pay extra for "optional" items like heated rear windows, reversing and fog lamps, and even windscreen wipers, heaters and demisters.
It is little wonder that this policy, coupled with their reliability, soon established the popularity of Japanese cars, and such product specification rapidly became the norm throughout the market.
Product differentiation will be used to increase the likelihood of specific product recognition (from amongst competing brands) and preference at the evaluation stage.
The sooner the potential customer selects a particular product or brand as meeting his or her purchase needs, the more successful has been its marketing.
a) decision process speed: the speed at which the individual (or group of individuals in the case of multi-individual buying situations) moves through the decision process will depend on a number of factors, including: * whether the decision involves a simple or routine purchased in which case routine response or impulse behaviour will occur.
Such situations might include the routine repeat purchase of washing up liquid, sweets or cigarettes.
* whether the decision involves a modification to previous purchasing patterns, for instance when the usual product purchased has been re.formulated, an apparently attractive new brand introduced, or the purchaser's usage context for the product has changed.
In this case, the decision process will be slowed down by the need for  some limited consideration or problem-solving behaviour.
* whether the decision involves a major purchase, in which case there may be prolonged reflection, consultation and problem-solving behaviour.
The reader can choose his or her own examples to illustrate the point.
The purchase process for a new house, car, cooker or video recorder may have been a quite lengthy process.
Certainly, as far as the marketer is concerned, the build-up of consistent and long-term customer loyalty towards a particular brand (brand loyalty) may have the (desirable) effect of speeding the individual through the decision process sequence, and minimizing the degree to which alternative brands or products are given serious consideration.
Brand loyalty is also said by marketers to make the process of evaluation and choice less difficult, particularly where this process gives rise to anxiety or uncertainty on the part of the consumer.
The marketer will try to encourage brand loyalty as a means of rendering the purchase process more comfortable and more satisfying.
After all, fear of the purchase process itself is hardly likely to be conducive to the build-up of positive feelings about the eventual product or service to be bought.
Theoretical models of consumer behaviour attempt to show the inter-relationship between the various behavioural and economic factors that are involved.
Within these models, typically, information is processed by the individual; economic, socio-cultural and psychological influences are evaluated and related; and a purchase/no purchase decision is the result.
One of the best known models was constructed by J. A. Howard and J. Sheth, and has since undergone substantial testing and development.
The model is described and explained in a simplified form, thus: i) inputs: information inputs about the alternative products or services available to the interested individual/ potential customer will include the facts about those products (brands available, product specification, quality, price etc).
They will also include the images or feelings created by those products, and by the promotional activity surrounding them.
1.2 A theoretical model: the Howard and Sheth model
ii) purchase attitudes and intentions ' will be shaped by basic behavioural determinants already discussed in this and the previous chapter.
These include: * Personality * culture * Social class
These attitudes and intentions will also be influenced by the Importance of the purchase decision to the individual.
iii) perceptual variables will determine the individual's reaction to the information inputs referred to in Paragraph (i) above.
For a start, an individual is likely to be more Positive towards information he or she has actively sought, Whereas there may be perceptual bias against unsought information.
Secondly, the degree of individual interest in (or "sensitivity" — to) information maybe determined by the source, content and authority of that information.
Thirdly, irrespective of the source or Priority of the information, any Particular individual will psychologically "filter" out what he or she does not think important, or what he or she does not want to know.
The result of these three components will be the individual's perceptual reaction towards information inputs.
This bias will shape the individual's reaction to that information.
iv) Processing determinants Will include: * Motivation — which includes the specific motives for the purchase, and the additional but nonspecific advantages that will result.
For instance, a sales representative needs a car, but if he is able to buy a BMW, Mercedes, Jaguar or Rover then he may gain a bonus in the form of status or prestige enhancements.
* Available satisfactions and past experience — the Psychological Processes involved in a purchase decision Will take into account the available satisfactions relevant to the purchase motivation, and accumulated experience of past consumer satisfaction from the product or service in view.
* Judgement criteria — by Which the individual evaluates the alternatives available in the market to Which he or she has access.
v) Inhibitors which are external constraints on actual or potential purchase behaviour.
These include: price of product or brand; availability of product or brand; financial status of the individual; time constraints which limit the time available to deal with the purchase.
vi) Outputs which may lead to a purchase decision.
These outputs take the form of personal attitude and intention to purchase which, if favourable, will lead to the purchase decision being made.
The Howard and Sheth model is reproduced in a simplified form in figure 12.1.
This kind of model has a number of advantages, of which the most important is its indication of the complex nature of many purchase situations.
It emphasizes the need for marketers to analyze the satisfactions being sought by individuals through their purchase and consumption patterns, and to gain a clear understanding of individual purchase motivations.
It suggests that marketers need to offer products or services that offer satisfactions, or solve the consumer's purchase problems, at a variety of levels at the same time.
These levels include the economic and physical, cultural, emotional and environmental.
For all these kinds of factors are involved in the determination of consumer attitude, motivation and purchase behaviour.
And, finally, it points to the importance of external constraints (inhibitors) in permitting the individual to satisfy his or her purchase motivations.
These are often so important that they require the marketer to find direct means of dealing with them, so as to minimise their effect on the satisfaction of consumer demand.
So, for example, the credit card and the financial "package-deal" , one-stop shopping and the direct mail catalogue all contribute to lessening the impact of these constraints, and facilitate the marketer's direct concern with supplying and selling his product to the customer.
The contents of this chapter are summarized in Table 12.2.
SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
Models of buying These comprise theoretical constructs of variables behaviour which are inter-related and significant in influencing the outcome of a purchase motivation.
Such models attempt to clarify the relationships between the variables that influence the buying situation, and may assist the marketer to predict the outcome of change in any one or a number of purchase variables.
TABLE 12.2
Summary: Chapter Twelve
1.1 Decision-process These models analyse the buying process as a series models of sequential steps.
There are likely to be distinct patterns of behaviour at each step, and the marketer can identify specific activities or opportunities that will assist the decision-making process, and orientate the would-be buyer towards his particular product or brand.
Decision-process models also assume that consumer learning and experience will build up and affect future purchase situations.
Decision process models are also affected by the degree to which brand loyalty has been built up and maintained, since brand loyalty speeds the individual through the decision process sequence, and lessens the degree to which alternative products or brands are evaluated.
1.2 Theoretical models These models attempt to show the inter-relationship between relevant behavioural and economic factors involved in the purchase decision.
Typically, information is processed by the individual; economic, socio-cultural and psychological influences  are evaluated and related; and a purchase/no purchase decision is the result.
Such models are illustrated by the Howard and Sheth model.
Chisnall P. M. Marketing: a behavioural analysis.
McGraw-Hill.
RECOMMENDED READING
1) Describe and comment on some of the major economic determinants of consumer demand.
QUESTIONS FOR SELF-REVIEW
2) Describe and comment on the role of individual personal motivation as a behavioural determinant of consumer demand.
3) How may Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs assist the Marketer to understand some of the behavioural reasons for consumer demand?
4) How may a study of Self-Image Theory assist the Marketer to understand some of the behavioural reasons for consumer demand?
5) What is "personality" ?
How may an individual's personality shape his or her demand for goods and services?
6) What is "culture" ?
Why is it an important determinant of purchase behaviour?
7) What is "life-style" ?
What is its significance as a determinant of consumer purchase behaviour?
8) "There is no such thing as life-style" .
Comment.
9) What is "social class" ?
Why is it a significant determinant of consumer buying behaviour?
10) Outline and comment on some of the marketing consequences of social mobility.
11) What is the significance of the group as a determinant of consumer purchase behaviour?
12) Describe and comment on family purchase behaviour and pattern.
Use your own family background to illustrate your answer.
13) How important is the family in determining individual purchase patterns?
14) What is a "reference group" ?
What is its significance in determining the nature of consumer purchase behaviour?
15) Why are "opinion leaders" important in determining people's purchase behaviour?
16) Describe and comment on multi-individual buying behaviour.
Describe some of the roles involved in such purchase patterns.
Use your own family and social background to illustrate your answer.
17) Compare and contrast "decision-process" and "theoretical" models of consumer behaviour.
Q18 What behavioural factors should be taken into account by the marketing manager who wishes to change consumer attitudes towards a product or service?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
Q19 "Successful marketing of goods and services of all kinds should be based on a fundamental appreciation of motivation." 
Explain.
Q20 Why is it important to understand family roles and decision making processes for products and services that are consumed by the household as a unit?
Q21 In what ways are consumers influenced by their group memberships and by their reference groups?
Q22 What are opinion leaders and how do they affect market processes?
Using a specific example, show how opinion leaders might be identified and influenced through a marketing strategy.
Q23 What advantages does life-style analysis have over more traditional types of consumer analysis?
13 Consumer Behaviour — A Case study
CONSUMER NEEDS AND ATTITUDES IN THE USE OF COTTON WOOL.
(1) INTRODUCTION
The objective of this chapter, is to illustrate in practical terms some of the material contained in the three previous chapters.
The case study is based on an actual consumer behaviour investigation carried out a few years ago by a leading market research agency.
2) THE PRODUCT
The product under investigation was COTTON WOOL.
3) THE RESEARCH OBJECTIVE
The research objective included an investigation (i) of consumer towards the purchase and use of cotton wool, and (ii) of the reasons that underpinned these attitudes and usage patterns.
In other words, why did consumers purchase the products and what needs were satisfied by its use?
4) THE RELEVANT CUSTOMERS
The investigation concentrated on the main consumer group that purchases cotton wool, namely women aged between sixteen and forty-five.
5) THE METHOD OF INVESTIGATION
The investigation was based on in-depth group discussions, These discussions were structured around a pre-determined format whose objective was to elicit the respondents' motives and attitudes towards the product.
The discussions took place in the homes of some of the respondents and appeared to be carried out in a relaxed and informal manner.
Respondents were encouraged to relax and to contribute to the discussion at will.
The aim of the approach was to avoid the tension of the individual interview, and to obtain group influence on the response of individuals, Consumer attitudes and behaviour towards a product like cotton wool are to a considerable extent shaped by the views and actions of other people.
6) THE RESPONDENTS
Eight discussion groups were held in various parts of the U.K. Each group contained between seven and eleven respondents.
The criteria for inclusion were: * age; * marital status; * socioeconomic class.
The distribution of these eight discussion groups was as follows:
THE FINDINGS
In the minds of many respondents cotton wool was perceived as one of those indispensable household requisites which is necessary for some tasks and handy for a great many more.
As a rule, the mothers in both upper and lower socioeconomic groups regarded cotton wool as: * an essential product for care of babies; * a useful product for care of children; Its uses in babycare include: cleaning eyes; ears and nose; sponging face; general body cleaning; cleansing the bottom, especially if sore, when nappy is changed; to apply cream to bottoms; to apply talc when baby is small;
Uses in childcare; its mainly medicinal role includes: bathing cuts and grazes; dabbing calamine lotion on heat spots; stopping up the ears when the child has earache; but also stuffing the toes of new shoes which are bought, deliberately, slightly too large (lower socio-economic groups).
Cosmetic uses included: removing make-up.
The mothers used cotton wool for cosmetic purposes because they had already purchased it for child and babycare, and it is to hand.
Sometimes, it depended on the location of the product; if the cotton wool is not kept in the place where makeup is removed then tissues tend to be used instead.
Mothers and the lower socio-economic single girls used soap and water for facial cleansing most of the time, and less frequently used cotton wool with cleansing cream or cleansing milk.
Upper socio-economic single girls were much more likely to say that they did not use soap and water because it would ruin their skin.
They used cleansing products often with cotton wool because it is "the only natural thing to use" .
Other cosmetic uses included: removing nail varnish; as a powder puff (mostly lower socio-economic mothers); in hair care: cotton wool was used in conjunction with lotions and in permanent waving.
Cotton wool was placed between rollers and the scalp at night to prevent rollers sticking into the head, thus disturbing sleep or making marks (mostly lower socio-economic girls); bathing the ears if pierced (mostly lower socio-economic single girls).
Other uses: Cotton wool has a diverse number of other household uses which include:
packing delicate things in (such as jewellery); decorations at Christmas; filter material.
7) THE USAGE CONTEXT
This section looks at the context of product use; what customers are doing, thinking and feeling when they use cotton wool.
In babycare, several of the significant routine care activities involve the use of cotton wool.
The emotional investment in these activities is high, involving as they do the powerful maternal drive.
Mothers set themselves exacting standards, either  because of their own inner motives or because of social forces acting upon them.
Because babies are delicate and vulnerable and because the mother — for all kinds of reasons — is compelled to succeed in caring for the child, the situation has a potential for much distress on the mother's part if anything goes wrong.
Mothers of young babies want the products they use in babycare to be absolutely "right" ; either (i) the product should be well known, widely recognised and easy to understand or (ii) it must have the endorsement of authoritative sources.
Cotton wool falls into the first category.
In childcare, the situation is a rather more relaxed one.
Mothers enjoy protective and caring episodes in dealing with their children as much as they enjoy seeing them grow more independent Such episodes are a simple arid direct affirmation of the maternal role.
Cotton wool is a material which can be used at such times; respondents thought of this context when talking about cotton wool.
Cotton wool plays a secondary part, on the whole, in cosmetics.
Most respondents found it a useful medium for aiding some cosmetic task or other.
Nevertheless, skin care assumes considerable importance in the woman's mind, so that even a secondary association can be a significant one.
Overall, the patterns and contexts of use indicated a restriction in the respondents' minds about the nature and purpose of cotton wool.
It could very easily be that the accidents of product development and distribution have led to an almost exclusive focus on skin care as the function of cotton wool.
Customer needs in different kinds of use:
7.1) In Babycare
The paramount need is for a quality of softness, something which is entirely compatible with its use on babies' skins.
The product should be: soft enough not to irritate or harm.
Two other characteristics which mostly attracted indirect mention but which, nevertheless, were important included: purity, in the sense of not containing other substances; dependability in the sense that the product can always be relied upon to meet the mothers' standard (viz softness, non-irritant, pure).
Mothers were generally confident enough about the product not to show much spontaneous concern, but these characteristics were of significance to them.
A property which did, however, find frequent mention was:
absorbency The fact that cotton Wool can "mop up" larger amounts of liquid or Semi-liquid matter than anything else of a remotely similar nature is the most important functional property it has.
There is also a marked convenience element in the use of the product, Respondents, typically Stated that cotton wool is: "economical" or "works out cheaper" , but did not say that it is more convenient than washing and reusing facial flannels or cloths.
It is likely that the implication of mothers Saving effort or time over the care of babies produces some anxiety (guilt) in them, unless the rationale is very acceptable, For the housewife, however, being economical and especially finding a particular way of reducing expenditure gives Satisfaction.
7.2) In Childcare.
There are few needs specific to the use of cotton Wool; most of the interest centred on the mother's more general needs as she uses the product.
Certainly, the significant properties as they relate to these needs are: cotton wool is more specific to the purpose (than cloths); it has a "medicinal" property.
it is soft enough to clean broken or damaged skin; it is intrinsically very clean and thus appropriate to use.
Thus, if the child appears with a bleeding wound the cotton wool not only performs well in staunching the flow, but it gives satisfaction because the mother has no fears about its cleanliness, and because the use of the material represents a special act of care.
From a practical point of view the need is for:
7.3) Cosmetic use
absorbency  both in order to take up cosmetics and cleansing agents, and a the same time to hold sufficient of the cleansing agents whilst they are being applied.
In addition, much of what has been previously said about softness (and purity and dependability) in relation to skin care of babies applies here too.
Single girls particularly spoke about skin care as a specific problem for which special products are required.
There is a particular form of satisfaction for many in seeing the dirt on the cotton wool after the skin has been cleaned, as a demonstration that their care has been effective.
The mothers appeared to be less particular, but were still Susceptible to the argument that skin care is a special and personal problem.
They were more likely to use paper tissues, mainly because of the convenience but often more simply because of the location of tissues in the house.
A final point of note here was that in cosmetic use there was no substantial resistance to the idea of convenience in use.
The case study shows that respondent attitudes towards the purchase, usage context and use of cotton wool are subject to a number of the behavioural influences discussed"in chapters ten, eleven, and twelve.
These are listed below.
8) WHAT DOES THE CASE STUDY TELL US ABOUT CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR?
a) Individual personal motivation: the use of cotton wool assisted the individual to satisfy caring needs in looking after babies and children.
Maternal needs and instincts are amongst the most potent human motivations, and the product is strongly associated with the context in which these needs are expressed and satisfied.
b) Individual personality: the cosmetic use of the product is associated with personality traits concerned with physical appearance and personal presentation.
Some respondents could only visualize facial cleanliness (a key component of personal appearance) in terms of cleansing with lotions applied with cotton wool.
Other products (flannels, tissues) were perceived as inadequate in this role.
c) Life-style: respondents in the single girl upper socioeconomic categories indicated that they achieved facial cleanliness with lotions and cotton wool because it is the  only natural thing to use.
The life-style of such girls increasingly emphasises the use of safe and natural products for cosmetic and presentational purposes, particularly where the usage context is an intimate one.
d) Culture: mothers are under massive social and cultural pressure to succeed in their maternal role.
There is therefore the potential for personal distress if anything goes wrong.
Products will be sought that minimise the risk of failure, however small, and carry general acceptance in a particular role.
Cotton wool fulfils these criteria; paper tissues (which disintegrate more easily and leave "bits" ) do not.
Cotton wool is a familiar and reassuring product.
e) Social class: the study revealed variations in attitude and usage pattern as between the various social classes.
For instance, there were variations in attitude towards the use of cotton wool in cosmetic and facial cleansing activities, and in hair care.
f) Family: the basic perception of cotton wool is as a product used in a family context, associated with care episodes.
This is hardly surprising since it is mainly purchased by women between certain ages, and is associated with baby and child care.
g) reference groups and opinion leaders: the life-style adopted by some of the single girls clearly indicates an orientation towards a particular type of reference group and opinion leader associated with encouraging "the use of natural products" , personal grooming and beauty (etc).
Similarly, mothers of babies and children tend to look towards the experience and activities of those women whom they perceive as "successful" , "caring" and "attractive" in the maternal role.
Again, given the cultural pressure on women with children, it is hardly surprising to find that successful mothers provide a point of reference and fulfil an opinion leader role.
Industrial Buying
This section analyses individual and company buying behaviour in industrial goods markets.
It examines some of the factors which influence industrial buying and purchase behaviour.
It differentiates the various purchase types to be found within the industrial situation, and examines the importance to marketers in supplier companies of selling under contract.
It analyses the problem of marketing to multi-individual buying structures, and concludes by looking at the applications of industrial purchase behaviour models.
14 BUYING BEHAVIOUR IN INDUSTRIAL GOODS MARKETS
INTRODUCTION
This chapter analyses company and individual buying behaviour in industrial goods markets.
It begins by defining the augmented nature of the product or service being purchased, and looks at the derived characteristics of demand for goods and services in these industrial markets.
It examines the scope and limitations of such markets, and remarks briefly upon the impact of business cycles on demand and purchase patterns.
This discussion is then broadened into an analysis of contingency or situational factors which will have both a general and a specific impact on individual company purchasing.
The chapter goes on to outline the main purchase types, and looks at the importance of contract markets in many industrial buying situations.
The analysis of buying behaviour in industrial goods markets is continued in Chapter Fifteen.
CHAPTER CONTENTS
1) Derived demand and augmented products 2) Business cycles 3) The scope of industrial goods markets 4) Contingency factors 5) Purchase types 6) Contract markets 7) Summary
Chapters Ten to Thirteen dealt with consumer purchasing behaviour.
This chapter turns to an analysis of buying behaviour in industrial goods markets.
It does not include any consideration of the buying activities of retail companies, which is an issue dealt with in later chapters.
1) DERIVED DEMAND AND AUGMENTED PRODUCTS
This chapter, then, concentrates on buying behaviour in organisations such as manufacturing concerns, large agricultural cooperatives, the construction industry, mining, government  services and so on.
The processes by which these organisations purchase the goods and services they need are radically different from those in consumer markets.
The value of their buying, furthermore, is enormous.
Just think of the capital investment required to manufacture cars, steel or cornflakes.
All that plant and equipment was purchased by the organisations requiring them.
Products are sold in industrial goods markets to organisations that need them as INPUTS.
These products and services are purchased in order that some specific organisational objective may be achieved, whether it be to make a new product, hold greater stocks, improve service and quality, or increase profitability.
The same logic is true for non-profit making organisations like government agencies or local government authorities.
These too make purchase decisions that are related to specific objectives.
Demand in industrial goods markets is therefore described as DERIVED.
The concept of derived demand was introduced in an earlier chapter.
Industrial goods and services are usually purchased to allow the organisation to satisfy demand from its own customers.
The demand for these goods and services derives from that final market.
So, a car manufacturer sells its products to the customer.
To do this, it will have a derived demand for manufacturing equipment, components, steel, lubricants and the like, so that it can satisfy its own customers.
The industrial buyer is therefore acutely aware that he or she is building-in, or using, someone else's product so that the final customer's demands can be met.
It is therefore no use if the steel is of poor quality, the paint is full of grit, or the machinery keeps breaking down.
Organisational buyers, therefore, may seek an AUGMENTED PRODUCT.
An augmented product is more than just a tangible product or service.
It is a collection of related benefits.
These benefits to the buyer may include: * exact specification and reliability; * stringent and effective supplier quality control; * after-sales service; rapid remedy for defects in delivered products; * supplier reputation for consistent and predictable meeting of customer needs; * length of supplier experience in the trade.
2) BUSINESS CYCLES
Industrial goods markets, and therefore the buying patterns within them, are usually subject to fluctuations caused by cyclical market behaviour.
Such fluctuations have an effect on both: * sales levels; which determine production levels plus * stock or inventory levels, which provide a buffer between sales and production levels.
During downward fluctuations in demand (which give rise to recessionary economic conditions), the organisation supplying the next or final customer will reduce his production and inventory levels, as demand for his product declines.
The result will be a cut-back in his derived demand for inputs.
Recession, therefore, has the unfortunate and cumulative effect of working backwards.
Each link in the chain pushes its problems backwards in the chain of supply, so that demand patterns become progressively more erratic until the final source is reached.
Thus, the demand patterns for products like coal, steel and heavy goods vehicles decline rapidly in a recession,(and may be subject to a level of demand during boom conditions that they simply cannot meet).
The machine tool industry meets the worst of the problem, as it is at the end of the manufacturing cycle and cannot respond quickly either in recession or in a boom, because of the long lead-times involved in production and delivery.
Indeed, the machine tool industry is often regarded as a good barometer of the state of the economy as a whole.
These kinds of cyclical dynamics are illustrated in Figure 14.1, using the example of the building industry.
Whilst the demand for buildings shows a considerable variation around the movement of the economy, the most violent swings may be felt by the manufacturers of specific products like bricks, concrete, roof-tiles and the like.
One of the only ways around this problem is for suppliers in industrial goods markets to encourage their customers to buy on a consistent and long term basis, under contract.
Such a contract may, to some extent, even out (or "smooth" ) the worst of the cyclical fluctuations experienced by the trade.
3) THE SCOPE OF INDUSTRIAL GOODS MARKETS
Companies that supply industrial goods markets enjoy one significant advantage over those that trade into consumer markets.
This advantage stems from the fact that the companies and organisations that make up the market tend to be clustered together, for instance on a geographical basis, or by product type.
This allows suppliers to specialise and to develop an intimate knowledge of customer needs and wants.
At the same time it permits cost-effectiveness for instance in terms of marketing and distribution costs.
An example should make the point: * a large proportion of the UK output of ceramic products comes from one geographic area (the North Midlands).
Equipment suppliers can concentrate their efforts within a relatively small area.
* specialist suppliers Of manufacturing equipment will find such a concentrated market economic to supply, since within one region there will be a relatively large and varied demand for highly specialised machinery, At the same time, equipment suppliers can keep abreast of market and technological developments within the industry upon which it depends.
This will be much more difficult where an industry is geographically diffused, or where the supplier (say, the steel industry) faces a very wide range of market demands.
On the other hand, demand in industrial goods markets is limited in terms of the total number of buying organisations.
There are relatively few customers for industrial kilns, but many consumers buying tins of baked beans!
Therefor each individual customer is relatively important to the supplier, and sensitivity to his needs,(which is fundamental to the Marketing Concept) is an essential pre-requisite to survival.
Investment decisions made by just a few organisations can make or break a Supplier.
This restriction on the scope of industrial goods markets has become more significant given the degree of industrial and commercial concentration that has taken place since, say, 1945.
There are fewer organisations in the market than hitherto (although the demands of each have increased proportionately).
This concentration is made more of a problem for suppliers where large scale organisations centralise their buying function.
One office may be responsible for many millions of pounds worth of purchase orders.
The significance of centralised buying will be most clearly seen in later Chapters which deal with buying by retail companies.
Such concentration means that the industrial marketer may be faced with a relative increase in buyer power.
The trading consequences of such a development possibly means that the supplier risks becoming a "captive" , subject to a potentially catastrophic threat of the withdrawal of the buyers patronage.
This threat of withdrawal of large volume business may restrict the supplier's freedom of manoeuvre, both with any one customer, and in the marketplace generally, For instance, such suppliers may find that customers dictate the terms and for supply, of trade, the prices to be paid, and the arrangements for supply.
Alternatively, buying organisations may themselves be faced with concentration amongst suppliers, and find that there are fewer alternative sources of domestic supply.
In such cases: * buyers may deliberately use two suppliers (this is called using a dual source); * buyers may take over their suppliers completely.
For instance, some foodstuffs manufacturers are dependent on their supplies of edible oils.
They might see it as better to take-over their main supplier, even if it means that company losing some existing orders from competing manufacturers of food products; * buyers may deliberately seek international suppliers, so as to maintain their choice and retain some degree of control over the prices and terms of supply.
Buying behaviour in industrial goods markets also tends to be conservative.
Those people responsible for buying will often place a limit on the range and number of alternatives they are prepared to consider, particularly where they are happy with their existing suppliers.
Much buying takes place under contract and this also tends to limit the search and investigation of alternative suppliers.
Buyers often develop strong loyalties to suppliers, preferring not to make changes unless they are unavoidable.
This is hardly surprising where the supplier consistently meets the customer's needs, and where the customer buys a wide variety of products from many different suppliers thereby incurring a major management and monitoring task.
In any case, where the supplier offers competitive or preferential credit terms and loan finance to the customer, the two parties become tied together by the financial packaging of contractual terms between the two parties.
The offering of the appropriate financial assistance and credit to the customer will then become a key part of the supplier's marketing policy.
For instance, the major suppliers of earthmoving plant, backhoe loaders, excavators (etc) have their own finance houses, who can offer attractive loan finance or leasing packages to the manufacturer's existing and potential customers.
4) CONTINGENCY FACTORS
Marketers in Companies supplying industrial goods markets have therefore to accept that the situations faced by  their companies in these markets are subject to a variety of different contingencies (Or specific circumstances).
Each marketing response will have to take the relevant contingencies into account, so that(to use the jargon) it is situationally relevant.
Generalised responses will not be adequate, and marketing policy will need to be accurately informed about particular circumstances prevailing at particular times within the target markets in view.
So far, the following contingencies have been identified: * industrial structure; number of potential customers; market structure; * centralised buying; contract business; * risk of supplier dependency on customer; unbalanced customer profile; * loss of market initiative; * risk of takeover by customer; * threat of competition from international suppliers.
Other examples of possible Contingencies could include: * the deliberate exercise of buyer power, influencing the prices, terms and conditions of supply; * large customers seeking smaller companies as suppliers, so that again buyer power can be exercised.
The ability to influence supplier costs, price and conditions of delivery may be seen as worth the extra managerial, administrative and quality assurance cost incurred in buying from a large number of small suppliers; * large customers who pursue a deliberate policy of delaying payment for goods or services received.
Some local authorities in the UK are notorious for doing this!
Such delaying tactics can have a serious impact on the supplier's working capital cycle and cashflow management; * the working capital and cashflow implications of large orders obtained.
This may lead to the investigation by a potential customer of the supplier's working capital, financial and management expertise before large orders are placed.
Those who place orders will not normally accept any great degree of risk that the supplier will go out of business before the order is delivered, nor will they place large orders with firms whose working capital and liquidity appears unsound or badly managed; * the placing of Conditions on Potential orders such that suppliers: must conform to specified quality control Procedures such as those specified by the UK quality standard BS 5750.
This is now a quite normal Condition to impose on suppliers, whose output quality may be rigorously tested by customers prior to the acceptance of batches of products; undertake (and pay for) specified research, development and design activities needed to meet the specifications laid down by the customer.
This, again, is quite usual, say in the automotive industry; * meeting stringent specifications laid down by the customer.
The best UK example is the Ministry of Defence (M.O.
D.) specification for products purchased for military service and use.
All such products must conform with the appropriate M.O.D. and N.A.T.O.
specifications, as a condition of acceptance by the military authorities.
5) PURCHASE TYPES
Purchase decisions in industrial markets can be Categorised thus:(i) Straight re-buy decisions: these are standard, routine and repetitive.
They would include orders for routine raw materials such as steel stock; screws, nuts and bolts; lubricants and fuel oil.
Such purchases are often made under long term Contracts, and may be enacted by computerised stock control programs when current stock levels reach a minimum "safety level" .
The Computer program is triggered by a decision-rule and a purchase order is automatically raised.
ii) Modified re-buy decisions: relate to purchase situations in which some kind of review is called for.
Whatever the reason for the review, the purchasing function will be required to examine alternative sources of supply, or alternative products capable of meeting an existing or predictable need.
The need for a review of the existing supply arrangements might be Occasioned by mounting dissatisfaction with current suppliers, or concern at increasing price levels.
Alternatively, Organisational processes such as "value analysis" may have shown that the  specific requirement can be met in a different way, this alternative being either cheaper or offering better value for money.
Witness for instance the use in car manufacture of self-tapping screws rather than nuts and bolts, the use of circlips instead of nuts to secure bolts, or plastic body sections and panels to reduce both body weight and manufacturing costs.
iii) New task purchasing: which relates to new types of goods or services never purchased before.
In such cases there is the greatest need for effective search, analysis, evaluation and selection by those people involved in the making of purchase decisions, particularly where the item to be purchased is complex.
New task purchasing, with its inherent lack of previous experience of the product to be purchased, contains the greatest risk for the organisation.
It may therefore provide the incentive for the most thorough pre-purchase behaviour, and marketers hoping to supply such products may have to be prepared for extensive enquiry and investigation before they will manage to sell any of them.
6) CONTRACT MARKETS
Some industrial markets are dominated by trade which takes place under contract.
Such markets present suppliers and marketers with substantial problems.
Typically, the products involved are standardised and cannot be differentiated.
Indeed, they may have to be manufactured to exact customer specifications.
Such products include fuel oil, paint, building materials and fitments, and electronic Components.
The markets in which they are sold often include a small number of very large customers, such as, for example in the UK: * fuel oil — Ministry of Defence, British Railways; P & O, Sealink and other large shipping companies (etc); * paint — Central and local government authorities, British Railways, car manufacturers (etc).
Before individual suppliers may submit tenders for orders from these kinds of customers, they must be accepted as capable and reliable.
This will involve the submission and testing of their product by the potential customer, who will ensure that it meets  his technical and operating requirements.
Only then may the supplier's product be classified as satisfactory, and, perhaps after a number of years of further product tests have elapsed, the supplier may be added to the list of recognised contractors.
Only then can the supplier tender for orders.
Competition between recognised contractors is then solely based on PRICE.
Product quality and specification, and delivery capacity, are assumed by the supplier to be the same in the case of all recognised contractors.
What results is high volume business which carries low profit margins.
Indeed, competition may be so fierce that pricing is based on a Contribution basis, that is, covering variable costs and only a proportion of the business' fixed costs.
The supplier will seek his profits in other markets, hoping that the volume at which he can operate in the contract market will make his product highly competitive in price and cost terms elsewhere.
Contract markets, therefore, may be sought for the volume and unit cost savings they bring, rather than profitability itself.
Contract markets therefore force the supplier to operate in a cost effective manner.
Once the product and marketing managers have gained the company a foothold in such markets, it will be up to production and operations management to produce and deliver the right quality goods at the budgeted cost.
SUMMARY
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 14.2.
TABLE 14.2
Summary: Chapter Fourteen
SECTION MAIN POINTS
1.
Derived demand and Goods and services are usually purchased in augmented products industrial goods markets to facilitate the process by which the organisation satisfies the demand from its own customers.
The demand for these goods and services derives from that final market.
An augmented product is more than just a tangible product or service.
It is a collection of related benefits.
2.
Business cycles Buying patterns within industrial goods markets are usually subject to upward or downward fluctuations caused by cyclical market behaviour.
Such fluctuations affect the level of sales, production and stockholding.
Such fluctuations affect the level of sales, production and stockholding.
These fluctuations can have a cumulative effect, particularly on the demand for such products as steel, bricks, heavy goods vehicles and machine tools.
3.
The scope of industrial The companies and organisations that make up goods markets industrial markets tend to be clustered together, whether by geographical region, or product (or both).
However, demand in industrial goods markets is limited in terms of the total number of buying organisations.
Industrial buying behaviour tends to be conservative, based on contracts, preferential credit terms and loan finance.
4.
Contingency factors Industrial market conditions are usually subject to a variety of contingencies, such as the development of buyer power, large buyers seeking small customers, the placing of conditions on specification and terms of supply, etc.
Each marketing response will have to take into account the relevant contingencies, so that it is situationally relevant.
5.
Purchase types Purchase decisions can be categorised into straight re-buy decisions; modified re-buy decisions; new task purchasing.
6.
Contract markets Products are supplied to exact customer specifications on the basis of open competition amongst recognised contractors.
Suppliers not on the list of  recognised contractors cannot submit tenders for the order.
Competition is based on price.
Commonly, the products involved are standardised and cannot be differentiated.
15 Marketing to Multi-Individual Industrial Buying Structures
INTRODUCTION
This chapter commences with an analysis Of multi-individual buying behaviour.
This is important because much organisational purchasing is influenced and determined by a number of individuals and roles, rather than by any one person.
Buying process roles are considered, and attention is then turned to the issue of how suppliers may effectively sell products to Companies using multi-individual buying procedures.
The chapter concludes with a brief examination of decision process and behavioural models of industrial purchasing.
Two simplified versions of such theoretical models are described and illustrated.
1) Multi-individual buying behaviour and the Decision Making Unit 1.1) Buying process roles 2) Marketing to multi-individual buying structures and Decision Making Units 2.1) Catalogues 2.2) Trade and technical press 2.3) Public relations 2.4) Peer group promotion 3) Models of industrial purchase behaviour 3.1) Decision process models 3.2) Behavioural models 4) Summary Questions for self-review Examination questions
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Purchase decisions, particularly on a straight re-buy basis, may be made by a Company's buying department.
But in  industrial goods markets the role of the buying function may vary from significant to relatively insignificant.
In general terms: * the more Complex the decision, the more people will be involved as a Decision Making Unit (DMU), and the less important will be the role of the buying department; * the more expensive the decision, the more will senior management be involved and the less important will be the role of the buying department.
1) MULTI INDIVIDUAL BUYING BEHAVIOUR AND THE DECISION MAKING UNIT
Given the likely involvement of a variety of people as a Decision Making Unit in purchase decisions, and the likelihood of particular contingencies affecting its Outcome, it will be important for the marketing function in supplier companies to: * understand how buying decisions are made; * understand how the Decision Making Unit is constituted; find out who are the most influential figures in the decision-making process.
For instance, decisions on investment in plant and machinery will at least be informed (if not influenced) by the advice and views of engineers and Operations managers, even though such people may not formally be included in the actual Decision Making Unit.
The problem for the marketing function of a potential supplier will eventually resolve itself into the specific issue of how to promote and sell the product to the Decision Making Unit.
Promotional and sales effort will need to find the right target (which may Not necessarily be the buying department), otherwise it may be wasted.
These targets may be analysed on the basis of buying process roles, as follows.
Five roles may be identified in the buying process.
These are:(a) The Gatekeeper: who builds up, maintains and filters information used by the other four roles.
Purchase decisions may need substantial information flows, whilst a well organised enterprise will also keep up-to-date on the main trends, developments and events involving the companies from which it buys its inputs.
It may know as much about its suppliers (and their Competitors) as it does  about its own markets.
This is one of the benefits of a professional approach to industrial buying and supply management.
The gatekeeper role may be fulfilled by the buying department but, as like as not, that role will be shared by influential members of technical and operating departments whose expertise and experience renders their technical knowledge indispensable to the making of purchase decisions.
1.1 Buying process roles
b) The User: the concern of"the user or recipient of the product will centre on whether or not the alternatives available meet the required operating or performance specifications.
Increasingly, they are also likely to be interested in the budgeted cost of the purchase, and the return they obtain from it (perhaps measured in terms of payback or discounted cash flow).
The user will be the role most concerned with the purchase of the augmented products since, for instance:
* the user has perhaps to budget for the cost of the item, and will wish to maximise the value for money he or she can obtain from the expenditure; * the user has to cope with the consequences of late delivery, faulty products, breakdowns and servicing requirements (etc); * the user will be concerned with product reliability and supplier reputation.
c) The Influencer: purchase decisions may be subject to a variety of influences.
It may be very difficult for the supplier's marketing department to identify all of the individual sources of influence, or to evaluate their relative significance.
Nevertheless, two categories of influence role can be identified: * External influences, which can include: your company's salespeople; salespeople from competing suppliers; journalists and professionals writing in trade and specialist journals; individual representatives at trade shows and exhibitions; influential individuals in companies competing with the potential purchaser's company; influential associates and people with significant reputations whose Opinions are listened to and adopted, perhaps in professional bodies such as engineering, Computing, marketing, ACCOUNTANCY, etc. * internal influences, which may of course include gatekeepers and users, described above.
Inevitably, once the company gets near to making a purchase decision, the influence exercised by senior management will increase, whether within functional departments, or at a divisional or general management level.
This is hardly surprising, since ultimately the responsibility for the decision eventually made, and its consequences, will fall to them.
This is why industrial buying tends to have a "conservative" philosophy.
Senior managers do not want things to go wrong, and will not take what they consider to be unnecessary risks in recommending one supplier as opposed to another.
d) The Decision Maker: where decisions take the form of modified re-buys or new task purchasing, it is most likely that senior functional, divisional or general management will take the actual decision to purchase, and choose the supplier, specification and product.
Obviously, the wishes of the user will be taken into account, as will the various sources of influence described above.
Where major investment decisions are concerned (say, in the purchase of a completely new computer-based data processing and management information system), the Board of Directors is likely to take the responsibility.
Again, this is hardly surprising, since in organisational terms the authority and responsibility distribution will determine how the final decision is to be taken, and who is to be involved.
Marketers in supplier companies will have to find out the nature of these organisational arrangements before they can have any hope of making a sale.
(e) The Buyer: who is responsible for the actual details involved in placing the order and monitoring the delivery process.
Typically this task will be carried out by the company's buying department.
Whether senior buyers are able at the same time to exercise an influencing and decision making role will depend on organisational factors.
These will determine: * the status and authority of senior buyers; * the degree to which they are consulted by influencers and decision-makers; * the degree to which they are actually involved in decision making.
Certainly, one of the organisational reasons for centralising the buying function in a company is that it gives senior buyers more clout.
At this level it may become essential to involve the senior buyer in high level buying decisions, in view of the large sums of money going through the department.
Ideally, the top professional buyer will seek Board status as the company's senior buyer, since this ensures his or her involvement in all major purchase decisions.
Supplier companies wishing to sell their products to industrial markets must try to establish a pattern or "mix" of inter-related activities.
The initial target in any potential industrial customer may be the gatekeeper role.
The supplier needs to build up awareness, understanding and interest in his products in the mind of the gatekeeper, whether this be a buying department, technical specialist, or both.
Otherwise the gatekeeper role may filter out awareness of the supplier, and so his promotional effort will fail at the first hurdle!
And in any case, the buying department of the potential customer must be informed about the basic mechanics of how to deal with the supplier.
It must know about product ranges and specifications, production and servicing arrangements, the names of salespeople, addresses, phone numbers (etc).
2) MARKETING TO MULTI INDIVIDUAL BUYING STRUCTURES AND DECISION MAKING UNITS
Supplier companies must then determine how they are going to inform, promote or persuade influencers and decision makers within the Decision Making Unit.
This is much more difficult.
For a start, the supplier's marketing department must try to identify and reach technical specialists, engineers, technical buyers (etc).
This will depend on how accessible these people are, and on how effective are the gatekeepers whose role includes filtering out what they, or the influencer, deem to be undesirable or unnecessary information.
A strong gatekeeper role will limit sales access to influencers and decision takers in the way laid down by company policy, and it may not be until that policy is changed that an individual supplier may be permitted  sales access to present his wares.
We have already seen this effect in the section on contract markets in the previous chapter.
Evidently, it presents the marketer with a circular or "chicken and egg" argument; if you have no access it will be difficult to persuade policy makers to change their attitude towards giving you access!
The problem is most difficult when it comes to the supplier's sales and marketing people gaining access to decision-makers.
The access will in part be determined by gatekeepers and influencers.
It will be made more difficult where a number of senior individuals are actually involved in making a purchase decision.
And it will be further complicated by status differences.
Senior management may not be prepared to deal with ordinary salespeople, or even sales managers.
So how can the supplier mitigate the effects of this limitation on access?
There are a number of possibilities, as follows.
A well constructed and well presented catalogue, sent to selected gatekeepers, technical managers (etc) acts as a detailed source of information about the supplier and his products.
Indeed many catalogues become prestigious reference works, updated by the supplier, which are used by the customer to frame purchase proposals.
For example, so detailed was the Texas Instruments integrated circuit catalogue that at one time it was the standard specification reference work for electronic component buyers.
Its product Categories were used by other manufacturers.
A good catalogue, therefore, makes life easy for its user, and so builds up the supplier's reputation.
2.1) Catalogues
People who work in a particular business tend to read the relevant trade and technical press, whether in the UK it be The Grocer, Marketing, Electronics Weekly, the British Baker, or whatever.
Whilst they may not take too much notice of advertisements which promote goods and services used in that trade, readers will tend to notice when advertisements by their suppliers are absent.
Buyers and influencers expect to see their suppliers (and their competitors) represented.
2.2) Trade and technical press
Editorial comment will be widely read and taken seriously, whilst favourable or unfavourable references to supplier  companies tend to be spotted and remembered in the trade.
This is hardly surprising.
Senior people like talking about their work, and read the trade and technical press both for reasons of professional and personal interest.
A good professional knows what is going on, both within his own company, and outside it in its trade environment.
Public relations and the building of corporate image are dealt with in a later chapter.
Suffice it to say that a company may use public relations activities, and what is called "corporate advertising" to try to build up an image in the minds of target individuals and groups who are likely to be influential in purchase decision-making.
This image might be one of reliability and technical competence, of innovation or sensitivity to customer needs (etc).
It is essential that this image be transmitted through media (communication methods) that will reach those people who hold influencer or decision making roles.
So, prestige newspapers and television might be used, as well as the trade and technical press, to secure editorial comment and carry out direct advertising.
Similarly, trade shows, exhibitions and sponsored events may be used to build up such a favourable image.
2.3) Public Relations
At the same time as using catalogues, trade and technical press, and public relations, supplying companies may use a two-pronged sales effort.
Sales staff and sales managers will attempt to get access to such influencer and decision-making roles as they can, presenting the supplier's products and making the sales effort.
Where senior management refuses access to the sales force, the supplying company can involve its own senior management to make its presentation on a peer group basis.
The supplying company will attempt to respond on a status to status basis, such that its products are presented and promoted to equals by equals.
2.4) Peer group promotion
In other words, senior sales, technical and general management in he supplying company will need to get out to present, promote and sell the company's products.
This may mean a change in management attitudes and practice within the supplying company.
Promotion and sales may not have been seen as a high status activity deserving of such high level  management attention.
Yet what is more deserving of anyone's attention than getting the sales orders upon which the survival of the enterprise depends?
It is a question of priorities: some industrial customers may not be prepared to deal with salespeople, and may insist on granting access only to people of their own status and organisational level.
This way, they may reason, they can get to the heart of the supplier's promotional and sales pitch, and reassure themselves that they are getting the right deal.
Models of buying behaviour were introduced in an earlier chapter as a means of analysing and explaining purchase decisions.
In industrial markets these decisions are subject to a wide variety of inter-related economic, marketing, technical and behavioural influences.
Models were described as comprising theoretical constructs of variables which are interrelated and significant in influencing the outcome of a purchase requirement.
Two approaches to the construction of buying behaviour models will again be considered.
3) MODELS OF INDUSTRIAL PURCHASE BEHAVIOUR
Decision process models analyse the buying process as a series of sequential steps.
These would typically include: a) recognition or anticipation of the need to make the purchase; b) classification of the nature of the purchase requirement into straight re-buy, modified re-buy or new task category; c) determination of the characteristics and quantity of the required item(s); d) specification and description of the characteristics of the required item, and the quantity to be actually purchased; e) search for possible sources, and investigation of alternative products/augmented products available; f) acquisition and evaluation of supplier sales proposals and terms; g) selection of supplier; h) agreement on terms and conditions of supply, order placed; i) receipt of product; j) post purchase evaluation and FEEDBACK into future decisions.
3.1) Decision process models
The nature of the progress through this series of sequential steps will be influenced (or determined) by the buying process roles described in section (1.1) above.
This influence can be summarised in diagrammatic form, as shown in figure 15.1.
The objective of behavioural models is the same in both industrial and consumer goods markets.
Theoretical models of buyer behaviour attempt to show the inter-relationship between the various behavioural and economic factors that are involved.
Within the context of industrial goods markets, organisational factors must be added to the list of relevant variables.
3.2) Behavioural models
One of the best known models was constructed by J. Sheth, and this model is described and explained in a simplified form, thus: i) Information sources: a variety of information sources will be available,(some of which have already been discussed in detail in this and the previous chapter).
They include sales representatives, advertising and promotion, trade exhibitions and trade news, professional and technical conferences and journals, word of mouth opinion (etc).
Each information source will be subject to some degree of filtering and perceptual distortion by members of the buying organisation.
ii) Contingency factors: include the relevant economic and market circumstances that are likely to influence product investigations and purchase decisions.
iii) product-specific factors: are those factors which will determine the nature, timing, risk and technical content of the buying process.
iv) company-specific factors: include such variables as: organisation size and degree of centralisation; official purchase decision-making procedures and processes; role of buying department and other buying process roles; means of resolving conflicts or differences that appear within the Decision Making Unit during the buying decision-making process.
v) Expectations and past experience: there may be a variety of expectations about products and purchase decisions to be found at different places within the buying organisation.
Similarly, there may be variations in people's experience of purchasing and using the product or service in question.
How are these expectations and experiences articulated?
How are they communicated?
What influence do they have?
And by what means does the organisation interpret, choose between, and make use of these expectations and this experience?
vi) Individual objectives and behavioural factors: the Sheth model focuses on such factors as: individual role and expectations; individual background, training and motivation; individual objectives in the purchasing process.
The Sheth model is reproduced in a simplified form in Figure 15.2.
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 15.3.
4) SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
Multi-individual buying A variety of people or roles may be involved behaviour and the DMU as a Decision Making Unit in industrial or organisational purchase decisions.
These may be analysed in terms of five influential roles, namely the gatekeeper, the user, the influencer, the decision-maker and the buyer.
TABLE 15.3
Summary: Chapter Fifteen
2.
Marketing to Supplier companies will have to determine how most multi-individual buying effectively to market their products to the various structures and DMU's roles identified in the previous section.
This may involve them in attempting to secure access to influencers and decision-makers.
This may be difficult if both gatekeepers and policy in the buying company aim to restrict such access.
Limitations on access may be mitigated by the use of: effective and useful technical catalogues; trade and technical press; public relations activities; peer group promotion.
3.
Models of industrial Two approaches to the construction of industrial purchase behaviour buying behaviour models were described, namely (i) decision process models (comprising a series of sequential steps); and (ii) behavioural models (such as that constructed by J. Sheth).
1) What is "derived demand" ?
Comment on its significance in the study of marketing.
QUESTIONS FOR SELF-REVIEW
2) Describe and comment on the significance of the concept of the "augmented product" .
3) What are business cycles?
How do they affect demand patterns in industrial goods markets?
4) How may the scope and structure of industrial goods markets affect the selling and buying activities and policies of supplier and purchasing companies?
Illustrate your answer by an example with which you are familiar.
5) What are "contract markets" , and why may they be significant in industrial goods marketing?
6) Comment on the importance to the marketer of the buying department in any firm to which he or she would like to sell goods or services.
7) Why may it be difficult for a supplier to sell his products to a company that makes use of a multi-individual Decision Making Unit to make purchase decisions?
How may it attempt to overcome these difficulties?
Q24 Dependent on how a product is purchased, it may be described as a consumer product or as an industrial product.
For example, a ball point pen may be purchased for personal use or by a company for use in its business.
What differences would you expect to find in the buying behaviour of an individual buying the same product for his/her own use and also on behalf of an organisation?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
Q25 Discuss the importance of identifying the Decision Making Unit (DMU) in the marketing of industrial products.
Use examples to illustrate your answer.
Q26 How might the composition of the Decision Making Unit (DMU) vary between: a) A new capital purchase decision and b) A repeat supplies purchase?
Use examples of products/markets to illustrate your answer.
Q27 Research has shown that industrial buyers are reluctant to change from an existing regular supplier even if the new supplier can offer a price reduction.
How might the marketing department of the new supplier meet this particular challenge?
Market Analysis
This section commences with a detailed examination of market segmentation.
Market segmentation is the analysis of a particular total market demand into its constituent parts, so that sets of buyers or "segments" can be differentiated.
These segments are used as targets against which appropriate products or services can be positioned, and upon which an appropriate promotional mix may be focussed.
The analysis is illustrated by a variety of case examples and case studies.
The second chapter in the section turns to the specific application of consumer targeting as a detailed example of market segmentation in practice.
Within the context of this section, consumer targeting is described in terms of the application of the ACORN system.
16 MARKET SEGMENTATION
INTRODUCTION
Market segmentation is a vital issue in the study of marketing.
Market segmentation means the analysis of a particular total market demand into its constituent parts, so that sets of buyers can be differentiated.
Segmentation has significance both as a marketing tool, and as a basic input to marketing and business planning.
This chapter examines the role of market segmentation as a marketing tool.
Its use in marketing planning is the subject of a later chapter.
The chapter begins by explaining the importance of market segmentation within the study of marketing.
Market segmentation is then defined and two main segmentation criteria are explained.
These criteria are based firstly on consumers/users, and secondly on products/benefits.
There is an analysis of how these criteria may be used to identify segment boundaries.
Market segments are then used as targets against which appropriate products or services can be positioned, if the forecast revenues are likely to exceed the costs to be incurred.
Similarly, segments are used as targets upon which an appropriate promotional mix may be focussed.
A number of practical examples are given to illustrate the principles explained in this chapter, and the chapter ends with a case study of how market segmentation might be implemented.
1) The importance of market segmentation 1.1) Distributor and retailer power in consumer goods markets 1.2) Volume commodity markets 2) Segmentation definitions 3) Segmentation criteria 4) Consumer/user characteristics 4.1) Consumer goods markets 4.2) Industrial goods markets 5) Product segmentation 5.1) Segmentation by benefit 5.2) Vendor segmentation 5.3) Contribution targets  6) Segmentation techniques and-product positioning 6.1) Attribute sets 6.2) Product positioning and differentiation 7) The validity and viability of market segmentation 8) A practical example 9) Summary
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Market segmentation means the analysis of a particular market demand on the basis of its constituent parts, so that sets of buyers can be differentiated.
It is an important input to marketing planning because it can be used to formulate company "product-market" objectives, by which the enterprise may: * define its markets; * position ranges of brands and product varieties; * identify gaps which offer significant opportunities for expansion or new product positioning; * rationalise policies for existing brands, products and mixes.
1) THE IMPORTANCE OF MARKET SEGMENTATION
Market segmentation plays a dual role, namely (i) as a marketing tool, and (ii) as a basic input to business planning.
Its role in business planning is dealt with in a later chapter.
There are three main reasons for the importance of market segmentation.
These are:
(a) market fragmentation, caused by demographic and lifestyle changes, new product and process developments and intense market competition.
Some markets, which once had a homogeneous character, have tended to splinter into a variety of consumer groups, each with different tastes and preferences; for instance, see Box 16.1.
Food markets in the UK tended, in the past, to have a homogeneous character.
There were mass markets for a relatively limited variety of fresh and processed foodstuffs.
Many people lived on a similar diet, and chases took place  slowly.
After the end of the second world war, however, a series of technological developments in farming, preserving, packaging, distributing and presenting foodstuffs made possible radical changes in foodstuff consumption habits.
BOX 16.1 FRAGMENTATION IN THE UK FOOD MARKETS
These technological and distribution changes ran parallel to an increase in real income available to the consumer.
Families had greater incomes to spend, and whilst the relative proportion of income spent on foodstuffs has not increased greatly, the absolute sums spent have risen as a result.
In other words, people were able to purchase a wider variety of foodstuffs.
Other changes have included: * an increasingly imaginative use of the technologies available; * a substantial increase in the rate at which manufacturers have introduced new products; * changes in the relationship between volumes and values purchased (for instance, less yellow fat is now eaten in the UK, but the value of fats consumed has not declined because more high value or value-added products, such as polyunsaturated fats, are being consumed); * acceptance of the refrigerator as an essential kitchen item; introduction of freezer cabinets, microwave ovens (etc); * increased priority of food preparation convenience, encouraging suppliers to market value-added foodstuffs (such as pizzas, frozen ready cooked meals and so on ); * use of additives to preserve products, lengthen shelf-life etc.
This process may be further developed by the introduction of techniques of food irradiation; * increased public concern with nutrition, food value and food health.
Hence the changes in attitude towards the fibre, fat and additive content of foodstuffs, the increased interest in healthy foods, consumer reaction to intensive farming and environmental concerns over the use of pesticides,(etc).
These changes, coupled with increased marketing activity from producer and retailer alike, have caused the once mass food markets to fragment into a wide range of market segments, upon each of which are Positioned a  whole variety of different foodstuffs.
There are convenience segments, children's segments, fresh food segments, health food and vegetarian segments, traditional segments, catering segments and so on.
Food is consumed at home, in restaurants or burger bars (etc), or eaten "on the hoof" from takeaways.
These segments vary in volume and value from very large to very small.
There are manufacturers, distributors and retailers geared up to supply them all, from multinational companies like Nestle to small healthfood firms manufacturing grain, nut and honey crunch bars.
Each has a place in such a varied marketplace.
(b) The development of retailer power, in which the relative advantage obtained from bulk buying, the use of retailers' own brands", and policy limitations on the range of items stocked have all combined to put the manufacturer or supplier at a disadvantage.
At the same time concentration has occurred amongst retail companies, leaving a small number of very.large companies as well as a large number of smaller retailers.
(c) Tile volume trap, in which markets for commodity type products (like plant-baked bread) may become dominated by suppliers capable of volume production and distribution to retail multiple chains bulk-buying on a centralised basis.
In each case, market segmentation offers an answer to the marketer.
For instance, non-standard or value-added lines are now frequently targeted on customer segments which seek to avoid tile purchase of standardised products, whether these are foodstuffs, clothes, computers or industrial machinery.
Alternatively, production arrangements may be designed to be flexible enough to supply target markets in a large number of relatively small and specialised niches, such as in the market for industrial or aviation control systems.
Technological developments in product design, manufacturing, distribution and retailing have also been essential to meeting these market developments.
Technological developments have permitted product differentiation, and made possible more flexible production and supply arrangements.
Such changes are needed if the demands of an increasing number of market segments are to be met, especially if they are relatively small in volume and value.
Let us look at two examples of these market changes in more detail.
The exploitation of the relative advantage obtained from bulk buying, the use of retailer "own brands" , and limitations on the number and range of items and brands stocked have all combined to put the manufacturer at a disadvantage.
1.1) Distributor and retailer power in consumer goods markets.
Grocery chains in particular require stock lines to meet sales turnover objectives, which if not met will result in the discontinuing of the line.
At the same time the manufacturer is expected to support his product with adequate promotional expenditure.
One of the defences possessed by the manufacturer against the retailer determining the nature of supply is the accurate positioning of products and brands, derived from effective market research, against target market segments known to be an important constituent of the retailer's customer profile.
Effective promotional activity may then leave the retailer with little choice but to stock the brand on a continuous basis.
This may be true whether the product is a "blockbuster" (such as Nescafe"), or aimed at specific smaller segments, as is currently the case in the UK with some health food ranges.
The second explanation involves the volume trap.
Where a product is effectively a "commodity" (as is the case with many foodstuffs), or the consumer perceives a number of alternative brands to be easily substituted (as with paint, do-it-yourself products, electronic calculators, video recorders or home computers), then volume production and marketing may determine who will dominate the market.
1.2) Volume commodity markets.
This is the case with the UK bread market in which two bakery companies (Allied Bakeries and Rank Hovis McDougall) supply 60% of all bread sold in the UK.
Volume, price and market share are inter-related.
chose with the highest volume in this market can control price, negotiate from a position of strength with retailers, and so build market share, which in turn increases the volume sold.
For those smaller plant bakery companies who cannot compete in these volume stakes the choice is quite clear.
They need in addition to aim non-standard or value-added product lines (such as quality wholemeal bread, malted, muesli or "breakfast" loaves, croissants, cakes, sandwiches, catering lines or hot bread) at those specific local or regional markets in which their location  and lower distribution costs give them an advantage, and at those market segments which seek non-standard or differentiated products.
Only by so doing can their business activity generate an adequate return.
Market segmentation means THE ANALYSIS OF A PARTICULAR TOTAL DEMAND IN TERMS OF ITS CONSTITUENT PARTS, SO THAT SETS OF BUYERS CAN BE DETERMINED.
These sets of buyers should possess distinguishing characteristics, so that: * they may be used as marketing targets against which products are positioned to meet segment customer need; * a marketing mix appropriate to a particular segment may be selected.
2) SEGMENTATION DEFINITIONS
Segmentation starts with the notion that a "global" analysis of total market demand needs to be broken down into its component parts.
These are likely to be more effective for marketing and operational planning purposes.
The mass producer (who may be production, quality or sales orientated) may attempt to supply all, or a substantial part of this total demand, and in so doing may consider that he can obtain a price, volume or distribution advantage relative to smaller scale producers.
However, this mass producer is then forced to market a product range that is limited to a demand pattern of hypothetical "average consumers" .
At the same time he will miss out on segments of the market which in mass production or distribution terms are not thought economic to supply.
This strategy has two basic flaws: * it assumes that the profile of the "average consumer" is adequately representative of the majority of buyers within the market.
This may mean that a production orientated company is (paradoxically) dependent on the effectiveness of its marketing skills in selling and promotion to sell adequate volumes in the marketplace.
Yet in industrial goods markets there may be no such thing as an average consumer; each buyer's demand pattern and requirement may be different.
* a significant proportion of the market may comprise consumers who require non-standard products simply because they are not able or willing to conform to standardised purchasing patterns.
Two simple illustrations may be given.
The first is the wide variation in specification and finish that are standard practice in the motor industry.
The second is the dilemma faced by national UK brewers in deciding the content and distribution of their product range.
Should they market keg beers under national brand names or should they return to localised brewing and brand names?
Ultimately, what should be their response to the fragmenting of demand in the different directions of "real ale" , pilsner lager, the decline of mild ale, and the increased consumption of wine and cocktail drinks?
Market segmentation, therefore, represents a recognition that people as buyers and consumers differ in their needs, tastes, family and cultural background, motivation, lifestyle and attitudes towards products and purchases So how is market segmentation carried out?
There are two main categories of segmentation criteria.
The first is based on the characteristics of the consumer or user.
The second, called "product segmentation" , focuses on how consumers or buyers perceive, group together and differentiate between available brands, products or services.
Products or services may then have to be positioned according to these perceptions.
Both types are summarised in Table 16.2.
3) SEGMENTATION CRITERIA
In this case, consumers or users are allocated into different groupings according to the way they may be categorised, thus: * Geographic Distribution — for instance, a substantial proportion of total UK demand is concentrated in London and the South East.
Geographic segments are also important in rendering manageable a worldwide export marketing activity.
Export marketing might be concentrated for example on South East Asian countries that have relatively high per capita income and large concentrations of population in cities such as Singapore, Hong Kong, Manila, Canton or Djakarta. * Demography — in which the population is categorised according to age, sex, socio-economic group, income, housing, family characteristics and stage in family cycle.
* Life-Style (or "psychographics" )— which was described in an earlier chapter as a reflection of deeper sociological.
and behavioural influences on people's attitudes and activities.
The relevant population may be categorised on the basis of distinct patterns of work, leisure, or attitude to consumption of particular goods or services.
4) CONSUMER/USER CHARACTERISTICS
4.1) Consumer Goods Markets
For example, an analysis of geographic distribution, demographic and life-style characteristics might be used to segment the market for value-added furnishing or food products, and determine appropriate distribution channels to be sought.* Personality — which is believed to be significant in the "trickle down" process (or diffusion) of new products In particular , opinion leaders may be important in increasing the level of recognition and acceptance of a new product, or in situations where innovatory behaviour is required of the consumer (for example in purchasing a completely new car model as soon as it is launched).
* Consumption Rate — consumers may be segmented on the basis of the volume and frequency of purchase.
They might, for example, fall into any of the following six categories:
The objective of marketing strategy towards these six segments would be (i) to maintain and increase the incidence of medium and heavy consumption of the company's products or brands; and (ii) to upgrade the other categories in the company's favour.
For instance, a manufacturer of household detergents might aim to increase the housewife's use of any one of its proprietary brands, and also persuade her to purchase other company products for other household cleaning, such as washing up or spray polishing.
* Geographic Distribution — this is particularly important where personal selling by sales representatives is the  main element of the company's promotional mix.
Personal selling is a very expensive activity to maintain, and it may be best suited to relatively concentrated markets, such as in the UK for ceramics or steel manufacture, or those in which buying is carried out on a centralised basis.
* Customer Size — the various industrial customers may be grouped according to their size, and potential purchase quantity.
The nature of the marketing process may have to vary with customer size; paint manufacturers will for instance have to get themselves onto a list of approved contractors before they can even bid for orders to major customers such as the railways or car manufacturers.
* Usage Rate — the supplier may attempt to increase the purchase rate of the customer, so that the customer becomes a heavier user, or may instead try to increase his proportion of the customer's total order for the product.
* Industry Classification — steel marketing is often segmented on this basis, since the UK Standard Industrial Classifications are readily understood and market data is frequently based upon them.
Such classifications render the process of categorising diverse market opportunities more manageable.
After all, steel is purchased by every industrial sector in the economy.
4.2) Industrial Goods Markets
This second approach focuses on how consumers or buyers perceive, group together, and differentiate between the available products, brands or services.
Products or services may then have to be fitted or positioned according to these perceived market patterns.
This segmentation basis can be explained thus: * People may seek the benefits that products provide, rather than the products themselves.
Market Research should be able to establish the nature of these benefits.
* Consumers may consider the available alternatives from the vantage point of the usage contexts with which they have experience, or the specific applications they are considering.
It is the usage requirement which dictates the benefit being sought.
5) PRODUCT SEGMENTATION
Segmentation based on usage contexts is held to be particularly efficient because it permits product and marketing planning to be based on customer perceptions of what is required of, or desirable in that product.
It is not based on the preconceived characteristics of (some possibly arbitrary) category of customer delineated on demographic or income criteria, or media data.
Three examples of Product Segmentation are given below.
Products are grouped according to the principal benefit which customers perceive that their purchase will bring.
Thus, for example, the UK travel market could be segmented on the basis of desirable combinations or permutations of factors such as speed, frequency of service, comfort, cost and freedom from undesirable features such as seasickness or football supporters!
The relatively low cost of long distance inter-city bus services, combined with their comfort and strict passenger control has, for instance, made them a highly competitive force when looked at from the viewpoint of older or economy conscious passengers.
5.1 Segmentation by Benefit.
A first variation on this theme will be product segmentation based on customer perceptions of "value for money" .
Product segmentation of this sort is visible in clothes retailing, and the distribution of fitted kitchens and bedroom furniture.
A second variation applicable to industrial goods markets will be customer perceptions of operating characteristics, which may carry greater weight than the technical specifications that may form the basis of the supplier's sales pitch.
Buyers of commercial vehicles or heavy trucks, for instance, may prefer to buy products that they know will "feel right" to drivers, and which at the same time are straightforward for their maintenance crews to service.
It may be necessary for suppliers in industrial goods markets to sharpen the focus of their own market segmentation policy by studying the specific demands and usage perceptions of the customers of the firms they supply.
Thus, not only are their own customers in focus, but the demands of the next group of customers "down the line" are part of the segment.
This is called Vendor segmentation.
5.2) Vendor Segmentation
After all, the supplier's products are only of benefit to his customer because the "end user" perceives them to be acceptable.
This is obviously the case in markets such as civil or electrical engineering, but the principle is widely applicable; for instance see Box 16.3 below.
Perkins Engines are a major (UK) supplier of diesel engines.
The company "sells to people who have factories" and "under-stand(s) what their problems are" .
That understanding lies at the heart of the company's market segmentation policy.
Box 16.3 PERKINS ENGINES
Selling engines to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), such as vehicle builders, agricultural and mechanical handling equipment manufacturers, and producers of generating sets and compressors means selling to customers who are building somebody else's product into the heart of their own machines.
Knowing what the customer wants is essential to this kind of business.
Anticipating his future power unit needs and helping him to achieve them is the key to tomorrow's survival in OEM industries hard pressed by recession and overseas competition.
Perkins also claims that it is making a segment virtue out of necessity.
It is using its applications engineering resources by offering "a total engine package" to those of its customers whom recession has forced to run down their own development activities.
Ultimately, segmentation policy may lead Perkins to a market situation where it may no longer see itself as "an engineering company selling an engineering product" but instead is "moving towards a service company approach" in which "the ability to work with customers must be a high priority." 
Retail outlets will view the products that they buy from manufacturers or wholesalers as items that should provide the maximum Contribution per unit of limiting factor, which is floor  space.
The usage context or benefit is simply one in which the total stock type, taken together, should bring in as much Contribution as possible per square metre.
Lines that fail to meet minimum Contribution targets are eliminated from the stock range, unless their presence (for instance as loss leaders or long-established lines maintained for customer goodwill purposes) supports the achievement of the overall Contribution objective.
5.3) Contribution Targets
A market segment may be identified and analyzed using the reasons for demand, whether these reasons are consumer or product orientated.
Two examples are given below, thus: * Consumer criteria: UK demand segment for low cost European travel: age range: concentrated between 18 to 30; sex: both male and female; socio-economic class: A B1 B2 C1; occupation: predominantly full-time student; source of finance: parental; casual holiday or part-time earnings; special factors: access to discount arrangements; hold student travel cards; personality indicators: innovative behaviour, tendency to extraversion, high tolerance of low standards of travel and accommodation modes.
* Product criteria: UK demand segment for high season air inclusive tour package family holidays: principal benefit sought: sunshine, warmth, comfortable accommodation, relaxed atmosphere; retail price:(say) between £200 to £500 for one or two weeks, per person; duration: 7,10 or 14 days, with emphasis on departure/ return on Fridays, Saturdays or Sundays; location and climatic requirements: Mediterranean coast, guaranteed sunshine, warmth; mode of transport: air charter flights; mode of accommodation: two, three and four star equivalent hotels or self catering apartments.
High standards of plumbing, sanitation and hygiene; special factors: school summer holiday peak demand; operator reliability and continuity; English spoken by guides and hotel staff; airport security and aircraft safety; access to long term airport car parking.
6) SEGMENTATION TECHNIQUES AND PRODUCT POSITIONING
This process of identification and analysis may be carried out in a number of ways, for instance: * by Using intuition based upon an interpretation of existing knowledge of the market; * by Using any of the wide array of market research techniques, based on internal sources of information about the market, and field research.
The information so obtained may then have to be rearranged to show segment differences, and again this process of interpretation may be subjective or objective, depending on how statistically valid the end product must be; * by using an analysis of attribute sets.
Attribute sets are analysed in section 6.1 below.
Attribute sets are combinations of individual reasons for demand.
Complex statistical multivariate procedures can be used to correlate and group market research data so as to give a statistically accurate identification of: * the size of segment groups and their similarities; * the differences between the various groupings of attribute sets; * the relationship of these groups to important consumer, market or product/benefit requirements.
6.1) Attribute Sets
These statistical procedures have two components.
The first is Factor Analysis which examines the correlations between variables across the respondents or products surveyed.
The second is Cluster Analysis which seeks correlations between respondents or products across the segmentation variables being used.
Various distributions of attribute sets are possible.
But where Cluster Analysis can show the existence of sufficiently large groupings of respondents, or product/benefit requirements which have similar attribute sets, then these may  be used as MARKETING TARGETS, if the benefits of selling into them are likely to exceed the cost.
Three simple examples are given in Figures 16.4,16.5 and 16.6.
The company should then use the segments that it has defined as targets against which products may be positioned.
The product range or "mix" (defined in a later chapter) should emphasise those product attributes or differences which are appropriate to the characteristics and requirements of clusters or segments that are seen as most viable in commercial terms.
Similarly, an appropriate promotional "mix" may be formulated to provide the most effective communication to, and persuasion of those specific people, who make up the segment, or are likely to seek the product or its benefits within the purchase contexts that the analysis has identified.
6.2) Product Positioning and differentiation
First class UK inter-city rail services provide an example to illustrate the point.
These services have been positioned against a particular segment within the diffused travel market, and are promoted accordingly.
This segment is that represented by long-distance business travellers and executives.
The best track, rolling stock and journey times are to be found on the main intercity routes, where timetables and the provision of first class carriages and full catering services are aimed at the needs of the business community.
Promotional activity stresses safety, speed and comfort (by direct comparison with the use of cars to cover the same type of journey), and the central location of termini (compared with the relative isolation of airports).
The logic for this product differentiation has already been explained, but it is worth repeating because it is a direct means of implementing the marketing concept.
People seek the benefits that products provide, rather than the products or brands themselves Specific products or brands should therefore be differentiated by those combinations of benefits and costs sought by a particular set of potential customers.
It may be impracticable and unrealistic in segmentation terms for a company to try to incorporate into one product all the benefits and costs sought by all potential customers.
Similarly, it may be highly risky if the product or brand contains only those benefits and costs selected on a subjective basis by the supplier, without reference to the marketplace itself.
In order for the market segmentation process to provide a valid input to company planning for products and markets, it must fulfil two basic requirements.
Firstly, can the process identify, describe and measure segments in a useful and meaningful manner?
Secondly, can the enterprise provide adequate flows of accounting data so that analysis of costs and revenues associated with segment activities are available for planning and control purposes?
7) THE VALIDITY AND VIABILITY OF MARKET SEGMENTATION
Hence, the four standard tests of segment VALIDITY: IDENTIFICATION — does the segmentation process discriminate meaningfully between sets of buyers, and does it pick out differences in market demand patterns?
MEASURABILITY — can the main features of each segment be measured and expressed in useful terms?
ACCESSIBILITY — can the enterprise actually direct its marketing effort at a particular segment, both in terms of product/product development, and marketing mix?
VIABILITY — to what degree will the revenue gained from selling into a segment offset the total cost involved?
Box 16.7 contains a checklist which describes the steps a medium-sized business (in this case a UK regional plant baker) might take in order to provide a market segmentation input to its product and market planning:(1) Analyse geographic distribution and density of relevant regional and local population.
8) A PRACTICAL EXAMPLE
BOX 16.7 A Regional Plant Baker's Segmentation Checklist
STEP REQUIREMENT
(2) Break this population analysis down in terms of chosen demographic variables and significant consumer life-style variations.
For example:(a) age, housing and home ownership patterns;(b) socioeconomic class distribution;(c) significant patterns and trends of income distribution;(d) family/non family orientations (e.g.: family dominated, middle class owned suburban residential areas; working class family rented residential areas; inner city rented singles/students, bed sit/flat accommodation; and so on );(e) significant shopping pattern variations relative to retail provision (and trends therein);(f) significant variations in purchase behaviour influences (e.g.: children's tastes in bread/cakes influencing mother's purchase patterns; acceptance of high fibre diet and concern with weight, smoking and heart disease among middle aged, middle class men; major competitor promotional campaigns).
(3) Research and/or describe type and purchase patterns of consumers showing heavy, medium and light/casual purchase rates of bread and cakes, relative to item (1) and (2) above.
(4) In the case of new/modified products (e.g.: high fibre muesli loaves), locate and identify types of innovative buyers and opinion leaders, and their shopping patterns.
(5) Obtain relevant sample consumer perceptions about:(a) food purchase priorities and influences;(b) your own products;(c) competitor's products;(d) relevant retail provision relative to user type (item (3) above).
(6) Locate, list and describe relevant local, regional, and national retail outlets and:(a) describe their trading, buying and pricing policy as if affects bakery products;(b) describe their attitude to manufacturer's brands/ own brands, and ranges.
(7) List and describe main and secondary competitors, and:(a) describe their segmentation policy (if this can be identified);(b) describe their trading policy (product positioning and marketing mix variables).
(Source: Baking Today October 1984).
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 16.8.
9) SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
The importance of The increasing importance of market segmentation market segmentation as a marketing tool can in part be explained by: market fragmentation; the development of retailer power (which is based on concentration, and on the relative advantage obtained from centralised bulk buying); the development of volume based markets for commodity-type products (such as plant baked bread).
TABLE 16.8
Summary: Chapter Sixteen
2.
Segmentation Market segmentation means the analysis of a definitions particular total demand in terms of its constituent parts, so that sets of buyers can be determined.
These sets of buyers should possess distinguishing characteristics so that(i) they may be used as marketing targets against which products are positioned to meet segment customer need;(ii) a marketing mix appropriate to a particular segment may be selected.
3.
Segmentation criteria There are two main categories of segmentation criteria.
The first is based on the characteristics of the consumer or user.
The second, called "product segmentation" , focuses on how consumers or buyers perceive, group together and differentiate between available brands, products or services.
4.
Consumer/user Summarised in Table 16.2.
characteristics  5.
Product segmentation This focuses on how consumers or buyers perceive, group together and differentiate between available brands, products or services.
It is used where (i) people seek the benefits that products provide, rather than the products themselves; and (ii) where customers consider the available alternatives from the viewpoint of the usage contexts with which they have experience, or the specific applications they are considering.
The usage requirement dictates the benefit being sought.
Three examples are given, namely: segmentation by benefit; vendor segmentation; contribution targets.
6.
Segmentation This may be carried out on the basis of (i) intuition techniques and product and interpretation; or (ii) use of market research positioning data (suitably re-arranged and interpreted); or (iii) using an analysis of attribute sets.
Attribute sets are combinations of individual reasons for demand.
They are correlated by Factor Analysis and Cluster Analysis.
Cluster analysis may reveal segments with sufficiently large groupings of respondents, or product/benefit requirements with similar attributes.
These clusters are then used as targets against which products should be positioned.
The product range and promotional mix should emphasise products or usage attributes required/sought by the people making up the segment.
7.
Validity of market The four standard tests of segment validation are segmentation Identification, Measurability, Accessibility, Viability.
17 Consumer Targeting and the Acorn System
INTRODUCTION
There are a number of methods by which knowledge about a market segment can be built up.
Some of these methods have been described in previous chapters, which dealt with market research, sales forecasting, analysis of consumer and buyer behaviour and so on.
Additional market segmentation intelligence can be gained from the technique of consumer targeting.
Consumer targeting has been made possible by developments in demographics and statistics, and Information Technology applications in these areas.
Consumer targeting has been pioneered in the UK by CACI Market Analysis using: * official UK Census of Population statistics; * official Post Office postcodes; * profiles of retail outlets and shopping centres.
Consumer targeting may be based on ACORN ( "A Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods" ).
ACORN is a classification system which divides blocks of 150 addresses throughout Great Britain into 38 different types of residential neighbourhood, according to their demographic, housing and socioeconomic characteristics.
This chapter describes the ACORN system in some detail, and examines some of its specific applications to market segmentation and consumer targeting.
These applications include customer profiling, the analysis of retail catchment areas, sales forecasting and retail branch siting.
This chapter has been prepared and written with the help of CACI Market Analysis.
The author wishes to acknowledge the assistance given by that company.
1) Marketing intelligence and consumer targeting 2) Demographic data and consumer targeting 3) ACORN described  4) Market research 5) Customer profiles 6) Area analysis 7) Retail catchment areas 8) Market forecast modelling 9) Retail branch customer profiling 10) Retail branch siting 11) Shopping centre planning 12) Leafleting 13) Summary Questions for self-review Examination Questions Chapter Appendix One: Shopping Centre Planner
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Previous chapters have dealt at length with market research, sales and market forecasting, consumer behaviour and market segmentation.
These chapters made extensive reference to how marketing intelligence (or knowledge) could be built up.
Each of these chapters contained at least some description of how the concepts and techniques they described could be put to practical use to build up market knowledge.
Companies need to analyse, segment, research and forecast the likely patterns and behaviour of the markets into which they wish to trade.
They need to do this for a number of reasons, which include: * identifying the characteristics and attributes of customers and market segments; * developing and positioning products and services which are appropriate to customer needs and purchasing patterns; * maximising sales penetration potential through distribution and retail channels; * focusing the most cost-effective promotional activity (advertising, exhibitions, sponsorship etc) as accurately as possible on target market segments.
1) MARKETING INTELLIGENCE AND CONSUMER TARGETING
The process by which detailed analysis is carried out, and accurate knowledge or intelligence of the market is built-up is a crucial one in marketing.
Without such market intelligence a company cannot remain sensitive to its market.
Market  intelligence is fundamental to market-orientated company operations and planning.
Each of the previous chapters on market research, sales and market forecasting, consumer behaviour and market segmentation have included practical illustrations of how the principles outlined in these chapters can contribute to the build-up of market intelligence.
This chapter concentrates on consumer targeting.
Techniques of consumer targeting are an important additional input to market analysis, segmentation and planning.
Such techniques may be used to assist and augment the processes of market segmentation, research and forecasting.
They have been made possible in consumer markets by developments (i) in the study of demographics and statistics; and (ii) in Information Technology applications.
These techniques of consumer targeting are now so widely applied that a separate chapter must be devoted to them.
Nevertheless, it is worth repeating that their essential role is to assist and augment the processes of market analysis, research, segmentation and forecasting.
The use of demographic data for consumer targeting was pioneered in the UK by CACI Market Analysis PLC, a leading marketing analyst.
The raw material for consumer targeting includes: a) Official UK Census of Population statistics, which may be sorted, permutated and aggregated according to the analysis requirements.
b) Official Post Office "postcodes" : all UK addresses have a postcode which was originally designated to permit automated sorting of mail.
CACI have built-up a geographically based postcode database which permits the analyst to match postal addresses to census demography.
This identifies the demographic features of geographic areas as identified by customer addresses.
Using customer addresses to define target markets is basic to the approach and method used in customer targeting.
c) profiles of retail outlets, which categorise shopping centres in terms of the number, type and size of shops, and identify the branch outlets of every retail multiple company.
2) DEMOGRAPHIC DATA AND CONSUMER TARGETING
Consumer targeting is largely based on ACORN, which is a system that classifies every address in Great Britain into one of thirty-eight types, according to the demographics of its immediate neighbourhood.
This classification makes it possible, for instance, for the analyst to use individual customer lists and market research survey data to identify the types of neighbourhood with the heaviest consumption of a particular product or service.
Such detailed market analysis then makes possible a very accurate targeting of retail and product distribution, product promotion and advertising on specific geographical demographic customer segments.
ACORN stands for "A Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods" .
ACORN is a classification system which divides units of 150 addresses throughout Great Britain into 38 different types of residential neighbourhood, according to their demographic, housing and socio-economic characteristics.
The system is based on the Census of Population in Great Britain, and Post Office address postcodes.
Its categories are shown in Table 17.1.
3) ACORN DESCRIBED
Organisations which have used customer addresses to define ACORN types cover a number of sectors.
Large users include direct mail order suppliers; financial organisations and building societies, which hold addresses for every account holder; gas and electricity companies and TV rental companies which maintain customer accounting information; multiple retailers who operate their own credit cards; travel companies; motor appliance and furniture manufacturers who retain addresses for warranty or guarantee Purposes; manufacturers who obtain addresses from special on-pack promotion or coupon drops; even charities and political parties.
For insurance companies, building societies, credit operators and direct mail houses, ACORN is used to identify the types of customer it is most profitable to serve.
They are able to identify from their own records those types who are the loyal customers — where average order value is highest, where bad debt is lowest, and where responsiveness to mailshots is highest.
TABLE 17.1 ACORN CLASSIFICATIONS
Sometimes, an ACORN type may score well on one of the criteria, but badly on others.
For instance, high status retirement areas (type 37) are usually of poor or average order value, but good on loyalty; modem council estates (type 16) are good on mailing responsiveness, but bad on debt.Since age distribution and family life-cycle stage both play a very important part in determining the ACORN codes, it is possible to distinguish pre-family areas (of relatively high disposable income and low commitments), young family areas (with a high level of mortgage, hire purchase and overdraft debt), post-family areas (with high levels of saving, low use of credit and high incomes), and retirement areas (with low income, but significant investment income).
Once an advertiser knows the ACORN types he wants to aim at, he has a number of options.
This is because research information, which gives the media types preferred by different ACORN types, is widely available.
For instance, although Daily Telegraph and Guardian readers are not dissimilar in social class, the Telegraph scores very much higher in the established high-status suburbs and high-status retirement areas; while the Guardian leads in high-status, non-family areas in inner cities and especially in inner London.
National market research organisations such as the British Market Research Bureau and JICNARS (Joint Industry Committee for National Readership Surveys), which are dealt with in a later chapter, code their surveys by ACORN to enable the advertiser to identify titles whose profiles best match his own, and to see what share of this target market that title reaches.
The marketing companies for local radio and local press also supply information showing the ACORN composition of the areas served by these media.
Another medium that can be used selectively is direct marketing, a fact which has been vigorously promoted by the Post Office.
(Direct marketing is dealt with in more detail in a later chapter.)
For instance, a number of building societies have  used ACORN to promote premium savings services only to those account holders who live in particularly affluent neighbourhoods; an electricity board promotes electric central heating only to those of its consumers living in agricultural ACORN types (beyond the reach of gas).
Some manufacturers have taken advantage of the willingness of leaflet contractors to deliver coupons to selected ACORN types only.
Another important capability enables the advertiser to mail each address in any town, or indeed Great Britain, falling into the appropriate ACORN categories.
This has proved a particularly useful option for retailers who wish to use direct marketing within relatively restricted catchment areas.
Other retail multiples use targeted mailshots to support new branches that they are opening.
While ACORN's most obvious application is in market analysis, advertising and direct marketing, CACI argues that it is equally relevant to the sales manager for setting equitable targets for different sales territories.
All too easily, he or she forms subjective opinions about the relative sales potential of different territories, but lacks an objective framework for setting sales quotas.
Now, by analysing a sample of customer addresses by ACORN he or she can set sales targets for each ACORN type; and by allowing for the population in each type in each sales territory, he or she can set quotas which relate directly to the potential for business in each area.
Another important application area is site location, using an ACORN profile of each shopping centre to minimise the risk of opening an unprofitable shop.
Many retailers also use ACORN to evaluate the product ranges that should be stocked at different stores.
Conversely, information about local consumer preferences can be used by manufacturers' sales forces in selling to a retail outlet those lines which its local customer profile is most likely to purchase.
(Channels of distribution are dealt with in detail in a later chapter.)
ACORN can be used for market research purposes in survey analysis and sampling.
Market surveys which contain respondents' addresses and postcodes can be related to the appropriate ACORN categories.
Then each respondent's ACORN category becomes a variable against which his or her responses can be cross-tabulated, for instance for market  segmentation purposes.
It can also be used to establish the propensity of different ACORN categories to buy different products or services, or to use them at particular rates; and to analyse their exposure and reaction to different forms of promotional and advertising media.
For instance: * ACORN analyses are available for some of the major U.K. consumer panels.
The use of consumer panels is described in other chapters: * The National Readership Survey, administered by JICNARS (defined above), provides extensive information on the exposure of different ACORN categories to published and broadcast media.
The issue of advertising effectiveness is dealt with in a later chapter.
4) MARKET RESEARCH
ACORN classifies areas on the basis of a number of attributes which can be used to construct stratified quota samples.
These attributes include direct strata indicators such as social class, housing type and neighbourhood, and indirect indicators such as region, parliamentary constituency and media area.
The design and use of samples was discussed in an earlier chapter.
Samples may be specified on the basis of postcode sectors, census enumeration districts or electoral wards and constituencies.
The results may then be cross-referenced back to the ACORN codes that are supplied with the sample, for aggregation and analysis.
Many U.K. companies maintain large customer databases.
The addresses held therein may already have postcodes, and there are specialist agencies that will add postcodes to addresses by computer where customer records are incomplete.
From the postcode of any address, CACI can categorise the customer record by its ACORN type.
5) CUSTOMER PROFILES
By taking a sample profile of its customers, the company can then discover which of its ACORN categories are its most valuable in terms of sales.
It can use its customer records to indicate what people in the different categories buy, how much they spend per capita, how they pay and whether they are repeat customers.
Using this kind of information, promotional messages and direct mailshots can be more selectively targeted on those categories which are the company's best and most consistent customers.
Area analysis can be used to provide a company with information about the different types of people living in a particular area.
The area defined might be: * a catchment area around a particular retail store; * sales territories; * official media coverage areas.
6) AREA ANALYSIS
Area analysis would then provide details of: * population according to Census statistics and population updates; * population by ACORN category; * statistics for the number of people who work in that area (which may be significantly larger than the resident population).
Once the company has defined its target market segment by ACORN type(s), area analysis will help find those locations in which these types are most concentrated, or most easily accessible.
The company may then target its efforts on these preferred locations.
CACI give the example of Haywards Heath, in West Sussex.
Over 40% of the population in this area are classified as category J, which is a high status, high income group.
This compares with the average of 16% in the U.K. as a whole.
Companies wishing to sell up-market financial services, cars, consumer goods (etc) would concentrate their efforts on such areas.
CACI have divided Great Britain into a series of retail catchment areas, based on a shopping centre with a Crown post office.
For each of these zones it can provide: * population statistics; * population by ACORN category; * consumer expenditure potential; * details of retail competition; * a postcode index for matching to a postcoded customer file.
RETAIL CATCHMENT AREAS
By using this information, retail companies may (i) site branch stores, and (ii) allocate their product mix according to the kinds of customer type to be found in these catchment areas.
In so doing, retailers can find answers to such questions as:
Do enough people shop in Hanley to support a "Next" shop?
how many bicycles should my Chester store be capable of selling in a year?
In which towns in the Tyne Tees TV region does my company have the most/fewest customers per 1000 population?
Effective consumer target marketing depends in part on finding or forecasting the areas of highest sales potential for any particular product.
Such a forecast of sales potential may be a crucial input into sales, production and budgetary planning.
If a company can ascertain the ACORN categories which make up its target market segments, this can be matched up with the distribution of ACORN types living in any area.
The relationship between these two factors can be an indication of sales potential.
This indication can then be compared with a national base of 100 to indicate whether a particular area is better or worse than average for finding buyers or owners of any product which is already specifically measured in existing national market research surveys.
8) MARKET FORECAST MODELLING
For instance, a national fuel distributor or utility might wish to identify the location of homes with electric or oil-fired central heating on a town-by-town basis outside the domestic gas supply network.
Once combined with the relevant ACORN types, the distributor may be in a position: * to set sales targets for regional and local sales management; * to identify towns in which to establish local retail branches or service depots; * to identify appropriate regional and local media for targeting promotional messages; * to select the postal sectors in which to aim a leaflet drop using the U.K. Post Office Household Delivery Service.
Retail companies may want to know the answers to the following kinds of questions: * How far do its customers travel to a specific store or"branch? * What is the direction from which they travel? * In what type of area do they live? * That are their lifestyles and purchasing habits? * How much of a town or area remains untapped by a shop located in it?
9) RETAIL BRANCH CUSTOMER PROFILING
CACI's BRANCHPLAN can assist in answering these questions by analysing addresses held by the branch.
The basis of the analysis is the customer's postcode, which may be held on existing computerised customer records.
Branchplan then indicates which ACORN types contain people most likely to use the store; which contain people who will travel long distances to do their shopping; and how quickly customer traffic falls off as distance from the outlet increases.
For instance, Figure 17.2 shows that most shoppers at one particular supermarket live within 1.5 kilometres of the store.
This information is relevant to plans for local advertising, leaflet distribution, and for determining the potential for opening another branch to be sited a few kilometres away.
Similarly, Branchplan can be used to generate a plot of customer distribution around a particular store location.
Figure 17.3 shows clearly the failure of the store (marked X) to draw from the north-west of the city in which it is situated.
From this analysis the company should be able to evaluate the untapped potential to the north-west, and forecast the viability of opening another outlet on that side of the city centre.
There are over one thousand shopping centres in Great Britain.
How can a retailer decide which of these offer the most profitable opportunities for new branch location?
How can a manufacturer pick the most cost effective retail company to use to target his wares most successfully on his chosen market segments?
10) RETAIL BRANCH SITING
The risk of opening a new shop in the wrong location may be significantly reduced by a knowledge of: * the population and ACORN profile of the location's catchment area; * the size and number of existing retail competitors in the location; * the "normal" level of retail competition in shopping centres of a similar type.
This information is available from the ACORN programs, and from specific retail census statistics, and market surveys.
These can be combined in a modelling program which compares and forecasts branch performance in groups of shopping centres, each with similar characteristics.
The objective is to assist retailers to: decide where to open new branches; relocate unsatisfactory existing branches; determine the level of service to be offered at any particular branch.
See Chapter Appendix One.
11) SHOPPING CENTRE PLANNING
The role of promotion within marketing is dealt with in a later chapter.
One simple but often effective form of promotion is that of the door to door distribution of leaflets.
Delivery schedules can be obtained that match the required ACORN customer targets.
This can take one of two forms in the U.K.
12) LEAFLETING
a) Post Office Household Delivery Service: postal sectors with high concentrations of the target ACORN category can be identified.
The Post Office will then restrict delivery of leaflets to these specific target locations.
b) Leafleting contractors: CACI can map any town or part of Great Britain and identify the location of target ACORN neighbourhoods.
The client's leafleting contractors can use these maps to isolate those sections of the town or country for selective distribution.
Alternatively, for distribution which requires very precise targeting, CACI lists the streets that fall within the specific ACORN neighbourhoods.
The contents of this chapter are summarised in Table 17.4
13) SUMMARY
SECTION MAIN POINTS 1.
Marketing intelligence There are a number of ways in which knowledge and consumer about market, or "market intelligence" , can be targeting built up.
These include market research, market segmentation, sales forecasting, analysis of consumer or buyer behaviour.
Chapter seventeen concentrates on consumer targeting as a source of market intelligence.
Consumer targeting has been made increasingly effective by developments in demographics and statistics, and Information Technology applications.
Whatever its source, however, market intelligence is fundamental to market-orientated company operations and planning.
Summary: Chapter Seventeen
2.
Demographic data and Consumer targeting makes use of (i) official consumer targeting UK Census of Population statistics;(ii) official Post Office postcodes;(iii) profiles of retail outlets, which categorise shopping centres in terms of number, type and size of shop, branch outlets etc.  3.
ACORN described ACORN stands for "A Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods" .
ACORN is a classification system which divides units of 150 addresses throughout Great Britain into 38 different types of residential neighbourhood, according to their demographic, housing and socio-economic characteristics.
4.
ACORN applications Consumer targeting intelligence may be built up using the ACORN system to carry out (4) market research;(5) the construction of customer profiles;(6) area analysis;(7) analysis of retail catchment areas;(8) market forecast modelling;(9) retail branch customer profiles;(10) retail branch siting;(11) shopping centre planning;(12) leafleting.
1) What is Market Segmentation, and why is it an important marketing tool?
QUESTIONS FOR SELF-REVIEW
2) Compare and contrast Consumer and Product based segmentation criteria.
3) "Highly specialised companies are highly risky companies" .
Comment on this statement.
4) "Mass producers do not need Market Segmentation policies, only a large salesforce" .
Comment on this statement.
5) Comment on the role of customer targeting within the process by which a company builds up its marketing intelligence.
6) What is ACORN?
Explain and comment on the principles upon which it is based.
7) Why is ACORN of great value to retail companies?
8) Why is ACORN of great value to companies making use of direct marketing?(also see later chapter).
9) Why is ACORN of great value to media buyers and suppliers?(also see later chapter).
Q28 (a) What is the purpose of dividing a market into segments?
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
(b) Describe the likely ways in which:(i) a manufacturer of diesel engines and (ii) a manufacturer of breakfast cereals might segment their markets.
Q29 Examine the main dimensions or bases which a marketing manager might use to segment his market.
Q30 How useful is social class as a variable for segmenting consumer markets?
Q31 What do you understand by "Product Positioning" ?
Select a product as an example and show how positioning can be used in the marketing of that product.
Q32 What is the relationship between market segmentation, market targeting and product positioning?
Q33 "Market segmentation and product differentiation are really two sides of the same coin and businesses seek to match products to market segments." 
How true do you think this is of bank marketing?
Illustrate by means of examples from your own bank.
CACI's Shopping Centre Planner identifies 230 areas of retail activity in Great Britain, varying from major city centres down to small local shopping parades.
CACI have derived catchment areas for these centres using gravity modelling techniques and drive-time analysis.
CHAPTER APPENDIX ONE
Shopping Centre Planner
CACI are able to provide simple summary reports on standard catchment areas around each centre, giving local statistics on population, housing and other key demographic indicators.
CACI are also able to build more advanced studies looking at the specific market sectors that a client may be interested in.
Typically this will involve detailed catchment area research, and competition analysis.
CACI have identified 2380 areas of concentrated retail activity and have thus created a comprehensive picture of retailing in Great Britain.
Each of these centres can be analysed according to its size, both in retail composition and in area covered on the ground.
Shopping Centre Definition
CACI used computer techniques to build up shopping centre analyses from raw data which covered a representative sample of all retail activity.
The sample included information on the locations of supermarkets, banks and selected outlets which take Access credit cards (about 140,000 outlets in all).
The centres are segmented into two categories based on the scores developed for each area.
There are 1446 main shopping areas covering all well known centres down to the level of small local centres.
CACI also identified a further 934 centres of low but significant retail concentration.
The planner is concerned with shopping centres rather than out-of-town retailing so that stand-alone stores or retail parks with few stores are not represented.
These retail areas can be built into the Planner in advanced projects.
CACI have used a gravity model in order to build up catchment areas around each defined shopping centre.
This model looks at each postal sector in Great Britain and answers  the question "where do people go shopping?" .
Clearly people use a number of centres, of different sizes.
Some centres may be visited every week, some only once a year.
Some visits may only be for convenience shopping and some for comparison.
To address this problem CACI's gravity model looks at all the centres around each sector.
Each centre will have a particular attractiveness and will be within a particular drive-time (eg 15 minutes) from the sector.
On the basis of this information proportions of population are allocated to each centre giving a realistic model of how people shop.
Catchment Area definition
For simple use of a Shopping Centre Planner CACI have developed a standard calibration of the model described above.
This standard Planner is designed to give a general purpose catchment for each centre and is not designed for a specific retail sector.
The calibration is based on CACI's long experience in the field of catchment area study across all retail sectors, and is therefore best viewed as relating to the catchment area of the centre as a whole.
Advanced Shopping Centre Planner Applications CACI have also developed the Shopping Centre Planner with a view to undertaking advanced analysis projects.
These advanced studies build into the planning model information which is specifically relevant to a chosen retail market sector.
There are two primary areas where the planner can be modified to fit more exactly with a particular market.
Firstly, CACI can build on to the shopping centres additional information relating to those outlets in a particular retail sector — this might be in terms of floorspace allocations, number of outlets or other attractiveness measures.
Secondly, CACI can specifically assess the catchment areas faced by any particular centre or retailer by analysing survey data, credit card data or other sources of customer information.
It is also possible to add in new centres in order to look at the impact of potential new developments, including "What-if" analysis based around the attractiveness of the new centre.
THE MARKETING MIX
18 The Marketing Mix
INTRODUCTION
This chapter defines and describes the Marketing Mix.
It then places this concept within the wider context of the marketing management process, and describes the role of the Marketing Mix in achieving the company's marketing objectives.
The chapter acts as the introduction to the next (and largest) section of this manual, in which the four constituent elements of the Marketing Mix (the "Four P's" ) are described in detail.
1) The Marketing Mix defined.
2) The Marketing Mix in context.
3) The Marketing Mix.
4) The Four P's. 5) Interdependence within each category.
6) Interdependence between each category.
7) Managing the Marketing Mix.
8) Summary.
CHAPTER CONTENTS
The Marketing Mix can be defined as the combination of detailed strategies; tactics; operational policies, programmes, techniques and activities, to which resources may be allocated such that the company's marketing objectives are achieved.
1) THE MARKETING MIX DEFINED
Up to this point, this book has: * introduced the marketing concept and defined the role of marketing management; * looked at how a company can research and identify its target markets and market segments; analysed consumer and buyer behaviour within these target markets; * examined the methods by which a company can construct some kind of demand forecast.
2) THE MARKETING MIX IN CONTEXT
These concepts, activities and techniques will yield market intelligence and marketing information.
This information will be used as a vital input to the corporate strategic planning and strategic marketing planning processes, from which will come the company's basic marketing objectives.
The Marketing Mix is concerned with the realities and practicalities of how these marketing objectives may be turned into specific marketing plans and activities.
The role of the marketing mix is to move objectives and plans into the reality of implementation and achievement.
As a result, the marketing mix must have: Strategic elements (for instance, the company must decide what kinds of products or services it wishes to produce, given the choices it has made about the target markets it wants to satisfy.
Such decisions will; inevitably, preclude other markets and products, given the limitation on resources available to it.)
Planning elements (for instance, what time-scales should be applied to new product development activities?)
Tactical elements (for instance, to what extent should the company allow discounts to volume buyers, and how widely should its pricing policy be publicised within the trade?)
Operational and implementation elements (for instance, should marketing management expect to be involved in the formulation of detailed advertising copy being undertaken by the company's advertising agency?)
Resource commitment (for instance, upon what basis should advertising and sales promotion budgets be constructed: or over what time scale should new products be expected to pay-back the Research and Development costs incurred in their development?)
The importance and complexity of the Marketing Mix, therefore, explain why it is such a major subject in the theory and practice of marketing.
A detailed study of the Marketing Mix comprises a substantial proportion of the total content of this manual.
The Marketing Mix was defined in Section 1 above as the combination of detailed strategies; tactics; operational policies, programmes, techniques and activities, to which resources may be allocated such that the company's marketing objectives are achieved.
3) THE MARKETING MIX
This complex of elements and activities should be managed such that it ensures that the right product is available at the right price in the right place at the appropriate time to satisfy the needs of target customers in the chosen market segments.
This management process will also require the creation of customer awareness about the product, its price and availability.
It may also involve some degree of persuasion that the customer should consider purchasing the product, or should actually make the purchase.
The need for appropriate promotion of the product or service is, therefore, also an important part of the Marketing Mix.
The Marketing Mix may effectively be described and analysed on the basis of the Four P's.
These are: PRODUCT PRICE PLACE PROMOTION
(4) THE FOUR P's
This is the order in which they are analysed in this manual.
Each comprises a major section with chapters listed as follows: Ch. 19 The Product Life Cycle.
Ch. 20 Product planning and development.
Ch. 21 Brand and product management.
a) PRODUCT
Ch. 22 Pricing determinants.
Ch. 23 Prices and costs.
Ch. 24 Pricing policy.
b) PRICING
Ch. 25 Channels of distribution.
Ch. 26 Physical distribution management and customer service.
Ch. 27 Direct marketing.
Ch. 28 International marketing.
Ch. 29 International — marketing strategies.
c) PLACE
Ch. 30 The promotional mix.
Ch. 31 Advertising media.
Ch. 32 Advertising effectiveness.
Ch. 33 Advertising expenditure.
Ch. 34 Sales promotion techniques.
Ch. 35 Personal selling.
Ch. 36 Salesforce management I. Ch. 37 Salesforce management II.
d) PROMOTION
The various elements or component activities which make up each of the four Marketing Mix categories are interdependent.
For instance, the larger the sales force, the less the need for heavy advertising expenditure.
Similarly, a product which is marketed under a prestigious brand name may enjoy a much longer market life than basically similar products which lack a strong brand image.
In consequence, product planning, and research and development activities may concentrate resources on the product and the brand, so further strengthening its position relative to the competition.
5) INTERDEPENDENCE WITHIN EACH CATEGORY
The four Marketing Mix categories are themselves significantly interdependent.
A number of examples can be used to illustrate this interdependence, for instance: * The size of the salesforce (Promotion) depends on the distribution channel (Place) to be used.
The more intensive is to be the distribution, the larger will be the salesforce.
Alternatively, the more the company wishes to rely on wholesalers, agents or trade distributors, the smaller will be the salesforce but the more important becomes advertising to the final customer group; * brand image (Product) must be reinforced by the pricing policy (Price) applied to the brand.
Customers will expect to pay more for a reputable brand, but they will also expect the price charged to be consistent with their perceptions of the product; * the amount and style of advertising and sales promotion (Promotion) will influence the consumer's perception of the product, which in turn must influence on-going company product and brand development activities (Product).
6) INTERDEPENDENCE BETWEEN EACH CATEGORY
The effective management of the Marketing Mix must take this interdependence into account.
Alterations to one element of the Marketing Mix can have repercussions within each category, or elsewhere within the Marketing Mix.
Marketing Management must therefore take care to ensure that the alteration, which in itself appears to be sensible, does not adversely affect other significant components of the mix.
For instance, an ill-judged price reduction may have an opposite effect to that desired.
The price reduction, for instance carried -out "on-pack" , may have the effect of damaging the brand's market image and positioning.
Or it may give rise to a level of customer price-sensitivity which was hitherto absent in the target market segment.
7) MANAGING THE MARKETING MIX
Conversely, a problem in one sector of the Marketing Mix may be solved by an adjustment in another.
For instance, a product may carry a price which cannot easily be reduced or discounted, for instance because of the need to cover heavy Research and Development costs.
This price might initially appear uncompetitive, but may be justified in the market place by additions to the features associated with the product such that consumers perceive the product to be effectively differentiated from the alternatives available.
As long as the price and the product differentiation are perceived in a consistent or positive light, then the extra price will be viable.
The skill of the marketing manager therefore lies in understanding how the four categories of the Marketing Mix interact, and in being able to combine them in the most cost-effective manner such that the company's marketing objectives are satisfactorily achieved.