

PREFACE
The usefulness of an aircraft is dependent upon the pilot at the controls.
A pilot who must restrict his flying to perfect weather and clear skies will find his aircraft tied to the ground for most of the year, but if he has the ability to control his aircraft accurately whatever the weather, and is qualified to fly confidently from airport to airport under instrument flying conditions, only the very worst weather, fog, ice or severe thunderstorms will restrict his plans.
He will be able to make full use of his machine, either flying commercially or privately, for business or pleasure.
This textbook is designed as a training and reference manual for all pilots intending to fly accurately and safely under instrument flying conditions.
It covers: The basic and advanced techniques required for instrument flight.
The techniques required for making full use of the radio and navigation aids available.
The techniques required for let-down and approach procedures, arrivals and departures in instrument flying conditions.
The techniques required for flight on airways.
When you have learnt these techniques, your reward will be the sheer delight of being able to set up any performance, no matter how heavy the workload; with the minimum of trial and error, whilst simultaneously maintaining accurate navigation and approach procedures.
Techniques do not "date" or become obsolete; you should retain this manual for reference and refresher study as well as using it for your initial training.
Finally, when you have mastered the techniques you will be competent to demonstrate to an examiner your ability to control your performance and conform to the requirements of the IMC rating and the full IR.
The manual is divided into three sections: Introduces you to instrument flying, the requirements and techniques involved, including the effects and control of disorientation.
SECTION ONE INSTRUMENT FLYING
Provides the information you will need for flying in IFR conditions and suggests aids to mental calculations.
SECTION TWO NAVIGATION & APPROACHES IN IFR CONDITIONS
Explains the details of navigation aids and associated procedures, ADF, VOR, ILS, VDF etc, along with pre-flight and in-flight planning techniques for each aid.
SECTION THREE NAVIGATION AIDS & APPROACH PROCEDURES
SECTION ONE
INTRODUCTION TO INSTRUMENT FLYING
There is no basic difference in technique between visual and instrument flight.
The basic combination of attitude and power produces a specific performance.
For instance, flying visually at the normal cruite; you set cruise power, hold your attitude for level flight and the aircraft will fly at the normal cruise.
To vary the performance and change the airspeed, or climb and descend, you change your power and attitude in each case.
The procedure is exactly the same when you fly on instruments; but without the external visual references.
However, there is a greater possibility of the pilot becoming confused about the attitude or motion of the aircraft because of his own false sensations.
This is called Disorientation.
It is discussed in depth further on in this section and should be studied.
The important thing to remember is to have implicit faith in the instrument indications, ignoring any contrary physical sensations.
In general the instruments are extremely reliable and failure is very rare.
However, it is vitally necessary to cross-check your instruments one against the other and to include the Navigation instruments in the essential cross-check of the Flight instruments.
For this purpose the flight instruments can be divided into two groups: Control and Performance.
The Control instruments are: 1.
Attitude Indicator (Artificial Horizon) 2.
Balance Indicator (The ball in the tube on the Turn Indicator) 3.
Power Gauge (RPM, Manifold Pressure)
The Performance instruments are: 1.
Airspeed Indicator 2.
Altimeter 3.
Vertical Speed Indicator 4.
Magnetic Compass, Direction Indicator, Remote Compass System 5.
Turn Indicator
The artificial horizon is the only instrument giving direct indication in pitch and roll
INDICATIONS OF ATTITUDE
Direct Indication
Pitch attitude ASI, Altimeter, VSI Roll and Yaw attitude Turn and balance, Compass
Indirect Indication
It is vitally important that both groups, control and performance, are used to support one another by means of the cross-check technique.
The cross check of the navigation instrument is included according to which navigation or approach facilities are being used.
The navigation instruments include: 1.
Automatic Direction Finder ADF 2.
VHF Omni Range VOR 3.
Instrument Let-down System ILS 4.
Distance Measuring Equipment DME
This is the cross check technique now most widely used.
The Artificial Horizon is regarded as the master instrument and you scan radially out from this to each of the performance instruments, returning to the Horizon in between each performance instrument check.
A continuous scan of all instruments is not possible, nor is it necessary.
You select those instruments which give you the most relevant information at the time.
PERFORMANCE CONTROL & CROSS-CHECK TECHNIQUE
The Selective Radial Scan
For example, flying level on a heading, if you are checking height, there is no need to refer to airspeed.
If your heading is being held with wings level on the Horizon, there is no need to refer to balance.
Thus you would select Horizon, Altimeter Vertical Speed and Heading Indicator.
When carrying out any actions which interfere with the scan, then such actions can be interrupted every few seconds to scan the Horizon.
The normal scan must be resumed as quickly as possible.
The most important aspect of scanning is that you must have a clear picture of what you expect to see on each instrument.
It is very easy to misread the indications, or misinterpret them.
Minimise this possibility by defining to yourself what you should see if your performance is correct.
As we have already mentioned, it makes no difference whether you are flying visually in relation to the natural horizon, or, solely by reference to the Artifical Horizon and Performance Instruments; the control of your performance is exactly the same, a combination of performance and power.
CONTROL OF PERFORMANCE AND SCAN TECHNIQUE
In normal visual flight, the accuracy of your performance will be improved if the Artificial Horizon is brought into the routine scan technique.
The descriptions which follow will tell you how to achieve and maintain certain performances by appropriate scan technique.
Selective means that you select those instruments which will give the maximum information for a certain performance, or during a change of performance.
In other words, you do not have to look at every instrument continuously.
A continuous scan of all instruments is not possible, nor is it necessary.
Selection is made of those instruments which give the most relevant information at the time.
The Scan Technique — called The Selective Radial Scan
Radial means that the Artificial Horizon (AH) is regarded as the master instrument and scans are made out from this radially to each of the performance instruments, returning to the Horizon in between each performance instrument check.
Scan is another word for "cross check" .
Having set up a certain attitude and a certain power, you must check, by scanning your flight instruments, that the desired performance is being achieved, and also that it is being maintained.
For instance, flying level on a heading, if you are checking height there is no need to refer to the airspeed.
If your heading is being held with the wings level on the horizon, there is no need to refer to balance.
Since any desired performance is achieved by a combination of attitude and power, it is necessary to know what effect certain attitude and power changes will have on the performance of the aircraft.
SETTING UP A DESIRED PERFORMANCE
The effects will be broadly similar in all aircraft belonging to the same group.
In the light aircraft group the following effects are correct (to rounded off figures), and will enable one to establish reasonably correct attitude and power for any performance.
Clearly there is a constant relationship between Attitude, Power, Airspeed, Climb and Descent in the proportions of .
For the full IR you will be required to hold a constant height of .
In addition to the techniques which are described in detail later, it is useful to memorise these few simple rules.
Allow 10% of the rate of increase of height, but increase this allowance to 20% when levelling from descent.
Levelling from climb or descent
Climbing at 600 ft/min to level at 4000 ft, lower the nose to the level attitudes at 3940 ft, just 60 ft before reaching the desired 4000 ft.
Example:
Descending at 600 ft/min, start to level at 20% of your rate of descent 120 ft before reaching your desired height.
Lead by ½ the bank angle.
Turning onto headings
Important — always make sure that you are correctly trimmed
Control of your performance is achieved by the combination of attitude and power, and it is essential that you should know just what the attitude and power is — in various configurations — for every performance you might need to set up in the aircraft you normally fly.
ATTITUDE FLIGHT
For example, during an instrument let-down you will have to maintain a rate of descent on your final approach which may be any figure up to 1000 ft/min.
If you do not know the pitch/attitude/power requirements there will be no time to experiment, especially in turbulence, and this will probably result in failure to make visual contact with the airfield.
The technique that we have introduced for light aircraft groups will enable you to set up a reasonably accurate performance on most types in those groups, requiring the minimum of adjustment on individual aircraft.
No longer will you raise or lower the nose "a bit" , or put on a "bit of bank" .
Pitch and roll attitudes will be changed a precise amount.
With the very poor Artificial Horizon presentation in average aircraft, the pitch attitude will be expressed in terms of the Horizon Bar thickness, or width as it is sometimes called, each attitude being the relationship of the top of the aircraft symbols wings on top of the Horizon Bar.
See Figs 1 & 2.
Thus an attitude of "one bar up" means the pitch attitude will be raised so that the aircraft symbol is above the Horizon Bar one thickness of the thickness of the wings.
That is the Top of the wings are above the Top of the bar an amount equal to the thickness of the wings.
As an example, take height correction.
You will aim, by the correct scan technique to hold you height within 100 ft.
A correction should not exceed 200 ft/min.
This correction will be achieved with a pitch attitude change of half a bar on the Artificial Horizon.
At low speed, power must also be used and the power associated with half a bar attitude change would be 200 rpm or 1–2 ins MP.
The pitch attitude indicated in Figure 1 is the basic datums — top of wings and nose of the aircraft symbol aligned with the top of the Horizon Bar — to which all other pitch attitudes are related, up or down, in terms of thickness of the aircraft symbol's wings.
Returning to pitch attitudes, these will normally be expressed in terms of wing bar thicknesses above or below the datums.
The datums to which any pitch attitude is related is the level flight cruise datums, the wings of the aircraft symbol covering the Horizon Bar.
But, in carrying out the scan technique, you will need to define each attitude to yourself in rather more detail.
Attitude flight — artificial horizon
For example, say one bar up is your attitude.
Can you recognise this attitude when scanning?
If you were to define it in your mind as — "bottom of wings on top of bar" — you would be more likely to recognise that the actual attitude was, or was not, accurate.
Never scan the attitude and say "I think that's right" .
It will almost certainly be wrong.
Only by defining it in some such manner as suggested will you be able to recognise that it is, or is not, correct.
For every performance you set up, there is an associated attitude and power.
In instrument flight procedures you must be able to produce any desired performance by knowing the attitude/power requirement.
As we have said, if your let-down procedure calls for a final descent rate of 800 ft/min, there is no time for trial and error.
In the light aircraft groups, there is a similarity of performance.
Changing attitude and power a certain amount will, on average, produce a somewhat similar result.
To help you in getting to know attitude/power relationships, we have introduced the following procedure:
An attitude change of one half-bar produces: 1.
An airspeed change of approximately 10 mph/kts. 2.
A vertical change of approximately 200 ft/min.
The associated power change would be 200 rpm or 1–2 ins mp.
These are average changes within the normal speed operating range, but, using this method, you will have a reasonable guide to setting up a certain performance.
Height corrections, for example: Aiming to hold your height within 100 ft the correction to gain or lose this amount would be a half-bar attitude change.
The associated power change would be 200 rpm or 2 ins MP.
When we ask the average PPL what they would do to set up a descent whilst maintaining their present speed, they reply — after some thought — is invariably, "I'll reduce power, but I shall not have to change the attitude." 
Remember that there is always an associated power/attitude.
In general, you can't change one without changing the other.
As an approximation, using the suggested procedure, you can say that each 100 ft/min descent is produced by a power reduction of 100 rpm.
So, if you want a descent of 600 ft/min you will reduce power by 600 rpm.
The associated attitude change for 200 rpm is half a bar.
Therefore, for 600 rpm, the attitude change would be 3 half-bars, that is a change of one and a half bars down from the existing attitude.
Similarly, an airspeed change of 10 mph/kts would require an attitude change of half a bar and an associated power change of 200 rpm.
So, if you want to reduce your airspeed from 120 mph/kts to 100 mph/kts, you will reduce your power by 400 rpm and gradually raise the nose of the aircraft to achieve an attitude change of 1 bar up.
This attitude/power association will enable you to have some idea for each performance, but you must get to know the exact requirements of the aircraft you normally fly.
You must also understand the functions and inherent errors in the control and performance instruments and understand how to check their accuracy at recognised stages.
These are: 1.
Artificial Horizon 2.
Heading Indicator (Directional Gyro) 3.
Turn and Slip Indicator
GYRO-OPERATED FLIGHT INSTRUMENTS
These instruments are operated by suction from engine-driven pumps, or by electric power derived from the generator and inverter for both DC and Ac.
If there is a power failure, an alternative source may be provided.
Make sure that you are familiar with the systems in the aircraft you are going to fly.
Some types allow full freedom in pitch and roll, but older instruments are limited to 60° pitch and 90° roll.
Attitudes in excess of this will cause the gyro to topple, and it will require several minutes to re-erect.
ARTIFICIAL HORIZON
Other small inherent errors are: An increasing speed will cause an apparent nose-up attitude ie, the bar will move down a small amount.
Acceleration Error —
A decreasing speed will cause an apparent nose-down attitude.
Deceleration error —
After a turn there could be a slight nose-up indication, and bank opposite to turn.
Turning Error —
For practical purposes these errors can be ignored, provided that the performance instruments are checked.
If this is simply a directional gyro it must be synchronised with the magnetic compass at frequent intervals.
Attitudes in excess of 80° in pitch and roll may cause the gyro to topple and some minutes will be required for it to re-erect. bearing friction and other causes, as well as the rotation of the Earth will make the gyro wander.
The amount should not exceed 4° in 15 minutes.
Heading Indicator
There are no restricting pitch and roll limits.
hence, it might be the only instrument available giving direct turn indication.
The Rate 1 indication is calibrated for one speed only, usually normal cruise.
Turn and Slip Indicator
Air speed indicator — altimeter — vertical speed indicator
PRESSURE OPERATED INSTRUMENTS
These instruments operate by pressure lines from the Pitot head and static pressure sources.
Uses direct air (impact) to an expanding/contracting diaphragm surrounded by static air.
ASI: Airtight case.
Uses static air pressure and aneroid to measure changing pressure.
ALTIMETER: Airtight case.
Uses static air lines connected via a calibrated leak to an expanding/contracting diaphragm.
The calibrated leak needs 10 seconds to equalise the diaphragm and surrounding pressures.
Small, smooth attitude changes will keep this time to the minimum.
VSI: Airtight case.
Have cockpit master switch and Pitot heat switch ON for prescribed time before checking that Pitot and static sources are in fact being heated.
PRESSURE INSTRUMENT CHECKS
External:
Pitot head cover removed.
Installation secure.
Drain holes and pressure holes all clear of ice or obstructions.
Internal ASI: Glass unbroken.
Needle on zero.
ALTIMETER: Glass unbroken.
Set QFE.
Indicated height should be <+-; >50ft.
Set QNH.
Indicated height should be airfield height <+-; > 50ft.
Altimeters 1 & 2 check within 50ft of each other.
VSI: Glass unbroken.
Needle on zero.
If not, note indication and apply to airborne indications.
NOTE Blocked static lines or vents will cause faulty indications of the pressure instruments.
if there is a second source of static pressure use it if you suspect a blocked static line/vent.
For example, if VSI not indicating.
(It will show 0 if no static).
The Compass System is set up on a pivot enclosed in a liquid filled (kerosene) chamber.
The liquid helps to support the weight of the compass card, and also dampens oscillation.
MAGNETIC COMPASS
There are certain errors inherent with a Compass System mounted in an aircraft.
Is the amount of degrees the Compass needle is deflected from Magnetic North by influences in the aircraft, such as metals and the operation of electrical equipment.
Adjustable compensating magnets are fitted and these are used to take out the effect of deviation when the compass is checked ( "swung" ).
However, very small deviations of a degree or two usually remain, and the deviation on various headings is recorded on a small card mounted close to the Compass.
DEVIATION —
The main errors occur during turns due chiefly to the effect of "magnetic dip" .
Turning from or onto northerly headings the compass will give an indication of a turn in the opposite direction.
NORTHERLY TURNING ERROR —
It means that the compass shows less than the actual amount of turn.
Therefore turns should be stopped a certain amount before the actual heading — Undershoot your heading.
The reverse happens when flying southerly headings and the compass will show more than the actual amount of the turn, so carry on past your actual heading.
The compass card will swing back when attitude is stabilised after the turn — Overshoot your heading.
SOUTHERLY TURNING ERROR —
To avoid northerly and southerly turning errors use the stop-watch and turn the required time at rate 1.
The compass card will be deflected from horizontal during changes of speed on Easterly and Westerly headings.
ACCELERATION AND DECELERATION ERROR —
When Accelerating the compass will indicate an apparent turn to the North.
When Decelerating the compass will indicate an apparent turn to the South.
Therefore the compass should be ignored when changing speed.
Pre-flight checks: Mounting secure.
Glass unbroken.
Float chamber Check fully filled.
Taxying: Compass card moving freely.
Check with known heading.
IAS, RAS & TAS The Airspeed Indicator shows Indicated Airspeed (IAS).
This has to be corrected for Position Error (Static Pressure effected by movement of the aircraft in relation to the position of the Pitot head and static vents).
This error can be ascertained from the aircraft manual.
Correction for this error provides Rectified Airspeed (RAS) on which further calculations are based.
AIRSPEED INDICATOR —
The Airspeed Indicator is calibrated according to assumed conditions of the International Standard Atmosphere (ISA)
And so, when these conditions are different then the IAS/RAS will not be the true airspeed (TAS).
The Airspeed Indicator will under read by approximately 1.75% of the RAS for every 1,000 feet of height.
1.
The Artificial Horizon is given maximum attention 2.
Scan radially out from the AH to each performance instrument, returning to the AH each time before proceeding to the next instrument.
3.
Select those instruments which will give maximum information for each performance.
APPLICATION OF THE SELECTIVE RADIAL SCAN TO SETTING UP EACH PERFORMANCE
Selective Radial Scan-General
Remember that the clock, stop-watch, navigation instruments, engine gauges, etc, must be included for continuous or occasional scan.
The diagrams which follow show the instruments which are selected and used for the desired performance.
1.
The Altimeter will be used to indicate that the pitch attitude is correct.
2.
Aim to hold your altitude within <+-; > 100 ft. 3.
Unless turbulence is severe, use the Vertical Speed Indicator to help maintain correct pitch attitude.
This instrument will normally indicate an upward or downward trend before the Altimeter reacts. 4.
If altitude is changed then make a correction at a rate not exceeding twice the amount of height to be changed.
For example, if 100 ft or less has to be gained, then the rate of change should not exceed 200 ft/min. 5.
This correction of 200 ft/min is achieved by raising or lowering the pitch attitude a maximum of a half-bar. 6.
If at normal cruise speed, there should be no need to adjust power for the above correction.
But if at lower speeds, always use power.
The amount required would be 200 rpm or 2 ins MP.
Height Corrections — Scan diagram 1
Scan diagram 1 1.
Aim to hold the heading within 5° if possible.
2.
If using a Direction Indicator, make sure that it is synchronised with the Magnetic Compass.
Remember that the gyro is prone to errors, so check with the Magnetic Compass at frequent intervals.
But, when you do check, make certain that you have maintained straight and level flight just previously, and that you continue to do so if re-setting the DI.
Check pitch and roll attitude whilst re-setting.
3.
If a heading correction is necessary up to 5°, then just use slight rudder pressure or 5° bank.
If over 5°, use bank, but less than Rate 1 angle for small heading changes.
4.
After a correction, check roll attitude and balance.
HEADING CORRECTIONS —
Scan diagram 2 1.
Apply climb power and raise the pitch attitude to the required position.
2.
Be ready with rudder to maintain heading.
3.
Adjust power as necessary as speed reaches the required figure.
4.
Check balance.
5.
Hold the required attitude, and when the speed has stabilised, adjust if necessary by a quarter of a bar; a half bar maximum at any one time.
6.
When correct speed is stabilised note and hold attitude.
7.
Trim to fly hands off.
ENTERING A CLIMB — FOR SAME OR HIGHER SPEED —
The ASI will be the main support instrument.
The Altimeter brought into the scan when the altitude nears the desired figure — Scan diagram 3
Scan diagram 4 1.
Allow a lead of 10% of the rate-of-climb. 2.
Then start to lower the pitch attitude by maximum stages of a half bar.
3.
Apply coarse nose down trim with each attitude change and as the speed increases.
4.
Be ready with the rudder to maintain heading.
5.
The level flight attitude will be achieved as the Altimeter comes onto the required height, and speed onto the required figure.
6.
Reduce the power to the required rpm just before speed is as required.
7.
Hold the required pitch and roll attitude and check balance and heading.
8.
Having held the required pitch attitude long enough — say 10–15 seconds — for the performance instruments to stabilise, then check the height.
If necessary adjust the pitch attitude a maximum of a quarter to a half bar at any one time.
9.
When height stabilised, trim to fly hands off.
LEVELLING FROM A CLIMB TO A HIGHER SPEED —
Note: If you lower the pitch attitude too rapidly — before the speed has time to increase — then you will lose height since the lower speeds do not produce enough lift to maintain height with the wings at the lower angle of attack in the normal cruise level flight attitude.
Scan diagram 5 1.
If at a higher speed then reduce to the required figure before commencing descent.
2.
Reduce power to the required rpm or Manifold Pressure.
3.
At the same time lower the attitude to amount associated with the power change.
4.
With the reduction of power be ready with the rudder to maintain heading.
5.
Be ready with nose-up change of trim.
6.
When the performance has stabilised, trim for hands-off.
ENTERING A DESCENT —
The ASI is the main pitch-support instrument.
The Altimeter must be scanned continuously.
SAME SPEED — Scan diagram 6 1.
Start to level off by increasing power at a height above that required.
This lead will be approximately 10–20% of the rate of descent.
2.
As power is increased, adjust the attitude to that required for level flight.
3.
Be ready with rudder to check heading.
4.
Check balance.
5.
When the performance has stabilised, trim for hands-off.
LEVELLING FROM A DESCENT —
The Altimeter is the main pitch-support instrument.
Scan diagram 7 1.
Ease on bank to the required angle on the bank index on the AH.
2.
Check nose-dot on AH for correct pitch attitude.
3.
Use the VSI for small pitch adjustments.
4.
Check balance.
5.
When turning onto a heading start to ease off bank before heading is reached.
The amount of lead will be approximately half the bank angle.
6.
Check balance and hold heading.
LEVEL TURNS —
The Altimeter will be the main pitch-support instrument.
Scan diagram 8 1.
Ease on bank to the required angle on the bank index on the AH.
2.
Check nose-dot for pitch indication and be ready if necessary with slightly lower attitude to maintain speed.
3.
Check balance.
4.
Start to ease off bank before heading is reached, the amount of lead being approximately half the bank angle.
5.
Check balance and hold heading.
CLIMBING TURNS —
The ASI will be the main support instrument.
Scan diagram 9 1.
Ease on bank to the required angle on the bank index on the AH.
2.
Check the nose-dot for correct pitch indication.
3.
Check balance.
4.
Start to ease off bank before heading is reached, the amount of lead being approximately half the bank angle.
5.
Check balance and hold heading.
DESCENDING TURNS —
The ASI will be the main support instrument.
The term "Limited Panel" is usually taken to mean that the Artificial Horizon and Heading Indicator are out of action.
INSTRUMENT FLYING — LIMITED PANEL
Such malfunction will instantly become apparent and recognised in the context of a regular scan technique.
There will be no direct indication of pitch and roll.
Headings will be flown using the Magnetic Compass (MC).
Without direction indication of attitude in Pitch and Roll, control displacements must be kept to a minimum at any one time.
This means a number of small corrections to achieve a performance change in terms of either Pitch or Roll attitudes.
This calls for very small control displacements, centralising almost immediately.
The Turn and Bank Indicator will be scanned continuously, with the Vertical Speed Indicator and Magnetic Compass.
The Airspeed Indicator and Altimeter will be scanned as required.
The Altimeter will be the main pitch-support instrument in level flight.
The Airspeed Indicator being the main pitch-support instrument in climb or descent.
Turns onto headings will be made at the standard rate, but using the stop-watch, not magnetic compass.
These are called timed turns.
Scan diagrams 10,11,12 & 13 1.
Calculate the number of degrees to be turned.
2.
Divide this number of degrees by 3 to get the number of seconds of turn.
3.
As bank is applied, start the stop-watch. 4.
Turn at rate 1.
5.
Ease off the bank to stop the turn when the stop-watch shows the required number of seconds of turn.
6.
Check balance and straight flight.
7.
Check heading when compass has stabilised.
8.
Make small corrections to achieve heading as necessary.
TIMED TURNS — RATE 1 —
The term "Unusual Attitudes" is taken to mean that the aircraft has adopted an attitude which could result in either a stall, spin or spiral dive.
Recovery must be instigated at once.
RECOVERY FROM UNUSUAL ATTITUDES
The recovery technique from either the low or high pitch case is in the same order: 1 — Power.
2 — Bank.
3 — Pitch.
1.
Nose high, speed low: Apply full power Nose low, speed high: Reduce power — close throttle 2.
Next, Check Bank.
Get the aircraft roughly in balance and use the ailerons to centralise the turn needle.
3.
With the needle centred, Check Pitch.
Use the elevator to return to level flight; be ready to check your attitude the moment the A/S "changes direction" .
For instance, if the airspeed is too high and begins to reduce, this is your indication to start levelling.
Level flight is achieved when the Altimeter stops its movement.
Stabilise a desired performance, and bring the aircraft back to the required Altitude/Flight Level.
You will need to extend normal flight monitoring when flying under I/F conditions.
IFR FLIGHT CHECKS
The checklists which follow are essential to the safe and accurate conduct of flight in these conditions.
They should be learnt and practised until the procedures become second nature.
There will be additional checks, peculiar to the individual aircraft flow and you will need to incorporate these into the standard checks.
Instrument flight means the possibility of flying in all weather conditions.
Before undertaking any such flight make sure that your aircraft is properly equipped with de-icing equipment.
Check that this equipment is operating satisfactorily before you leave the ground.
ICING CHECKS AND ACTION IN ICING CONDITIONS
1.
All flight surfaces, fuselage, cleared of frost, ice or snow.
Use a prescribed cleaner.
Such clearance must be complete and uniform, or stability problems could arise.
2.
Pay particular attention to clearing ice from: Control Hinges, Pressure and Static Vents, Drain Holes, Aerials, Undercarriage and Bay, Cockpit and Cabin Screens, Wipers, Propellers. 3.
Check Pitot heat.
Have heater switched on in cockpit for a prescribed period.
4.
Check that de-icing equipment — Boots, Fluid, Heat etc — is operating.
GROUND CHECKS
Keep a continuous look-out for ice formation.
have a torch available.
IN-FLIGHT CHECKS
You should have some idea from the forecast of a possibility of icing.
Have de-icing equipment switched on beforehand if you have to enter an area of known icing.
Carburettor icing is somewhat different as it can occur in very hot weather conditions.
CARBURETTOR ICING
The chief cause is high relative humidity, 60% and over, and when outside air (ambient) temperature is between 4°C and 29°C.
When throttling back select carburettor heat before doing so.
If in a protracted descent, warm the engine every 500 ft in cold conditions by applying cruise power for a few seconds.
Use the heat if icing is suspected.
The chief indication would be a drop in rpm or Manifold Pressure.
When icing has already formed give time for the heat to take effect.
Avoid flying in cloud at temperatures below 0248C.
If rime ice is forming, conditions will probably not be severe.
But glaze ice is serious.
Leave the icing region.
ACTION IN ICING AREAS
Fly below the 0°C level.
Leave cloud, or precipitation areas by change of altitude and/or heading.
In clear air, at temperatures less that 0°C, any ice which has formed will be slow to evaporate.
Fly below the 0°C level, if safe to do so.
Airframe icing varies with cloud types.
Greatest risk is associated with Cumulus, Cumulo-nimbus and Nimbo-stratus.
In layer clouds giving precipitation the risk of appreciable icing is reduced because the amount of liquid water in the cloud is reduced.
Disorientation means a situation in which a pilot is confused about the position, attitude or motion of his aircraft because of false bodily sensations.
Mild temporary disorientation is a common experience in flying and does not normally cause trouble for experienced pilots who learn to disregard the erroneous sensations.
However, serious disorientation with loss of control resulting in an accident, can and does occur and all pilots should know about this problem and how to deal with it.
DISORIENTATION IN FLIGHT
On the ground you remain orientated by the balance mechanism in your ears and the muscle, joint and skin receptors throughout your body ( "seat of the pants" sensors).
Above all, your eyes indicate your orientation by sight of things about you.
In the air the effect of accelerations and visual illusions mean that all these sensors can mislead you, and disorientation may result.
The pilot and the  aircraft form an integrated control system and the pilot is the weaker link in this system because of human limitations.
There are two main ways in which the weak link may break down: a) Confusion from conflicting illusory information received in the brain from different sensors, eg your eyes and the balance mechanism of your ears.
b) Failure to obtain the correct information, eg misreading, or more rarely, the fault of an instrument, or neglect of essential information because attention is directed elsewhere.
Should either of these situations occur, wrong control actions may be taken and a potential accident sequence initiated.
Many situations predispose to spatial disorientation — The main ones are: a) Any situation involving a reduction or change in the way essential cues are available to you, eg on transition from visual to instrument flight or attempting to fly visually when what you can see is inadequate as in poor light, haze or high altitude.
b) Immediately after aerobatics, particularly prolonged spinning or rolling manoeuvres.
c) When head movements are made in a turning aircraft and outside visual reference is lost, as in changing R/T frequency.
d) When out of flying practice.
e) Impairment of brain function by oxygen starvation, alcohol, fatigue, emotional disturbance or medication.
Amount the commonest types of disorientation are: a) This often occurs during straight and level flight.
The aircraft having banked gently without you sensing it, owing to lack of attention, the banked attitude may be wrongly perceived as straight and level.
Correction of bank to level position, as indicated by the instruments will now give a feeling of bank in the opposite direction.
This experience, common to many pilots is known as "The Leans" ! b) This can occur because the resultant forces acting on an aircraft, to which the body balance mechanism responds, does not coincide with the true gravity vertical.
A false sensation of attitude will arise if the pilot interprets the resultant acceleration as his true vertical reference: this can occur for instance in forward acceleration, on take-off or a missed approach.
The opposite will occur with deceleration giving a resultant feeling of "pitch down" .
The same misinterpretation of the gravity vertical is possible in a co-ordinated turn.
These forces and effects are most apparent in high performance aircraft.
The danger of inadvertent "correction" by the pilot in response to these illusions cannot be overstressed.
c) If the aircraft is deliberately turned, the balance mechanism in the ears senses the turn and this information is passed to the brain.
If a constant  rate of turn is now maintained, the sensation of turning lessens and may disappear altogether.
If the pilot then rolls out of the turn to fly straight and level he may feel that he is now turning in the opposite direction, and compensatory eye movements which involuntarily accompany such a feeling may blur vision and make attitude checking difficult, with possible disorientation and loss of aircraft control.
d) If while the aircraft is turning in one direction the pilot moves his head in another, perhaps to select a switch or alter a setting, the stimulation of the balance mechanism of the ears, in the two planes of rotation at the same time, can produce a spontaneous stimulation of the balance mechanism in a third plane of rotation, with completely confusing messages being then sent to the brain.
Severe disorientation may follow.
e) Sudden changes of pressure in the ears when clearing them, either on ascent or descent, can produce in susceptible pilots a strong feeling of disorientation, usually lasting only a few seconds.
While present it can be most alarming and has been known to cause severe impairment of flying performance.
False sense of attitude.
Misinterpretation of the gravity vertical.
False sensation of turning.
Coriolis stimulation.
Pressure vertigo.
To summarise so far: a) False sensations or sensory illusions may occur at any time in a pilot's career and in fact commonly do occur in the normal course of events.
b) These illusions are most likely when trying to fly visually without adequate external cues, and loss of aircraft control may result.
c) The impression created by these illusions on a pilot may be powerful.
Determined and persistent concentration on the aircraft instruments is often required to overcome the feeling of disorientation.
d) Except when flying in good visual conditions (when the eyes can easily verify your position, attitude and motion, with respect to the surface of the Earth) bodily sensations are usually unreliable, whereas failure of flight instruments is much less likely to have occurred.
To prevent disorientation: a) Make sure that you feel fit to fly.
Anxiety, alcohol, drugs, fatigue, even missed meals can predispose to disorientation.
b) Maintain as high a standard of instrument flying as you can, and be thoroughly familiar with each type of aircraft and associated flight procedures you fly so that mental conflict is less likely to occur.
c) Be on your guard against the possibility of disorientation and try to avoid situations which are likely to produce difficulties.
What to do if disorientation does occur: Since temporary mild disorientation is something that all pilots must learn to live with, the majority are probably not consciously aware of having to do anything.
However, if troublesome or severe disorientation does occur then: a) Get on instruments.
Scan and check your instruments systematically.
Believe absolutely in the accuracy of their information (they cannot all be wrong) and try and disregard conflicting body sensations. b) Stay on instruments until unambiguous visual cues become available.
c) Avoid rapid head movements until instrument orientation is established.
d) If severe disorientation persists, discontinue possible aggravating procedures, hand over to co-pilot/instructor or summon a companion aircraft.
If flying solo, abort the sortie, inform ground control of your problem and request SRA and other available aids.
PROBLEMS IN INSTRUMENT FLYING DUE TO ERRORS OF PRESSURE-DEPENDENT FLIGHT INSTRUMENTS
1.
Pilots may not fully appreciate the nature of manoeuvre-induced errors (frequently called instrument lag) that may effect pressure-dependent flight instruments during manoeuvres which result in a change of angle of attack.
2.
These transient errors are additional to the errors normally present in instrument systems eg mechanical lag (hysteresis), position error, density error, and compressibility error which affect Altimeters, Airspeed Indicators and Vertical Speed Indicators.
Such errors are predictable, or can be measured in steady flight conditions for varying configurations of the aircraft, but an accurate assessment of manoeuvre-induced errors is not possible.
3.
The effect of manoeuvres on pressure-dependent flight instruments is to produce significant errors, together with delays in instrument response.
Manoeuvre-induced errors are due primarily to the following: a) Short term fluctuations of local pressure at the static vents during any changes of aircraft attitude (the pressure fluctuations are due largely to variations in the airflow over the static vents, as the angle of attack varies).
b) Delays in transmission of pressure change to the instruments, due to viscous and acoustic effect in the pipelines connecting instruments to the aircraft's static vents.
These fluctuations and delays may be further complicated by airflow variations at the static vents induced by changes of aircraft configuration eg during the operations of flaps or landing gear.
4.
The magnitude of manoeuvre-induced instrument errors is dependent upon the rate-of-change of aircraft attitude during the manoeuvres producing the error ie rate-of-change of pitch, roll or yaw, and rate-of-change of height and airspeed.
The errors are likely to be more significant during changes of pitch attitude than during manoeuvres involving roll or yaw, since in normal flight configurations the latter manoeuvres tend to be smaller in amplitude and duration than is the case with pitch changes.
5.
The errors are likely to be most significant during the initiation of climb or descent, or on levelling out following a change in pitch attitude.
They are therefore of particular importance during a missed approach and when flying in turbulence.
Errors will also be experienced during rotation immediately prior to take-off, but these are allowed for during calibration of flight instruments and static vents, during the pre-certification flight trials of an aircraft.
6.
Because of the variable nature of the factors contributing to manoeuvre-induced instrument errors, it is not possible to give positive guidance as to the magnitude — or even sense — of the errors likely to be encountered during a given manoeuvre.
However, estimations of the rate of climb based on either the Vertical Speed Indicator, or the Altimeter should be used with caution as these instruments are susceptible to manoeuvre errors; Airspeed Indicators are also affected, and none of these instruments should be used for the assessment of instantaneous values, or rates of change, during a manoeuvre.
The transient errors induced by a manoeuvre can cause pressure-dependent instruments to misread for up to three seconds at low altitude and up to ten seconds at altitudes of the order of 30,000 feet after movement of the control surfaces has effectively ceased.
The times are somewhat longer for Vertical Speed Indicators.
It is important to appreciate that a stable instrument reading does not necessarily indicate a stable flight condition.
The problem is not confined to pressure-dependent instruments coupled directly to Static Vents; systems employing an Air Data Computer or Servo Altimeter, will also be affected, since their basic inputs are derived from the aircraft's static and pitot pressure sources.
7.
During any in-flight manoeuvre involving change of aircraft attitude — and also during any change in the aerodynamic configuration of the aircraft — absolute reliance should not be placed on instantaneous reading, or indicated rates-of-change or pressure dependent instruments.
This applies particularly to the Vertical Speed Indicator (and also the so-called Instantaneous Vertical Speed Indicator as it at present exists).
Pilots are advised to carry out in-flight manoeuvres by reference first to gyroscopic flight instruments such as the Artificial Horizon and Turn and Slip Indicator.
The gyroscopes associated with Artifical Horizons are subject to errors both in turns and during fore-and-aft acceleration, but for all practical purposes may be considered to be unaffected by the normal manoeuvres experienced in airline operations.
The pressure dependent instruments should of course be scanned, but they should not be relied upon to give accurate indication of instantaneous values or rates of change except during stable flight.
Under no circumstances should frequent elevator movements be made with the object of maintaining a constant indicated airspeed, height or rate-of-climb, as this technique may lead to severe low frequency oscillation in pitch.
Altimeters and Vertical Speed Indicators will behave similarly under these conditions, and therefore comparison between the two instruments will be of no value.
Only reference to the Artifical Horizon can be relied upon to indicate when steady flight has been achieved.
SECTION TWO
NAVIGATION & APPROACHES IN IFR CONDITIONS
Flights carried out in Instrument Meterological Conditions and under Instrument Flight Rules are governed by local, national and international regulations.
All flights in these conditions must conform with published procedures and traffic patterns.
There is a comprehensive system of navigation and approach assistance available for air traffic operating within control areas and in instrument flying conditions that enable pilots to comply with these regulations.
It is necessary to both study and understand the facilities available, and to be familiar with the calculations and preparations involved so that once a pilot can maintain a performance in IFR conditions within the prescribed limits and under stress — he must also be in a position to make full use of the facilities available to comply with the traffic patterns and procedures required.
Before studying the procedures described further on, it will be helpful to be familiar with a few facts and suggestions for making personal "rules of thumb" and simplified tables as aids to mental calculations.
Heading groundspeed and timing calculations Estimation of drift
Maximum drift occurs with a wind angle of 90°.
But, for all practical purposes you can say that a wind angle of 60° produces maximum drift.
Actually it is  of maximum.
To estimate drift, just assess your wind angle.
Take this angle as a proportion of 60, and then use the same proportion of the maximum drift.
This is simply a question of knowing the wind angle to your heading.
(Remember that after allowing for drift, the wind angle will be changed and a slight adjustment may be necessary in assessing the new wind angle).
Estimation of G/S timing
The following are proportions of the total wind on the nose or tail with each 10° wind angle.
Diameter of rate 1 turns in distance and time
This information is useful if you want to plot wind effect etc, on holding and let-down patterns.
For practical purposes the diameter of the Rate 1 can be considered as being 0.1nm for each 10 kt of speed.
It is important to know this time diameter when joining a hold, for example from No 3 sector on the non-pattern side of a holding track.
Basically you overfly the holding fix (usually a VOR or NDB) by the radius of your turn, say 19 seconds.
But since your overhead is usually positively established only when you have gone through your holding rack, the 19 seconds is rounded off to 15.
Drawing the pattern to scale, and the effect of the wind on turns will help with the flying.
Let down patterns and wind effect
The let-down charts in Aerad and Jeppesen flight guides are usually based on an airspeed of 150 kts.
When different tracks are used for the out and in-bound legs, the difference in degrees between the two is based on the formula , being in time (mins) out.
In the pattern as shown in fig 20, the outbound distance is 5 nm.
At 150 kts this is 2 minutes.
36 divided by 2 equals 18 which is the difference between 032° and 230° (050°).
On the procedure turn tracks, drift must be allowed for in the normal way.
Also timing on the outbound leg must be increased or decreased if there is a head or tailwind component by one second for each knot.
Another variant, the 30° turn, is known as the "Tear-drop" .
It is used for entry into a holding pattern from sector 2 and also in approach patterns.
Finally the 80° or 90° turn.
Very little to recommend it as it involves turning through 360°.
Drift is allowed for by holding a 90° heading away from, or towards the track, depending on wind directions.
the 90° to track heading is held for 2 seconds for each degree of drift on the track.
Time allowance for head and tail wind effect on patterns such as procedure turns and holds
Timing
On such patterns the still air time of 1 minute is increased or decreased by 1 second for each knot of wind component.
So, if you have a head wind component of 30 kts then timing for a 1 minute leg would be increased by 30 seconds.
Similarly a tail wind component of 30 kts would require the still air time of 1 minute to be reduced by 30 seconds.
This allowance is valid only for speeds 90–120 kts.
Lower speeds could require between 1 and 2 seconds for each knot of wind component.
Note — important Under no circumstances will you use this method for assessing outbound and inbound times on let-down patterns.
On let-down patterns a specific distance is flow outbound and the time adjusted for this distance according to groundspeed.
A holding pattern is simply a delaying procedure, like a train waiting at a signal.
HOLDS
Holding pattern
It is usually flown when ATC so directs, by reason of a traffic problem.
But you, yourself could use a holding pattern, for example to await a possible weather improvement; or as a delaying procedure when, if you continue, you will reach a point in controlled airspace before the time at which you have been cleared.
The position at which you carry out your holding is usually a radio beacon — NDB or VOR — or at the intersection of two position lines.
The pattern itself is shaped like a racetrack, hence the name.
The standard OCAO pattern is to turn right at the holding point and fly the outbound leg for one minute.
Then turn right again to make good the inbound holding track back to the holding point.
Standard pattern
This procedure — turns are Rate 1 — will produce an overall time of 4 minutes.
See fig 26.
Timing for the outbound leg is defined as starting when the aircraft is abeam the holding point, or when the outbound heading is reached, whichever comes later.
However, the outbound timing must be adjusted as necessary to comply with a time at which you may be cleared to leave the holding point.
On the instrument rating test you are required to adjust your outbound time so as to produce and overall time of 4 minutes.
Wind effect must be allowed for at all times.
If you fly the ICAO timing your overall time could exceed 5 minutes, so watch this on the test!
If holding at levels about FL14 then the outbound timing is 1 ½ minutes.
With the standard pattern, outbound timing is defined as commencing abeam the holding point, or on reaching the outbound heading, whichever comes later.
The effect of wind on the diameter of the turns, and on the outbound time, must be allowed for, as well as the normal drift allowance on the tracks.
This will mean adjusting the time outbound, and allowing more than a single drift on the outbound leg.
Fig 27 Holding — wind effect and compensation
The diagram below shows the effect of a 20 kt wind at 45° to the hold.
Drift has been allowed for on the outbound leg in the normal way and 1 minute has been flow outbound.
The result is that the aircraft is about 30° off the inbound holding track, with less than half a minute to run to the holding point.
The compensation for the wind effect on the diameter of the turn is to allow two to three times the single drift on the outbound leg.
Single drift on inbound of course.
Compensation for time is to allow — on a 1 minute hold — one second for each knot of head or tailwind component.
For example, in diagram 27 there is a head wind component of 14 kts on the outbound leg, so the outbound time would be 1 minute 14 seconds.
This is how the previous pattern would appear after allowance is made for wind:
Timing is started over the holding point, so work out the time for the turns as well.
Rate 1 equals 3°per second.
So, divide the number of degrees of turn by three to get the time.
In some cases you will find that three times the drift on the outbound leg is too much, and the outbound heading comes out on the wrong side of the wind.
If this happens, reduce the allowance to twice the drift.
We advise apply two rounded up to 2 ½ times the drift, to avoid over-distortion of the pattern.
In the USA twice the drift is the recommended amount, therefore decide for yourself.
With a large entry angle a large proportion of the 4 minutes is taken up in the first turn overhead.
This means that in the wind conditions as in fig 30, you will have little to no time on the inbound track.
Not a satisfactory state of affairs.
Increase the time on the outbound leg by half the difference between the time taken on the first turn from the entry heading (145° above) and from the hold axis.
The hold axis is 090°, which gives 55° difference.
55° at rate 1 is 18 seconds.
Increase outbound time to 1 min 39 secs.
Similarly if less time is taken on the entry turn (eg sector 3 non-hold side) decrease the outbound time.
The 70° line which divides up the holding area is best remembered as leaning towards the far end of the outbound leg of the pattern.
If possible try to regain the inbound holding rack.
But, if the interception angle is more than 40 or 50° then go straight to the beacon.
With VOR you will have to centre your L/R needle by rotating the OBS scale in order to know your QDM to the beacon.
This entry is a 30° procedure turn.
The outbound leg is adjusted for single drift, and is flown 1 minute <+-; > 1 second for each knot of head or tail wind component.
Note the overfly of the holding track with the large entry angle.
There will be the same amount of overfly after the turn from the outbound leg.
This shows a large angle of entry to the pattern.
In this case overfly the beacon by approximately 15 seconds.
Time adjustment to comply with an expected approach time (eat) or an onward clearance time (oct)
In Fig 36 an example is given of a holding pattern that has been completed in a time of 4 mins 28 secs.
The procedure carried out was standard; that is starting outbound timing when abeam the holding point, or upon reaching the outbound heading — whichever comes later.
As can be seen, the abeam position came later, as would be expected with that wind.
The outbound time of 1 minute was increased by 30 seconds to allow for the 30 kt wind component.
You will have been given a time at which to expect clearance to leave the hold — this could be either EAT or OCT.
Support it is now 10 minutes ahead.
Your next two patterns can be adjusted to 5 minutes each.
Your last pattern was 4 mins 28 secs, so you need an increase on the outbound timing of approximately 15 seconds.
That is, you were half a minute short of 5 minutes on your last pattern so divide that time between your out and inbound legs.
Similarly if the previous pattern was longer than required, reduce the outbound time by half the error.
In general, do not exceed the total time of the still air pattern by more than 1 minute.
You could get outside the protected area of the hold.
Corrections — or interceptions by another name — are usually twice the number of degrees that you are off the desired track.
TRACKING
Corrections to regain a required track
Example: 5° off track — Correct by 10° 10° off track — Correct by 20°
The correction is applied to the desired track.
If the wind tends effectively to lessen the correction, then increase the correction by 10° or 20°, according to the amount of drift.
If you are more than two to three minutes away from a radio facility — on airways for example— and you are 5 to 10 degrees off track, then correct 30° as a minimum.
The smaller correction could take too long.
One advantage of the correction of twice the number of degrees off track, is that it produces the two equal sides of an isosceles triangle.
That is, the time taken to regain track, equals the time from the facility at the point where the track is regained.
In general, as already described, corrections will be twice the number of degrees that the aircraft is off the desired track.
Correction to regain a track
But, when more that 2 to 3 minutes away from the facility, a correction for 5° off track should be made with a minimum angle of 30°.
If you are 5° off track at 12nm from the facility then this 5° represents 1 nm off track.
With a 10° correction you would have to fly 6 nm before regaining track (Fig 38a).
So — in controlled airspace, on airways, for example, use the 30 degree correction for 5° off track.
This angle will reduce the interception distance to approximately one third of the 10° correction (Fig. 38b).
Always increase the interception angle if the wind significantly affects it.
There is no difference when tracking outbound from a facility — use the same procedure.
angle of lead When intercepting a track to or from a radio beacon you must allow for the turn onto track from the intercepting heading.
The allowance, in terms of degrees, is known as the Angle of Lead.
table 4 Intercepting a track —
How much you should allow depends on three factors: 1.
Size of the interception angle 2.
Distance from the station 3.
Effect of wind
So far as distance is concerned, it is much better to use time instead, and you won't have to worry about speed.
The following formulae will give time and distance from a Beacon: Time in minutes Seconds flown between bearings Degrees of bearing change
Radio aids — ADF, VOR, VDF time/distance checks
Distance in nm TAS (or G/S) x minutes flown Degrees of bearing change
You can plot the second position line you crossed as a true bearing on your chart or map, and mark the distance (see fig 39).
Make certain you know how to use them.
Misuse through ignorance can result in your getting lost, flying into controlled airspace, and putting other aircraft at risk.
Use of radio aids
The work load on every flight is variable and can be increased to an extremely high level on contact with unexpected or stressful conditions.
APPROACHES
Pre-flight planning
There is no substitute for comprehensive pre-flight planning to ensure the safe and satisfactory conduct of a flight.
This must always include detailed study and preparation of the let-down procedures at all proposed destinations and alternates.
Make sure that you are familiar with the information given on the approach charts.
(See Figures 42, 43 & 44.)
Study the let-down chart and sketch it until you can remember: Let-down tracks and heights, Missed approach procedures, Relationship of final approach track to runways for your visual circuit.
Decide circle-to-land procedure for all runways, High ground and obstructions, Minimum safety altitude for initial approach.
Planning — General notes
Plan for likely direction of the initial approach to destination and each en-route diversion airfield.
Have all times and minimum rates of descent worked out on a still-air basis first of all.
This will afford a check on your forecast wind planning.
Also, it will enable you to amend your plan more easily in the air when actual conditions may differ.
Don't descend below your en route safety altitude — even though ATC might clear you — unless you have clearly established your position.
If your position is uncertain then tell ATC.
Initial Approach
Altitude
Forecast will be checked en route.
Get actual local conditions as early as possible so as to have time to make any amendments to your plan.
Weather
Get this as early as possible so that ATC can fit you into their traffic.
The minimum requirement is 10 minutes before ETA.
Clearance
Approximately 2 to 3 minutes before ETA carry out approach checks and reduce speed appropriate to type.
Checks
If holding you will already have decided your sector joining procedure.
Arrival overhead the facility
If not holding, then your initial direction of approach might require a  procedure turn to bring you onto the outbound leg heading.
You will have planned for this on the initial approach.
The time specified on a let-down chart such as 1, 2 or 3 minutes, etc, is in fact quite meaningless and dangerous unless associated with a specific distance and speed.
Time on outbound leg
Therefore, convert the time given on the chart to a Distance.
Base this distance on 150 kt.
Most of the charts are drawn at this speed, viz Aerad and Jeppesen.
For example if your speed is 90 kt and the chart says 2 minutes outbound you will plan to fly 5 nm, ie 2 minutes at 150 kt.
The actual time to fly this 5 nm will be based on your outbound groundspeed.
In general, the 2000 ft wind would be used to assess this.
Note: Occasionally the chart will specify a lower airspeed validity than usual,(eg "Procedure valid for 90–105 kit TAS" ) in which case you should base the distance outbound on 100 kt instead of the usual 150 kt.
Having decided the outbound time, check the amount of height you have to lose to the final turn and work out the rate of descent.
Then plan to increase this rate to make sure of reaching the final approach point at the desired height.
Remember, as you cross the facility to start the outbound leg, your descent is not necessarily started immediately.
You will have to get clearance.
So you will have less than your planned time for the descent.
Rate of descent on outbound leg
If the final turn is a descending turn, decide the height at the start of the turn.
Don't get below this height outbound.
If for any reason, your timing is at fault — you might have failed to log time overhead outbound, or your stop-watch hasn't started — Don't continue the descent.
Go around immediately and tell ATC.
The time inbound will be based on your estimated ground speed inbound and on the distance flown outbound.
Final approach — time and descent rate
Decide the rate of descent.
This will be based on the assumption that you are going to descend from the final approach altitude to 0 feet at the field.
In fact you will not descend below your decision height until visual contact is established.
But, many pilots plan on the false assumption that they have the total time inbound in which to reach their DH.
This results in the DH being reached over the field with little hope of seeing anything in marginal conditions.
You should aim to each the DH with the field ahead of you, in approximately one minute.
So, if your final approach altitude is 2,000 ft and your inbound time is 3 minutes, then your minimum descent rate would have to be 700 ft/min.
If the DH is 500 ft, then at 700 ft/min it would be reached in approximately 2 minutes which would give you a reasonable chance of making visual contact.
Remember to increase the planned rate of descent if for any reason the descent is not started on completion of the final turn.
You must know your aircraft well enough to be able immediately to set up the Attitude and Power for the required descent rate.
This will not be the occasion to try and find out.
During the final descent, check the loss of height in half-minute intervals to ensure that the desired descent rate is being maintained.
Adjustment can then be made at an early stage before it is too late.
Like the outbound leg, if you lose timing don't continue the descent.
Go around immediately, tell ATC.
Carry out your let-down on the assumption that you will have to round again.
Thus you will have the missed approach clearly in mind.
Missed approach
With non-precision approach procedures (VDF, ADF, and VOR) the missed approach must be started on expert of the planned approach time, or when over the facility (if this is sited on the field) whichever comes first.
With a precision approach allowing a lower DH, then the missed approach is initiated immediately on reaching the DH if there is no visual contact.
Get the aircraft safely established in the climb and on the correct track.
Then advise ATC.
This could be the most difficult part of the approach.
If visibility is poor a circle-to-land procedure with a higher DH must be adopted (see Figures 45 and 46).
Visual contact and circuit
Plan the procedure for all runways.
Have in mind, when you do break out, how and where the field is likely to appear, having regard to your heading on the final approach track.
Fig 45 Aim to position the aircraft on, or as close as possible to, the outbound track prior to crossing the facility outbound.
Let-downs — procedure to adopt on arrival overhead
Divide the area either side of the outbound track into three 60° sectors.
For convenience they can be numbered 1, 2 and 3.
Above patterns drawn at airspeed 90 kt.
Rate 1 turn diameter at this speed is approximately 0.9nm, which is the length of the main runway in the sketch.
Use this sort of comparison in assisting where your turns will take you, and don't get further away than your original sighting distance.
And don't get below your minimum safe height until you are in sight of and lined up with your runway.
According to your route, let us assume that you select a Flight Level of 50.
If sea level pressure is 1013.2, then this level would represent 5,000ft.
But if the actual pressure is, say, 990 mbs you would be 700 ft lower (one millibar equals 30 ft).
SELECTING A FLIGHT LEVEL
This could put you at risk.
Make certain, therefore, when selecting your flight level, that you take this into account.
Use the pressure forecast for your route.
There is a graph in Air Pilot RAC 2–4 to help you.
1.
Airways are like railways, you fly fixed tracks from one beacon (VOR or NDB) to another.
2.
Each Airway is known by a letter and number — Alpha One, Romeo Two etc.
The exception which is still known by the colour designation is purple.
3.
The Purple Airway is temporarily set up over the route covered by a Royal Flight.
4.
The Radio Beacons are usually the designated points at which routine position reports are made.
Other en route points — Fan markers, Position Line intersections — may be designated as "On Request" reporting points.
5.
Vertical, horizontal and lateral separation of aircraft is afforded by the controlling authorities, London control and Scottish airways.
6.
The Flight levels at which you fly are odd and even.
You will plan for an odd fl if flying an Eastbound track 000°-179°.
Plan for an even fl if flying a Westbound track, 180°-359°. 7.
The lowest usable FL on an airway will give 1500 ft clearance over the highest obstruction on the ground.
8.
You may have to hold anywhere en route.
The standard pattern is used, adjusting the final pattern so as to be at the holding point as near as possible to the onward clearance time.
The holding track is the Airway centre line, turning Right at the holding point.
Exceptions — left hand patterns — are listed in the Air Pilot.
9.
When joining an Airway try to do so on a track as close as possible to 90° to the centre line.
10.
Joining or leaving an Airway will be at a certain point, usually a designated or "on request" reporting point.
11.
Standard Position Reports will be made at all designated points (Black Triangle on charts), or when asked "on request" (White Triangle).
12.
The standard position report is:
Flight on airways — general notes
Failure of radio aids — Tell ATC Without a certain level of equipment you cannot fly in controlled airspace.
If VMC, or when you can get into VMC, land as soon as possible.
Radio/Instrument Failure
Tell ATC of you intentions and accept their instructions.
If VMC, land as soon as possible.
Otherwise adopt the standard procedure given in Air Pilot, and any special procedure that may be required at certain major airports.
Failure of Radio communications
If VMC land as soon as possible.
If IMC follow control instructions with the intent of getting a VMC landing.
Failure of Instruments — Tell ATC
Note Circumstances must influence the course of action to be followed.
But in general, in the event of any major failure of your equipment the obvious answer is to make a landing at an early stage.
Thus at all stages of your flight you will have planned for such contingency and noted the airfield(s) to use.
First check all the electrical system, fuses, circuit breakers, microphone and headset connected.
Radio Failure
If communication cannot be re-established, transmit message twice on designated frequencies, starting with the phrase: "Transmitting Blind" 
If the frequency is changed, then announce the frequency to which you are changing.
If you have a transponder, then operate it on Mode A Code 7600
If you are VMC, then continue and land at the nearest airfield.
Report to ATC as soon as possible.
Basic Procedure
If you are not VMC, then continue in accordance with the flight plan to the holding point at the airfield of the first intended landing.
Maintain your last acknowledged cruising levels.
If these have not yet been given then maintain those in the flight plan.
Adjust your times so that your ETA at the holding point coincides with a time based on your last acknowledged position report, and flight plan for times for each section of the route.
Begin descent over the holding point at the ETA as worked out above.
Or, at the last acknowledged EAT.
Rate of descent to the lowest level of the stack must be at least 500 ft/min.
Strict timing is vital.
Descent may only be started within the ten minutes immediately following ETA or EAT.
If you have received "delay not determined" before failure, and no subsequent Eat do not land at the destination airfield.
If unable to lane within the time allowed, or to approach and land visually, leave at the altitude and route appropriate for that airfield.
Or, fly at the last assigned altitude or minimum sector altitude, whichever is the higher.
Then fly to an area in which VMC can be maintained, and land at a suitable airfield.
Or, select a suitable area in which to descend below cloud and land visually at a suitable airfield.
There are specific procedures to adopt in certain circumstances and at certain airfields — You must study these in Air Pilot or Flight Guides.
Specific procedures
This is an airborne radar unit, a device which responds to a coded radar pulse with a coded return, giving a distinctive "blip" on the air traffic controller's radar screen, allowing identification.
THE TRANSPONDER
The transponder operates in two basic ways, called"modes'.
Mode A is the identification mode, whilst Mode C is the automatic altitude reporting mode.
Each aircraft will be given numerical codes to use by ATC.
For example "1100" might be given, as illustrated above.
Below are several typical ATC phrases used in conjunction with transponder operation.
Operation of the Indent button causes an additional coded pulse to appear on the ground radar screen for about fifteen seconds to assist the radar operator to identify your aircraft.
This should only be operated on the specific request of ATC.
On Standby the transponder unit is on, but does not give a response.
Always "Squawk Standby" when changing codes to avoid accidental display of emergency codes etc.
Full details of transponder operation and use are published under SSr AIP RAC73 and AIC 51180 which should be studied.
SECTION THREE
Radio Aids
VOR — General Description
VOR means Very High Frequency Omni Range.
It operates in the VHF band on frequencies between 108 and 118 MHZ and is therefore not subject to the many errors which plague ADF (Radio Compass) on medium frequencies.
VOR provides navigational guidance — with the help of the left/right pointer (also known as the Course Direction Indicator) along 360° tracks TO the VOR beacon and along 360° tracks from the beacon.
You, yourself, can select any one of these tracks that you wish to fly.
If you do not know your position, the VOR indicator will tell you on which of those 360° tracks TO, or on which of those 360° tracks FROM, the beacon your aircraft is at, at a given moment.
You can use these tracks (or position lines as they are called) for the following purposes:
VHF transmissions are straight "Line of Sight" signals.
That is, they do not follow the curvature of the earth, as do medium frequency waves.
VOR — LIMITATIONS
So, if you are the other side of the horizon, away from the VOR transmitter, you could be below the transmission and not receive any signals.
In such a case, climb to a higher altitude.
As a rough guide, the distance in nautical miles over which signals can be received can be estimated by taking the square root of your altitude and multiplying by one and a quarter.
Obstructions, such as high ground, between you and the transmitter can cause loss of reception.
Try climbing to a higher altitude.
See Air Pilot COM section for designated operation coverage.
In general, accuracy of VOR bearings is between 1° and 2°, but is accepted up to 4°.
If no signal is being received, an OFF flag will appear on the Indicator and the left/right pointer will be centred.
Do not rely implicitly on any information derived from the VOR signals.
Cross-check with other means and particularly, by normal DR navigation.
Remember that Compass, Clock and Stop-watch are still your most important navigation instruments.
When you first tune a station frequency, check the identification twice to make sure you have the right beacon.
Have the morse characteristics written down.
Check the call-sign at frequent intervals.
If a VOR beacon fails, a standby will be brought into operation.
But until the standby comes into action, no identification signal will be transmitted.
So, no indent, no signal.
Voice transmissions are frequently relayed on the VOR frequencies; you should not rely on these transmissions to identify a VOR station, because they are often simultaneously relayed on other VOR's.
The omni-bearing selector has two uses: 1.
To select any specific track to fly.
2.
To find out which position line, to or from the beacon, the aircraft is on at any given moment.
VOR — Use of the OMNI-Bearing Selector
Turning the knob left or right rotates the bearing scale.
To select a track to fly, simply turn the knob until the desired track bearing is against the index on the omni-bearing scale.
It makes no difference whether you want to fly towards the VOR beacon, or away from it.
Simply set the track you want to fly.
To find out which position line you are on, rotate the knob until the left/right needle is in the centre.
The bearing against the index on the omni-bearing scale is then either your QDM or your QDR.
It is your QDM if TO is showing.
It is your QDR if FROM is showing.
Note that the left/right needle will centre in two positions — on a certain bearing, and on the reciprocal of that bearing.
Thus, without the TO/FROM indication, you would not know which side of the beacon you were.
If you want to home to a beacon, find out what your QDM is, by turning the OBS knob until the left/right needle is centred with TO showing.
Then fly that QDM.
Any movement of this needle is related to the bearing set on the OBS.
You, yourself, can move the needle to any position by rotating the OBS scale.
Or, a change in the position of the needle may be caused by the flight path of the aircraft in relation to the bearing on the OBS.
VOR — The Left/Right Needle
Regardless of the aircraft's heading, whenever its position coincides with the bearing set on the OBS, the left/right needle will be centred.
In an area 10° wide either side of the bearing on the OBS, the needle will indicate displacement off that bearing.
When the aircraft is more that 10° off the bearing, the needle will be stationary, full over to the left or right of the OBS dial.
In this position it is said to indicate "Full scale deflection" .
The indications between the centre-line and full scale deflection are marked by the inner circle and 4 dots, each representing 2° up to the full scale deflection of 10° each side of the centreline.
Follow the demand of the needle to "fly left" or to "fly right" in order to bring the needle back into the centre.
When the needle has centred, it indicates that you are on the centre line of the track set on the OBS scale.
1.
Tune and identify station.
If not familiar with morse then have the station characteristics written down.
After setting up the frequency, make sure of positive identification.
2.
Establish present QDM.
Turn the Omni Bearing Selector (OBS) knob until the L/R needle is centred with "To" showing.
The figure on the OBS scale is the QDM. 3.
Turn to fly towards station.
Turn onto the same heading as this QDM.
Since this turn could take the aircraft off the QDM, then re-centre the L/R needle if it is outside the circle.
To centre the needle turn the OBS knob Towards the needle when "TO" is showing.
Note this second QDM and turn onto the same heading.
Now estimate your drift.
4.
Establish drift.
Having turned to allow for drift, check the L/R needle for any movement away from the circle.
If it does move L or R, turn in the same direction a maximum amount — at any one time — of 5°.
USE OF THE VOR FOR HOMING TO A STATION
At this stage, your object is to try to stop any further movement of the needle, NOT to return it to the centre.
Continue these small heading changes of 5° or less, until the needle remains steady.
With the needle steady, you have established the drift.
And as, in this case, we are not concerned with a specific track, there is no requirement to get back onto the original QDM.
We can either leave the L/R needle in it present off-set position, or preferably re-centre it.
In either case, heading will remain unaltered unless thee is any further demand by the L/R needle to change.
5.
Establish Overhead.
The Overhead will be when the "TO/FROM" changes to the opposite indication.
To make good a specific track to and from a station you must find the heading required with a known or unknown wind.
USE OF VOR TO MAINTAIN A TRACK ALREADY INTERCEPTED
1.
Having intercepted the track fly the same heading as the track.
2.
The L/R pointer is in the circle.
3.
Keep the VOR in a continuous scan, checking for needle movement away from the circle.
4.
Plan ahead.
If L/R pointer moves left, wind is from the left.
If the pointer moves right, wind is from the right.
5.
Pointer starts to move L or R. Follow this by turning in the same direction a maximum amount — at any one time — of 5°. 6.
The object of this small heading change is to stop the pointer moving before bringing it back into the circle.
7.
Having made a heading change, check the pointer for movement.
If still moving away, turn another 5° (or less).
8.
Continue these small heading changes until the pointer is steady or moving back towards centre.
9.
With the needle steady, the heading now being flown is that which will take the aircraft direct to the station.
Whether the aircraft is on the required track within the acceptable limits depends on the number of dots deflection of the L/R pointer.
10.
Remember that the edge of the circle and each dot outward represent 2 °,4; °,6; °,8; °, and 10° off centre line.
11.
If the pointer is steady at 1½ dots then the aircraft is on a position line which is 5° less than track (if the pointer is left), or 5° more than track (if pointer is right).
12.
Thus the heading now being held is 5° less, or 5° more than the heading required to hold the centre line (the track).
13.
Regain the centre line by turning 10° towards the needle.
(5° off track x 2).
14.
When the pointer is in the circle, turn onto the heading (which was holding the pointer steady at 1 ½ dots) 5° from blue, 5° from yellow.
15.
If the pointer is moving slowly back, then let it go back to the edge of the circle; then 1 turn towards the movement 2°-5° (according to rate of change) until it is steady.
fig 50 VOR — Time/Distance to station — Using the formula on pages 43 & 44 (Fig 39)
1.
Select a beacon ahead and to one side.
Identify.
2.
Centre the OBS needle with TO showing.
The figure against the index on the OBS scale is your QDM. 3.
The difference between this QDM and your track equals the angle off the nose bearing of the VOR. 4.
Start timing when the OBS needle in centred.
5.
Now select on OBS a QDM ahead of you which is the original QDM plus/minus the original angle off the nose bearing.
In the diagram, the original angle off the nose is 30°, the QDM being 010° (30° off the track of 040°).
The QDM you now select will be 010° minus 30°, which will be 340°.
Had the station been to the right of track, then the second QDM would be the original, PLUS the angle off the nose.
6.
When the OBS needle centres on the second QDM, stop timing and note the interval.
 "TWICE THE ANGLE OFF THE NOSE" METHOD.
Fig 51 The isosceles triangle can also be used when flying towards a beacon, and with no idea of ETA.
But, you must know the wind.
VOR — TIME/DISTANCE FROM STATION
1.
Using OBS, centre the L/R needle with TO showing.
2.
Turn onto this QDM. 3.
If the turn takes the aircraft off the QDM, then re-centre the needle with the OBS, and fly the second QDM. 4.
Now turn 10° right or left and start timing.
Allow for drift on this heading.
5.
Using the OBS, select a QDM 10° off your present one.
This will be 10° LESS than your present QDM if you have turned RIGHT.
Or, it will be 10° MORE if have turned LEFT.
6.
When the L/R needle centres on this new QDM stop timing, noting the interval.
7.
Turn onto the heading to maintain this new QDM. 8.
Your time from the station now equals the time taken to get the 10° change of bearing.
9.
The above procedure involves very little extra time in reaching the station.
Preparation is the same as for all holding procedures, using the inbound track to assess DRIFT and WIND COMPONENT (W/C).
Apply 2 to 2 ½ times the drift and consequent W/C to planning the outbound heading.
THEN 1.
Simply set inbound track on the obs scale (090° fig 52) and intercept.
The To/From Flag will indicate To.
2.
When the O/H indication is received (the To/From flag changes to From) start the stopwatch and start the turn onto the outbound heading.
3.
Complete turn onto outbound heading of hold.
4.
The VOR flag will change from FROM to To at the Abeam position…
(This indication is correct irrespective on the aircraft heading…much simpler than ADF) 5.
Commence inbound turn at the time planned from the Abeam position.
Do not change the OBS setting during the holding procedure.
it is unnecessary and increases the work load.
Turning inbound the VOR indicator needle will roll in from the same side as you.
i.e. fig 52 is a right hand holding pattern…
The needle will come on to the scale from the Left on the indicator.
Points to remember:
Since the radial is 10°wide if your turn is going to finish on the inbound track the L/R needle will come onto the scale at 60° and you simply continue turning and scanning.
If however it has not reached the scale then level your wings and hold a 40° intercept (050° in fig 52) and continue your turn when it is 1 to 2 dots on the scale.
If on the other hand it goes right through the C/L continue your turn and make a 40° intercept the other way (ie onto Hdg 130° in fig 52).
When the needle indicates 1 to 2 dots on the scale Turn back onto the inbound heading.
Do not in practice change the OBS from the inbound track (090° fig 52) at any time in the hold.
VOR holding on a DME fix towards or away from a VOR is flown as a normal VOR hold.
Outbound timing is initiated over the fix and at the abeam position — if the abeam position cannot be determined — timing from abeam must be taken to be when the outbound turn is completed.
If the outbound leg is based on a DME distance, the outbound leg ends at the DME limited distance (fig 53a).
If a limiting radial is also published, the radial is followed until a turn inbound is initiated, at latest where the DME distance is reached (fig 53b).
The importance of pre-flight planning and general notes on let-down procedures are in Section II on pages 47, 48 & 49.
VOR LET-DOWN PATTERNS
These details apply to all types of pilot interpreted approaches.
They are set down again below for ease of reference in relation to the VOR.
1.
Study the chart.
Note the Safety Altitudes and Obstruction Heights and relationships to the runways. 2.
Memorise the tracks and heights and Missed Approach Procedure.
It helps to sketch the pattern until you know it.
3.
Draw circle-to-land procedures for each runway.
4.
Draw Holding Pattern with sectors and bearings.
5.
Note whether Holding Pattern also forms an alternative let-down pattern, and if so, the outbound time/distance.
1.
If no EAT is given, carry out the Standard ICAO Procedure.
2.
If an EAT is given, carry out the Standard Procedure, noting the time on each pattern, and then adjust final patter(s) to desired time.
3.
For example, the Standard Procedure has resulted in a 4 minute 40 seconds pattern.
Your EAT is now 8 minutes ahead.
You want two 4 minute patterns.
Your last hold was 40 seconds more than this.
Reduce the outbound leg by half this "error" .
See fig 36, Page 41.
VOR — HOLDING
1.
If your direction of approach is opposite to the Outbound Leg, carry out a 30° Procedure Turn.
2.
If your direction of approach is over 60° to the outbound track turn the longer way round, with adjustment for wind.
3.
If you are not running directly onto the outbound leg, tell ATC before arrival.
VOR LET DOWN
Overhead (Getting onto outbound leg)
1.
Do not just plan a time plus/minus an allowance for wind.
Plan for a distance at your estimated groundspeed.
So if the chart specifies an outbound time of, say, 2 minutes, this must be converted into a distance and flown at your estimated groundspeed.
See pages 30–33. 2 minutes at 150 kt is 5nm.
So, if your groundspeed is 100 kt, you fly outbound for 3 minutes.
2.
It is absolutely essential for this outbound leg to be flown for this specific distance if you are going to have any hope of reaching your Decision Height on the final approach with the field ahead of you.
3.
Diagram No.80, page 108 calls for an outbound leg of 3 minutes.
Assume your speed is 90 kt, and the W/VO 60 °/25; kt.
Work out your pattern with a 3 minute outbound leg (with allowance for wind) and let us know what your final rate of descent is to Decision Height.
You will then realise why you must plan for a specific distance.
In fact, in most cases, the let down chart does specify a distance outbound. 4.
Work out the minimum rate of descent for this outbound leg.
Then go for a rate somewhat higher to ensure that the required altitude is reached before the turn.
5.
Have some idea as to the effect of wind on this final turn so that, if necessary, corrective action to get onto the final approach track can be initiated out of the turn.
6.
If using QFE, make certain that this is set before starting the final turn.
7.
If you are carrying out a VOR DME, or ILS DME the distances to required positions indicated on the chart will be accurately shown on the DME.
You must still plan your timing to these points at your estimated groundspeed.
Outbound Leg (Intermediate Procedure)
1.
Estimate groundspeed and work out the time to the threshold.
2.
From this time work out the Rate of Descent.
This Rate will be based on the total loss of height from the final turn, or final approach fix, to 0ft at the threshold.
For example, in the Figure 80, the height at the final turn is 2012".
If the inbound time is 3 minutes, then the minimum Rate of Descent will be 700 ft/min.
On this basis you ensure as far as is possible that Decision Height is reached at a point where the field is ahead of you and visual contact established.
Many pilots plan on the basis that they have only to lose height from the final turn to the DH during the total inbound time.
This results in the DH being reached when the aircraft is over the field.
3.
On the planned Rate of Descent, make a note of the height at which you should be at half-minute intervals.
Then, if your actual height does not agree you will be able to adjust.
4.
Decision height (OCL plus 60 ft) must be reached at least half to one minute from the threshold, so that visual contact can be made in conditions permit.
5.
DH is held until visual contact is made or until expert of the inbound time turn to the threshold.
The missed approach procedure must be commenced not later than this time.
6.
On finals, be ready for visual contact of the runways and of what direction they are likely to appear in, relative to your heading, and the relationship of the final approach track to the runways. 7.
If visibility is poor and there is the possibility of losing visual contact with a normal circuit, then carry out the circle-to-land procedure, telling ATC.
FINAL APPROACH
On a VOR let-down, the Missed Approach Procedure is commenced not later than the expert of the final approach time, ie the time from the final turn, or from the final approach fix, to the threshold.
MISSED APPROACH
Get the aircraft safely away from the Missed Approach and then advise control.
Whether or not you have another attempt at the let-down, must be your decision in the light of any guidelines on the first go.
If in doubt, divert.
If there is a possibility of improved weather, then you might decide to hold until this takes place.
Many pilots make use of a VOR station to let down on an aerodrome where there is no published or approved procedure.
Bear in mind that where a procedure is approved, the published instructions include the minimum heights to be flown at successive stages in the approach and a final obstacle clearance limit or minimum descent height recommended.
The calculation of these heights takes into account, amongst other things, the limitations and accuracy of the total VOR system.
WARNING
If you plan a non-approved and non-standard aerodrome approach using a VOR for guidance, it is essential that you take into account the possible inaccuracies of the system (up to +/- 4° is the accepted error in VOR receivers), and make sure that you establish the minimum safe height for the terrain.
A recent accident at Barra involved an aircraft executing a missed approach, following a let down using a VOR for which there was no published approach.
It was destroyed in a collision with a hill at 950 feet.
The minimum safe height for an aircraft approaching Barra, to ensure a 500 foot clearance above the highest ground within 5nm of this beach landing area is 1,760 ft!
Be sure your pre-flight planning is fully comprehensive.
We suggest that you set out the following information in such a way that, in the air, you can select any item immediately, and without confusion.
Let—Down Procedures — Preparation
ADF means automatic direction finding, and for us this means the radio compass.
ADF — GENERAL DESCRIPTION
It operates in the medium frequency band, which is subject to many errors.
You must study Information Circular 56/1984 which lists the main ones.
Although VOR, operating on the VHF band, is relatively free of these errors its reception distance is limited to line of sight.
Medium waves which are used for ADF, follow the curvature of the earth.
In addition a sky wave is reflected back to earth over large distances.
Thus, the reception instance is the advantage of the medium frequency.
ADF transmissions can be used for a variety of purposes such as:
Always try to cross-check bearings by other means, particularly normal Dr navigation.
Remember that the magnetic compass, clock and stop-watch are your most important navigation instruments.
Accuracy of bearings is within 4–5°.
When checking a beacon identification, have the morse characteristics written down.
Check the call-sign twice for positive identification.
Your receiver can go off-tune.
Check the call-sign reception at frequent intervals.
The beacon (or transmitter) is called an NDB — Non-directional beacon.
The main factors affecting the accuracy are: 1.
Thunderstorms cause completely false indications of bearings, including the overhead.
Thus you might well commence a let-down miles away from the NDB, thinking that you had passed overhead.
2.
Night Effect causes serious bearing errors and interference between stations.
3.
Precipitation Static reduces range and accuracy.
4.
High Ground between NDB and the aircraft causes bearing errors, particularly at Low Altitude.
5.
Coastal Refraction alters the bearings, particularly when bearings are at an oblique angle to the coastline.
6.
High Power NDBs can deflect bearings when you are closer to that beacon.
Also accuracy is reduced in areas with NDBs operating on closely spaced frequencies.
ADF — ACCURACY OF BEARINGS
All this adds up to the fact that NDBs are thoroughly unreliable.
Use VOR whenever possible.
But whatever the accuracy of any aid, false indications and failures can and do occur.
You must at all times try to maintain a DR plot of your position.
Magnetic Compass, Clock and Stop-watch are still your main navigation aids.
Study the airline accident reports and you will realise the truth of this.
With all radio aids monitor your selected station call-sign continuously, make certain you have check the morse characteristics, and write them down.
Always get a time check at the start of any flight.
A flight safety report on an accident to a vickers vanguard at base follows; read and digest.
Regardless of the ADF aspect, this accident should never have happened.
Check, check and check again.
Vanguard G-AXOP of Invicta International Airlines operating as Invicta 435' crashed in a heavy snowstorm near Base/ Mulhouse airport on 10 April 1973, killing 104 passengers and 4 crew.
The aircraft departed from Bristol Airport for a non-scheduled flight to Base and there was no evidence that the flight was other than routine until the aircraft reached the Base/Mulhouse terminal area.
It was identified on the surveillance radar when it made its first position report and was cleared to continue to the BN non-directional beacon.
Weather conditions were passed to the crew and included cloudbase (120m) and runway visual range at two points on the runway (700m and 1,300m).
On arrival at the BN beacon, the aircraft was cleared to descend to 2,500ft (the initial altitude for the published ILS descent procedure) and was requested to advice passing the MN beacon which marked the northern end of the racetrack holding pattern.
At 0856:58 the crew reported level at 2,500ft, followed 44 sec later by a position report over the MN beacon.
From the track plot deduced by the accident investigation team from the aircraft's flight-data recorder, the Vanguard appears to have been nearly 5 miles south-west of the MN at the time this position report was made.
The next call from the aircraft was as it crossed the BN having cleared for an ILS approach; the call said that Invicta 435 was turning outbound again and would report again at the MN beacon.
Although the aircraft did turn northwards, the flight-data recorder trace showed that the outbound track was held for only a short while.
In fact, when 435 next reported crossing the BN it was almost overhead the airfield, flying parallel to the ILS localiser.
After one and a half minutes the aircraft began to overshoot, correctly making an initial turn to the west.
It was, however, by now well south of the airport and, after acknowledging an air traffic control instruction to report back at the BN beacon ready for another approach, the Vanguard tracked toward the BS, another beacon which was immediately to the south of the landing runway, 16.
At this point (overhead the BS) the Vanguard, while steering approximately north, called that it was at the MN beacon and was advised to report the BN on final approach.
At 0911:25 Invicta 435 reported overhead the BN and was cleared to land; it was, at this point approximately three miles south of the airfield and approximately one mile west of the extended runway centreline, some two miles further on Base air traffic asked "Are you sure you are over the BN?" to which the Vanguard Captain replied"I think I've got a spurious indication.
We are on the Lo…on the ILS now, Sir".
After another 30 seconds the Vanguard called "BN is established on localiser and glidepath; the ADF's all over the place in this weather" .
The tower replied: "For information I don't see you on my scope radar; I don't see you on my scope radar" .
The last exchange of messages took place only a few seconds later when the tower asked the height of the aircraft; on receiving the reply "1,400 on the QNH" the tower controller observed: "I think you are to the south of the field" .
The instrument approach charge for Base/Mulhouse is reproduced above.
It shows the position of the non-directional beacons referred to in the text.
The TVOR was not installed at the time of the accident.
Impact occurred near Hochwald after the aircraft had apparently began its last attempt at an ILS approach from the BS beacon instead of the BN
The aircraft was seen by a reliable observer as it initiated its first overshoot; within two minutes he had telephoned saying that the aircraft was only 50m above the ground and heading south.
Two minutes later Zurich area control centre asked Base whether they had an aircraft flying outbound towards the Hochwald beacon (ten miles south of the airfield) as they had an unidentified trace.
On this prompting the Base controller also saw a trace which led him to challenge the aircraft's position report at BN.
The magnetic flight-data recorder was recovered intact from the wreckage; a cockpit voice record was not installed or required under UK legislation at the time.
Autopsies on the crew showed no trace of a medical condition that might have affected their performance, nor trace of alcohol or drugs.
Wreckage analysis showed that there was nothing untoward about the airframe or engines, However comments were made about the avionics installation.
It was noted that the localiser deflection sensitivity of the No. 1 VOR was set too high and the flag alarm settings on both the localiser and the glideslope were such that the flags would not appear even when the signals were unusable.
The two ADF receivers were working in the ADF mode at the time of the crash, though the No 1 unit may have been subject to intermittent electrical interruptions due to poorly soldered joints.
The No 2 box was turned to 306khz (for BN) and No 1 to 335KHZ for MN.
The report suggested that this was the reverse of the settings which would be expected and that this could have contributed to the homing errors.
The report noted a distinct change in the accuracy of flying which is coincident with a change of voice on the radio as the two crew members exchanged functions.
There had been substantial altitude variations during initial manoeuvring around the BN beacon between 2,200ft and 2,900ft.
 "Possible turbulence cannot explain this deviation, as the acceleration recording by the FDR indicated only slight turbulence and the aircraft was, in general considered to be very stable under such conditions" .
The report suggest that deficiencies in the radio/navigation equipment may have led the crew to descend on a spurious glidepath; this was possible, although only if the crew did not keep "the normal continuous mutual check on the basic navigational instruments and the marker control" .
During a flight the day before a discrepancy between the Captain's and First Officer's localiser indications had been observed: an approach flow from the left side of the cockpit resulted in the aircraft tracking to the left of the localiser.
The investigation team considered that this fault reoccurred and that this may have account for the aircraft making its first approach toward the built-up area of Basle to the east of the airport.
Although the report found that the airlines training and operating regulations to be in order, it referred to the "dubious basic training" of the Captain.
He had required nine attempts before passing the British Instrument Rating Test.
Further suggestions found that Base ATC could have been more alert, and that the ATC controller should have been prompted into immediate and determined action.
You will have seen that the accident to which this report refers happened in 1973 — The mistakes indicated in the report are as relevant to-day as they were then.
We Repeat regardless of the ADF aspect, this accident should never have happened.
Check, Check and Check again.
The Pre-flight planning procedure for approaches, let downs and R.T requirements are set down on pages 47–56 and require careful study.
1.
The RC needle is simply a remote indication of the loop aerial which receives signals from the ground station.
2.
This loop aerial uses a minimum signal (null) to find the direction of the station.
In the null position there is an 180° ambiguity, and with the RC this is automatically solved by a sense unit.
3.
The signals received by the loop and the sense unit also drive a motor which turns the loop.
Thus the loop aerial is always, in effect, kept pointing at the ground station to which the receiver is tuned.
4.
In simpler terms, therefore, the RC needle is always pointing directly towards the station, regardless of your heading.
So you will normally know whether the station is to your left or right and whether it is ahead of astern.
5.
Mentally divide the RC dial into two halves with a line from 0° to 180°. 6.
This line represents the fore and aft axis of your aircraft, the fuselage.
The 0° on the RC dial is your nose and the 180° your tail.
7.
A line through 270° — 090° represents your wings.
In fact, 270° and 090° are commonly known as "wing tip" positions of the RC needle.
8.
When the RC needle is on 0° the station is straight ahead.
9.
When the RC needle is on 180° the station is straight behind you.
10.
When the RC needle is in the left hand of the dial, the station is to your left.
When the RC needle is in the right hand of the dial, the station is to your right.
11.
If the RC needle is between 0° and 270° — 090°, the station is ahead of you.
12.
If the RC needle is between 270° — 090° and 180°, then the station is behind you.
RADIO COMPASS
General Indications
Radio Compass-Bearing Indications
1.
The bearings 0° to 360° indicated by the RC needle are relative bearings.
2.
These bearings are relative to your heading.
3.
Thus, 0° on the RC dial always has a value which is the same as your heading.
4.
For example, if your heading is 270° and the RC needle is on 030°, then the bearing of the station is 30° right of 270°, ie 300°.
See Fig 55. 5.
If your heading is 270° and the RC needle is on 330°, then the bearing of the station is 30° left of 270°, ie 240°. 6.
So, to get the bearing of the station,(ie your QDM) add the RC bearing to your heading.
7.
If the result is more that 360°, then subtract 360°.   8.
When Rc is in left hand half of dial, it is sometimes easier to note the number of degrees Rc is left of 0° and then subtract that number of degrees from your HDG. 9.
Thus, in the example above RC is on 210°. 210° is 150° left of 0° (360°).
Subtract 150° from your heading of 270° and you get the same result, QDM 120°. 10.
But do this only when your heading is a large figure.
Otherwise you could be confused.
RADIO COMPASS — INDICATIONS OF BEARING
Add RC bearing to your heading.
If result is more than 360°, then subtract 360°.
Remember that the 0 on the RC dial always has a value which is the same as your heading.
To calculate your QDM
To find out how far, in time or distance, you are from NDB along a certain position line.
This will give you an approximate position fix.
ADF — TIME/DISTANCE CHECK
Objective
This involves turning at 90° to the headrest position line and then noting the time taken to get a 5° or 10° change of bearing.
The 1 in 60 rule will then give time and distance from the NDB.
Procedure
1.
Tune and identify the station.
2.
Note Radio Compass (RC) bearing.
What you want to do, is bring the RC onto either 090° and 270°, whichever is the nearer to where the RC is now.
3.
So, if RC is in the Right hand half of the dial, that is, between 0° and 90° or between 090° and 180°, then bring the Rc onto 090°. 4.
If the RC is in the Left hand half of the dial, then bring it onto 270°. 5.
Which way to turn to bring the RC onto 090° or 270°?
Remember that the RC will move in the opposite direction to your turn.
So, if the RC is between 0° and 090° you will want to move it to the Right (clockwise) to get it onto 090°.
Therefore, you must turn Left away from the RC. 6.
If the RC is between 090° and 180°, then turn right towards the RC to bring it anti-clockwise onto 090°. 7.
Thus if the RC is in the NE or NW quadrant, turn away from the needle to bring it onto 090° or 270°. 8.
If the RC is in the SE or SW quadrant, then turn towards the needle to bring it onto 090° or 270°. 9.
When RC is on 090° or 270°) note heading and start the stop-watch. 10.
Fly for at least 1 minute, and a 10° bearing change.
11.
When you have got a 10° bearing change (or more, if necessary), note the elapsed time in seconds, or minutes.
12.
Use the formula on page 43 to calculate time/distance.
Note: This formula appears in Section 2 on page 43, but is reproduced below for convenient reference to ADF.
Time/Distance Checks (fig 56)
ADF/VOR/VDF
The following formulae will give time and distance from a beacon: Time in minutes Seconds flown between bearings degrees of bearing change Distance in nm TAS (or G/S) x minutes flown degrees of bearing change.
You can plot the second position line you crossed as a true bearing on your chart or map and mark the distance.
See formula on the previous page.
Selection stations either side of your track(s).
And, if available, use departure and destination aids for track guidance.
GROUNDSPEED AND POSITION CHECKS
Plot a series of bearings at 5° intervals either side of a 90° to track bearing.
For ADF and VOR use magnetic bearings.
For VDF use either QDM or QTE.
Put distance and time against these bearings based on your estimated groundspeed.
You will then have an easy check when the actuals come up.
For position checks off airways add also the distance from the station.
Make some basic transparencies for yourself to help save time:
A more appropriate method for normal en-route flying is "double the angle on the nose" .
The procedure is as follows: 1.
Select, tune and identify a station ahead 10° to 45° to one side of track.
2.
Note relative bearing, 030° say, and start timing on stop-watch. 3.
Hold your speed and heading along your track.
4.
When Radio Compass has moved to a position where it is twice the original bearing, stop timing and note the interval.
For example, if original bearing was 030°, then twice that is 060°, which is when you stop timing.
5.
The time/distance you flew from 030° to 060° equals the time/distance from the station along the second line of bearing 060° relative).
6.
Play this as a true bearing on your map.
ADF — TIME/DISTANCE CHECKS
The isosceles triangle can also be used when flying towards a beacon, and with no idea of your ETA.
But you must know the wind.
ADF — TIME/DISTANCE FROM STATION (fig 59)
1.
Turn onto 0° on the RC.
Estimate and allow for drift.
2.
Now alter heading 10° right or left and start timing.
Note RC bearing.
3.
When Rc has moved 10° stop timing, noting the interval.
4.
Turn to head directly in towards the station.
5.
Your time from the station now equals the time it took to get the 10° change of bearing.
6.
The above procedure involves very little extra time in reaching the station.
1.
Tune and identify the station.
2.
Turn towards the RC needle and bring it onto 0°.
Note heading and log it.
RC on 0°, heading QDM. 3.
Plan ahead.
If there is drift, RC will not remain on 0° (plus/minus 2–3°).
So, if RC moves 4–5° you must correct.
4.
If RC moves Right onto 005°, then the wind is from your Right 5.
If RC moves Left onto 355°, then the wind is from your Left.
6.
Allow fro drift — an estimated amount.
For example, 10° would be a fair average in the light aircraft group.
Turn towards the wind an amount which will offset the RC needle 10° on the opposite side of the RC 0° to the wind.
Note heading and log it.
7.
For example: You have turned onto 0° on the RC and your heading is 215°.
RC moves to reach 005°.
Wind is from Right.
Turn Right 15° to offset the RC needle, 10° Left of 0°, i.e. 350°.
Note heading 230°, and log it; also log drift allowance 10°.
If you are slow in your reactions you might be more than 5° off your original QDM (as above) by the time you have decided what to do, so the turn to offset the RC 10° might well involve a turn of more than the 15° above.
8.
You are now allowing an estimated amount of 10° for drift.
Again normal procedure in the air — you must plan ahead.
If RC remains steady within 2–3° of its 0° plus/minus drift position, then track straight to the station is being maintained and your estimated drift allowance is correct.
9.
If the RC moves towards the direction (Left or Right) from which the wind is coming, then your drift allowance is not enough — you are still drifting.
Turn left or right towards the RC needle to offset it more than the previous allowance.
In other words, if the RC needle moves towards the wind, you turn towards this movement into the wind, adjusting your allowance accordingly.
10.
If the RC needle moves left or right in the opposite direction from which the wind is coming, then your drift allowance is too large.
Turn left or right towards the RC needle to offset it less than the previous allowance.
In other words again, if the RC needle moves away from the wind, you turn towards this movement away from the wind, adjusting your allowance accordingly.
11.
If there is enough time before you reach the station, you will eventually average out your drift allowances.
ADF — HOMING — WIND UNKNOWN
Having turned onto 0° on the RC, decide the wind angle and estimate the drift on your heading.
Then turn towards the wind, to offset the RC needle on the opposite side of 0° to the wind, by the amount of your estimated drift.
Then continue as for unknown wind.
ADF — HOMING FORECAST WIND
1.
Turn parallel to the desired track.
If you are on track, then the RC will show: 0° when station is ahead 180° when station is astern 2.
So, if RC does not show 0° or 180°, then you are not on track.
3.
The direction, to your left, or to your right, in which the RC is displace from 0° to 180°, is the direction to turn to reach the track.
4.
The number of degrees that the RC is displaced from 0° or 180° is the number of degrees that you are off track.
5.
The interception angle (correction) to use to regain track should be twice the number of degrees off track, rounded off to whole figures.
But if you do not know your distance from the station, then use an interception angle of exactly twice the number of degrees off track, plus/minus drift.
The time then taken to reach the track will be the approximate time to the station from the interception point.
6.
The interception angle will be applied to the Track.
So, interceptions/corrections will always be on headings which are the desired Track plus/minus the angle which you decide to use.
7.
Having turned towards your track at a certain angle, you now wait for your RC to move to a bearing where it is displace from 0° (station ahead) or from 180° (station astern) the same number of degrees that you are using for your interception angle.
8.
So, if you are intercepting your track at an angle of 30°, you will wait until your RC has moved to a point where it is displaced 30° from the RC 0° to 030° or 330°.
Or, 30° from the RC 180–210° or 150°. 9.
Which side of the 0 °/180; ° will the RC be displaced?
The same side, left or right, as the station is during your interception.
Remember that the RC is always pointing towards the station.
To help you to work out quickly what the RC will show when the track is intercepted, a rule of thumb is given in the accompanying diagrams.
ADF — TRACK INTERCEPTION OR CORRECTION TO MAINTAIN
1 Turn parallel to track.
RC now points towards the track, telling you which way to turn, L or R, to reach the track.
2 If you were on track RC would show 0° (station ahead) or 180° (station astern).
3 So, the number of degrees that the RC is displaced from 0° or 180° equals the number of degrees that the aircraft is off track.
4 The interception angle will be twice the number of degrees that you are off track.
Increase this angle by the amount of maximum drift if turning towards that side of the track from which the wind is coming.
Use rounded off figures.
5 Apply the angle to the track for heading to use.
6 Track is intercepted when RC has moved to a point where it is displaced from 0° (station ahead) or 180° (station astern) the same number of degrees as the interception angle.
ADF — TRACK INTERCEPTION BEACON AHEAD OR ASTERN
To work out quickly what your RC will indicate at the point where you arrive on track, use the following method: When you turn Left to intercept (or to allow for drift on track) consider Left as Minus
When you turn Right, consider Right as Plus
Suppose you are turning Left to intercept your track at 50°.
Express this to yourself as
 "I'm turning Left onto track Minus 50°" 
To know what the RC will show when track is intercepted simply reverse the Minus 50° to the opposite, Plus 50° i.e.
 "I'm turning Left onto track Minus 50° therefore RC will show 0° Plus 50° or 180° Plus 50° when I reach track" .
0° Plus 50° is 050° 180° Plus 50° is 230°.
As you have seen in the previous exercise, the interception angle is normally decided by you, based on the number of degrees off the required track and also the wind effect.
But, occasions do arise when positions have to be determined from the intersection of position lines.
TRACK INTERCEPTION
For , when flying airways Romeo 123, between Brookmans Park and Clacton VOR, the position Brain can be determined by the interception of a bearing of 177° to Southend NDB.The RMI is simply a heading indicator combined with 2 bearing indicators.
These bearing indicators can be selected to give bearings from 2 ADF stations, or 2 VOR stations, or 1 ADF station and 1 VOR station.
RMI — RADIO MAGNETIC INDICATOR
The RMI will certainly help you in working out a QDM, since the pointers indicate your QDM and no calculation is necessary.
And when tracking, the pointers will show the Track QDM/QDR.
So, when intercepting or correcting on ADF, the pointers will show the Track QDM/QDR on interception.
But it will still be up to you to decide the interception angle.
Also, to know whether you have the Track ahead still, or whether you have passed through it.
There are almost no short-cuts with ADF!
The same procedure applies when you are turning inbound to intercept the intermediate or final approach.
ADF — APPROACHES
On final turn, check RC on headings at 090°, 60°, 30°, to track.
Unless your heading is within 45° of the outbound track do not turn directly onto the outbound track heading.
Timing could be upset, and you could be in an unsafe position for the descent.
GETTING ONTO THE OUTBOUND TRACK OF A LET-DOWN AFTER ARRIVAL OVERHEAD (ASSUMING NO HOLD)— Valid for all types of approaches.
Divide the Initial Approach area into three 60° sectors either side of the outbound leg.
When overhead turn as shown above.
ILS ILS means Instrument Landing System.
A misnomer, since the actual landing is visual.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The system uses two"Beams', one giving directional guidance to the runway, the other giving height guidance.
The directional guidance beam is called the LOCALISER.
The height guidance beam is called the Glide Path, or Glide Slope.
See fig 70.
The Localiser operates on frequencies 108–112 Mhz.
The Glidepath operates on frequencies from 329–335 Mhz.
Normally the glide path is coupled to the localiser frequency, and all you have to do is to tune the latter on your receiver.
Each ILS has an individual call-sign, usually starting with "T" followed by airfield or runway identification.
After identifying the call-sign, you must check Localiser and Glidepath flags "away" .
The OBS setting will have no effect on the indications of the CDI
Ordinarily there are two marker beacons, the OM and MM, each situated a certain distance from the runway threshold.
This distance is not standard, but will vary with each airfield and runway.
Locations with Category II and Cat III ILS may have an inner marker (IM).
MARKER BEACONS
The outer marker (OM) operates on 75 Mhz and is sited up to five miles from the runway threshold.
It transmits a signal of continuous dashes in morse.
As the signal builds up in intensity, immediately over the transmitter a Blue light is activated on the instrument panel, flashing the same signal.
The middle marker (MM) also operates on 75 Mhz and is sited up to one mile from the runway threshold.
It transmits a signal of continuous dots and dashes and activates an Amer light, flashing the same signal.
The inner marker (IM) is sited between the MM and the threshold.
It transmits a signal of continuous dots and activates a White light flashing the same signal.
The main purpose of these beacons is: 1.
To provide a position fix.
2.
To provde a height datums against which to check glide path and altimeters.
For example, a height is laid down for each ILS at which the aircraft should be, on passing over the markers.
If the aircraft is satisfactorily following the glide path beam, then this height will be automatically achieved.
But, if the glide path is being held — apparently satisfactorily — and the laid down height is reached without any signal from the marker, then there is the possibility that the glide path signal is faulty, or that the altimeter setting is wrong.
In this case, if the Altimeter is correct, then don't use the glide path, continue the descent at the planned rate, but use a higher decision height.
ILS, coupled with DME, does not usually include marker beacons.
Position fixes and height data against which to check the glide path and Altimeters, are laid down in the approach charts at specific distances on DME.
ILS/DME
In most cases an NDB is located at the outer marker.
LOCATOR BEACON
The main purpose of the NDB is: 1.
To provide an initial approach fix to which the aircraft can fly, prior to the descent.
2.
To provide a cross-check for the outer marker.
3.
To provide a cross-check for the localiser; and track guidance should the localiser fail.
VOR fixes and VOR DME are frequently designated for localiser I/C, particularly where no NDB is positioned at the outer marker.
Radar vectoring is frequently used by ATC to position the aircraft onto the localiser.
The localiser beam is fixed bearing from the transmitter and is only 2 ½° wide either side of the centre-line, approximately 250 ft wide for each mile away from the transmitter.
ILS — GENERAL NOTES FLYING THE LOCALISER
At the runway threshold the displacement of the aircraft off the centre-line would be 100 ft for the circle and each dot on the localiser scale.
Therefore, as you cross the middle marker on final, your localiser displacement should be no more than between the circle and one dot.
This means that corrections must be extremely small at any one time.
Beyond the outer marker the maximum heading change should not exceed 5° at any one time.
A reasonable heading must be established by the time the outer marker is crossed inbound.
From that point, maximum heading change should not exceed 2° at any one time.
What you are aiming at is a steady indication on the localiser needle, rather than returning it to the centre.
So, when the needle moves away, you first aim is to try to stop it moving away any more by means of these very small heading changes.
If it then remains steady, the heading you are then holding will be within 1° to 2° of the heading which will hold the centre-line.
The displacement of the localiser needle is a "demand" showing the direction in which to turn, in order to regain the centre line of the localiser beam.
In the early stages of training most pilots tend to chase the localiser needle.
This is due to incorrect IF and scan technique.
Bring the localiser into the normal level flight and descent scan routine.
When the localiser makes a demand for a left or right correction, refer back at once to Horizon and Heading using rudder for the 2° to 5° heading change.
Note the Heading and then refer back to the localiser.
Start to turn towards the centre-line when the LOC needle starts to move in from full-scale deflection.
With a wind from the procedure turn side of the centre-line, use an ADF bearing as well to avoid overshooting the centre-line.
The glide path beam is approximately ½° wide, or deep, either side of the centre-line, about 50 ft for each mile away from the transmitter.
FLYING THE GLIDE PATH
At the middle marker, the displacement of the aircraft off the centre-line would be approximately 10 ft for the circle and each dot.
Therefore corrections must be extremely small and like the localiser, what you are aiming at is a steady indication of the GP needle, rather than trying to put it dead in the centre.
A steady indication of 1, or even 2 dots Down would be satisfactory.
But, Not 2 dots Up.
You are then below the GP and at risk.
This is the maximum deflection Up you should allow.
Reduce your rate of descent immediately to bring the needle back towards the circle.
If the GP needle goes above the 2 dots Up, don't delay — go around immediately.
There must be no second thoughts about this.
Corrections to maintain the glide path are made with attitude changes of a quarter to half a bar.
But, if speed changes more than 5 knots then a power adjustment of 50 to 100 rpm must be made.
Rate of descent must be planned.
This will be based on groundspeed using the surface wind, and the GP angle.
In the UK, GP angle is normally 3°.
Having planned your rate of descent, you must have in mind also the attitude and power for that rate.
There is no time to experiment and in turbulence it is essential to know them.
Normal descent scan technique is used.
And don't fly the GP needle.
Use your horizon.
The missed approach is commenced immediately on reaching decision height, if visual contact has not been made at this point.
Very high frequency direction finding is an aid to navigation.
No special equipment is needed in the aircraft other than the normal transmitter/receiver.
VHF DF
VHF transmissions are "line of sight" , so reception distance is limited by the height at which you are flying.
As a rough guide the reception distance can be found by multiplying the square root of your altitude by one and a quarter.
Also, any obstruction such as high ground between you and the transmitter can cause loss of reception.
Transmission by you enables a ground operator, with special equipment, to note the bearing of your aircraft at the moment of your transmission.
Unless you transmit, the ground operator's "screen" will be blank and no bearing can be given.
Immediately overhead the DF station is an area of uncertainty, and when you are in this position there will be no response on the screen to your transmissions.
The operator will reply "no bearing" .
The bearings given in response to your transmissions can be used in the following ways: 1.
As a position line(s) for a GS or position check.
2.
As a course to steer to the DF station.
3.
For an instrument let-down.
When using position lines, have them drawn on your map or chart at the positions at which the checks will be made.
Ascertain the frequency and call-sign of the stations you select to use during your flight.
For this purpose consult the Air Pilot, or the Flight Guides.
RT PROCEDURE
Establish contact in the normal way, and then request what you want — a QDM, a QDR or a QTE.
Call at least 10 minutes before ETA.
Position and Time position established.
Altitude and Flight conditions.
ETA.
 "Request VDF let-down" .
VDF LET-DOWN — RT CALLS
1.
Initial Clearance
The DF operator is normally on the same frequency as ATC.
Call-sign might be the same, but is usually termed "HOMER" .
Request a"series of QDMs' to indicate that you will be calling at frequent intervals.
2.
First Call for QDMs
Initially, you might be asked to "transmit for DF" .
Give a count of "1, 2, 3, 4, 5" and finish with call-sign.
After this, "request QDM" is usually enough.
These will be given to ATC — not Homer — as requested.
The standard reporting points are: On arrival overhead the DF facility.
Overhead at start of outbound leg.
Prior to turning onto the final approach leg.
On making visual contact with the field.
3.
Position Reports
Until you are within a minute or two of your ETA, there is no need to call for QDMs more frequently than at a half to one minute intervals.
GENERAL NOTES
When close-in and when making corrections, call every 10–15 seconds.
If the QDMs remain within 3° to 4° of each other when homing, or within the same amount of a desired track QDM, then don't change heading.
When intercepting a desired track QDM don't wait for the exact Track QDM.
You might never receive it.
Recognise your track from the QDMs 3° to 4° immediately either side of it.
Whenever you hear one of these QDMs you must fly a heading to parallel your track.
1.
Having obtained clearance, maintain your cleared altitude or flight level.
2.
On receipt of your first QDM, turn onto that heading, assess the wind angle, and allow for any drift.
3.
Plan ahead for possible change in QDMs.
If they remain within 3° to 4° of each other don't alter heading.
When wind is from your left the QDMs will decrease if drift allowance is not enough.
When wind is from your left the QDMs will increase if drift allowance is too much.
When wind is from your right the QDMs will increase if drift allowance is not enough.
When wind is from your right the QDMs will decrease if drift allowance is too much.
4.
Having planned ahead, if an alteration of heading is necessary then the new heading will simply be the new QDM plus/minus an increased/decreased drift allowance.
5.
The amount by which you change the drift allowance should not exceed 2° to 5° at any one time.
6.
Treat with caution any QDM received which is significantly different from previous ones.
Call again.
7.
Any odd QDMs received could be caused by your passing overhead the DF facility.
Immediately overhead there is no response to your transmissions on the DF operator's screen.
In reply to your request he will reply "no bearing" .
Continue to call until you get a QDM.
This QDM will be an approximate reciprocal of your previous ones.
8.
If you are passing slightly to one side of the DF facility, and there is a response to your transmission on the operator's screen, the "blip" would be changing position.
In that case, the operator would reply for example "180 increasing" .
This would indicate that you were overhead.
9.
Thus, there are three main indications that you are overhead: 1) No bearing 2) A reciprocal 3) A rapidly changing QDM 10.
Never start a descent solely on the information "no bearing" .
You could be miles away from the facility.
Always confirm that it was overhead by calling until a reciprocal is received.
VDF — HOMING PROCEDURE
1.
Call for a series of QDMs 2.
Turn onto the first QDM received.
If the turn is large, it could take you off that QDM.
So, get another QDM and fly it.
3.
Decide the wind angle and estimate drift.
Turn to allow for this drift, applying it to the QDM you are now flying.
4.
Now plan ahead.
If your drift allowance is correct, the QDMs should show little change.
5.
Drift allowance not enough The QDMs will decrease if wind is from your left The QDMs will increase if wind is from your right.
Drift allowance too much The QDMs will increase if wind is from your left The QDMs will decrease if wind is from your right 6.
Don't alter heading unless you get a change in the QDMs of 4° to 5°.
If you do get such a change, then you must revise your drift allowance.
7.
The revised drift allowance will be applied to the QDM last received.
8.
Again, you must plan ahead so that you will be ready to react to a changed QDM. 9.
If you are unable to think what to do, then fly the QDM last received, and start again.
10.
When you revise your drift allowance, do so in stages of a maximum of 5°.
If you do get a 5° change in the QDMs then your estimate of how much to change the drift allowance can be related to how quickly the QDM change occurred.
11.
Be careful how you react to QDM changes when close to ETA.
If in doubt, don't is a golden rule.
VDF — HOMING, NO SPECIFIC TRACK
1.
Turn parallel to the desired track.
2.
Call for a QDM and write it down.
3.
The difference between the QDM and the desired track QDM equals the number of degrees off track.
4.
The interception angle to use to get onto the desired track will be twice the number of degrees off track.
5.
Apply this interception angle to the desired track for the heading to use.
6.
Have a mental picture of the relationship of the 10° position lines between your present QDM and your track QDM. 7.
Tell yourself whether the subsequent QDMs as you approach your track will be increasing or decreasing.
Then, by what actually occurs, you will be able to confirm that you have in fact turned in the right direction to reach your track.
8.
If your interception angle is over 30°, then be prepared to reduce it to 30° (plus drift), when the QDMs indicate that you are 10° to 15° off track.
9.
The rate of call as you close with the track should be every 1–15 seconds.
10.
Be prepared to recognise your track QDM, not only the exact QDM, but also those within 4° either side.
Whenever you hear one of these figures you are on track, so make sure then that your heading is correct.
Remember, that you may never receive the exact track QDM.
VDF — TRACK INTERCEPTION
Station ahead or astern
After arrival overhead on the initial approach, a turn directly towards the outbound leg of the let-down will only be made when the initial approach direction does not require a turn of more than 60°.
VDF — PROCEDURE OVERHEAD
Approaching from a direction opposite to the outbound leg, or at a large angle, will mean a procedure turn, or a parallel procedure.
When turning inbound after carrying out these procedures, simply fly straight to the station.
Don't try to intercept track if the turn does not finish on track.
As soon as you get the overhead indication — in whichever form — you must turn to parallel the outbound track
Important
1.
Draw the outbound track and write down it's QDM. 2.
Draw three 10° position lines (QDMs) either side of the track QDM. 3.
Orientate this drawing as you do with a map when flying.
4.
It is now easy to see that any QDM received which is a smaller figure than the desired track QDM means that you are to the left of your track.
You must correct to the right.
5.
Any QDM received which is a larger figure than the desired track QDM means that you are to the right of your track.
You must correct to the left.
6.
Get the mental picture of these QDMs, your track and the 10° ones either side, and they will be easily recognised in the air.
7.
You must be prepared to recognise your track QDM — not only the exact QDM, but also the QDMs within 4° either side, any one of which you will treat as being your track.
Remember that if QDMs remain within 4° of the desired track QDM, no correction is necessary.
8.
Thus, any time that you receive a QDM which is within 4° either side of the Track, you must recognise it as being your Track.
Heading must then be adjusted as necessary to maintain track.
VDF LET-DOWN — TRACKING OUTBOUND
NB: When you are flying away from the DF station the operator will still be giving you QDMS.
Remember that these QDMS are the reciprocal of your Track.
(Fig 79 "From" )
You will be aiming to make good the Inbound Track.
VDF LET DOWN — TRACKING INBOUND — FINAL APPROACH
Note!
The QDMs passed to you by the DF operator are now your track to the station.
A simple rule — To use when making good the Inbound Track is: QDM more than your required QDM…
Steer more/turn right QDM less than your required QDM…
Steer less/turn left.
An approach which relies on a quick appraisal of the chart is not enough…
NEVER IGNORE THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURATE PRE-FLIGHT PLANNING FOR LET-DOWNS.
One of our students, an IMC rated PPL with around 400m hours experience was asked to plan a let down using the chart below.
Airspeed 
At first he said "I'll allow 20% extra for the wind" .
Then, "No, it says 3 minutes" .
No minimum rate of descent planned.
Outbound
No time planned.
 "I'll hold the standard descent of 500ft/min" .
No plan for when he could expect to reach Decision Height.
Inbound
So, what would have happened?
His GS outbound would be 
GS inbound would be 
At 500ft/min his DH would have been reached in 3 minutes.
At this time his position would be 2nm past the field.
Look at that structure and the high ground.
A classic result.
When the chart specifies a time outbound such as the 3 minutes on the adjoining pattern, such time is meaningless unless allied with a specific speed to produce a specific distance.
DO NOT IGNORE THE IMPORTANCE OF PRE-FLIGHT PLANNING YOUR LET-DOWN
The safest plan is to assume that any such specified time refers to Inbound Leg time.
Therefore, plan the distance — at the inbound G/S — which will give 3 minutes.
Then plan the time on the outbound leg that it will take to fly that distance at the outbound G/S.
So, Let us assume that our aircraft speed is 90kts.
Surface 
For the adjoining pattern let us assume that the mean wind for the final approach is 250 °/22kts.; ased At airspeed of 90 kts this will give a G/S of 112 kts.
To produce 3 minutes inbound at a G/S of 112kts the required distance is 5.5nm. 6nm rounded off to a higher figure.
So we have to fly 6nm on the outbound leg.
Outbound G/S is 60kts.
Therefore outbound time is 6 minutes.
Would you have allowed 100% extra time on that three minutes?
The loss of height outbound is 1000ft in 6 minutes, giving a minimum rate of descent of 200ft/min.
But you should descend at a higher rate so as to reach 2500ft before you turn.
Inbound rate of descent is based on the assumption of reaching 0ft at the threshold.
On this basis you will have a reasonable chance of reaching MDA or Decision Height with the field ahead of you.
So, we have 3 minutes to lose 2000ft.
Rate of descent is 700ft/min.
We should reach our minimum descent altitude in just over 2 minutes.
Therefore, with a half to 1 minute still to run we should be able to establish visual contact.