

 
golfing conversations of any use.
Pardon?
Golfing conversations of any use.
No.
Why what's wrong with golf?
Has to be  you're not recording.
Oh no.
But Danny died on Friday morning.
Sad too really for
Mm.
for me and I think it might be rather than just record an apology for her absence, I think we should just put in something, just to say that we're that we are very sad
Mhm.
that er at Danny's death.
And also I think we should record our admiration at how she has coped really over the last few years 
 
Do we want to send flowers?
I thought we could come to that later on .
Mhm.
Right.
But er I think our admiration for her 
Mhm.
should be recorded really 
Mhm.
and er
Well that will come in to  the meeting as well.
And  the meeting cos we really have 
Mhm.
to start the reading of the next and last meeting and 
Mhm.
all that jazz.
have to start doing that .
Okay?
All right then.
Okey doke.
talking about apologies for this meeting .
Can you speak a little bit louder please.
No.
Is the tape on.
It was.
Yeah.
Oh .
Right meeting.
I would have thought it would have been better in the introduction rather as part of the minutes, would you not have thought so?
Well I thought you wanted it in the minutes..
problem.
Well all right we'll ha Okay l let's have the minutes of the last meeting then Joan.
Right.
Present, May , Edith , Jim , Duncan , Agnes , Margaret , Kell , Barbara  and me.
Apologies from Anne.
The minutes of the previous meeting were ado were read and adopted by Mrs  and seconded by Mrs .
Matters arising.
Mrs N was  on the committee, and was welcomed by the ladies captain.
Treasurer's report.
The following amounts were held in the accounts.
Deposit, eight hundred and twenty one.
Current, eighty four pound ninety nine.
Cash in hand, thirty two pound ninety nine.
Making a total of nine hundred and thirty eight pounds ninety eight.
Three hundred and eight pounds was for the ladies open, four hundred and twenty for the outing to , two hundred and twenty six had already been paid for the coach, plus all the prizes.
Handicap secretary's report.
There were ninety entries for the ladies open, and entries have now more or less stopped.
Club championship second round was cancelled due to inclement weather, and it  final round.
the final round will now be played in conjunction with the golf foundation competition for the eighteenth of August.
A separate notice will be put up in the locker room, that three person bounce games can now be used for cutting handicap.
Secretary's report.
A letter was sent to the church council asking for the tea to be reserved from nine thirty until sixteen thirty on the days of the ladies open, fourth of August.
And to asked for the cream teas to be retained.
This had been agreed.
Letters have been sent to Duncan and Willy  be once again acting as starters.
Duncan agreed, but there was no reply from Willy, due to domestic circumstances.
Captain's report.
The trophy for the ladies open has not been engraved for the last few years.
Helen  to be contacted and asked for the plinth so that this can be completed before this years event.
Letters to be sent out to local firms as per list.
This should be brought up to date for next year.
Some donations have already been received, and the treasurer will produce a list, a letter of thanks.
Any other business.
Outing.
Trolleys can be hired at .
There'll be one scratch and six handicap prizes for the morning, a  scramble for players in the afternoon, with prizes for each of the winning group.
There will be the normally  prize, plus any prizes to be  between the ladies captain and the handicap secretary.
Tips, ten pounds for the bus driver, and thirteen pounds for the .
The open.
It was suggested that a letter be sent to the church council, asking for a notice lower down than at present, to be positioned to ensure ladies from other clubs, find the fifteenth tee.
Also that each card, a slip should be inserted, and following competitors of the whole at which the longest driving will take place,where the fifteenth tee is sited.
A proposal was put forward to change the outing to a weekday because of the increasing problems of finding a course to accept ladies on a Sunday.
It was agreed to hold a vote on the bus this Sunday, as there were people who would normally be attending and also .
And also if necessary .
Meeting closed, next meeting fifth of July.
Now somebody like to  Dr  somebody like to .
Well now, business arising from the minutes?
Right.
Joan?
A letter was sent to the church council.
They haven't replied yet, but verbally they said there'd be no problem with the notice.
Mhm.
Er I've done the slips and given them to Margaret to be .
There was no vote taken on the bus.
On the bus.
And Willy  has replied
They actually spoke about in at the place right enough.
Some of the girls  speaking about it.
Aye they did .
But then we should have got  we we sh We should have done it on the way there, but we forget.
There were too 
Mhm.
many other things being organized.
Willy  has replied and said, he won't be able to do it because of his domestic circumstances.
But erm  is going to step in and do it.
Oh that's good.
Good that's that's grand, that's grand.
If there's er there's no more word about Bettie at the moment she 
 
she's just in the same condition as she's been 
Mhm.
for the last two or three weeks, yes.
Has the plinth been returned?
Who was who was t 
Helen   
Yes I know Helen has it.
Did 
Me I would imagine would be contacting.
Oh well we don't know.
as long as it's not 
There's nothing in the draw is there?get keys for the drawer.
keys.
No.
be in there.
and they don't have keys for the door.
Oh well maybe  and Gwen if she comes back.
Yeah.
.
Helen has certainly been asked.
Cos I heard 
Mm.
someone asking here about it.
Try and Is she playing on Wednesday does anybody know?
Yeah?
Maybe remind her on Wednesday or find out from her if she you know,asked her.
Anything else on there?
From the last minutes?
Right just.
Pardon?
Nothing to be added is there?
Don't think so.
Apologies for tonight's meeting have been received from Nancy, who is on holiday, and may of course is isn't here because Danny has died.
I don't know  how many are going to the funeral on Wednesday morning, it's ten o'clock at Sacred Heart.
Where is it, Sacred Heart?
Which is just at the angle 
So it's the one down
Just at the angle the he just the junction of  Road and  
 
on the left hand side here.
There's a car park  the church.
Is there.
you can get into the car park if you come down er .
you just turn then before the church, there's a car park there.
before the church.
Is that before you take the the angle?
Before you take the angle?
You turn in to the right.
Aye coming down from the cross.
And there there's a car park just behind.
There will be a I think there'll be a lot of cars there.
Mm.
Let's face it, you can cross the r Park across in  and walk across.
Mhm.
Yes.
You could actually park erm  
I don't I don't think there'll be any difficulty.
Er
Road..
Anyway the service is at ten o'clock
Mhm.
in the Sacred Heart.
eleven fifteen.
But I know that er the one or two people who told me that they're going, er we were just going to the service in the church and then 
Mhm.
come on to the and play our golf afterwards .
Mhm.
Now I know that I'm going and Alma's going, but we've yet to decide I would rather just go to the crematorium 
Well that yes well Aha.
Aha.
Erm  
It's only be 
.
to the crematorium as well?
Or to the church ?
Well that's what they haven't decided.
I see.
leave a wee note up there or something?
I think when  
Aha 
and then coming .
 
I think I think so because if if we leave it any 
Mhm.
later than that, it's er I mean to go to the crematorium at quarter past eleven, we wouldn't be back here before twelve o'clock.
No the way we was thinking of going we were just gonna go to the the church to find out how many 
Go to the church and then come down.
were gonna go to the church and then we would come back down.
That would
I thought she was leaving a note or something, no?
Aye?
did she leave a note?
No.
But anybody who wants to to go to the crematorium 
Aha, cos I've  from her.
rather than to the cos the church service is long, it does take er nearly an hour I believe 
Well Marg I mean I phoned Margaret, she said it takes about an hour.
An hour, but down there there'll 
 
only be a quarter of an hour.
Mhm.
I'm gonna go to the church, but I'm just going straight to work.
Mhm.
Yes.
Yes.
I don't know that we should Do we all do we want to go together 
 
and sit together or are we just go 
Yes  that would be fine.
I think it probably would.
Mhm.
down the  Road or whether it was the one here and  wasn't sure either.
Cos I phoned her this morning.
You know what I mean, she wasn't sure .
No, she to she told me on the phone.
told me that it's that it's Sacred Heart .
Mhm.
So I phoned her last Nancy phoned me last Friday afternoon before she went on holiday to tell me, and I phoned  I wasn't sure whether just to sort of play it low key or then I thought, Well I know I really should just give here a wee ring.
sympathy to her and er she she was alright, she was grand.
She said that you were  been quite shocked though because 
Mhm.
they'd been ca they'd been called so many times you know when he was low.
And er she just sort of that it happened so quickly.
But at the same time she said, Well we're pleased because you know, he didn't suffer any pain or anything.
Just The the nurse had turned him at half past five in the morning.
And when they came to wake him up and get him ready for breakfast  to feed him at six o'clock, he was gone.
Ah.
could have been a stroke.
They thought it was perhaps just that.
You know.
A fairly big stroke that just
She's been an absolute brick  
She has really We're full of admi admiration for her.
She's been ma she's been a really constant The constant devotion that she had 
Mhm.
for him really was was really super.
great  And of course her doing it all with her usual
Mhm.
wit and good nature that
Mhm.
However.
So anyway, no more apologies .
flowers no?
Oh flowers Yeah I was going to say, I thought we might send flowers to her maybe on Thursday or Friday.
Just let you know, let it get past and then send her some.
Some flowers.
Yes Joy has a Joy
A friend who's a florist.
Mhm.
A friend who's a florist and gives a very you know, extremely good value for
Twelve pounds.
Mhm.
Well  well I know that er Marian's flowers are are they're beautifully arranged too and they're you're getting 
 
You'll probably get er a lot more flowers for your money from Marian than you would get from .
No guarantee.
If you want to use the guy that you normally use fair enough.
How old was erm Danny?
Was he about twenty three?
Twenty four?
Was he not older than that .
I thought he was about twenty eight.
I understood he was nearer thirty.
 
I know time has stood still really.
been quite a few years she's been  
Oh Aye.
Well where will  where will we
Meet?
No where will  Where will we go for the flowers?
That's right, fair enough then.
Now do you organize that, because you've got the money Edie, is 
 
that?
Well if you don't mind.
Erm.
You might have a slight problem, because we use the same    I'll I'll try and get out the cash.
Oh of course.
we usually if I want a cheque signed you see or  
And it has to be May?
You don't have any cash in hand or anything?
Well at the moment we've got five pounds  cash in hand.
But I'll make it up, I can always square it up later on.
Yes yes.
books later.
Yes.
Yes.
Right if Edie wouldn't mind doing that, we'd be pleased.
Right now it's your turn Edie for the Treasurer's report.
Right.
There's seven hundred and eighty pounds seventy pence in the deposit account.
Seven hundred
And eighty pounds seventy P.
And forty nine pence in the current account.
And Five pound thirty one, cash in hand.
Which makes it seven hundred and eighty six pence.
Er now three hundred and forty three pounds of that, is for the open day.
Cos we've had donations, we've had t twenty five pound donation from .
Er and ten pound donation from .
Oh yes?
Erm  have given us forty pounds worth of holiday vouchers.
let you know they'll come back from the letters.
Yes Oh that's very good, that's quite a good response then.
Who do you have donations m made payable to?
Good that's excellent.
Does anybody know if we've if we've had any more entries?
No?
Perhaps  could tell us .
Do we get the treasurer's thingy.
No we .
Do we need a statement about the outing.
I assume we didn't make a loss on it.
Well we


What do you mean, Well?
Oh dear was that the wrong question ?
 
We had a lovely outing actually.
It's just cos the bus was subsidized that's .
We didn't we did there was no loss.
Oh well in that case, a jolly good time was had by all.
we had a good subsidized bus.
Yes.
I think er I think everybody enjoyed the outing.
There were a few complaints about the rough was too rough and the coarse was too bad and whatnot, but I quite liked the fact that it was labelled because it meant that Rosemary could and  could play the .
They wouldn't have managed eighteen holes had it been you know a hilly course.
So and we got the benefit of the scenery roundabout.
It was good.
You do appreciate you own course when you come back .
Oh 
Appreciate the fairways.
Well we played  Monday, and  would do anything to have  's greens.
Well certainly the greens were long but the fairways were about 
The greens were good  Oh aye, I got my feet rather wet, from being in the bog.


Bit steep for us, thirty quid a round.
So we have the report from from you Edie.
My secr No no, I haven't got my secretary's report here.
 
and we can't er the handicap secretary's not here yet so we don't know.
Captain's not here, so I don't know.
 
 
Pardon?
A vice captain's one?
I didn't w I didn't win anything.
 

Now that was a very good idea actually.
Mm.
Giving us a consolation prize of a golf ball.
Yes yes 
Yes it was.
Mhm very good.
I think that was good, we'll keep that in mind for next year .
Mhm.
Have we decided for next year?
Well
Well I think we are round to any other business I suppose.


Next year's outing could come u 
I wrote down in the book, some of the places.
There was ,, West Lothian,,and .
But I couldn't get a phone number for that one.
, it's it's  Golf course, and it's the  Golf Club.
The  Golf Course is 
I think yes  
.
Aye.
Erm I couldn't get Greenbaum.
Somebody told me Greenbaum was lovely,come to the house  
get  at weekends?
No.
No.
is thirty pounds  Thirty pounds a head.
Edinburgh  and it's thirty pounds a day.
Erm , I've just got a phone number to phone them.
, no Sunday.
Erm what was the other one?
West Lothian,.
They're yes it's quite a late .
Well it's not very 
It's hilly but it's not it's not as bad as 
It's not strenuous.
as  from what I gather.
It's not strenuous.
And the problem with that is that  is like a tiny boxroom.
It really is very very small.
But the problem with  the ladies room is too small  I asked the ladies captain what they did.
considering we're going as far  what about .
No we just no it was just, people had said these things and  won't take on a Sunday.
But I just said put them down in  the book .
were coming back weren't they?
 
West Lothian, West Lothian we've  already written to West Lothian and it was too early.
Aha.
They don't know the dates
Right.
Mhm.
until the fixture list is completed next year.
keep the letter and try and contact us 
Mhm.
again in nineteen ninety four.
Right.
Mhm.
So you're gonna have to  gonna start writing letters we're gonna make sure we
West Lothian's locker room is half the size of ours.
Not counting the toilets .
Mhm.
I asked  the captain what they did when they did when they had ladies parties?
She says, Oh well we just sort of all move along.
But you're all arriving at the one time.
I mean  
That's right that's right, yeah.
No  it's not m it's not much it's not much further than.
These are only names that people have mentioned and I wrote them down, I write them down.
It's not much further than .
And the the road has been improved.
So you should be well with a decent bus you should get  the course 
 
Well I enjoyed it.
was one of the places that we.
The clubhouse is lovely.
Aha, the clubhouse is lovely .
Aha.
And the food was very nice you said.
I we I went and looked at it  I looked at it, it looked all right and I thought 
We went to the  opening, wondered why it was,met everybody.
And then we got out on the course and we realized .
You knew why.
People had been before and 
Cos I think we've written to them about three or four times.
Yeah.
Keeps being on my list  
It is very difficult a Sunday, but it Actually although we didn't take a vote on the bus, the few people that I did speak to a few people, and they were not terrible exited at the idea of of an outing during the week.
Well for one thing we have got really have quite a few  school teachers now who just couldn't get off during How many school teachers do we have Agnes?
Well I don't know I haven't look through the list.
bringing it into July or are too many people on holiday in July?
Even the first week in July.
Mhm.
Even the first week.
Well where's Nancy, she's away for a start.
Mm.
 
But she wasn't away till the third or the fourth, if you could get it within the very first few days  
 
So at the mo at the moment what 
Joyce is a school teacher.
she knows you and her name's Joyce .
And  know her.
What are the what are the possibilities that we have then?and West Lothian.
and West Lothian both said it's too early didn't they.
's kept us on file and will give us the first date available in June.
Er  is the same.
Erm
But we weren't interested in  were we?
Er is that all you mentioned?
West Lothian, that was too early and  we're to write back to .
You're really as well leaving I know
We've had a lot of problems.
Well you used to be able to book up a over a year in advance.
But it's getting now there's there's no way they're gonna take you.
I mean I had the same problem when I was secretary.
That Joan's having now .
Mhm.
You know every time you go it was too early, too early right back.
There was very few who were willing to take
Mhm.
I think it's they're booking 
told to put nineteen ninety five on the ledger as well.
Nineteen ninety five?
I like the sound of  I like the the distance it's away and er
I would think it would be depend on the weather.
Well that depends the weather depends most courses
And God knows how that bus'll get to .


Even if it's the same bus.
You've actually been here just yourself
How how did you find it.
Well I found it difficult because I I still cannae play golf well, but I could play even less well then.
But if you hit When you're going round this hill, if you hit to the right, the ball always came  like too many .
enjoyed it.
All the rest of them that could play  golf enjoyed it, because
we're not going to play golf, we're going to have a good time.
Some place where we can enjoy ourselves.
But it's  you get a terrific view once you've  
Yes I was going to say that.
The views should will be quite nice from parts of that course I would think.
Just just thinking of  itself, I don't know the course.
You're going round clockwise one way and anticlockwise the other.
There was a lot of congestion the night we were there.
A lot of 
Mm?
hold ups.
We could see people You know, why that would be I don't know and I thought possibly 
times when you couldn't see beyond that hole .
Aye, I though, Well maybe it's a difficult hole and there's hazards or something .
Do you think it's worth writing to Has anybody else any thoughts about ?
Do you know  golf club?
Mhm.
Mhm.
Cos they changed since we were there.
It used to be  
 
beautiful.
The club house beautiful cos we've got
Aha a wee course and a big course.
You played there  
We went there we went there last Easter.
Mhm.
For the weekend.
Have you any idea what the green fees would be there ?
 
It's going to make the cost of the outing very expensive .
 
Mhm.
And did you get round it alright?
We've still got 
Pam reckons it was thirty pounds .
Yeah.
Yeah that's well that's I think that would make our er outing very very expensive.
Maybe too expensive for some of the members.
That was one of the advantages of  you know
Mhm.
That's right.
As well as being flat it was very cheap.
look at  then if it's municipal.
I think we are goi we are going to have to face the fact that we are not going to get an outing 
Is  municipal?
Well  
for l for 
Is it?
Mhm.
For less than thirty pounds 
Mhm.
going to a private club .
I thought it was quite expensive the last time we wrote there as well.
Well this i this i I feel that er I think your weekend fees are always dearer than your week
it was not before 
It's got wide open fairways.
Well we played at  before but we
But the food we we didn't like the food, but you could always arrange to eat somewhere place else.
 
I I thought was a .
It was really it was really a lovely too wasn't it.
Remember how hot it was.
Mhm.
five minutes 
Well I didn't enjoy  because 
Every every element available was there.
.
Well another thing is the the fees are quite expensive at weekends .
Are they?
Are they.
They have gone up  considerably..
oh yes.
Now that Gleneagles don't have the princes and the Glendevon, they've just got that Monarch course now, more and more people are playing  because they realize it's it's next door.
heading down that way, is there nothing down there?
I don't
 

what about  in East Kilbride?
Have you played there?
is 
Yeah.
lovely.
We played a well we went to the open last year, quite a few of us, and we're going again er  and w It wasn't a particularly nice day but we thought if it's it was a nice day, this would really be a lovely course.
I've got the number but no price .
What what their food and everything is like, I I wonder what  
Well we could get the bus to take us a long route.
No.
What to East Kilbride?
Aha.
Mhm.
And just pretend we're going far away.
 
It doesn't matter how far you go  see the see the the time we went to .
There was one particular hole and I looked at it and thought, in a million years we will never get up there.
And I thought, you would need a miracle to get up there.
And I thought well well 
 
there's just no, I've just gotta get up.
And all of a sudden 
 
as I was climbing the hill I thought, Oh gosh, this trolley seems to be coming up here no problem.
It is a miracle.
pulled her own trolley.
and you know how  sod in rain.
And she was pulling her trolley, pushing mine and there was me toddling up there thinking, This trolleys become
But er about ?
What .
Did you say  was very hilly?
It's I don't think it's hilly, because you're up the hill, you're already up the hill.
You're right up the top of the hill .
I would I would think it'll be very expensive .
There is a lot of  cardie 
visitors welcome weekdays only
Yes fifteen pounds at weekends.
What, fifteen pence?
Pounds.
But you can't play at weekends .
No.
Sunday's quite a problem.
Do you think it's worth enquiring about  even though it's not very far.
Yes.
What about our open day by the way?
I don't know there's anything else we need to organize.
have parties on Sundays?
No.
it just says on the book weekdays only.
Weekdays only.
I know they all are though aren't they?
Well  is out then of course.
If we're talking Sunday.
How did you get on?
How did you do?
Seventy five.
I think your  would be too high at .
I don't think they'd take you in on a Sunday either?
I don't think you would go on a Sunday at .
I can't imagine we'd get Sunday.
it was all the names .
Greenbaum.
Well Greenbaum's nice.
Somebody had said something about that earlier.
if we're talking about going to the  you can go down to  play the course there, you'd only get one round played.
We could also get very  wet weather 
What's the course like Joan?
Alright.
Mm.
Just as long as not a South Westerly or a gale.
is quite a long course as well.
There's no bunkers at .
Yes there are I was seventeen on that.
It says that in the book thing, there's no bunkers.
Now how  is 
Do you think we should leave it till leave it till after our open day?
And then
then by about September we can we might get a few more positive answers .
You'll get responses.
Sunday.
Fine so we know that they take visitors.
Except Saturdays.
Visitors welcome except Saturdays.
Mhm.
Fees?
Fees are fifteen pounds.
I'm positive I didn't really mean yes I was really meaning we might get some answers that aren't  
 
nearer next year.
Fifteen pounds is a day, it's that's at weekends.
It's twelve pounds a round or fifteen pounds a day.
Full facilities available for eating.
I think it's Where's that?
West Lothian it's on the side of a hill, but how hilly I don't know.
Sixty eight.
Well maybe we should leave this till after the open day, and then we can really concentrate on it.
Go through the You take the book home, and you come up with ideas for the next meeting.
How many people have been through?
You're actually better asking people.
Well I think, there are
When you c when you're going up the hills, they're long gradients,you're not really aware of them.
And there's a quite a lot of hills heading down.
But we're not sure of facilities.
Mhm.
And doesn't  
 
we were discussing  last year.
Where is it.
It's in the address book.
How I quite enjoyed it but it's got deep bunkers.
I think we should study the book further and maybe wait till after the come back to it after our open day 
.
Now we need the minutes secretary's report now that she has er arrived.
Well she wasn't going to come so it wasn't that exciting..
Right ninety four, for the open day now.
 
Er  from last time.
I need to looking for one person,someone.
Who?
Er that  but never says anything positive.
So I haven't bought anything.
About half eleven, eleven thirty six.
My mum had tried some  but she's 
What handicap has this person got?.
Oh that?
Aye that.
She's got a caravan down
I know who you mean.
Yes.
.
Right .
Er I'll ask  if she can find anyone else.
What time?
About eleven thirty six.
Well that's when 
Right eleven thirty six.
Yes.
Right.
And the only thing is that finally after three months of waiting for the  received all their medals and things for  so it can go ahead.
They had asked for stationery and the medals that you know .
Sent me two sheets for the official ledger, two sheets  peoples handicaps, three medals and two medal certificates and that was the whole 
Also I've got to say, I've had a letter back from the F L G about the letter about .
.
.
ample facilities and we've got to use the facilities offered for nothing by members.
Mm.
Yes well there you are.
 
I rather suspected the the competition 
I don't think they'll bother.
qualifies to play in it will not  
People will not go 
No.
And maybe then they'll get the message.
Other than that I've got nothing to do .
Well the the other thing about  er that involves Margaret is the arrangements for this Wednesday.
Mhm.
Because 
Yes I was going to say about  to try and start later in the morning if that would suit people .
Well that was well this is the idea, because the funeral's ten o'clock.
I had suggested it yesterday  
And it will be eleven before the service is finished, so the earliest I think we should 
I think quarter to twelve.
I thought half past eleven tee off.
I assume everybody's just going to come straight round.
Yeah.
There.
Because I'd sort of said that  
 
It's No I was going to say, there are those perhaps who'd h haven't heard and those who don't know about it.
If somebody  if they turn up at the normal time, I assume when though there's you know  we could leave a not a not a notice and they could just go out.
Mhm.
I mean, that means there's no draw I suppose that those of us who've been  could have a quick draw when we
Well in my
.
I mean there's nothing to stop them doing that .
Who how many people are there?
Location fourteen miles North of Dumfries.
Parkland, erm weekends, fourteen pounds.
Eating facilities available, except Monday.
Margaret , me, Carol, Morag,.
Now I don't know about Morag  you know, and Mae  knows.
It's a well e aye.
Are you playing in the morning?
And so you were going as well.
So it's just a matter, as soon as we come back, get out.
Yes.
That's it.
Mhm.
So we don't really need to make a set time actually, if we're all there we just all come and we just .
 

Right.
Right so that er well that, there really isn't a problem then on Wednesday morning .
Margaret.
It's not in the book?
 

 

Right, can we go on to the open day?
Erm
Not till I get my pen back.


Do you want this one then?
We should really get, organize
I mean Mae'll be around as of next week.
I don't think she'll be staying off for any great length of time, with the open day coming up I think she'll be 
 
quite keen to get back so, we don't want to go.
I think she'll find life abnormal enough
do the normal routine she does  she'll maybe think .
I mean the if she were going to be  next week or something, she'll maybe want to organize most of it herself.
Aha.
We should put notices up soon ab asking for donations for her tombola 
 
We could start doing that.
Thank you.
Maybe as of 
open day Margaret, we were saying that we er we should really put the notices up asking for donations for the tombola.
And do you think we start selling raffles tickets, any time.
Is it too soon or is it
having a raffle.
The tombola took in 
Aye.
about two hundred pounds.
And everybody brings stuff for it.
Black fishnets?
No they were
 

quite sure he hasn't heard of  before.
 

I'll tell you about it at the end.
. Did you not realize Carol there was
You're on tape, you're Candid Camera .
I didn't know what it was there for.
Aye well that's recording us.
to get everything in the minutes.
Well this is for blackmail purposes.
 

So apart from that, do we need do we start  do we wait till next week before we start selling raffle tickets?
Do you know if Helen has got the  for the 
 
Well there are prizes.
If anybody says, What are the prizes?
I'll say see Agnes cos she knows  
Never mind the prizes  
And Agnes'll .
And all the lady members always either before or on the day, come up with bags of stuff for the tombola.
Oh yes we always.
And we've got the two I've got the two 
Great.
Yes.
Eventually.
Eventually.
I want one, I want one.
They're lovely actually, they're nice 
we were in town on Saturday and I saw two really nice sports bags, but we had so many parcels I I didn't hadn't the heart to suggest to Bill we
Aha.
buy any more .
But I'll I'll go and get them soon.
now got two A A books, this years of that, similar to that.
two sets of head covers.
And other things.
we were talking about them, we were raising money to to buy extra practice 
Were we?
You don't need it then it just goes, you know it can go into the
We need raffle tickets.
Oh we need to get raffle tickets, Obviously  this Wednesday, till we get more.
I suppose so.
Of course we can start selling raffle tickets.
  

What else do we need?
 
That's a shame .
Oh listen Margaret do you know  looking for the the plinth in the drawer.
No we'll find it.
Anything else we have to do for the open day?
Do you want a typewritten sheet, remember last year you had a typewritten sheet .
Well that's right, we don't actually need that.
I remember sitting helping to write the cards the night before and we were writing them off a typewritten sheet.
Is the any to compare the the entries we have this year with the entries we got last year.
And see who's not coming this year that did last year.
It just might be somebody we know, and jog them along and say
those lists you did, those typewritten lists from last year.
probably destroyed but they should be on disk.
They should still be  disk.
It might be worth going through them and er anybody we think  
Aye cos I mean we we thought
We should do this for the mixed open as well, keep a a note of the entries from one year to the other and you can get in touch with people and say, Are you playing or not  
We don't have all that many places left do we 
how many can we take all together.
Is the morning getting full.
The morning's just about full
Well it might be worth looking through last year's list  in the day.
Right if Edie can manage to find that, if she doesn't mind.
Well and do you want me to do one for this year?
Yes.
Who does the notices that go up?
we ask  to help .
I d think we can leave that actually till just nearer 
I was told that 's just verbally agreed rather than 
Aha.
officially agreed.
Yeah.
But it is nice if they are asked, sometimes it's sometimes they are just expected to do and if they haven't been officially asked.
It's nice no to be forgotten about as well.
That happens that's happened in the 
Yeah I think 
past .
Yes cos they've been starting
Oh that would be good cos I was going to say normally,is er sort of up in that corner in charge of the tombola but er
Just don't 
This is the some the th one of the things I was going to suggest about I was going to leave it till next meeting, is that we we try and organize ourselves so that we are not su Last year I found myself sitting there frantically writing names on raffle tickets, knowing I was going out to play in about ten minutes, but there was nobody there to take over.
Well that's it.
You know I should be back when there's somebody going away 
Well we could maybe leave it till the next committee meeting to to organize ourselves to 
So we know what sort of times we're expected to be sort of selling raffle tickets and
Another thing, it's quite easy to get mixed up.
And it's better really if one person does it.
I don't know if Anne wants to do it or not.
Is putting the numbers on the tombola.
On the prizes
Well I was going to say
That's quite a lot of work for
It is
Yes but on the day, people are walking up there with carrier bags full of the stuff, and it's got to be done, and put out.
Maybe the week before Is all the stuff coming here this time though
was taking it all home.
There's nowhere to store it
I took it home last year.
Well we need maybe I don't know
I had everything in in the house any anything that they'd brought up early beforehand.
That's right.
the stuff down the night before with the 
Yes.
numbers on it?
Perhaps we should leave that for Mae cos maybe Mae would like to do that herself.
If she If she has room at home .
Right yes I would agree.
Okay?
Mhm.
We'll just leave that for the meantime and keep We'll we'll remember.
We can't just leave it till our next meeting cos it only is
.
I'll maybe speak to her about it a week, a week on Wednesday I I assume she'll be back then.
Try and remember to say to her.
I might have a problem  my daughter's expecting on the twenty first of this month.
And I intend to go down to London.
Mhm.
Right now I'd hoped  but if she's late.
Yes yes.
problem.
Well don't worry about it 
I can do I can  I can sort out 
I'm gonna ask Moira to do the cheque, write the cheque.
What cheque?
The presentation cheque.
Now don't worry about it, I'll help you with that anyway Edie.
already had a list.
I don't know whether there'll only be one or not.
Yes well Bill  and and Margaret .
Usually usually Charlie helps down the
and Sam  usually.
Is he going to help?
working.
Oh you're working.
How dare you be working?
day is it?
Wednesday.
You're working.
might be on holiday.
It's just so we can send you an official love letter.
You can't be on holiday.
You can't go away on holiday, Helen's got to be here on the day.
It's Helen's place
I don't know when we're starting back, I'm not sure.
No you start on the Thursday, you keep Wednesday off.
Funny that isn't it.
 

we just get started we get  Do you get the raffle tickets too?
Edie?
Is that 
I get the raffle tickets.
I could probably get cheap ones.
As long as they can tear.
They're very hard when you're in a hurry .
What were you doing?
About a fiver or something 
So each of those big books with a thousand tickets  only cost me a pound.
They're over two pounds if you buy them in John Menzies.
Mhm.
It's easy to take off the outside when when you come to take the inside ones it's quite difficult.
Sometimes the inside ones depend how carefully the the ones on top 
That that's right.
And it it's easy when you're not busy, but if you get a spell of being busy,.
How much are the raffle tickets going to be?
The usual fifty pence a strip?
Making it clear to them they get they get it's not
they're not going in in strips, they're g they're getting five chances for their fifty pence.
It's very common nowadays 
I know but it's only giving you one
I think it's better if you give them fi They'll buy more tickets if they're getting
I think they'll just buy a strip anyway.
That's right you don't want just to have four chances, you want to have twenty chances .
No I was saying if I was saying if I was going to spend that on raffle tickets, it wouldn't matter if I was getting
The other thing is we sometimes get children around and they come and they just want to buy.
You know two tickets.
Well their mother'll have to give them
I think we just we should stick to er giving them five chances for their.
It just means like a person could
more people have the opportunity of winning.
It's perfect to  we're going to get raffle tickets and hopefully get started selling them.
A week on Wednesday or so.
Yes I think.
This Wednesday?
Right okay we just we
If you start on those two books and then
Oh I see.
Ju I thought you were talking about the tombola when you were saying fifty pence a strip, sorry.
Something like that yes.
Is that the usual.
So we get more raffle tickets this week.
Is there anything else that we Right those are the the most imp urgent things,get the notices up and er Who does the by the way Who is it 
Will you please do them this year Agnes?
No.
Have you time?
Probably.
Thank goodness  tomorrow?
For Wednesday .
Wednesday.
I'll see if I c if I've got any paper lying about the house.
Can anybody think of anything else ?
That's no problem.
Any other er business?
I'd like to ask something, I don't know if it's got anything to do with it or not, but it really annoyed me yesterday.
And that was the eighth green not being on.
Well
And what I was playing was an official competition.
It was an official competition.
It's because  
Yes well that's that was noth Yesterday was nothing whatsoever to do with the L G U or the ladies section.
But tomorrow we'll be on the the green.
And we will be playing from the tee which is at the front left hand corner.
What sh happened yesterday actually was, that the big flag on the new green, should have been taken out.
But it wasn't.
The front corner front left hand corner of that of 
 
the new tee, is our official tee and er that's where it will stay a onto the new green.
It's a par three and I'm assured that it measures more than the hundred and forty yards required for us to be par three.
That was a mistake.
The big flag should have been taken off the the new green and it wasn't.
that that green wasn't put on for that competition.
Well I would agree with you there but that's  we weren't running it, and we'd nothing to do with er with the organizing of yesterday's .
So there should be no problem on Wednesday at all on Wednesday.
But that is we we're going to go We'll on Wednesday officially we'll be on the new green .
for extra day scores then
It's still a par three.
See we're that's what makes us well that's what makes us seventy two now.
Any other er
Any other er business then ladies?
I think 
Next meeting.
The next meeting I think we'd already agreed it was going to be the first Monday in August which I think is the
 
