

Bernard Capp
,John (d. c. 1639), Puritan minister, is best known for his influential millenarian treatise, published posthumously.
He is probably the John Archer who graduated MA from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1626.
In September 1627 he was licensed to preach anywhere in London, and became a lecturer at St Antholin's and All Hallows', Lombard Street.
Samuel Hartlib [q.v.], seeking relief in England for distressed Protestants abroad, named him in 1630 as a leading well-wisher.
Archer was soon in trouble over his Puritan scruples.
In December 1630 he was silenced by William Laud [q.v.]for not catechizing according to the form laid down in the Prayer Book, and for refusing to bow at the name of Jesus.
The sentence was lifted after he submitted in January 1631, but by March Laud had found further evidence against him.
The feoffees for impropriations came to his rescue by offering him the vicarage of All Saints', Hertford (where the millenarian Christopher Feake, q.v., was later to serve).
He was instituted there on 3 May 1631 and served for several years.
Archer suffered from very poor health in this period.
According to Thomas Edwards [q.v.], a friend despite their differences, he was consumptive and often close to death, and rarely able to preach.
He was also deeply unhappy with the religious climate of Laudian England.
In 1637 he decided to settle abroad, and he arrived in Holland on 27 July.
He was favourably impressed by Utrecht, ‘a brave City, a University with godly professors, full of English’, but pressed on to Arnhem, where he became pastor of the English church.
Enjoying better health than for many years, he was able to become an active preacher.
Thomas Goodwin and Philip Nye [qq.v.]also belonged to the congregation.
Archer died while still abroad, probably in 1639.
Archer's treatise The Personall Reigne of Christ upon Earth was published in London late in 1641 or early in 1642, and predicted that the millennium was close at hand.
It prophesied the calling of the Jews in 1650 or 1656, the fall of Rome in 1666, and the coming of Christ around 1700.
Having set up his kingdom Christ would withdraw to heaven, returning at the end of the thousand years.
The book appeared at a time of great political and religious excitement and caused a considerable stir.
It went quickly through several impressions, and did much to foster the spread of millenarian ideas in England.
Archer urged readers to leave matters in God's hands, but he also predicted the imminent overthrow of earthly kings; the revolutionary implications were obvious to many contemporaries, including the Fifth Monarchists.
In 1645 the bookseller Benjamin Allen published some of Archer's other writings.
Comfort for Beleevers , a pastoral treatise never intended for the press, provoked a storm by declaring that God was in part the author of the sins of the godly.
Archer had intended this to reassure church members troubled by their human frailties, but the Westminster Assembly was outraged by its antinomian implications and sent deputations to Parliament in July 1645 to denounce it as heretical and blasphemous.
The Lords and Commons both ordered the book to be burned by the public hangman and all remaining copies to be seized.
Instructions about Right Beleeving , a collection of sermons, was uncontroversial.
The identity of Archer's wife is unknown.
Their only child was born while the family was living in Arnhem.
[P. Seaver,The Puritan Lectureships , 1970; I. Calder, ‘A Seventeenth Century Attempt to Purify the Anglican Church’,American Historical Review , vol. lii, 1947–8; P. Christianson,Reformers and Babylon , 1978; C. Webster,Samuel Hartlib and the Advancement of Learning , 1970; T. Edwards,Antapologia , 1644.]
A V Simcock
,Elias (c. 1588–1653), mathematical instrument-maker, was born about 1588 in Ashurst, Kent, of unknown parentage.
He was apprenticed about 1602 to the London engraver and instrument-maker Charles Whitwell, with whom he claimed to have served nine years by the time of Whitwell's death in 1611.
He became a freeman of the London Grocers' Company on 7 July 1612.
From Black Horse Alley, off Fleet Street, he later moved his shop to the sign of the Horse Shoe in the Strand.
He was first mentioned as a maker of surveying instruments in 1611.
His reputation for skill and accuracy was quickly established.
He collaborated with many mathematicians and inventors in putting new forms of instrument into production.
Most creative was his friendship with William Oughtred [q.v.]: their ‘Circles of Proportion’(1632), for instance, was the earliest form of slide-rule.
At the height of his career, in 1634, Allen gave a horizontal sundial to the church of his native Ashurst.
He made several instruments for James I and Charles I, and clearly occupied a position equivalent to the later instrument-makers to the king.
He was active in London guild life, especially in the newly formed Clockmakers' Company, of which he became master in 1637.
Mathematical practitioners met at this period in a ‘club’ under his leadership.
Among their achievements was to agree upon the size of a standard English foot.
Allen made his shop a centre of such activities, and also gave instruction in the use of instruments.
He was, to a great extent, the founder of the scientific instrument-making profession in Great Britain.
Fourteen apprentices were trained by him, the most distinguished of whom was Ralph Greatorex [q.v.].
An engraving of Allen by Wenceslaus Hollar [q.v.](from a lost painting) is one of the few portraits of an English artisan of so early a period, and bears witness to his fame.
His wife, whose name is not known, died before him, and they had one daughter.
He was buried at St Clement Dane's, London, 1 April 1653.
[Joyce Brown,Mathematical Instrument-Makers in the Grocers' Company 1688–1800 , 1979; E. G. R. Taylor,The Mathematical Practitioners of Tudor & Stuart England , 1954; A. J. Turner, ‘William Oughtred, Richard Delamain and the Horizontal Instrument in Seventeenth Century England’,Annali dell' Istituto e Museo di Storia della Scienza di Firenze , anno vi, 1981, pp. 99–125.]
Peter Leach
,Lewis William (1777–1853), architect, was baptized 25 August 1777 in Weeford, Staffordshire, the second of the four sons of Benjamin Wyatt (d .
1818), land surveyor and occasional architect, of Weeford — and, later, agent to the Penrhyn estates of Bangor, north Wales — and his wife Sarah, daughter of William Ford, brewer, of Burton-on-Trent.
From 1795 to 1800 he was apprenticed to his uncle Samuel [q.v.], during which time in 1797 he started exhibiting at the Royal Academy, and in the beginnings of his career he was indebted in different ways to both Samuel and his other architect uncle, James [q.v.].
In 1800 he became assistant to the latter, who at the same time gave him a post in the Office of Works as labourer in trust at Carlton House and also employed him in connection with his work as surveyor of the ordnance; his first recorded works — minor country-house commissions in Staffordshire, of 1803–5 — were designed in James's office for execution by the Wyatt family building business; and in 1805 he submitted designs for Downing College, Cambridge, after those by James had been severely criticized by Thomas Hope [q.v.], perhaps in an attempt to salvage the commission for the family.
Then, setting up in practice on his own c .1806, he was employed at Heaton Hall, Lancashire, where both James and Samuel had worked previously; and on Samuel's death in 1807 he completed two of his commissions, Tatton Park, Cheshire, and Hackwood Park, Hampshire, and in effect succeeded to his practice in the Cheshire area.
Wyatt's subsequent work was primarily as a country-house architect and ‘improver’, although he competed unsuccessfully for a number of major public commissions and in 1816 published a Prospectus of a Design for Various Improvements in the Metropolis , in which he made radical proposals for replanning the West End.
In 1813, however, he succeeded James Wyatt as architect to the Middlesex Hospital, holding the post until 1829, and he also made some further progress in the Office of Works: in 1818 he was promoted to the clerkship of the works for the eastern division, transferring in 1829 to Hampton Court, but he then lost his position in the reorganization of the office in 1832.
In 1815 he visited Paris, in 1820 he made a six months' visit to Italy, and in 1825 he was in Paris again, having been sent to supervise repairs at the British embassy.
The predominant feature of his architecture is a marked stylistic eclecticism.
A number of works, including his finest, Willey Hall, Shropshire (1813–15), are in a monumental neo-classical manner developed from the late work of his uncles Samuel and James; at Cuerden Hall, Lancashire (1815), he experimented with a ‘picturesque classicist’ mode reminiscent in part of the work of Sir John Vanbrugh [q.v.]and in part of the contemporary ‘primitivist’idiom; while at Cranage Hall, Cheshire (1828–9), he used the Tudor style and at Sherborne House, Gloucestershire (1829–34), produced a convincing copy of an Elizabethan design.
Similarly skilful pastiches of interior decorative styles included work at Hackwood (1807–13) and Lyme Park, Cheshire (1814–17), in an English late seventeenth-century manner, and at Hawkstone Hall, Shropshire (1832–4), and elsewhere in the Louis XIV mode particularly associated with his cousins Benjamin [q.v.]and Philip Wyatt.
The death of Wyatt's father in 1818 left him quite a wealthy man, able to indulge a taste for connoisseurship and collecting works of art.
He married late in life but in 1833 his wife died in childbirth, the baby also dying; and about two years after this tragedy and after a series of professional reverses, notably the discovery of defective work at Sherborne House, which led to a negligence award against him, he gave up architectural practice.
He then retired to a small property near Ryde on the Isle of Wight, where he spent his later years carrying out improvements to the grounds and where he died 14 February 1853.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978;idem (ed.),
The History of the King's Works , vol. vi, 1973; John Martin Robinson,The Wyatts , 1979.]
Bernarr Rainbow
,Henry George Bonavia- (1847–1917), founder of Trinity College of Music, London, was born 30 June 1847 in Valetta, Malta, the eldest surviving son of William Hunt, former private secretary to the bishop of Jerusalem, and his second wife, Marietta Bonavia, daughter of a Maltese doctor of Italian extraction.
He was educated at King's College School, London, and later made journalism his career, but the strong religious instinct on his father's side and a love of music inherited from his Italian forebears combined to provide another vocation.
On becoming choirmaster at south Hackney parish church (1872–5) Hunt gathered the support of leading organists in London and in 1872 set up an independent institution to provide better training for church musicians.
Known to begin with as the Church Choral Society, it was renamed the College of Church Music in the following year.
Meanwhile Hunt was studying music in his spare time.
He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1872 and graduated B.Mus. in 1876.
Persuaded by his own musical studies of the need to educate rather than indoctrinate church musicians, he extended the aims of the College of Church Music, incorporating it for the purpose in 1875 ‘by special licence under Act of Parliament’ as Trinity College, London.
He was warden from 1872 to 1892.
To equip future students to sit for degrees in music made newly available at London University after 1879, Hunt now arranged an ‘arts’ class at the college to prepare candidates for matriculation, while broadening the music curriculum to conform with the university's new syllabuses.
Then in 1879 he sought affiliation with the University of Durham; but objections by the Royal Academy and Royal College of Music prevented his developing stronger links with either university.
However, soon after graduating at Oxford, Hunt had achieved a long-held aspiration upon his ordination at Winchester in 1878.
Following successive curacies at Esher in Surrey, St Philip's in Regent Street, and St James's, Piccadilly, he was then inducted vicar of St Paul's, Kilburn, in 1887.
In all those appointments he was popular both as preacher and pastor, but he kept up his musical activities, graduating D.Mus.
(Trinity College, Dublin) in 1887.
Energetic and many-sided, Hunt edited or sub-edited several popular magazines and journals, including the Quiver (1865–1905) and Cassell's Magazine (1874–96), besides founding and editing a children's paper,Little Folks , until 1876.
Further, between 1900 and 1906 he was lecturer in musical history at London University and his Concise History of Music (1878) was much used, reaching a nineteenth edition in 1915.
In 1870 Hunt married Louisa Madeline, daughter of Eugene Carless, chemical manufacturer, of Stratford.
They had two sons and two daughters.
On his induction as incumbent of Burgess Hill, Sussex, in 1905 Hunt resigned his remaining London appointments.
He died of heart failure under anaesthetic during a routine operation 27 September 1917 in Brighton.
[Mid-Sussex Times , 2 and 9 October 1917;Musical Opinion , November 1917; Percy A. Scholes,The Mirror of Music , 1947; George Grove,Dictionary of Music and Musicians , 1st edn., 1878–89;Organist and Choirmaster , July 1919.]
Gillian Avery
,Hugh John (1886–1947), writer, was born 14 January 1886 in Maidenhead, Berkshire, the fourth son in the family of five sons and one daughter of an Irishman, John Brien Lofting, clerk of works, and Elizabeth Agnes Cannon, his English wife.
From the age of eight he was a pupil at Mount St Mary's College, a Jesuit school in Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
Despite an early passion for natural history (he had used his mother's linen cupboard as a combined zoo and museum) his first impulse was to train as a civil engineer, hoping thereby for opportunities to travel.
In 1904 he began his studies at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, but he returned to England a year later and completed the course at the London Polytechnic.
He was in Canada in 1908–9 prospecting and surveying; he worked on the Lagos Railway in West Africa 1910–11, and in 1912 was employed as an engineer by the United Railways of Havana.
He gave up engineering that year and went to the United States, where he married Flora Small of New York and settled to writing.
He worked for the British Ministry of Information in New York during 1915, returning to England in 1916 to enlist with the Irish Guards, but was wounded and invalided out in 1917.
The family settled in Madison, Connecticut, in 1919, and Lofting began writing again.
His first book appeared in New York in 1920,The Story of Doctor Dolittle , an account of the gently eccentric John Dolittle who gives up his medical practice in order to devote himself to treating animals, learning all their various languages with the help of Polynesia, his sage and authoritative parrot.
The saga, which was illustrated with his own naïve pen-and-ink drawings, had its origins in the compassion he had felt for the sufferings of the animals in the past war (‘If we made [them]take the same chances as we did ourselves, why did we not give them similar attention when wounded?’) and in the letters about an imaginary horse surgery that he had written home from the front to his two children, Elizabeth and Colin (the latter of whom habitually called himself Dr Dolittle).
It was an instant success and its sequel,The Voyages of Doctor Dolittle , received the American Library Association Newbery medal in 1923.
The exploits of the doctor and his household of animals were to be recorded in twelve books, always set in England at some unspecified time in the middle of the last century.
(None of his books indicated that he had spent so much of his life in America.)
At first he took an exuberant delight in the books and in embellishing them with fantastic quasi-scientific detail, for, after the slapstick of his first book with its visit to the comic African court of the Jolliginki where the black Prince Bumpo yearns to be white, the tone is increasingly sophisticated and inventive.
But he became weary of his creation and with Doctor Dolittle in the Moon (1928) he hoped that he had seen the end of his hero.
It was a time of great personal sadness; his first wife had died in 1927; he had married Katherine Harrower-Peters the following year, but she too had died a few months later in an influenza epidemic.
He was to marry Josephine Fricker, of Toronto, in 1935, by whom he had a son, Christopher.
He brought the doctor back to earth in Doctor Dolittle's Return (1933), and there was to be one last book,Doctor Dolittle and the Secret Lake , built round the story of the Flood with Dr Dolittle as a latter-day Noah.
It was published posthumously in 1948.
But he was in poor health when the latter was written, and both books reflect his increasing pessimism about international affairs; as Edward Blishen says, ‘the positive and determined John Dolittle has been replaced by an unhappy dreamer.’
The two other posthumous Dolittle books are collections of short stories.
The unworldly, peace-loving doctor, oblivious of both material comfort and public opinion, is in some respects a self-portrait.
Lofting had expressed in articles in the Nation in 1923 and 1924 his strong feelings about the glorification of war and violence ‘which seems as yet to be part of every child's metamorphosis’, and horror of war is the theme of the poem,Victory for the Slain (1942), his only published work for adult readers.
He wrote a handful of other books for children, which were mostly picture-books, but included a full-length fantasy,The Twilight of Magic (1930).
Lofting died 26 September 1947 at his home in Topanga, California.
[The Times , 30 September 1947; Edward Blishen,Hugh Lofting , 1968.]
Monica E Baly
,Florence Sarah (1840–1922), pioneer of district nursing, was born in Blandford, Dorset, 31 March 1840, the only daughter of Henry Lees, medical doctor, and his wife Matilda Physhyian.
Henry Lees deserted his family and Florence was brought up by a half-brother, an Oxford don, who sent her to school in London.
In 1864 the family moved to St Leonards, where Florence helped her mother visiting the sick.
In 1866 she went to St Thomas's nursing school as an observer for four months and the following year studied at the Kaiserswerth Institute on the Rhine, under Pastor Theodor Fliedner, subsequently visiting many hospitals in Europe.
Returning to England, she gained further experience at King's College Hospital before returning to France to study nursing there.
With the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian war in 1870, Florence Lees volunteered for war nursing and the Crown Princess Frederick of Prussia, Queen Victoria's eldest daughter, made her superintendent of the Royal Reserve Hospital at Homburg.
For her services she received the German war medal and the cross of the German Order of Merit.
Still anxious to pursue her nursing studies, she toured America and was impressed by the advanced ideas of Dr Palmer Howard, who held that nurses must be educated in the manner of medical students.
However, back in England Florence Nightingale and William Rathbone [qq.v.]were wrestling with the problem of starting a district-nursing scheme for London and they persuaded Florence Lees to return and ‘harness her great cleverness’ to conducting a survey of the nursing needs of London.
Single-handedly she produced a report which was a masterly review of the nursing practice in London — and its shortcomings — in 1874.
As a result, with the help of the Order of St John, the Metropolitan and National Nursing Association was founded to provide trained nursing in London, with a headquarters in Bloomsbury and Florence Lees as the superintendent-general.
After conflict and controversy she converted the committee to the idea of a district-nursing service as a corps of educated, trained women under the superintendence of a highly trained nurse.
In this she can be considered to be the founder of district nursing.
In 1879 Florence Lees married the Revd Dacre Craven, the rector of St George the Martyr, who supported her work and who became secretary to the Home for District Nurses in Bloomsbury Square.
He was the son of Charles Cooley Craven of Aberdeen.
They had two sons; the elder committed suicide in 1928 and the younger died in action in 1917.
When in 1887 Florence Lees persuaded Queen Victoria to devote most of the women's jubilee offering to establishing district nursing throughout England, the Cravens, together with Florence Nightingale and William Rathbone, were instrumental in ensuring that the Metropolitan and National Nursing Association became the model for Queen Victoria's Jubilee Institute for Nurses.
Mrs Craven served on the original council and advised on the training.
In 1889 she published a Guide to District Nurses and Home Nursing which became essential reading for district nurses.
She was awarded the Jubilee medal and the cross of St John of Jerusalem and remained closely associated with district nursing until she and her husband retired to Walton-on-the-Naze in 1918.
Florence Lees died 24 October 1922, saying that she could not live without her husband, who had died two months previously.
There is a brass memorial to the Craven family at the parish church in Walton-on-the-Naze.
[Mary Stocks,A Hundred Years of District Nursing , 1960; Monica Baly,A History of the Queen's Nursing Institute , 1987; information from the registrar for the district of Poole and the vicar of the parish church in Walton-on-the-Naze.]
Peter Leach
,Henry Edmund (1797–1864), architect, was baptized 26 July 1797 at St Michael's church, Bath, the son of James Goodridge, a leading builder in the city who carried out much of the development in the suburb of Bathwick, and his wife Anna Buck.
He was apprenticed to John Lowder, then architect to the city, and supplemented this training by visits to France c .1818 and later, in 1829, to Italy.
Setting up independently in the city c .1820, he developed a successful practice both in Bath itself and in the neighbouring areas of Somerset and Wiltshire.
Harvey Lonsdale Elmes [q.v.], subsequently the architect of St George's Hall in Liverpool, was an assistant in his office from 1834 to 1837.
Goodridge's best-known work is the Lansdown tower on the edge of the city, built in 1824–7 for the celebrated William Beckford [q.v.], who had settled in Bath in 1823; and this and his own residence, Montebello (later Bathwick Grange) on Bathwick Hill (1828–30), are compositions of great originality, combining a Picturesque irregularity of form with an eclectic mixture of Greek and Italianate detail.
Others of his early works are more conventionally neo-classical in manner, but he also designed a number of churches in the Gothic style, some of which — notably that in Rode Hill, Somerset (1822–4)— are highly, indeed bizarrely, individual, while his Devizes Castle, Wiltshire (c .1840) is in a neo-Norman idiom.
In his entry for the competition for the Houses of Parliament (1835) he proposed an octagonal House of Commons and a House of Lords in the form of a ‘baronial hall with minstrel gallery’.
Goodridge's ‘great passion’ was ‘the picturesque in landscape gardening’, which he exercised in the grounds of his Bathwick villa.
He exhibited occasionally at the Royal Academy and became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects ‘at a very early period of [the]Institution’.
In 1822 he married Matilda Yockney.
They had a son, Alfred Samuel, by whom Goodridge's practice was continued after he retired,c .1855.
He died 26 October 1864 and was buried at Lansdown cemetery, Bath.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978;Gentleman's Magazine , vol. ii, 1822; A. S. Goodridge, ‘Brief Memoir of the late Henry Edmund Goodridge’,R.I.B.A. Sessional Papers , 1864–5.]
Godfrey Smith
,Norman Hector Leifchild (‘Nathaniel’)(1893–1976), humorous columnist, was born 31 May 1893 at 4 Somerset Road, Ealing, Middlesex, the only surviving son (there were also three older daughters, of whom the younger two were twins) of William Gubbins, commercial traveller, formerly an Oxfordshire farmworker who had run away to London at the age of twelve to sell groceries, and his wife Marie Cecile Richards.
His father died when he was two.
Gubbins was educated at Battersea Polytechnic, but was taken away at sixteen when the headmaster told his mother that educating him had proved a hopeless task.
He began work in the Daily Express library at ten shillings a week where, by his own testimony, he spent many miserable years filing cuttings in the wrong envelopes and losing reference books.
He served in World War I as a private from August 1914 to February 1919; it was, he later said, an equally unhappy experience, but he was invalided home early, which may well have saved his life.
There followed more years of miscasting as a reporter, until the editor of the Sunday Express , John Rutherford Gordon [q.v.], decided he needed a humorous column.
Gubbins got the job, he claimed later, because there was no one else in the office at the time.
His first column, under the generic strap-line ‘Sitting on the Fence’, appeared on 30 November 1930 on page 3 — a star position — and under his new by-line, Nathaniel Gubbins, which was to remain with him for life.
The first few weeks were shaky.
Gubbins seemed uncertain whether he could pull it off.
But he soon got into his stride, and began to develop a whole bestiary of characters who were to delight millions for the next twenty-three years.
There was the Worm, apotheosis of the suburban man for whom Gubbins wrote.
There was the Sparrow, vehicle for his most sustained and ferocious satire on the sex war (Sparrow dallied with the Other Sparrow at the Tree Tops Club).
There was Sally the Cat, an archetypal female, and the Ginger Cat, a tom with all the foibles of its gender.
There was a series of brilliant dialogues with his own stomach, which acquired a separate, living, suffering identity as Tum, his gastric doppelgänger .
(Gubbins suffered from chronic dyspepsia, smoked fifty cigarettes a day, and confessed he found the world intolerable without a glass in his hand.)
Gubbins was at his finest during World War II (he mocked his Home Guard service but in truth was an artillery officer at a secret Home Guard site).
He was a hero to the Eighth Army, the darling of W. M. Aitken, first Baron Beaverbrook [q.v.], and the subject of two Times leaders.
The BBC ran a series of Thursday evening programmes, based on his characters, in 1944.
In 1953, Beaverbrook decided the column had lost its appeal.
Gubbins was sacked; he moved to the Sunday Dispatch , but the transplant did not take.
The last twenty years of his life were spent in retirement; indeed, he had to write to the Sunday Times in 1963 to point out that he was not, as they had reported, dead.
In 1922 he married Phyllis Magdalen Hughes, fashion editor of the Daily Mirror .
She was the daughter of Francis George Hughes, a furnishing company's representative.
They had two daughters, one of whom died at the age of thirty-eight, and one of whom, Stephanie, was to appear in the Gubbins oeuvre as The Awful Child, forever asking awkward questions.
She married the writer Leo Walmsley.
Gubbins died 3 February 1976 at Victoria Hospital in Deal.
[The Best of Nathaniel Gubbins , selected and introduced by Godfrey Smith, 1978; private information.]
Colin P Griffin
, Sir George , first baronet (1814–1893), collier, industrialist, and politician, was born in Gateshead 18 March 1814, the son of Ralph Elliot, pitman, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Braithwaite, of Newcastle upon Tyne.
He began work as a boy at the Pensher coalmine of Charles Stewart, third Marquis of Londonderry [q.v.], and had become an overman by 1837.
He was undermanager (1841) and manager (1844) at Monkwearmouth, then the deepest mine in Britain;c .1845 he became a managing partner in Washington colliery, and sole owner of Unsworth.
He became viewer (that is, inspector) to Lord Londonderry's collieries in 1848, and bought Pensher from him.
In the 1860s he extended his ownership of collieries into north and south Wales, north and south Staffordshire, and Nova Scotia.
In 1849 he had bought a wire-rope business which laid the first permanent transatlantic telegraph cable in 1866.
Elliot was one of a new type of mining engineer whose expertise extended to many parts of the industry.
He helped to found the Institute of Mining Engineers in 1852, and was a member of its council (1852–7), vice-president (1865–8), and president (1868–9).
He was in the forefront of experiments in mining technology, and an advocate of improved safety lamps, shaft detaching hooks, and coal-cutting machinery.
Trials at his collieries of new ventilating methods, such as the fan and high-pressure steam jets, were widely discussed, and he made a major contribution to the most efficient method of mining coal simultaneously in adjacent seams.
He argued that economy, efficiency, and safety were compatible and, unlike many of his colleagues, supported the establishment of the Mines Inspectorate.
His attitude to labour changed from that of an early nineteenth-century Tory paternalist, advocating model villages provided by employers and condemning trade unions, to that of a post-Disraelian Conservative who believed in self-help and free collective bargaining.
He was elected MP for the mining constituencies of West Durham (1868–80), East Durham (1881–5), and Monmouth (1886–92); his parliamentary work was mostly concerned with matters affecting the coal industry and the City, though he was also an early advocate of ‘gas and water socialism’.
He appeared as an expert witness before several government inquiries, and was a commissioner on that investigating mine safety in 1882.
In 1893 he made an unsuccessful attempt to solve the coal industry's economic and labour difficulties by proposing the amalgamation of collieries into a massive semi-public enterprise monitored by the Board of Trade, which would control output, fix prices, pay fair wages, and establish a miners' welfare fund.
In 1836 he married Margaret (died 1880), daughter of George Green of Rainton, Durham; they had two sons and four daughters.
In 1874 Elliot became the first of the coal industry's business leaders to receive a baronetcy.
He was an honorary DCL (Durham) and DL and JP (Durham and Monmouth).
Socially, he was not regarded as a model of refinement, and was known to his Durham constituents as ‘Bonnie Geordie’.
He was a member of four London clubs, and owned two substantial country residences, in addition to the London house at Portland Place in which he died, 23 December 1893.
He left £561,044.
His elder son died in 1874 and he was succeeded in the baronetcy by his second son, George William (born 1844).
[The Times , 20 September and 25 December 1893;Transactions of the North of England Institute of Mining Engineers , 1855–6, 1868–9; H. W. Macrosty,The Trust Movement in British Industry , 1907; R. A. Church,A History of the British Coal Mining Industry: vol.
III, 1893–1913 , 1986.]
Bridget Hill
,,, or ,Barbara (c. 1609–1704), a leading Quaker preacher of Bristol, was ‘a woman of good parts and education’ and well connected.
Her husband, about whom nothing is known, probably died young, leaving her a widow with a small income which she supplemented by teaching.
She was converted to Quakerism in 1654 by John Audland and John Camm [q.v.].
Of her earlier life we know only that she ‘feared the Lord’ and ‘sought’him ‘earnestly’.
She may have been one of the Bristol Seekers from whom many Quakers at this time were recruited.
After conversion, to ‘subdue her body’, for a year she abstained ‘from all Flesh, Wine and Beer’, drinking only water.
‘She became plain both in Speech and Habit’, alienating her employers and losing her pupils.
For entering churches in Bristol ‘to bear testimony against their formalities’, she was imprisoned for three months in 1654.
Leaving a meeting at a private house she was stabbed, narrowly escaping death.
To gain the release from prison of two Quaker preachers, she went to Basingstoke.
Denied access to them, she successfully pleaded their cause with the mayor.
In 1656, when several Quakers were imprisoned in Ireland, she felt called to continue their mission and sailed for Cork.
A storm forced her boat into Dublin, where she met the deputy, Henry Cromwell [q.v.], and cautioned him about his treatment of Quakers.
She left him ‘much troubled and…melancholy’.
In Cork her religious enthusiasm and the power of her preaching alarmed friends.
She was accused of witchcraft, and imprisoned.
A letter to George Fox [q.v.]told of a call to Jerusalem, but she was dissuaded and on release went home.
Shortly afterwards she was back in Dublin, exhorting judges in the Court of Justice to righteousness.
Again imprisoned, ‘she suffered much’.
Only the intervention of powerful friends obtained her release.
She went to Limerick, was imprisoned, and moved to Cork and Kinsail gaols before being released and banished.
In 1657 in Marlborough she attempted to speak in the church following the service, was attacked, brought before a magistrate, and imprisoned for six weeks, during which she fasted six days.
On release she went to the mayor and so powerful were her reproaches that he ‘acknowledged the truth of her doctrine’ and henceforth attempted to protect Quakers.
She visited Molton, Barnstaple, and Bideford in the west country ‘in all of which places a Prison was her Lot’.
Bearing witness in Great Torrington she was sent to Exeter prison, long detained before trial, and finally ‘Whipt till the Blood ran down my back’.
After the Restoration she remained active.
The year 1681 found her in prison in Bristol for attending a Quaker meeting.
Two years later in Ilchester, Somerset, she was again imprisoned, and the same year she was fined £280 for non-attendance at the local Anglican church.
In 1686 she wrote to James II about the continued imprisonment of many Quakers.
Her memoirs, published in 1691 but almost certainly circulated privately long before, end in 1657.
In 1689 two other writings intended for publication were, in the ‘sensitive political climate’, censored.
She died in London in 1704.
[Barbara Blaugdone,An Account of the Travels, Suferings, and Persecution of Barbara Blaugdone , 1691; William Sewel,The History of the Rise, Increase, and Progress of the Christian People called Quakers , 1722; J. Besse,A Collection of the Sufferings of the People called Quakers , 2 vols., 1753; William Braithwaite,The Beginnings of Quakerism , 1912; M. R. Brailsford,Quaker Women 1650–1690 , 1915.]
Isobel Grundy
,Laetitia-Matilda (1759–1835), author, was born in London and baptized 8 August 1759, the second of three children and only daughter of Sir John Hawkins, attorney, musicologist, and biographer whom Samuel Johnson [q.v.]famously called ‘unclubbable’, and his wife Sidney Storer, whose inheritance (added to her original dowry) enabled the family in 1760 to acquire a fine house in Twickenham.
Her first novel was published before 1780 by Thomas Hookham after rejection by Thomas Cadell [q.v.].
Written to raise money for ‘a whim of girlish patronage’, it brought in twice as much as was needed: the work is now unidentified, as are ‘many subsequent volumes’ whose production she was too ashamed to mention.
After the deaths of her father in 1789 and her mother in 1793 she remained at Twickenham, living with her scholarly brother Henry and a friend, Margaret Mitchell.
In 1793 she replied to the politically radical Letters from France of Helen Maria Williams [q.v.]with Letters on the Female Mind , its Powers and Pursuits .
After maintaining that with few exceptions ‘the feminine intellect has less strength but more acuteness’, she argued the Christian anti-revolutionary case.
Hitherto anonymous (‘I chuse to be concealed’), she set her name in 1806 to her translation from German of Johann Martin Miller's Siegwart and then, ‘with the utmost repugnance’, to The Countess and Gertrude, or Modes of Discipline (1811).
Hawkins is a busy authorial presence in this Bildungsroman , which she dedicated to Henrietta Maria Bowdler [q.v.], not for her own writings but as friend and editor of the scholar Elizabeth Smith [q.v.].
The popularity of this novel has been linked to its didacticism: a second edition followed the next year.
Rosanne: or, A Father's Labour Lost (1814), in which a daughter becomes her father's religious and moral salvation, and Heraline, or Opposite Proceedings (1821) share many of its features: slightly heavy-handed authorial notes, careful attention to the influences which shape their heroines' moral and intellectual development, condemnation of various aspects of behaviour prescribed for women, and matter-of-fact presentation of libertinism in high life.
Each is published by name and dedicated to a noblewoman.
Jane Austen [q.v.]called Rosaline ‘very good and clever, but tedious’.
The anonymous Annaline: or, Motive-Hunting (1824) is also ascribed to Hawkins.
Hawkins collaborated with her brother Henry on Sermonets (1814), ‘Addressed to Those Who have not yet Acquired, or who may have lost, The Inclination to Apply the Power of Attention to Compositions of a Higher Kind’: her topics include female dress, female education, and ‘the female Character of the present Age’, which begins with the fact that Christ chose to confide in women.
She compiled Devotional Exercises (1823) from an earlier book by Bishop St Patrick [q.v.], and left to Margaret Mitchell a manuscript diary of travels round much of England and Wales in 1824–7.
Her Anecdote s, Biographical Sketches, and Memoirs (1822) and Memoirs, Anecdotes, Facts and Opinions (1824), which is more personal and autobiographical, are her best-known work, and they were abridged and adapted by Francis Henry Skrine (1926) and D. H. Simpson (1978).
Laetitia-Matilda Hawkins died 22 November 1835 in Twickenham.
She was unmarried.
[George Paston (Emily Morse Symonds), ‘A Spinster's Recollections’ in Side-Lights on the Georgian Period , 1902; Percy A. Scholes,The Life and Activities of Sir John Hawkins , 1953; J. Paul de Castro, ‘Laetitia Hawkins and Boswell’,Notes and Queries , 18 December 1943; Bertram H. Davis,A Proof of Eminence: the Life of Sir John Hawkins , 1973.]
Desmond Shawe-Taylor
,Richard (1891–1948), Austrian tenor, who was naturalized British in 1940, was born 16 May 1891 in Linz, Austria.
He was illegitimate, and was christened Richard Denemy after his mother's maiden name.
His father,(Anton) Richard Tauber, was an actor, and his mother, Elisabeth Denemy (later Seiffert), played musical-comedy roles.
He studied at the conservatoire in Frankfurt 1909–11, and with Carl Beines in Freiburg, and made a youthful début in 1913 as Tamino in The Magic Flute at the Neues Stadt-Theater in Chemnitz, of which his father was director, with instant success.
He was soon engaged on a five-year contract with the Dresden Opera, where he sang all the leading lyrical tenor parts.
In 1915 he made his first appearance at the German Opera House, Berlin.
From 1922 his career centred on Vienna, where he sang the classical repertory at the Staatsoper and operetta at the Theater an der Wien.
During the Mozart festivals in both Munich and Salzburg he became enormously popular as Tamino, Belmonte, and Don Ottavio.
The famous Swedish Don Giovanni, John Forsell, declared that the young Tauber was the greatest Ottavio he had ever heard, and he was noted for the intense conviction with which he declaimed to his Donna Anna (in the German text then still generally in use, even at festivals) the solemn oath, ‘Ich schwöre’.
Among his non-Mozartian roles, those of Max in Weber's Der Freischütz and of Hans in the German version of Smetana's The Bartered Bride were especially successful.
His name and achievements became better known to the general public, however, in the sphere of lighter music: in operetta rather than in opera, and above all in the stage works of Franz Lehár, in which he charmed thousands by his sympathetic tenor quality and by the grace and variety of his vocal inflections.
The song ‘You are my Heart's Delight’ from Lehár's operetta The Land of Smiles (1929) was one of his most famous, and it was in this work that he first came to England in 1931.
He also showed marked ability as a conductor with the London Philharmonic Orchestra and as a composer.
His operetta The Singing Dream (1934) was a great success in Vienna, and his other works included the operetta Old Chelsea (1943) and an orchestral Sunshine Suite .
Except for a film version of Leoncavallo's Pagliacci , his film career was mainly an extension of his operetta activities.
It would not be quite true to claim that his wide experience of light music, and the strain of singing long parts, with numerous encores, throughout the week left no mark on either his style or his vocal chords; but he can be justly likened to two other similarly popular tenors, John McCormack and Tito Schipa, in his ability to return successfully to serious music until the end of his career.
In 1938 and 1939 he appeared under Sir Thomas Beecham [q.v.]at Covent Garden in his three greatest Mozartian roles and in a German-language Bartered Bride ; and after the war he insisted on taking part there with his old colleagues, the visiting Vienna State Opera, as Don Ottavio in a Don Giovanni at Covent Garden which was to be his final stage appearance, in September 1947.
In appearance, Tauber was not handsome, but genial.
His first marriage, in 1927, to the operetta singer, Carlotta Vanconti, was unsuccessful and led to protracted divorce proceedings, which were not finalized until 1936; in that year he married his second wife, the English stage and film actress, Diana Napier, and settled in England.
After his death Diana Napier wrote (or collaborated in) three volumes of biography or memoirs.
There were no children of either marriage.
Tauber died from lung cancer 8 January 1948 in London.
[Diana Napier Tauber,Richard Tauber , 1949, and My Heart and I , 1959; Charles Castle and Diana Napier Tauber,This was Richard Tauber , 1971; Willi Korb,Richard Tauber , 1966 (in German).]
G E Aylmer
,Richard (1597–1670), colonist, religious radical, merchant, and naval administrator, was born in Alford, Lincolnshire, 3 January 1597, the fourth child and fourth son in the family of six sons and two daughters (one of whom died young) of Edward Hutchinson and his wife Susannah.
He came from a prosperous or at least commercially successful Lincolnshire family which emigrated to Massachusetts in 1633 and 1634.
The Hutchinsons were involved in the great Antinomian controversy by which the infant colony was riven in 1636–8, Richard's sister-in-law being the feminist leader Anne Hutchinson (née Marbury, q.v.), and his brother-in-law her closest ally, the Revd John Wheelwright.
Hutchinson had become a freeman — that is, a full church member — in 1634 but, along with others considered theologically unsound, was ordered to be disarmed in 1637, and with the rest of his family moved to the more tolerant atmosphere of Providence (later Rhode Island) in 1638.
He seems to have returned briefly to Massachusetts, perhaps in connection with his property there, but was back in England by 1643, in the service of the younger Sir Henry Vane [q.v.], who as governor of the Bay colony at a precociously early age had been something of a fellow-traveller with the alleged heretics.
Hutchinson's first official work was under the navy and customs committee of the Long Parliament; by 1645 he was acting as Vane's deputy in the very important post of navy treasurer.
In view of Vane's other commitments, Hutchinson must have had practical charge of parliamentarian naval finance, although it would seem that he was only paid a salary out of the treasurer's profits.
Then in 1650 Vane was voted out of the position and Hutchinson succeeded him, holding it from the beginning of 1651 until the Restoration.
With the outbreak of the first Anglo-Dutch war (1652–4), the treasurership became much more lucrative, its holder being remunerated partly on a poundage basis related to naval expenditure.
Hutchinson was also active in the Ironmongers' Company of London, of which he had purchased the freedom.
His earlier association with Vane (who had actually tried to resist being replaced by his own deputy) did not prevent Hutchinson from remaining in office under the Cromwellian Protectorate.
While inevitably losing office in 1660, he cleared his accounts successfully, while years later Samuel Pepys [q.v.]believed that the finances of the navy had never been better handled than while he was treasurer.
Hutchinson seems to have resumed his part in a family transatlantic trading network; although according to tradition his losses in the great fire of London exceeded £60,000, he seems to have died a wealthy man.
In 1621 he married Mary Hiley.
They had six surviving sons and four daughters.
His  descendants included the earls of Donoughmore; the governor and historian of Massachusetts, Thomas Hutchinson [q.v.], was a collateral descendant.
Confusingly, it was another Richard Hutchinson, of the City and later of Stepney, who was co-treasurer for sick and wounded soldiers, widows, and orphans from 1643 to 1660 and a judge for imprisoned debtors in 1653–4, and who served as co-paymaster of the navy under the treasurers in 1688–71, appearing in the latter part of Pepys's diary.
(The ex-naval treasurer's will was proved in April 1670, and the co-paymaster was still serving the following year and being called to account after that.)
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; R. Latham and W. Matthews (eds.),
The Diary of Samuel Pepys , 11 vols., 1970–83; Violet A. Rowe,Sir Henry Vane the Younger , 1970; B. Bailyn,The New England Merchants in the Seventeenth Century , 1955; Public Record Office, E.351, Declared Accounts, Navy; PROB/11/PCC 47 Penn, 129 North, 174 Pett.]
Christopher Andrew
, Sir Hugh Francis Paget (1873–1939), chief of the secret service (CSS or C), was born 18 August 1873 in Southampton, the son of Frederick Sinclair, gentleman, and his wife Agnes May.
Sinclair began his career in the Royal Navy at the age of thirteen.
His service record before World War I, a period during which he specialized in torpedo work, repeatedly commended him as a ‘most zealous officer’ with ‘excellent tact and judgment’.
During World War I Sinclair served successively as assistant director of the mobilization division on the Admiralty war staff (1914–16), commander of HMS Renown (1916–17), and chief of staff of the Battle Cruiser Force (1917–19).
Sinclair's first major involvement in intelligence came as director of naval intelligence from 1919 to 1921.
In 1919 he was also given responsibility for founding the new signals intelligence (sigint) agency, the Government Code and Cipher School (GC and CS).
After a tour of duty as chief of the submarine service from 1921 to 1923, Sinclair was appointed chief of the secret service in succession to Sir Mansfield Cumming [q.v.].
In addition to becoming operational head of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS), Sinclair also became non-operational director of GC and CS.
SIS between the wars was a small, underfunded, foreign intelligence agency, staffed mainly by men with a service background.
During Sinclair's first decade as CSS, its main priority was intelligence-gathering from Soviet Russia.
Sinclair himself had a deserved reputation as ‘a terrific anti-Bolshevik’.
His priorities were changed by the rise of Adolf Hitler.
By the mid-1930s the Soviet menace had slipped into fourth place in the SIS ‘order of priorities’ behind Germany, Italy, and Japan.
As the Nazi menace grew, Sinclair's influence in Whitehall increased.
He dined regularly with Sir Robert (later Baron) Vansittart [q.v.], permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office from 1930 to 1937; Vansittart described the political intelligence from SIS in 1936 as ‘invaluable’(then probably a somewhat exaggerated estimate of its real significance).
Helped by his immense clubbability, Sinclair's influence in the higher reaches of Whitehall by the mid-1930s extended well beyond the Foreign Office.
He won the support and friendship of the two most powerful civil servants of the time: Sir Maurice (later Baron) Hankey [q.v.], cabinet secretary from 1916 to 1938, and Sir N. F. Warren Fisher [q.v.], permanent secretary at the Treasury and head of the civil service from 1919 to 1939.
By the time of the Munich agreement in September 1938, Sinclair also had the ear of the prime minister, A. Neville Chamberlain.
He was a convinced appeaser, pressing strongly that the Czechs accept ‘the inevitable’ and surrender the Sudetenland to Germany.
Sinclair also urged Chamberlain to beware of a pact with Russia, insisting that the Red Army ‘could do nothing of real value’.
As war approached, SIS reports on German intentions, like those from other sources, became increasingly confused.
Vansittart's successor as permanent under-secretary at the Foreign Office, Sir Alexander Cadogan [q.v.], complained that ‘we had no means of evaluating their reliability.’
Soon after the outbreak of World War II, Sinclair was taken in by a deception operation mounted by the German Sicherheitsdienst (the SS security service) which led to the capture of two of his officers in the Dutch border town of Venlo.
Sinclair had a reputation as a bon viveur as well as a fine sailor.
A large crocodile-skin cigar case was usually close at hand.
He had a justly celebrated wine cellar.
Even during World War I, Sinclair prided himself on offering his guests delicacies such as Californian peach-fed ham.
He derived his nickname ‘Quex’ from the play,The Gay Lord Quex , by Sir Arthur Pinero [q.v.].
Like his namesake, playfully described as ‘the wickedest man in London’, ‘Quex’ had, until his middle years, a stormy private life.
In 1907 he married Gertrude, daughter of William Sydney Attenborough, of independent means.
In 1920, embarrassingly soon after becoming naval aide-de-camp to George V, Sinclair was divorced.
He had no children and did not remarry; his sister Evelyn subsequently kept house for him.
Sinclair was promoted rear-admiral in 1920, vice-admiral in 1926, and admiral (retired) in 1930.
He was appointed KCB in 1935.
He died in London 4 November 1939, five days before the Venlo incident.
[Christopher Andrew,Secret Service: the Making of the British Intelligence Community , 1985; Christopher Andrew and Jeremy Noakes (eds.),
Intelligence and International Relations 1900–1945 , 1987; private papers and naval records.]
A R Peter Hayden
,George (1786–1846), nurseryman, was born 12 March 1786 in Hackney, north-east London, the second of two surviving sons — he also had at least three sisters, two of whom died in childhood — of Joachim Conrad Loddiges (c .1738–1826), a native of Hanover and the founder of the Hackney firm of nurserymen, Conrad Loddiges & Sons, and his wife Sarah Aldous.
When William and George Loddiges joined their father in the nursery it had already established an international reputation and had introduced many new plants to British gardens.
The gifted and versatile George, the younger of the two, proved to be the main driving force in the decades which followed, when the nursery was without equal anywhere in the world.
The total retail value of their stock at this period was estimated at £200,000.
The fifteen acres of nursery were skilfully planned.
In the nine-acre arboretum, as part of it was called, each species and variety was represented by a well-grown display specimen and a stock of smaller plants for sale.
The variety was remarkable.
Their 1836 catalogue listed 67 species and varieties of oak, 29 of birch, 91 of crataegus, 180 of willow, and 1,549 roses.
‘In this department, Messrs. Loddiges have done more than all the royal and botanic gardens put together,’ wrote J. C. Loudon [q.v.].
In 1839–40 George Loddiges laid out the arboretum at the Abney Park cemetery.
Loddiges designed the steam heating and the system of irrigation from overhead pipes for the range of hothouses which was greatly admired by visitors in the 1820s.
The nursery was renowned for palms and orchids, and by 1845 there were 280 species and varieties of the former and 1,916 of the latter.
Loddiges found an outlet for his considerable artistic talent in the publication of the nursery's periodical, the Botanical Cabinet , illustrating plants grown in the nursery, which appeared at monthly intervals between 1817 and 1833.
Most of the 2,000 fine coloured plates, engraved by George Cooke [q.v.], were from Loddiges's drawings.
The text of the Botanical Cabinet , combining scientific information with pious observations, reflected Loddiges's deeply held religious convictions.
He was a member of the councils of the Linnean Society and of the Horticultural Society, whose garden regularly benefited from the resources of the nursery.
He was always ready to provide plants for scientific purposes, and his friend Nathaniel Ward [q.v.]warmly acknowledged the help he received from Loddiges in developing Wardian cases.
They were both early members of the Microscopical Society.
It was Loddiges's unfulfilled ambition to write and illustrate a folio work devoted to humming birds.
His collection, amounting to 200 species and recognized as outstanding throughout Europe, was acquired from a descendant by the British Museum (Natural History) in 1933, along with his notes.
He married Jane, daughter of the Revd James Creighton, in 1811.
They had one son and two daughters.
His daughter Jane married the artist Edward William Cooke [q.v.].
George Loddiges died in Hackney 5 June 1846.
[London borough of Hackney archives; manuscripts in the collection of C. R. Cooke, OBE (a descendant), including the diary for 1828–79 of E. W. Cooke and the diary for 1839 of Jane Loddiges;Gardeners' Chronicle ,Gardener's Magazine ,Botanical Cabinet ; nursery catalogues at the Society of Antiquaries; obituary in Journal of the Horticultural Society , 1846, pp. 224–5; St John's, Hackney, registers of baptisms and burials.]
Jean Young Farrugia
,Thomas (c. 1596–1651), postmaster, was the second son of Thomas Witherings of Overton, Staffordshire, and his wife Dorothy, daughter of John Fearne.
He appears to have set up in trade as a London mercer, and he was sufficiently well connected to obtain, like his uncle and elder brother, a minor office at court, that of ‘harbinger’, arranging the progresses of the queen.
But it was the patronage of Sir John Coke [q.v.], one of the principal secretaries of state from 1625 to 1639, which lay behind his rise to complete control of foreign and domestic posts in the 1630s; and it was that achievement which gave him the opportunity both to create a new postal service and to acquire an estate in Essex worth £800 a year.
From 1632, first in partnership with William Frizell and then, after disputes with Frizell, alone from 1634, he held the office of postmaster for foreign posts.
He successfully reformed the service on the Continent, setting up fixed and regular posts for the speeding on of the portmantle or packet, in place of the irregular messengers and carriers who had travelled the whole distance.
In 1635 he turned his attention to the internal posts.
Supported by Coke, and in the face of opposition from the master of the king's posts, another patentee, Charles, second Baron Stanhope, Witherings proposed a radical reform, aimed again at making the service quicker and also more profitable to the Crown.
The plan had three parts.
The general public was to be able to use the royal posts on certain of the roads out of London; there were to be fixed rates of postage (to defray the cost of salaried postmasters); and horse posts (which were to travel at the rate of 120 miles in twenty-four hours) were substituted for foot posts (which travelled at the rate of 16 or 18 miles a day).
The new service was introduced in 1635 on the roads between London and Edinburgh, Plymouth, and Chester and Holyhead (for Ireland), and on by-roads off these major routes.
In 1637, when Stanhope was persuaded to surrender his patent, Witherings took control of the whole postal system.
He was already postmaster for foreign posts; he now obtained the rights in a new office — the Letter Office of England; and the secretaries of state, who became ex officio postmasters-general in the same year, made him their deputy.
So profitable and powerful a monopoly, however efficiently administered, could not last for long.
In 1640, shortly after Coke's retirement, Witherings was replaced by the financier Philip Burlamachi [q.v.]and accused of ‘divers abuses and misdeameanours’.
The Long Parliament tried to have him restored in 1641–2, but without effect, and from 1644 onwards Sir Edmond Prideaux [q.v.], later attorney-general under the Commonwealth, was somewhat precariously ensconced as postmaster-general.
Witherings's last years were disturbed by further accusations of dishonesty, many of them malicious.
In 1649 and 1651 he was charged with conveying money, letters, and intelligence to the Royalists overseas, and acquitted on both occasions.
He died 28 September 1651, while on his way to church in Hornchurch, Essex, leaving a widow and a daughter.
He was buried in the chancel of St Andrew's, Hornchurch, where there is a memorial tablet to his memory.
[J. G. Hendy, ‘Early History of the English Post’, unpublished MS in the archives of the Post Office; ‘Witherings’ Inland Letter Service',St Martin's le-Grand Magazine , General Post Office, October 1918 and January 1919; H. Robinson,The British Post Office: a History , 1948; G. E. Aylmer,The King's Servants , 1961.]
T W Kirkbride
,Joseph (1778–1855), pioneer cement maker, was born in Hunslet, Leeds, the eldest in the family of five sons and one daughter of Thomas Aspdin, bricklayer of Hunslet, and his wife Mary.
Aspdin followed his father's trade of bricklayer and builder at Briggate, Leeds.
His experiments with cement making led him to apply for a patent which was granted in June 1824 — no. 5,022 entitled ‘An Improvement in the Modes of Producing an Artificial Stone’— the first such patent to be granted.
Cement is the term in common use for a powder which hardens when mixed with water and is used to bind together aggregates of gravel and stone to produce concrete.
Portland cement is today the most popular type of cement and is used in vast quantities for building and construction in all parts of the world.
In Aspdin's day cement manufacture was undergoing relatively rapid development and many experimenters were working in the field.
As Portland stone had a high reputation and provided a standard with which artificial products would naturally be compared, Aspdin chose the name ‘Portland cement’ for his patent material.
He produced it by burning at high temperatures finely pulverized lime with clay in certain proportions, and grinding the product.
To get the high temperatures he used a kiln like a glass furnace.
This may have been the factor which enabled him alone to burn clinker successfully, since a glass kiln would be more likely to reach the temperatures required for successful burning of Portland cement rather than the lime-burning kiln used by his competitors.
There was a glass-works at Hunslet at this time and a glass-works and foundries at Wakefield.
Aspdin set up a partnership in 1824 with a neighbour as ‘patent Portland cement manufacturers’, operating from Leeds and Wakefield and later expanded to an agency at Liverpool.
When the partnership ended in 1837, Aspdin recommenced manufacture with his two sons, James and William, at a nearby site and took James into partnership three years later.
When he retired in 1842, James continued the business.
Meanwhile William was establishing partnerships to make Portland cement at Westminster and Gateshead upon Tyne in England, and Hamburg in Germany.
Throughout this period William was an enthusiastic advocate, often with exaggeration, of the superior qualities of his father's Portland cement.
Aspdin married Mary Fotherby at Hunslet, Leeds, 21 May 1811.
They had two sons and five daughters, two of whom died in infancy.
Aspdin died 20 March 1855 and was buried in St John's churchyard, Wakefield.
There is a tablet to his memory in Leeds town hall which was unveiled in 1924.
[P. E. Halstead, ‘The Early History of Portland Cement’,Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. xxxiv, 1961–2.]
J R Maddicott
, Sir Henry (c. 1280–1340), baron, was the younger son of Louis de Brienne,iure uxoris Vicomte of Beaumont in Maine, by Agnes, daughter of Raoul, Vicomte of Beaumont.
Through his great-grandfather, Alfonso IX of Leon, he was distantly related to Edward I's first wife, Eleanor of Castile [q.v.]: a connection which may have promoted both the marriage of Henry's sister, Isabella, to Edward's supporter, John de Vescy (died 1289, q.v.), in 1279 or 1280, and Henry's own entrée into English affairs in 1297, when he was made a knight of the royal household.
He quickly came to be on close terms both with Edward himself, in whose Scottish wars he regularly served, and with his heir.
After the young Edward's accession in 1307 Beaumont rose rapidly.
Summoned to Parliament in 1309, he received extensive lands in Lincolnshire (later augmented by his sister's lands in that county after her death in 1334) and the more contentious grant of the Isle of Man.
The king's favour made him the special target of the reforming Ordainers, who in 1311 called for the exclusion from court of both Henry and Isabella, the resumption of his grants from the king, and the transference of the custody of Man to ‘a good Englishman’(a phrase which reveals one reason for his unpopularity).
These demands, however, were never implemented and Beaumont remained prominent at Edward's court until 1323.
Regularly employed on missions abroad, he was also closely involved with the king's attempt to secure the bishopric of Durham for Henry's brother Louis [q.v.], which led to the capture and ransoming of both the Beaumonts by Thomas, Earl of Lancaster [q.v.], the court's leading opponent, in 1317.
He had his revenge in March 1322, when he was among the royalist army which defeated Lancaster at Boroughbridge.
It may have been shortly after this that he served (so J. Capgrave says) in the Italian crusades launched against the enemies of Pope John XXII.
About 1310 Beaumont married Alice Comyn, niece of John Comyn, third Earl of Buchan [q.v.]and heir to the Comyn earldom.
This claim to a Scottish title and lands did as much as royal favour to determine the course of his career.
The status which it gave him as a disinherited lord led him to oppose the Anglo-Scottish truce of 1323 and helped to persuade him to turn his coat shortly afterwards.
Although he was still sufficiently trusted to be appointed as one of the young Edward's guardians when the prince was sent abroad to do homage for his father's French lands in September 1325, a year later he had become one of the leading backers of Queen Isabella in her invasion of England.
After Edward II's deposition Beaumont was well rewarded for his change in allegiance by a large grant of lands in Leicestershire, but the Anglo-Scottish treaty of Northampton of 1328 led him once more into opposition.
The treaty had promised the restoration of their Scottish inheritances to Beaumont and the other disinherited; but these promises were not kept.
Beaumont became implicated first in the rebellion of Henry, Earl of Lancaster [q.v.]against the regime of Roger Mortimer IV [q.v.]and Isabella in 1328–9, fleeing to France after its collapse, and then in the inept conspiracy of Edmund of Woodstock, Earl of Kent [q.v.].
The coup of 1330 which finally overthrew the regime and established Edward III as king opened a second successful phase in Beaumont's career.
He returned to England and became the leading supporter of Edward Baliol [q.v.]in Baliol's attempt to secure the Scottish throne for himself and the restoration of their lands for the disinherited.
In 1332 he shared Baliol's triumph at the battle of Dupplin Moor and in 1333 he was in the victorious army which defeated the Scots at Halidon Hill and restored Baliol to his throne after a brief Scottish rebellion.
In the aftermath of the battle Beaumont was apparently made both Earl of Moray and constable of Scotland by the new king.
In 1334 he was captured and ransomed by the Scots, gaining his freedom in time to fight in Edward III's major Scottish campaign of 1335; but thereafter he shared in the general decline of English fortunes and interest in Scotland.
In July 1338 he went abroad to the Low Countries with Edward, dying there 10 March 1340.
According to Capgrave, he was buried at the Cistercian house of Vaudey in Lincolnshire.
He left a son and heir, John, aged twenty-two, and a widow, who died in 1349.
He was essentially an adventurer, who owed his rise to his service to three kings, his military vigour, his fortunate marriage, and his ability to press home the advantages which opportunity offered him.
[J. Capgrave,Liber de Illustribus Henricis , 1858; J. C. Davies,The Baronial Opposition to Edward II , 1918; R. Nicholson,Edward III and the Scots , 1965; M. Prestwich, ‘Isabella de Vescy and the custody of Bamburgh Castle’,Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research , vol. xliv, 1971; G. E. Cokayne,Complete Peerage , new edn., vol. ii, 1912.]
Martin Harrison
,Charles Eamer (1837–1907), artist in stained glass and church decoration, was born 29 June 1837 at Ovingdean Hall, Sussex, the fifth son and seventh and last child of Nathaniel Kemp, JP who died when his son was six, and his second wife Augusta Caroline, the daughter of Sir John Eamer, a former lord mayor of London.
Kempe (he added the ‘e’ in the 1860s) was educated at Rugby and Pembroke College, Oxford (MA 1862).
A severe stammer prevented his taking holy orders, and he determined to devote his Anglo-Catholic fervour to the cause of ecclesiastical art.
He gained practical experience in the office of the young G. F. Bodley [q.v.], son of the Kemp family physician, and a leading figure in the later phase of the Gothic revival in architecture.
He studied briefly in the London stained-glass studios of Clayton & Bell, and in 1866 set up his own business in stained glass and church decoration.
Three years later he received his first major commission, to decorate Bodley's new church of St John, Tue Brook, Liverpool.
Thereafter Kempe's business prospered, and his work graces many cathedrals, including those in Wells, Lichfield, Southwark, Winchester, Durham, Gloucester, Canterbury, and York Minster.
Of his many foreign commissions one of the most prestigious was the window ordered in 1877 by Princess Alice [q.v.],
Grand-Duchess of Hesse, for the royal mausoleum in Darmstadt, in commemoration of the death of her young son.
In 1875 Kempe bought an Elizabethan house, Old Place, Lindfield, which he greatly enlarged and decorated lavishly with his growing collection of furniture and works of art.
Although he is often characterized as retiring and eccentric, he entertained distinguished visitors in style, and studio staff were frequently welcomed to Old Place and treated with considerable generosity.
Never more than competent as a draughtsman himself, Kempe was adept at selecting and training young designers and craftsmen to carry out schemes under his direction.
His early work was inspired by English fifteenth-century glass, and he was a pioneer in his appreciation of late medieval styles.
By 1880 he was turning to German models, and as business increased (he is believed to have employed as many as a hundred men) production became stereotyped.
In 1882 the eighteen-year old (Sir)(John) Ninian Comper [q.v.]was Kempe's pupil and already anticipated the view of most subsequent critics with his preference for Kempe's early work.
Kempe died, unmarried, at his home in London 28 April 1907, and was buried in the family vault at Ovingdean.
The business passed to his cousin, Walter E. Tower, and the weak derivatives of the Kempe formula produced until the studio's demise in 1934 did little to advance Kempe's reputation.
Yet his role in the advancement of late nineteenth-century art and architecture was an important one.
His adaptations of late Gothic and northern Renaissance styles were influential and had many admirers.
That he had established an alternative path to Pre-Raphaelite styles was recognized by W. Owen Chadwick, who suggested in The Victorian Church (1966) that ‘the art of stained glass reached its zenith, not with the innovations of William Morris and Edward Burne-Jones, but in the tractarian artist, Charles Eamer Kempe.’
[Martin Harrison,Victorian Stained Glass , 1980; Margaret Stavridi,Master of Glass , 1988.]
J H Woodhouse
,Richard Dixon (1858–1936), geologist and seismologist, was born 31 July 1858 in Dublin, the third son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Thomas Oldham [q.v.], first head of the Geological Survey of India, and his wife, daughter of William Dixon of Liverpool.
Educated at Rugby and the Royal School of Mines, he was appointed to the Geological Survey of India as assistant superintendent in 1879, following the death of his father in 1878.
Serving as director of the Survey from May 1896 to November 1897, he retired in 1904, partly because of ill health; he suffered from sprue, and returned to England.
Oldham's scientific works include more than seventy publications in the Memoirs and Records of the Geological Survey of India, the Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society , the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , and other journals.
While the greater number of these works are on geological themes, he is most widely remembered for his far-reaching contributions to the early development of seismology, including his discovery in 1906 of the Earth's core.
Early in his career he completed the work begun by his father on the Cachar earthquake of 1869, and on a catalogue of Indian earthquakes, leading to publications in 1882 and 1883.
The great Assam earthquake of 12 June 1897 occurred during his period as director of the Survey, and he led the investigation into the results of the earthquake, culminating in a memoir of 1899 which was the most complete account of a seismic event up to that date.
In this memoir he identified the arrivals of dilatational and distortional body waves (P-waves and S-waves) and of surface waves in seismic recordings, a finding which was further documented in a paper of 1900 and which laid the foundations for the instrumental study of earthquakes and of the Earth's deep interior.
In the words of his 1906 paper, ‘the seismograph enables us to see into the earth and to determine its nature…as if we could drive a tunnel through it.’
He compiled the first useful tables of travel times of seismic phases and used them to show that wave speeds increase smoothly with depth, up to a point where they suffer a sharp decrease, which he identified with the boundary of a central core ‘possessing radically different physical properties’, though he did not conclude that the core was liquid.
He was a fellow of the Geological Society (1886), recipient of its Lyell medal (1908), a fellow of the Royal Society (1911), president of the Geological Society (1920–2), and an honorary fellow of the Imperial College of Science (1931).
Oldham was unmarried.
He died 15 July 1936 at the Gwalia Hotel, Llandrindod Wells.
[C. Davison in Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. ii, 1938;Nature , vol. cxxxviii, 1936, pp. 316–17;Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society (Proceedings ), vol. xciii, 1937, pp. ciii–cvi.]
G E Aylmer
,George (fl. 1614–1648), businessman and royal office-holder, exemplifies the interconnections between industry and government in early Stuart England.
Not to be confused with his Herefordshire relative and namesake, who was the father-in-law of George Calvert, later first Baron Baltimore [q.v.], his origins are obscure, though he seems to have had family and property connections in Shropshire and Surrey.
Initially described as a woollen-draper and/or clothier, Mynne's main commercial interests came to be in the metal industries, notably in the smelting of iron.
His first recorded entry into royal service was as deputy paymaster of the forces in Ireland, 1614.
He was deputy governor of the Mineral and Battery Company, a quasi-monopolistic body, for twenty-five years (c .1621–46), and a partner in various ventures to produce iron, chiefly in the Forest of Dean, together with Sir Basil Brooke of Madely, Coalbrookdale.
In the 1630s the two were convicted of breaking the newly enforced forest laws, by the alleged theft of wood (to make charcoal) and were fined the huge sum of £59,000, eventually reduced to £12,000.
Mynne was also charged with waste of timber in Carmarthenshire, presumably for his lesser ironworks in the neighbouring county of Pembroke.
Given the dependence of the industry on charcoal, it was difficult if not impossible for ironmasters to avoid putting themselves at risk, certainly in England, perhaps less so in Ireland.
Mynne was MP for Old Sarum in 1621 and West Looe in 1624, both being closed boroughs under royal patronage.
His purchases of the clerkship of the Hanaper in Chancery (for £2,400 in 1620) may help to explain this.
In the former (and better recorded) of these two Parliaments he spoke as a kind of expert witness about the problems connected with English cloth exports to the Netherlands, in favour of free speech (in the context of Puritan attempts to silence pro-Catholics), and for measures being proposed against the taking of fees by office-holders being extended to lawyers in private practice.
Charles I's commission on exacted fees and innovated offices was investigating Mynne and the Hanaper (in effect the treasury of the Great Seal) in 1630; he got off then but was finally brought to trial for extortion in 1634.
Some of his judges in Star Chamber waxed eloquent about Mynne's misuse of his position, distinguishing this from his legitimate attempt to improve his status and rise in the social hierarchy.
He was sentenced to pay a large fine, and to surrender his office to trustees (one of whom was his own brother-in-law), although the intricacies of the case were not settled until at least 1636.
Meanwhile he continued also to operate as a moneylender, advancing large sums on bond during these same decades, and was appointed to a royal commission on the cloth trade in the late 1630s.
The ambivalence of Mynne's relations with the Crown is epitomized by the repeated accusations of delinquency (that is, royalism) brought against him by one of the parliamentarian committees in charge of penal taxation during the years 1643–7.
There seems little doubt that he supplied the king's war effort with raw iron, if not with actual munitions, and his fine was finally set at just under £5,000, although after he had died intestate early in 1648, his executors alleged that he and his estate had paid out over £13,000 in all.
Mynne's son and heir, also George, who died three or four years later, left cash legacies largely in the form of sums still owing by his father's debtors.
Mynne married Ann, daughter of Sir Robert Parkhurst, lord mayor of London (died 1636) and sister of Sir Robert, MP (died 1651); his daughters married, respectively, Richard, brother of John Evelyn the diarist, and Sir John Lewkenor, MP.
Marriage here would seem to have been both cause and effect of upward social mobility.
It might appear that Mynne and his family had been ruined by a combination of the forest laws, the drive against exacted fees, and finally by backing the losing side in the civil war: yet their liquid assets must have been very considerable.
If George Mynne or his son had survived until the Restoration with male heirs to succeed them, the family's history might look very different.
[G. E. Aylmer,The King's Servants , 1961 and 1974;idem , ‘Charles I's Commission on Fees’,Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research , vol. xxxi, 1958; G. Hammersley, ‘The Revival of the Forest Laws under Charles I’,History , vol. xlv, 1960; E. S. de Beer (ed.),
The Diary of John Evelyn , 6 vols., 1955; information from Dr Alan Davidson and the History of Parliament Trust; W. Notestein, F. H. Relf, and H. Simpson (eds.),
Commons Debates 1621 , 7 vols., 1935;Victoria History of the Counties of England, Surrey , vol. iii, 1911, p. 274,et al .;
Public Record Office, PROB/11/PCC, 24 Pile; British Library, Loan MS 16/2.]
Peter Leach
,Francis (1741–1789), architect, was born in 1741, the elder son of William Hiorne, mason and architect of Warwick, and his first wife Mary Duncalfe.
William Hiorne and his younger brother David (d .
1756) had established themselves as leading practitioners of their trade in the midlands area, and Francis Hiorne succeeded to the family business on the death of his father in 1776.
By then he was already active as an architect and his subsequent practice, mainly in the midlands but also on occasion further afield, developed immediately; but his career was cut short by his early death at the age of forty-eight and the total number of his executed works was not large.
Hiorne's work in a classical idiom included two buildings of some individuality, the churches of St Anne's, Belfast (1776, demolished), which showed the influence of the baroque St Philip's, Birmingham, and Tardebigge, Worcestershire (1777), with its striking needle spire; but it was as an architect specializing in the Gothic style that he gained a particular reputation.
His best-known work, Tetbury church, Gloucestershire (1777–81), is one of the most elegant examples of late eighteenth-century Gothic and was widely admired at the time, the poet William Mason [q.v.], for example, commenting that it gave him ‘the very highest opinion’ of Hiorne's ‘Gothic taste’; and his approach to Gothic design also appears to have embraced at least the rudiments of scholarship as well as its decorative appeal.
His preparations for carrying out work at Arundel Castle, Sussex — a project curtailed by his death — were reported by a correspondent of the antiquary Richard Gough [q.v.]in 1787: ‘At Greystoke Castle I found Mr. Hiorne the gothic architect, whom the Duke of Norfolk had invited there to consult with relative to his intended repairs at Arundel Castle; and we made a party to see Alnwick Castle, etc. in Northumberland, for Mr. Hiorne's information.’
Hiorne's antiquarian leanings are reflected in his election as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1784; and like his father, who had been an alderman of Warwick and served as mayor in 1765–6, he was also a prominent figure in the public life of his home town.
He was elected an alderman in October 1773, held office as mayor in 1773–4, 1782–3, and 1787–8, served as treasurer to the corporation from 1781 to 1789, and as the Warwickshire county bridge-master during the same period.
He died in Warwick 9 December 1789.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; W. Papworth (ed.),
An Encyclopaedia of Architecture , 4 edns., 1852–88;Gentleman's Magazine , vol. ii, 1789, vol. ii, 1800; A. Gomme, ‘William and David Hiorne’ in The Architectural Outsiders (ed.
R. Brown), 1984; John Nichols,Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century , 1817–58, vol. vi.]
Ronald M Birse
,Thomas (1826–1882), civil engineer, was born in Edinburgh 28 July 1826, the son of John Ormiston and his wife Margaret Lindsay.
The family moved to Glasgow, where Thomas received a rudimentary education, leaving school early to enter the business of his father and uncle, builders in Glasgow, with whom he acquired a knowledge of carpentry, masonry, and surveying.
In 1846 he entered the engineers' department of the River Clyde Improvement Trust, shortly afterwards becoming chief assistant and in 1852 acting engineer to the Trust for a short period on the death of David Bremner [q.v.].
Three years later James Walker, a past president of the Institution of Civil Engineers, appointed him principal assistant in his London office, where he remained until the beginning of 1862.
During this time he continued to work on the design of docks and harbours in the Isle of Man, the river Mersey, and Cardiff, as well as many of the Trinity House lighthouses.
He was entrusted with the entire charge of the erection of the lighthouse on the Needles rock, 1856–7.
At the end of 1864 he went to Bombay to superintend a large land reclamation scheme adjacent to the harbour, which he did so successfully that in 1873 the government of India formed the Bombay Port Trust with Ormiston as chief engineer.
He foresaw the large expansion in Bombay's trade that took place in the 1870s and 1880s, to which the facilities of the Princes dock, constructed under his direction from 1875 to 1880, made a great contribution.
On the occasion of its opening in January 1880 he was appointed CIE.
He had previously relinquished his post to his brother George E. Ormiston in 1877 and become consulting engineer to the Bombay Port Trust in London.
He was for many years a JP for Bombay, and took a keen interest in municipal affairs.
He gave much time and energy to advising the government on engineering projects throughout India, and in 1879 he visited Cyprus to report on the harbour at Famagusta.
He was a fellow of the University of Bombay, and was elected dean of the faculty of engineering in 1879.
In 1857 Ormiston married Charlotte, daughter of William Lane of Freshwater, Isle of Wight; they had three sons and four daughters.
In 1880 Ormiston's health began to fail and early in 1882 he retired to the Isle of Wight, where he died in Freshwater 9 July 1882.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. lxxi, 1882–3, pp. 409–15.]
Richard Ingrams
,Terence Hanbury (1906–1964), novelist, was born 29 May 1906 in Bombay, the only child of Garrick Hanbury White, a district superintendent of police in the Indian Police Service, and his wife Constance Edith Southcote Aston, the daughter of a judge on the Indian circuit.
His parents later divorced, and at the age of five White was sent to England to be brought up by his maternal grandparents in St Leonards, Hastings.
In 1920 he went to Cheltenham College and in 1925 to Queen's College, Cambridge, to read English.
He obtained a second class (division II) in part i of the English tripos (1927) and a first class in part ii (1929).
After contracting tuberculosis he spent a year in Italy, where he began to write a satirical novel, later published as They Winter Abroad (1932), under the pseudonym of James Aston.
He returned to Cambridge and completed his degree course in 1929.
In the same year he published Loved Helen, and Other Poems .
For two years he taught at a preparatory school in Reigate, before being appointed head of the English department at Stowe by the school's headmaster, J. F. Roxburgh [q.v.].
White excelled in this role and for the rest of his life retained many of the attributes of the old-fashioned schoolmaster.
He was a bachelor with (largely) homosexual instincts, melancholy and prone to drinking bouts, but with an enormous capacity for new interests and enthusiasms.
(‘The best thing for being sad’, Merlyn says in The Sword in the Stone , 1938, ‘is to learn something.’)
It was during his Stowe years (1932–6) that White acquired his passion for hunting, shooting, and fishing.
Two early novels (Earth Stopped , 1934, and Gone to Ground , 1935), the satirical Burke's Steerage (1938), and England Have My Bones (1936) all have hunting and shooting themes.
When he resigned from Stowe in 1936 in order to become a full-time writer, White spent some months in a cottage near the school experimenting with falconry, later describing the episode in his most successful book,The Goshawk (1951).
In 1938 White published The Sword in the Stone , the first instalment of what was to become an Arthurian tetralogy entitled The Once and Future King .
It was a brilliantly imaginative, and in parts satirical, account of the boyhood of King Arthur, loosely based on the work of Sir Thomas Malory [q.v.].
White put himself into the character of Merlyn, passing on to the young king his knowledge of wildlife and hunting.
He wrote the second instalment,The Witch in the Wood (1940), in Ireland, where he spent a fishing holiday at the beginning of 1939.
In the event he stayed there for six years, immersing himself in the special atmosphere of rural Ireland which he found greatly sympathetic.
At one time he intended to become a Catholic and even at one stage a priest.
White's Irish impressions are to be found in The Godstone and the Blackymor (1959), illustrated by Edward Ardizzone, and The Elephant and the Kangaroo (1948), a fantasy about a second flood, with White as Noah.
White agonized about helping the war effort and in 1942 applied to join the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve (he had learned to fly before the war) but his attempts failed, thereby exacerbating his sense of guilt and isolation.
A natural Tory, he abhorred the postwar Labour government and in 1947, after a surprise windfall of £15,000 when his children's book,Mistress Masham's Repose (1947), was chosen as the book of the month in the USA, exiled himself in the Channel Islands.
Although he was only in his early forties his writing days were almost over.
He completed two books of historical essays,The Age of Scandal (1950) and The Scandal Monger (1952), and a translation of a medieval bestiary (The Book of Beasts , 1954), on which he had laboured for many years.
In 1959 The Once and Future King was adapted for the stage as a musical called Camelot , by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe.
Starring Richard Burton [q.v.]and Julie Andrews, it opened on Broadway and was an immediate hit.
This sudden acquisition of wealth finally put paid to White's writing career and he became more and more morose and more openly homosexual.
Following a highly successful lecture tour of America in 1962, described in America at Last (1965), he died suddenly 1 July 1964 while crossing the Mediterranean.
He was buried in Athens.
He was unmarried.
White was a tall, distinguished, bearded figure, ‘looking like one of the Sikhs at Queen Victoria's funeral’(his own description).
As the child of a drunkard father and a hysterical over-possessive mother he suffered all his life from sadistic impulses, guilt, and irrational fears.
He was a natural recluse who found all human relationships difficult.
However, until his final period, he rose triumphantly above his handicaps.
He was a master stylist, a sharp, satirical observer of the social scene with an unfailing capacity for taking up a variety of interests, and the ability to persuade his readers to share his enthusiasms, however out-of-the-way.
[Sylvia Townsend Warner,T. H. White : a Biography , 1967; David Garnett (ed.),
The White/Garnett Letters , 1968; François Gallix (ed.),
Letters to a Friend: the Correspondence between T. H. White and L. J. Potts , 1984.]
Mary Stott
,Margaret Caroline (1861–1944), general secretary of the Women's Co-operative Guild, was born 16 October 1861 in Marylebone, London, the youngest of seven children and only daughter of the Revd John Llewelyn Davies, a Christian Socialist, for many years rector of Christ Church, Marylebone, London, and later of Kirkby Lonsdale, Lancashire, and his wife Mary, daughter of Sir Charles John Crompton [q.v.], justice of the Queen's Bench.
She was educated at Queen's College, London, and Girton College, Cambridge, which her aunt, S. Emily Davies [q.v.], had helped to found.
Reared in the idealism of the Christian Socialists, Margaret Llewelyn Davies became convinced that the Rochdale Pioneers' theory of co-operation provided an ideal basis for society, and joined the Marylebone branch of the Women's Co-operative Guild, which had been formed in 1883.
In 1889 she became general secretary of the Guild, which then had fifty-one branches and a membership of between 1,700 and 1,800.
When she retired in 1922 there were 1,038 branches with 52,000 members.
In her thirty-two years of office, she never accepted a salary.
In 1890 her father moved to the parish of Kirkby Lonsdale and it was from his vicarage in this small town that Margaret, with the help of her lifelong friend Lilian Harris (died 1950), ran the Guild until 1908.
Lilian was the daughter of Alfred Harris, a wealthy banker from Bradford.
Margaret maintained close contact with the branches, especially in the north, and inspired many campaigns.
In 1904 she published The Women's Co-Operative Guild 1883–1904 .
In 1907 the central committee campaigned for a minimum wage for all women co-operative employees.
By 1912, 200 retail societies and the Co-operative Wholesale Society had complied.
In 1909 Margaret Llewelyn Davies gave evidence to a royal commission on divorce law reform, and the Guild began its advocacy for divorce on the same terms as men.
In 1912 the Guild annual congress passed a resolution that divorce should be available after two years' separation.
Objections to this caused the central board of the Co-operative Union to decide to withdraw its £400 annual grant to the Guild unless the divorce law campaign were dropped.
Margaret Llewelyn Davies was adamant that in no circumstances would the Guild surrender its independence and the branches raised sufficient funds to carry on the Guild's work until a compromise was reached four years later.
From 1904 the Guild joined in the non-militant suffrage campaign.
It also campaigned for maternity benefit to be paid to the mother and for maternity care to be improved, and, under Margaret Llewelyn Davies's leadership, took a strongly pacifist line.
In 1915 Margaret Llewelyn Davies compiled a deeply moving book,Maternity: Letters from Working Women , from the letters of 400 Guild officials about their experience of childbirth and child-rearing.
It had a preface by Herbert (later first Viscount) Samuel [q.v.], then president of the Local Government Board, and made a considerable impact.
In 1931 a similar compilation Life as We Have Known It had an introduction by Margaret Llewelyn Davies's close friend, Virginia Woolf [q.v.].
The first woman president of the Co-operative Congress, Margaret Llewelyn Davies in the year of her retirement, 1922, declared: ‘Our programme transfers the power of capitalism into the hands of the people organised democratically as consumers; makes capital the servant of labour; allows for a partnership with the workers; abolishes profit, socialises rent, and will ultimately get rid of the present wages system.’
It is not for such radical views, strongly held through they were, that she is remembered, but for the understanding support she gave to thousands of working-class women, giving them the confidence to venture into public life.
She was tall and gracious, with a deep voice and a strikingly vivid personality.
In 1921 she helped to found the International Women's Co-operative Guild.
A supporter of the Russian revolution, she was chairman of the Society for Cultural Relations with the USSR from 1924 till 1928.
Margaret Llewelyn Davies died 28 May 1944 in Dorking.
[J. M. Bellamy and J. Saville (eds.),
Dictionary of Labour Biography , vol. i, 1972.]
Nigel Smith
or ,Jacob (1613– c. 1685), Ranter, was born in 1613 in Leicester, the son of William Bauthumley, shoemaker, who died in 1634.
Both father and son were members of a semi-separatist group in All Saints parish in the city, and both attracted the attention of the ecclesiastical authorities for repeating sermons in William's house.
William was excommunicated in 1619 and Jacob in 1634, although he had already refused to kneel at communion in 1627.
Their identities have been confused: William was probably ‘Bottomley the shoemaker’ who prayed aloud in the company of the Nonconformist ministers Francis Higginson and Jeremiah Burroughs [qq.v]in the later 1620s.
Both Bauthumleys then were closely involved in the emergence of Nonconformity in Leicester, a process which was hastened by the action of the forces attempting to achieve its eradication.
The consequence of excommunication for Jacob was economic isolation: he was forced to give up his trade (also shoemaking) and was given redress for this when he petitioned the Long Parliament in 1640.
Bauthumley fought for Parliament and rose to be quartermaster in Colonel Cox's regiment.
He seems to have had no direct connection with the other publishing Ranters (although Joseph Salmon, q.v., refers to him), but on 14 March 1650 Bauthumley was bored through the tongue with a hot iron for blasphemy, had his sword broken over his head, and was cashiered from the army.
He was punished for publishing The Light and Dark Sides of God (1650), copies of which were ordered to be burned, although George Thomason [q.v.]was still able to acquire a copy in November of the same year.
By this time, Bauthumley had probably returned to Leicester, where the tract had already been sent to London as ‘very dangerous…a very wide door to atheism and profaneness’.
Bauthumley's earlier habit of repeating in private sermons already delivered helps to explain his acquisition of a literacy exceptional for a shoemaker:The Light and Dark Sides of God has been regarded as ‘a neglected masterpiece of seventeenth-century devotional prose’.
It is a work of deep inwardness, where the presence of God in all creatures makes external worship and scriptural authority superfluous: ‘God is in all Creatures, Man and Beast, Fish and Fowle, and every green thing, from the highest Cedar to the Ivey on the wall; and that God is the life and being of them all.’
In no place does Bauthumley recommend the practical antinomianism of which the other Ranters were accused.
The devil and sin exist for him as states of mind in which the true location of the godhead is not recognized, even though such  unenlightened awareness still functions as a praise of God.
Sinful acts are not Bauthumley's concern as such, but it is not difficult to see why The Light and Dark Sides of God was regarded as a dangerous work when it appeared to undermine Christian certainties: ‘I have made God mutable as my self.’
When George Fox [q.v.]met Bauthumley at Swannington in January 1655, he referred to him unfavourably as a Ranter, although The Light and Dark Sides of God circulated among Quakers.
Later on, Bauthumley became a minor corporation official at Leicester, in 1658 as serjeant-at-mace, and in 1667 as library keeper.
In 1676 he published an abridgement of Foxe's Book of Martyrs , entitled A Brief Historical Relation .
Between 1676 and 1685 Bauthumley was keeper of the house of correction, administering relief to the poor in Leicester on behalf of the corporation.
The date of his death is not known.
[C. E. Welch, ‘Early Nonconformity in Leicestershire’,Transactions of Leicestershire Archaeological and Historical Society , vol. xxxvii, 1961; J. F. McGregor, ‘The Ranters: A Study in the Free Spirit in English Sectarian Religion, 1648–53’, B.Litt. thesis (1968) for the University of Oxford; N. Smith (ed.),
A Collection of Ranter Writings from the Seventeenth Century , 1983; J. C. Davis,Fear, Myth and History: The Ranters and the Historians , 1986; N. Smith,Perfection Proclaimed: Language and Literature in English Radical Religion 1640–1660 , 1989.]
Richard Cork
,David (1890–1957), painter, was born in Birmingham 5 December 1890, the fifth of the eleven children of Abraham Bomberg, a Polish immigrant leather-worker, and his wife Rebecca, whose family kept an inn and reared horses.
In 1895 the family moved to Whitechapel, London, and Bomberg attended Old Castle Street School, off Aldgate High Street.
Around 1906 he was apprenticed to the German immigrant lithographer, Paul Fischer, in Islington.
But far more important to his future development as an artist were the evening classes at the Westminster School given by Walter Sickert [q.v.], which he attended in 1908–10.
Then, fortified by a visit to the ‘Manet and the Post-Impressionists’ exhibition at the Grafton Galleries (1910), where he saw Cézanne's work for the first time, Bomberg entered the Slade School of Art in London with the aid of a much-needed loan from the Jewish Education Aid Society.
During his time at the Slade (1911–13), Bomberg proved himself a precocious and innovative student.
One of an exceptional Slade generation, which included Paul Nash, William Roberts,(Sir) Stanley Spencer, and Edward Wadsworth [qq.v.], he rapidly gained a reputation as a forceful member of the avant-garde.
Percy Wyndham Lewis [q.v.]visited Bomberg at his Tenter Buildings studio in 1912, and in 1913 he travelled to Paris with (Sir) Jacob Epstein [q.v.]to select work for the Jewish section of an important exhibition of ‘Twentieth Century Art’ at the Whitechapel Art Gallery (1914).
After leaving the Slade Bomberg had a short and stormy affiliation with the Omega workshops of Roger Fry [q.v.]before exhibiting six works in the ‘Cubist room’ section of ‘The Camden Town Group and Others’(December 1913), a major survey of the British avant-garde held at Brighton City Art Galleries.
But 1914 was the annus mirabilis of his early career.
Having exhibited five works as a founder-member of the London Group, including a frenetic and impressively organized canvas called ‘In the Hold’(1913–14, Tate Gallery), he asserted his independence from Wyndham Lewis's newly-formed Vorticist group.
Bomberg's first one-man show at the Chenil Gallery, Chelsea (July 1914) established him as a remarkably powerful Cubo-Futurist.
In a youthful masterpiece entitled ‘The Mud Bath’(1914, Tate Gallery), he presented a vision of his local Whitechapel steam-baths as a stark arena where harsh, clear-cut figures, an amalgam of human and machine forms, hurled themselves around and into the pool.
Bomberg shared the Vorticists' involvement with the machine-age dynamism of modern urban life.
In 1915 he exhibited six works in the ‘invited to show’ non-members' section of the first Vorticist exhibition, held at the Doré Galleries in London.
By November, however, he had enlisted in the Royal Engineers, from which he later transferred to the 18th King's Royal Rifles.
In March 1916 he was sent to the front line in France.
Although war prevented Bomberg from painting, he did receive an important commission in 1917 from the Canadian War Memorials Fund.
The subject was ‘Sappers at Work’ and the first version (1918, Tate Gallery) was rejected.
The second, more representational version (1919, National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa) was accepted.
During the 1920s Bomberg underwent an irrevocable loss of faith in machine-age abstraction.
He turned instead to a more traditional style rooted in his response to landscape.
After journeying to Jerusalem in 1923 with funds provided by the Palestine Foundation Fund, he painted surprisingly naturalistic views of the city and countryside.
Then, having returned to London in 1927 and left his wife, he held an exhibition of Palestine and Petra paintings at the Leicester Galleries (1928).
In 1929 he made his first trip to Spain, where Toledo inspired him to achieve a greater breadth and expressiveness in his landscapes.
He returned to London early in 1930, but only displayed his Spanish paintings in a 1932 one-man show at the Bloomsbury Gallery.
These were the years when Bomberg's reputation faltered, and during his brief affiliation with the Communist party he visited Russia in 1933.
Lack of success then drove him back to Spain, where his best work was painted at Ronda in Andalusia.
By the time Bomberg applied for a war artist's commission in 1939 he was a sadly neglected figure.
After several rejections the war artists' committee grudgingly asked him to paint an underground bomb store near Burton-on-Trent in 1942.
It inspired some of his finest work, but the committee only accepted three bomb-store drawings.
Bomberg suffered continual rejection during the war.
The last one-man show he ever held in London was staged at the Leger Gallery (1943), and the only art school to accept him as a teacher was the Borough Polytechnic, where he taught part-time from 1945 to 1953.
Although the classes were small, he became a legendary teacher.
Among his students were Frank Auerbach and Leon Kossoff, and the Borough period coincided with his most fruitful post-war painting expeditions: Cornwall in August 1947, and Cyprus in the summer of the following year.
The heat and light of the Mediterranean inspired him to paint his most exuberant and expressive landscapes, but they remained largely unseen.
He returned to Ronda in 1954.
There, after an abortive attempt to establish a School of Painting at the Villa Paz, he executed his final landscapes and figure paintings.
A new turbulence enters his freely handled work, and the ‘Last Self-Portrait’(1956) reveals the extent of his despair.
In 1916 Bomberg married Alice, daughter of John Burton Mayes, a London wholesale stationer, and divorced wife of Jack Richardson.
He left her in 1927 and in 1941 married the painter Lilian Mendelson, divorced wife of Jacob Mendelson, an art dealer.
She was the daughter of Oliver Oswald Holt, civil servant.
They had one daughter, born in 1935.
In 1957 Bomberg became seriously ill and was moved to hospital in Gibraltar, and later to England.
He died at St Thomas's Hospital, London, 19 August 1957.
[Richard Cork,David Bomberg , 1987; Richard Cork,David Bomberg , catalogue of the retrospective exhibition at the Tate Gallery, 1988; David Bomberg archive, Tate Gallery; private information.]
Barbara Caine
,Charlotte Maria Shaw (1842–1923), educational reformer, was born 1 January 1842 in Bangor, the only child of Joshua Mason, a Liverpool merchant, and his wife Charlotte.
Her mother's poor health made sea air desirable and she spent her early years on the Isle of Man.
She had a lonely childhood.
Her education was undertaken by both her parents, using prescribed texts.
In 1858 her parents died.
Charlotte Mason regarded teaching as her vocation from her early adolescence.
In 1860 she began her training as an infant teacher at the Home and Colonial Training College, London.
As she had been left penniless, the Home and Colonial Society made an unusual arrangement for her, organizing a teaching position at a school in Worthing before she had completed her training.
In 1861 she became headmistress of the Davison Infant School, where she remained until 1873.
In 1863 she was awarded a first-class certificate.
In 1874 she became a lecturer in education, hygiene, and physiology, and vice-principal at the Bishop Otter College in Chichester.
While there, she indulged her passion for long walks and put together her first book,The Forty Shires: their History, Scenery, Arts and Legends (1880).
In 1878 she gave up teaching for two years, following a breakdown in health.
She moved to Bradford in 1880, and developed the principles first delivered in a series of lectures in 1885–6 and expounded in Home Education (1886).
Mason's principles were in accordance with the child-centred views of Pestalozzi, Froebel, and Herbert Spencer [q.v.].
It was imperative, in her view, that education meet the physical, intellectual, and moral needs of the child, that the child be respected and seen as the active agent in his own education.
The task of parents and teachers was to supply books and information, to provide sympathy and encouragement, sometimes to sum up and enlarge on particular questions.
But the actual work of learning was always that of the child.
She always insisted on the active and determining role of the child, rejecting absolutely any analogy between the growth of a child and the growth of plants because of the power of the gardener to prune a plant.
Although she trained teachers for infant schools, Mason was not in favour of nursery schools, believing that a home education was the best kind.
As a result, much of her effort went to training mothers in the best ways to care for small children.
These ideas became the basis for the Parents' Educational Union, which was established in 1887 in Bradford.
It became the Parents' National Education Union in 1892 as branches developed in several cities.
In 1891 she moved to Ambleside and started the House of Education to prepare for the teaching and care of children.
She started the Parents Review School in 1891 (later the Parents Union School from 1907), a correspondence school which sent out work to all children enrolled.
She devoted herself to the ‘liberal education for all’ movement.
In her view, a liberal education was the birthright of every child and she tried hard to persuade the Board of Education that any form of continuing education should be based on the humanities rather than on technical training.
Despite her love of exercise, her health had been poor since her early adulthood and she was bedridden for many years.
She was unmarried.
She died 16 January 1923 at Scale Howe, Ambleside.
[Charlotte Mason,An Essay Towards a Philosophy of Education , 1923,Home Education , 1886, and A Liberal Education for All: the Scope of Continuation Schools , 1919; Parents National Education Union,In Memoriam, Charlotte Mason , 1923; Essex Cholmondeley,The Story of Charlotte Mason , 1960.]
Susan M Parkes
, Sir Patrick Joseph (1826–1894), Irish educationist and administrator, was born, probably in Dublin, in 1826, the son of John Keenan esquire of Phibsborough, Dublin, and his wife Mary, daughter of Patrick Sherlock of Dublin.
He had at least one sister.
He was educated at Ratoath National School, county Meath, and trained as a teaching monitor at the Central Model Schools of the Board of National Education, Marlborough Street, Dublin.
In 1845 he was appointed headmaster of the Central Model Schools and in 1848 a district inspector of the National Board.
He rose through the ranks to become head inspector (1855), chief of inspection (1859), and resident commissioner of national education (1871–94).
A man of marked ability, his knowledge and experience of Irish education were widely recognized.
He was both the child of the National Education system and its architect.
In 1857 he published a pamphlet Model Schools — a Sketch of their Nature and Objects , and in 1868 was called as a leading witness to the royal commission on primary education (Ireland).
As a Catholic and exemplar civil servant he acted as adviser to and mediator between the government and the Catholic Church authorities.
He was an acknowledged expert in the system of ‘payment by results’ which was introduced into Irish national schools in 1872, and as such was appointed by the British government to report on the education system of Trinidad in 1869 and that of Malta in 1878.
In both colonies his Irish experience of the problems of language and religion in education proved invaluable.
Among his main achievements as resident commissioner were the passing of the Intermediate Education Act (1878) which established a system of ‘payment by results’ for secondary schools, based on success in public examinations; the recognition of the Irish language as an ‘extra’subject (for result fees) in national schools from 1879; the provision of state grants for denominational teacher-training colleges; and the introduction of compulsory free education by the 1892 Irish Education Act.
He also gained popularity with national schoolteachers by his official recognition of their newly formed union — the Irish National Teachers' Organization.
He gave evidence on Irish education to both the royal commission on technical instruction (1881–4) and the royal commission on the workings of the Elementary Education Act (England and Wales)(1886–8).
In his later years he suffered ill health and his work was curtailed.
He was appointed CB (1871), KCMG (1881), PC (1885), a member of the Royal Irish Academy, and JP for county Dublin.
He was president of the education department of the social science congress held in Dublin in 1881.
Keenan married Elizabeth Agnes, daughter of Michael Quin, JP, of Waterville, county Limerick, in 1860.
They had two sons.
Keenan died at Delville, Glasnevin, near Dublin, 1 November 1894.
[Fiachra O'Dubhthaigh, ‘A review of the contribution of Sir Patrick Keenan (1826–1894) to the Development of Irish and British Colonial Education’, M.Ed. thesis (1974) for Trinity College, Dublin; Thom's Dublin directories ; obituary in Irish Times , 4 November 1894.]
John Horden
,John (1731–1808), ‘the Birmingham poet’, innkeeper, and political ballad-writer, was born in 1731, the son of Charles Freeth, landlord of the Bell tavern, Birmingham, and his wife Mary.
Nothing is known of Freeth's education or his early years, although it seems that he was once an itinerant street ballad-singer.
By 1768 Freeth had become landlord of the Leicester Arms, Birmingham, where he remained until his death in 1808.
Freeth's Coffee House, as the Leicester Arms was known, became one of the most celebrated taverns in England.
It was Freeth's custom to write songs — setting his words to popular tunes — about remarkable events in local and national news, and to sing them nightly to the company assembled at his Coffee House.
The habit was profitable: it crowded the place with patrons, attracted eminent visitors, and, since Freeth wrote as a determined radical and Nonconformist, it created a political meeting-place.
The interest aroused by his songs encouraged Freeth to publish them, and the words of nearly 400 songs appeared in more than a dozen collections between 1766 and 1805, John Baskerville [q.v.]being among his printers.
The most substantial of these collections is The Political Songster (1790).
Freeth usually sang about feats of war, national emergencies, and affairs of state, such as the victories of Earl Howe and Lord Nelson [qq.v.], and the activities of Charles James Fox, Lord North, and William Pitt [qq.v.].
To those ballads he added a substantial leavening of others that were complimentary, jocular, and satirical.
Though unsophisticated, many of his patriotic songs have a stirring lilt; on politics he wrote with indignation, rough good humour, and an effective turn of phrase that earned him the reputation of being one of the best political ballad-writers in the kingdom.
From 1771 until 1785 Freeth used the pen-name ‘John Free’ in punning allusion to his beliefs.
His songs offer a significant insight into the popular politics of the late eighteenth century.
To draw attention to the hospitality provided at his inn Freeth issued printed invitation cards, written in verse.
In some fifteen lines, he extends his invitation, comments forcefully on an item of news, and indicates the fare offered.
With these cards Freeth originated an unusual, possibly unique, kind of trade card.
In late Georgian Birmingham Freeth was an outstanding figure, respected for his probity and the warmth of his friendships.
His likeness has been preserved in several portraits, notably by Johann Eckstein in ‘John Freeth and his Circle’(1792).
Where and when Freeth married is not known.
His wife's name was Sarah; she was five years his junior, and she predeceased him by ten months.
John and Sarah Freeth had nine children, of whom one son and seven daughters are mentioned in his will.
Freeth died in Birmingham 29 September 1808.
[John Horden,John Freeth: Political Ballad Writer and Inn-Keeper , 1992.]
David Bradshaw
,Wilfred Edward Salter (1893–1918), poet, was born at Plas Wilmot, near Oswestry, Shropshire, 18 March 1893, the eldest of the three sons and one daughter of Tom Owen, railway clerk, of Plas Wilmot, and his wife (Harriett) Susan, daughter of Edward Shaw, JP, ironmonger and former mayor of Oswestry.
His father was transferred to Birkenhead in 1898, and between 1899 and 1907 Owen was educated at the Birkenhead Institute.
In 1907 his family moved to Shrewsbury, where his father had found promotion with the Joint Railways.
He continued his education at the Shrewsbury Technical School until 1911, while at home he emerged as a votary of John Keats [q.v.]and a model of Christian piety.
Proudly wearing the bishop's mitre and gorgeous robes his mother had made for him, he conducted Sunday evening services in the family sitting-room, rearranged as a church for the occasion.
In October 1911 he took up a position as pupil and lay assistant to the Revd Herbert Wigan, the vicar of Dunsden, near Reading.
He was considering taking orders, but soon became dispirited by the contrast between the stuffy cant of Wigan's vicarage and the godless poverty of his parish.
Avowing his apostasy, he left Dunsden in February 1913, and, after a short stay with his family, he took up a post as a teacher of English at the Berlitz school in Bordeaux.
He remained in France until 1915.
His concern for the Dunsden poor and the compassion of his war poetry are at odds with a remark he made to his mother at the outbreak of hostilities.
‘The guns will effect a little useful weeding’, he advised her in a letter which regretted ‘the mortality of the English regulars less than that of the French, Belgian, or even Russian or German armies: because the former are all Tommy Atkins, poor fellows, while the continental armies are inclusive of some of the finest brains and temperaments of the land’— sentiments typical of the preciosity which occasionally mars his civilian correspondence.
Soon, however, he was confronted with the ‘actualities of war’ during a visit to a casualty hospital, and the bullet-holed limbs and suffering he witnessed there helped purge him of such studied hauteur.
He returned to England to enlist on 14 September 1915 and, after a brief spell in the Artists' Rifles, was commissioned into the 5th (reserve) battalion of the Manchester Regiment on 4 June 1916.
He left for the Somme at the end of December and was soon transferred to the 2nd Manchesters.
In his earliest poems from the front, such as‘At a Calvary Near the Ancre’, he imagines a maimed Christ and his fellow soldiers as equal victims of warmongering ‘pulpit professionals’.
‘I am more and more Christian as I walk the unchristian ways of Christendom’, he wrote, confessing himself ‘a conscientious objector with a very seared conscience’.
His contemplation of the male body, a gaze at once poignant and covert, and a hallmark of his poetry from the Dunsden period onwards, was no less reverential amidst the carnage of the western front.
On 1 May 1917 he was diagnosed as neurasthenic and sent to Craiglockhart War Hospital, Slateford, near Edinburgh, to recuperate.
It was here, in August, that Owen met Siegfried Sassoon [q.v.], the single most important encounter of his brief life.
The astringent effects of Sassoon's ‘humanized reportings’ on Owen's verse are immediately apparent in poems such as‘The Next War’and ‘Anthem for Doomed Youth’.
He returned to his regiment in September 1918 during the final advances on the German lines.
His gallantry in the ensuing conflict won him the MC, but he was killed while crossing the Sambre and Oise canal near Ors in the early morning of 4 November — one week before the armistice, and two years before the first volume of his work was published.
Although he had felt his senses were ‘charred’, he wrote some of his greatest poems, such as‘Spring Offensive’, during the final few weeks of his life.
In a preface he drafted shortly before his death for a prospective collection of his verse, the man who has come to epitomize the soldier-poet wrote: ‘Above all I am not concerned with Poetry.
My subject is War, and the pity of War.
The Poetry is in the pity.’
W. B. Yeats [q.v.]dismissed him as ‘all blood, dirt, and sucked sugar-stick’, yet it is likely that, had he survived the war, Owen would have grown in stature to span the native tradition between Thomas Hardy and Philip Larkin [qq.v.].
[Harold Owen,Journey from Obscurity: Wilfred Owen 1893–1918 , 3 vols., 1963–5; Wilfred Owen,Collected Letters , eds.
Harold Owen and John Bell, 1967; Cecil Day-Lewis (ed.),
The Collected Poems of Wilfred Owen , 1963; Jon Stallworthy,Wilfred Owen , 1974.]
George Bentley
,William John (1810–1894), orthopaedic surgeon, was born 7 August 1810 at the Red Lion Inn, Red Lion Street, Whitechapel, London, the only son and eldest of three children of John Little, proprietor of the Red Lion Inn, and his wife Hannah.
The Little family for many generations lived in Carbrooke, Norfolk.
At the age of two he developed a club-foot deformity due to poliomyelitis.
From the age of thirteen he was educated at the Jesuit College of St Omer, France, winning the laurel wreath for French studies.
In 1828 he began five years as an apprentice apothecary with the Apothecaries' Company of London.
He studied at the London Hospital and Aldersgate School of Medicine.
He became MRCS (England, 1832) and MRCP (London, 1837).
In 1834 Little went to study with Johannes Müller at the University of Berlin in order to discover what could be done to correct his deformity, which English surgeons refused to treat, leaving it to the bone-setters.
During the course of dissections of cadaver club feet he recognized the role of muscles and tendons rather than bones in this deformity.
In 1836 Dr Louis Stromeyer of Hanover successfully undertook tendo Achilles division for Little's club-foot deformity.
In 1837 Little received a doctorate from the University of Berlin for his work on the nature of club foot.
From 1837 onwards he introduced the Stromeyer technique of tenotomy in England.
This involved anterior division of the tendo Achilles just above the ankle without anaesthetic, followed by splintage and manipulation.
In 1839 he published A Treatise on the Nature of Club-Foot and Analogous Distortions , in which he recognized the association between fever and club foot, and was on the verge of describing foot deformity secondary to poliomyelitis.
In 1839 Little was elected assistant physician at the London Hospital.
In 1840 Little founded the Orthopaedic Institution in Bloomsbury, an infirmary for the cure of club foot and other distortions, and for the study of orthopaedics.
In so doing he founded modern British orthopaedics.
The Orthopaedic Institution became the Royal Orthopaedic Hospital in 1845, but Little had resigned in 1844.
Throughout his career Little continued his pioneering work.
In 1843, in a series of lectures at the Orthopaedic Institution (published in 1855 as Lectures on the Deformities of the Human Frame ) he described what became known as ‘Little's disease’, a spastic paralysis of both lower limbs secondary to infantile cerebral palsy.
Little recognized that the cause was an abnormal birth which produced brain damage and secondary spasticity of the limbs.
In 1843 he published On Ankylosis or Stiff Joint: a Practical Treatise on the Contractions and Deformities Resulting from Diseases of Joints .
In 1847 he described two boys with what was obviously pseudo-hypertrophic muscular dystrophy, described twenty-one years later by Guillaume Duchenne.
In 1853 On the Nature and Treatment of the Deformities of the Human Frame appeared, and in 1868 Spinal Weakness and Spinal Curvature .
In 1845 Little was appointed physician to the London Hospital, and he held this position until he resigned in 1863.
In 1854 the Revd Andrew Reed [q.v.], a friend of Little's, established the Royal Hospital for Incurables, and Little became medical examiner and a member of the governing board.
In 1877 he was elected FRCP.
He visited North America in 1878, and was elected honorary member of the American Orthopaedic Association in 1890.
In 1837 he married Elizabeth (‘Isa’), daughter of Thomas Roff Tamplin, brewer, of Horsted Keynes, Sussex.
They had four sons and seven daughters, only seven of whom reached maturity.
His grandson was Admiral Sir Charles Little [q.v.].
Little died at home in Ryarsh, Kent, 7 July 1894, and was buried there.
[J. Schleichkorn,The Sometime Physician: William John Little, Pioneer in Treatment of Cerebral Palsy and Orthopaedic Surgery , 1987; W. A. M. Smart in London Hospital Gazette , vol. xlvii, no. 3, 1944, pp. 84–7; Arthur Rocyn Jones, ‘William John Little’,Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery , February 1949, pp. 123–6; Peter F. Smith, ‘William John Little, 1810–1894’,Health Libraries Review , vol. iii, 1986, pp. 193–4; J. A. Cholmeley,History of the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital , 1985.]
Ronald M Birse
,John (1799–1883), bobbin-maker and aeronautical pioneer, was born in Attercliffe near Sheffield, 6 December 1799, the son of William Stringfellow, cutler, and his wife Martha.
His father was a man of wide scientific interests from whom he inherited a considerable degree of mechanical aptitude and ingenuity.
At an early age he was apprenticed to the lace trade in Nottingham, but in about 1820 moved to Chard in Somerset, a centre of lace-making, and was so successful that within a few years he had established his own business as a manufacturer of bobbins and bobbin carriages.
Thus provided with a steady income, he was able to devote much of his time to aeronautical experiments and other scientific pursuits.
In 1831 and again in 1832 he launched hot-air balloons at local festivals, one of them flying a distance of more than four miles, but even at this time his goal was powered flight with fixed-wing aeroplanes.
The idea was developed in discussions with another manufacturer of lace-making machinery who had moved to Chard in the late 1830s, William Samuel Henson (1812–1888), and was inspired by the aeronautical writings and experiments of Sir George Cayley [q.v.].
Henson and Stringfellow began testing various wing forms in model gliders, and by 1840 had evolved their projected full-size passenger-carrying flying machine or ‘aerial steam carriage’, which Henson patented in April 1843.
A twenty-foot wing-span model powered by a steam engine of Henson origin, but much improved by Stringfellow, was tested in 1845 but could not sustain itself in the air.
Henson then abandoned his aeronautical ambitions altogether.
Stringfellow persevered on his own, however, and built another ten-foot model powered by a smaller steam engine of his own design.
More than one witness recalled that it gained height steadily after being launched on several occasions in 1848, and Stringfellow himself certainly considered that he had demonstrated with it the possibility of powered flight.
Stringfellow, having built a number of other model aeroplanes and engines since 1848, entered a model steam-powered triplane and a model steam engine in the aeronautical exhibition at Crystal Palace in June 1868.
His steam engine was awarded a prize of £100 by the Aeronautical Society for having the greatest power-to-weight ratio of all the fifteen engines exhibited, but unfortunately the triplane could never be tested in the still-air conditions to which it was suited, and so never proved itself to be, if indeed it was, a practical flying machine.
Stringfellow was an outstanding designer and builder of small lightweight steam engines, but his model aeroplanes suffered from the twin disadvantages of being too large to be fully tested indoors, and not stable enough to be tested out of doors.
It is remarkable, however, that his fixed-wing propeller-driven models showed the way ahead so clearly at a time when most other proposals for aerial machines involved flapping wings or unlikely applications of the helicopter principle.
In the late 1850s Stringfellow took up the new art of photography, becoming so proficient that he advertised himself as a professional portrait photographer, with a studio in the High Street of Chard.
He was elected a member of the Aeronautical Society in 1868, and with his prize money erected a building seventy feet long in which to continue his experiments, but his sight began to fail and he was unable to make any further progress.
He patented in 1870 a wheeled ‘apparatus for affording protection from bullets and other missiles’, but did not succeed in selling it to any of Europe's warring armies.
On 24 February 1827 he married Hannah Keetch, said to have been born in Newfoundland.
Their surviving family consisted of six sons and four daughters.
Stringfellow died in Chard 13 December 1883.
[M. J. B. Davy,Henson and Stringfellow: their Work in Aeronautics…1840–1868 , 1931; C. H. Gibbs-Smith,Aviation: an Historical Survey , 1970, 2nd edn., 1985; H. Penrose,An Ancient Air: a Biography of John Stringfellow of Chard, the Victorian Aeronautical Pioneer , 1988.]
Peter Leach
,John (1772–1842), architect, born in 1772, was a pupil of Thomas Hardwick [q.v.]and set up practice in London in 1796.
In 1811 he won the competition for a complex of buildings in Plymouth consisting of a hotel, assembly rooms, and theatre; and, his success with this important commission establishing his local reputation, he moved to Plymouth and remained for twenty-five years the leading architect of the neighbourhood.
So much of his work has been lost that it is difficult to appreciate its impact, but with the backing of the ambitious mayor, Edmund Lockyer, he extensively transformed both Plymouth itself and its satellite towns of Stonehouse and Devonport.
He was active not only as an architect, designing a further series of public buildings, stucco-faced terraces in the London manner, and attractive suburban villas, but also as a town planner, responsible for the creation of Union Street, a bold stroke of planning which united the three towns.
Most of Foulston's work was in the Greek Revival style — which it was his role almost single-handedly to propagate in the area — but his best-known project was the extraordinary group of buildings erected at Ker Street, Devonport, in 1821–4, an extreme example of the Picturesque stylistic eclecticism of the early nineteenth century.
It consisted of a Greek Doric town hall and commemorative column, a terrace of houses in the Roman Corinthian order and a pair in the Greek Ionic, a ‘Hindoo’ Nonconformist chapel, and an ‘Egyptian’library.
(The chapel and the houses have been demolished.)
Foulston himself wrote of the group that: ‘it occurred to him that if a series of edifices, exhibiting the various features of the architectural world, were erected in conjunction and skilfully grouped, a happy result might be obtained.
Under this impression, he was induced to try an experiment (not before attempted) for producing a picturesque effect.’
In a number of his other works, notably the Proprietary Library (1812, destroyed 1941) and St Catherine's church (1823, demolished 1958) in Plymouth and the Ballroom in Torquay (1830, demolished), the influence of Sir John Soane [q.v.]was strongly apparent; while his few Gothic projects, although more conventional, included a restoration of the medieval abbey gatehouse in Tavistock in 1824.
His theatre in Plymouth (demolished 1939–41) was notable for its extensive early use of cast iron.
Shortly before he retired Foulston took into partnership the architect George Wightwick [q.v.], who succeeded to his practice.
In his latter years he created an elaborate water garden at the cottage ornée he had built for himself on the outskirts of Plymouth, and was wont to drive round the streets of the town in a gig disguised as a Roman war chariot, looking, in Wightwick's words ‘(as far as his true English face and costume allowed) like Ictinus of the Parthenon, ‘out for a lark’.’
Also during his retirement, in 1838, Foulston published a volume of his designs,The Public Buildings erected in the West of England, as designed by J. Foulston , and in the same year he became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects.
He died at his home in Plymouth 13 January 1842 and was buried in St Andrew's New Cemetery.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; J. M. Crook, ‘Regency Architecture in the West Country’,Journal of the Royal Society of Arts , vol. cxix, 1971; W. Papworth (ed.),
An Encyclopaedia of Architecture , 4 edns., 1852–88; F. Jenkins, ‘John Foulston and his Public Buildings in Plymouth, Stonehouse and Devonport’,Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians , vol. xxvii, 1968.]
Irvine Loudon
,Henry (c. 1827–1861), anatomist and author, was born c .1827.
Almost nothing is known of his family, childhood, or early education except that his father was private messenger to George IV and William IV, and that he had one sister and two brothers.
In May 1845 Gray entered St George's Hospital as a ‘perpetual student’ where he showed early signs of his intense interest in anatomy and was described by his contemporaries as diligent, painstaking, and methodical.
In 1848 he became MRCS (and soon became a fellow ‘by examination’) and in the following year was awarded the college's triennial prize for an essay on the nerves of the eye.
He won the Astley Cooper prize in 1853.
In 1850, as a newly appointed house surgeon to St George's Hospital (where he later became lecturer in anatomy) he presented a paper to the Royal Society ‘On the development of the optic and auditory nerves’.
This earned him the unusual distinction of being elected to a fellowship of the society at the age of twenty-five (1852).
In 1854 he published On the Structure and Use of the Spleen , a substantial work of 380 pages, based on original observations.
His famous Anatomy, Descriptive and Surgical (1858) was published by John W. Parker [q.v.]in England, and by Blanchard & Lea in the United States in 1859.
No medical text has ever been so widely used by successive generations of medical students and doctors.
By the time of its centenary, there had been twenty-six new editions by eight successive editors in Britain and eleven in the United States; by 1980, there had been thirty-six editions.
The success of the book was not due to an absence of rivals.
There were already several texts on anatomy, the most famous being Elements of Descriptive and Practical Anatomy (1828) by James Quain [q.v.].
Gray's Anatomy , however, eclipsed all others, partly for its meticulous detail, partly for its emphasis on surgical anatomy, but most of all perhaps for the excellence of the illustrations, based on drawings by H. V. Carter, who assisted Gray with the dissections, and engraved by Messrs Butterworth & Heath with remarkable skill.
The design of the book, and the skill with which the illustrations were interpolated in the text could hardly have been improved.
For a man of just thirty it was a remarkable achievement.
The book was well received by the Lancet and British Medical Journal , but savagely attacked by an anonymous reviewer in the Medical Times and Gazette of 1859, who dismissed it, in a ridiculous review for which the most likely reason was personal animosity or jealousy, as ‘a book which is not wanted [and]is not even up to the mark of the existing vade-mecums.
A more unphilosophical amalgam of anatomical detail and crude surgery we have never met with.’
Gray was already working on the second edition when he caught smallpox from his nephew, developed the confluent form of the disease, and died at 8 Wilton Street, Belgrave Square, London, 8 June 1871, aged thirty-six according to the obituary notices of the Lancet and the Proceedings of the Royal Society , which raises the question of his date of birth, usually stated as 1827.
It is a measure of Gray's single-minded devotion to anatomy and authorship that ‘Gray's Anatomy ’ remains even today, not only an important book of reference but as virtually a household phrase.
[Charles Mayo Goss,A Brief Account of Henry Gray, FRS, and his Anatomy, Descriptive and Surgical , 1959;Proceedings of the Royal Society , vol. xii, 1863; obituary in Lancet , vol. ii, 1861, p. 600;Medical Times and Gazette , new series, vol. xviii, 1859; W. Brockbank, ‘A Centenary of a False Prophecy’,Medical History , vol. ii, 1958, pp. 67–8.]
D C Freshwater
,Norman (1880–1976), engineer and manufacturer, was born in Lawthorne, Yorkshire, 16 December 1880, the eldest of four children (three sons and one daughter) of William Swindin, stationmaster at Macclesfield, and his wife Martha Normansell.
His father died suddenly and Swindin had to leave school and start work at the age of fourteen to help support the family.
He tried to devise new and better ways of operating the machines in the bottle works where he was employed and, realizing that he needed to increase his knowledge of science and mathematics if he was to exploit his ideas, he went in the evenings to the nearby Mechanics' Institute and also took lessons in trigonometry from a local clergyman.
When he was twenty he joined Davis Brothers, a well-known firm of consulting chemists in Manchester, working directly for George E. Davis [q.v.]— an experience which was to colour his whole career.
He was given much responsibility, superb training, and wide experience of the emerging process industries.
He was also largely responsible for rewriting Davis's Handbook of Chemical Engineering in its two-volume format for a second edition.
Davis's death in 1907 left Swindin looking for another post.
He went to work for the Gas Light & Coke Company at Beckton in 1908 but he soon chafed at not being given the free rein to which he had become accustomed at Davis Bros.
He then found employment with F. Elmore, an eccentric genius with a novel chemical process and plenty of money to experiment with it.
The enterprise failed, but in the course of its failure Swindin developed the ideas and learned the techniques that were the foundation of his success.
Corrosion had always been a problem in the chemical industry, both in containment and in heating.
In two key inventions Swindin solved both of these for many situations.
His first was the development of submerged combustion, which enabled the most intractable liquids to be heated without expensive constructions.
The second was the development of a method for fixing vulcanized rubber firmly on to mild steel, thus facilitating the manufacture of cheap chemical-resistant equipment.
He founded a company with his brother and started manufacture in his backyard.
This was successful beyond their expectations, and enabled Swindin to enjoy a long and fruitful retirement.
Swindin had a remarkable memory and was a good anecdotalist.
Apart from his interest in technology and technical education, he had an enduring love of the arts, especially music and painting.
A founder-member of the Institution of Chemical Engineers, he never reached high office (he was too much of a maverick to fit into any formal organization) but contributed much to its educational work.
He also developed a close association with Loughborough University (which awarded him an honorary degree in 1972) and his annual lecture there was one of the highlights of the academic year.
In 1910 Swindin married Norah Beatrice, daughter of Matthew Jury Bayfield, shipper's clerk.
There were no children.
Swindin died 25 August 1976 in Bognor Regis.
[N. Swindin,Engineering Without Wheels: an Autobiography , 1964.]
M E Ceadel
,Edmund Dene (1873–1924), radical campaigner on international issues, journalist, and Labour MP, was born Georges Edmond Pierre Achille Morel de Ville in Paris 10 July 1873, the only child of Edmond Morel de Ville, a middle-ranking French civil servant of good family, and his wife Emmeline de Horne, an Englishwoman of Quaker ancestry from East Anglia.
His father having died when he was four, Morel was raised by his mother, who quarrelled with her French relatives, changed her name to Deville, and taught English and music so as to be able to send him to be educated at Madras House, Eastbourne, and Bedford Modern School, until her failing health forced his return to Paris at the age of fifteen to obtain paid employment in a bank.
In 1891, however, the offer of a clerkship in the Liverpool office of Elder Dempster, a shipping firm which traded with the Congo Free State, enabled Morel and his mother to return to England.
In 1896 he was naturalized.
To help support his family, he began writing articles calling for the defence of free trade in West Africa against the protectionism of the encroaching French and the special privileges of the Royal Niger Company.
Though initially little more than special pleading for Liverpool shipping interests, his journalism taught him radical attitudes, most notably a hatred of the Foreign Office, for according so low a priority to West Africa, and a sympathy for African culture, which was reinforced by meeting the traveller Mary Kingsley [q.v.]in 1899.
By 1900 his radicalism had prevailed over his loyalty to his employer.
In that year he began campaigning against the brutal system of forced labour employed by Leopold II, king of the Belgians, as absolute personal ruler of the Congo Free State, even though this forced him to leave Elder Dempster, where he had become head of the Congo department.
In 1903 he launched a paper,West African Mail (later the African Mail ), as a vehicle for his campaign, and in 1904 also founded the Congo Reform Association with (Sir) Roger Casement [q.v.].
These made his name — which by now was E. D. Morel — but also revealed his bellicosity (he favoured sending a gunboat to the Congo), capacity for self-deception (he forgot his own previous defence of the Leopoldian system), and vanity (he resented sharing the limelight even with activists of longer standing).
His Congo campaign achieved its preliminary aim in 1908 when the Free State was handed over to Belgium, and thereafter had some success in pressing the latter to adopt specific reforms, despite the reluctance of the British and French governments to antagonize Belgium, on whose friendship their European policies depended.
Within a month of the testimonial luncheon of 29 May 1911 which concluded his Congo activities, the Agadir crisis gave Morel a new cause that enabled him to develop his opposition to British and French policy.
In 1912 he published an impressively researched study of Morocco in Diplomacy and became Liberal candidate for Birkenhead.
Sympathetic to Germany, hostile to the entente with France, and unmoved by Belgium's plight, he campaigned for neutrality in 1914, and, as soon as this effort failed, launched the Union of Democratic Control, which opposed annexationist war aims and later also called for a negotiated peace.
His secretaryship of the UDC, which he held until his death, cost him his Liberal candidacy and led to six months' imprisonment for a technical breach of the Defence of the Realm Act.
It also brought him, via the ILP which he joined in April 1918, into the Labour party, whose international thinking was considerably shaped by the UDC's criticisms of the treaty of Versailles (and French attempts to enforce it) and even the League of Nations.
But, although winning a famous victory over (Sir) Winston Churchill to become Labour MP for Dundee in November 1922, he was passed over for the foreign secretaryship of the first Labour government fourteen months later.
This disappointment was all the more galling for the fact that the prime minister and eight other cabinet ministers had been his colleagues in the UDC; and, unmollified by nomination for the Nobel peace prize, Morel became almost as bitter a critic of the Ramsay MacDonald government as of its predecessors.
In 1896 he married Mary Florence Richardson, daughter of John W. Richardson, a Liverpool printer.
They had four sons and one daughter.
His health never having recovered after imprisonment seven years before, he died in Bovey Tracey, Devonshire, from a heart attack 12 November 1924, shortly after retaining his seat in the general election.
[The Times , 14 November 1924; Catherine Cline,E. D. Morel 1873–192 4: the Strategies of Protest , 1980; F. Seymour Cocks,E. D. Morel, the Man and his Work , 1920; Marvin Swartz,The Union of Democratic Control in British Politics During the First World War , 1971.]
Arnold Taylor
(c. 1230–1309), military architect, is first recorded as Master James, son of Master John cementarius , working in 1261 with his father on the castle of Yverdon for Peter of Savoy, Earl of Richmond [q.v.]; by 1265 he was chief master mason.
In the 1260s and 1270s he was concerned with works throughout Savoy, notably Aosta, Chillon, and St Georges-d'Espéranche.
He worked with the count's military engineer, Sir John de Masoz, knighted by Henry III after the siege of Bénauges (1254).
The surname by which he was known in England may reflect his connection with the building of Count Philip's castle at St Georges in the Viennois, which was nearing completion when Philip did homage there to his great-nephew, the as yet uncrowned King Edward I, during Edward's return from crusade in 1273.
More probably, however, James, and the brothers Tassin and Giles of St George, masons named in the building accounts of Saxon (Valais) in 1279–80, all sprang from the well authenticated ‘de sancto Jorio’ family, originating at St Jeoire in Faucigny.
James of St George first appears in English records in March 1278, when as Master James ingeniator he travelled to Wales ‘to ordain the works of the castles there’.
He thus assumed control of the works begun in July 1277, probably under the ageing Master Bertram ingeniator (d .
1284), at Flint, Rhuddlan, Ruthin, Aberystwyth, and Builth.
By the outbreak of the second Welsh war in March 1282 Rhuddlan was complete and the others well advanced; James proceeded to Aberystwyth ad castrum regis ibidem construendum ; in July 1282 he ordered the demolition of the old keep at Hope.
Later, as James machinator , he was involved with works at Ruthin and Denbigh.
In January 1283 he was at the siege of the castle of Dolwyddelan, whose nodal position made its capture crucial to the English conquest of Snowdonia.
The campaign of castle building which James now directed as ‘master of the king's works in Wales’ marked the climax of his career.
The castle and walled town of Conwy, adjudged together to be ‘incomparably the most magnificent of Edward I's Welsh fortresses’(Sir J. Goronwy Edwards, q.v., 1944) were begun in March 1283 and virtually completed by late 1287.
Harlech, started in May 1283, was finished in 1289.
Caernarfon was commenced in June, but not completed in James's lifetime.
With its polygonal towers and decorative banding in the imperial style of Constantinople, Caernarfon was envisaged as the state capital of a future dynasty of English princes of Wales, and was designed on an altogether grander scale than its contemporaries.
In December 1280 Master James was granted letters of protection for seven years, probably the estimated time for completing the works he took over in 1278.
In 1284 his responsibility for the operations launched a year earlier was put on a permanent footing with the grant of 3s. 0d. a day for life and a future widow's pension of 1s. 6d. a day for his wife Ambrosia should she survive him.
There is no further mention of Ambrosia in the records, and possibly she is to be identified with the ‘Dame Ambroise de Saint-Joire’ named in 1288 among the first entrants to the Carthusian nunnery of Melan (Haute-Savoie) founded in 1282 by Beatrice de Faucigny.
James himself was appointed in 1290 to the constableship of his newly completed Harlech Castle.
The defeat of the Welsh rising of 1294 led to the inception in 1295 of James's last great commission, Beaumaris Castle in Anglesey, Britain's most perfect example of the concentric castle plan.
The first eighteen months saw phenomenal progress, with a labour force of 3,000 men, 400 of them masons, and expenditure of over £10,000.
Thereafter the more urgent demands of Gascony and Scotland reduced the average yearly outlay to a mere £300.
From 1298 to 1305 Master James was with the king in Scotland, where he executed works at Linlithgow and Kildrummy castles; in 1304 he was probably directing engineer of the siege-works at Stirling.
He resumed work at Beaumaris in 1306 but died before May 1309.
On any reckoning James of St George's achievement in the field of medieval military architecture was outstanding.
His was the genius that enabled King Edward I to raise great fortresses by threes and fours in the space of five or six summers.
Unstereotyped, of striking beauty and enduring strength, the north Wales castles have survived as a unique and lasting monument to their age and their creator.
[A. J. Taylor, ‘Master James of St. George’,English Historical Review , vol. lxv, 1950;idem , ‘Edward I's Castle Building in Wales’,Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. xxxii, 1946;idem , ‘The King's Works in Wales, 1277–1330’ in History of the King's Works , ed.
Howard Colvin et al .,
vol. i, 1963;idem , ‘Castle-building in thirteenth-century Wales and Savoy’,Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. lxiii, 1977;idem , ‘Master Bertram,Ingeniator Regis ’ in Studies in Medieval History presented to R. Allen Brown , ed.
Christopher Harper-Bill, 1989.]
C G Lewin
,Richard (1568–1624), mathematical practitioner, was baptized 27 March 1568 in St Clement, Eastcheap, London, the only child of Richard Witt, salter, and his wife Anne, daughter of John Dickenson, butcher.
He was descended from a Northamptonshire farming family, his grandfather probably being William Wytt of Dene.
His father died November 1567, leaving his mother pregnant and in debt.
In 1570 she married William Smyth, embroiderer, and they had five children, two of whom were admitted to Christ's Hospital.
Witt's own education is obscure, however.
He may have been the Richard Whit or White matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1584, though this is not certain.
He later became a freeman of the Salters' Company, like his father, but it is probable that his chief occupation was as a teacher of mathematics and accounting.
In 1610 Witt joined with seven other London mathematicians in recommending a new book on accountancy and arithmetic, William Colson's A General Tresury of Accounts for all Countries in Christendome , and in 1613 he published his own treatise,Arithmeticall Questions, touching the Buying or Exchange of Annuities , which demonstrated the utility of mathematical knowledge for men of business.
This book, the first English work dealing solely with compound interest, expanded the subject clearly in a practical way, with numerous worked examples, and was one of the earliest publications to use a form of decimal arithmetic.
A second, revised edition was published in 1634.
In August 1613 Witt married Helen Pennaunt, a widow, and moved into her home, ‘a small low messuage or tenement’ on the corner of Coleman Street and London Wall.
They had no children.
He died 4 November 1624 and was buried next to his mother in St Clement, Eastcheap.
In his will, written in his own hand, he donated some of his books to Oxford University and bequeathed to his servant, Thomas Painter, ‘all my books and papers of Arithmetic and Geometry in English and all my copies written and printed and all mine Instruments of Geometry’.
He left £8 to the Salters' Company, for a supper on the day of his burial.
[C. G. Lewin, ‘An Early Book on Compound Interest’,Journal of the Institute of Actuaries , vol. xcvi, part I, no. 403, June 1970, pp. 121–32, and ‘Compound Interest in the Seventeenth Century’, ibid., vol. cviii, part III, no. 440, 1981, pp. 423–42.]
Paul Ranger
,Henry (1750–1818), theatre manager, was born in Clare, Suffolk, the fifth son of Daniel and Elizabeth Ford, and baptized 6 March 1750.
He attended Clare School and later was said to have resided as a law student at the Inner Temple.
At the age of twenty-three, having changed his surname to Thornton, he was leading in the west country a band of itinerant players, John Bernard [q.v.]amongst them, who described their life in Retrospections of the Stage (1830).
After conducting other strolling groups, Thornton became prompter, a job akin to stage manager, at the Portsmouth theatre in the early 1780s.
By 1787 Thornton was the established manager of theatres at Henley, Newbury, and Andover, adding to these in the following year his first purpose-built theatre at Reading.
Early in his career Thornton appears to have had a clear idea of the disposition of his circuit.
He leased or bought a number of buildings along the Bath Road, in towns used as overnight rests by the coaching companies.
A similar pattern of theatres was acquired along the Portsmouth Road, with the circuit terminating on the Isle of Wight at Ryde.
In 1791 the Windsor theatre, then no more than a shed in a muddy field, was bought from Francis Waldron [q.v.], writer and actor.
Thornton rebuilt it at the foot of the castle ramparts.
With its sumptuous furnishings, the playhouse proved to be very popular with George III and his family, and a description of their visits is given by Charles Knight [q.v.]in A Volume of Varieties (1844).
Throughout his management Thornton attracted eminent performers to his theatres.
Various members of the Kemble family [qq.v.]played in them.
Comedians such as John Quick and Richard Suett [qq.v.], both favourites of George III, made regular forays.
Dorothy Jordan [q.v.]appeared throughout his management, giving her last performance in Ryde before she left for France in self-imposed exile.
The circuit was one of the first to stage hippodramas, employing Andrew DuCrow [q.v.]and his horsemen for this purpose.
Henry Thornton was a man with flair but with no eye for detail.
Highly forgetful, he is said to have put on all six shirts his wife packed for his tour and removed each as it became too dirty to wear.
He had little patience with learning lines, a habit which spread to members of his company.
Nevertheless, when staging epics such as Pizarro by R. B. Sheridan [q.v.]he did so with tremendous verve.
With such presentations he was helped by one of his sons-in-law, Arthur Hatton, whose own interest lay in the spectacular.
Another son-in-law, Richard Barnett, on Thornton's retirement in 1817, took up the reins of management and was still running the Guildford and Oxford theatres on the circuit until almost mid-century.
During the late 1770s Thornton married Elizabeth Pritchard, the daughter of a provincial theatre manager.
They had two sons who died young and three daughters.
Thornton died in Chelmsford 21 April 1818.
[Henry Angelo,Reminiscences of Henry Angelo , 1828; Edward Cape Everard,Memoirs of an Unfortunate Son of Thespis , 1818.]
Marilyn L Brooks
,Eliza (d. 1840), writer, was born in the 1760s.
She may have been the Elizabeth Mansell christened 26 December 1762 at St Botolph, London, the daughter of John Mansell and his wife Susannah.
Her father died when she was young and she spoke of one brother.
Her friends included William Godwin, Thomas Holcroft, Charles and Mary Lamb, and Mary Wollstonecraft [qq.v.], whom she nursed during her fatal illness.
Her marriage to John Fenwick (possibly on 8 May 1781 at St Dunstan, Stepney), a radical author and translator, proved disastrous and she left him in 1800 ‘determined…to consider myself and children totally separated from his bad or good fortunes’.
In order to support herself, her daughter Eliza, and her son Orlando, she took up numerous, often very short-lived pursuits, including the superintendence of schools, translating, colouring prints, working in her brother's shop in Penzance, running William Godwin's Juvenile Library, and working as a governess for families in London and Lee Mount, Cork.
In 1795 her epistolary novel Secresy; or, The Ruin on the Rock was published ‘By a Woman’.
Using powerful images of confinement and liberty it tells of the romantic but misguided attachment of Sibella, whose defiance towards her restrictive education leads on to her sexual maturity and death.
Ostensibly showing ‘the fatal end of an ungoverned passion — virtuous in its object, but vicious in its excess’, the novel's conflicting and more convincing emphasis is on the heroine's defiance towards the ‘moats and walls [which]are feeble barriers to a determined will’.
The novel was well received as a warning against excessive sensibility by the Monthly Magazine and the Critical Review , which praised its ‘philosophic attention to the phenomenon of the human mind’.
She went on to write educational books for children, including The Life of Carlo, the Famous Dog of Drury Lane Theatre (1804), a ‘little pantomimic book’ about the Forty Thieves (1806);The Class Book; or, Three Hundred and Sixty Five Reading Lessons Adapted to the Use of Schools (1806), under the name Revd David Blair; and Lessons for Children (1811).
In 1814 she followed her actress daughter, now married, to Bridge Town, Barbados, where they opened a thriving school.
Two years later her son died of yellow fever.
The school failed after the collapse of her daughter's marriage, and when her plans to open a school near Bristol failed, she left for America.
She and her daughter set up schools in New Haven and New York, where her daughter died in 1828, leaving her and her four grandchildren to a semi-nomadic and seemingly ill-fated existence in America.
The two older boys drowned.
Her thirty-year correspondence with Mary Hays [q.v.]vividly recounts her attempts at independence, her indebtedness to friends, her financial insecurity, and unwittingly, her impetuosity and blind faith in her new ventures.
She frequently refers to the ‘slavery’ attached to all of her situations.
She believed herself to be ‘pursued by a malign and inexorable fate’, which, although aided by her hasty, unrealistic plans, does seem to have dogged her latter years.
Despite this, her life displayed an indomitable resilience in the face of misfortune, and a determined instinct to survive.
She died whilst living with her granddaughter in Rhode Island in 1840.
[V. Blain, P. Clements, and I. Grundy,The Feminist Companion to Literature in English: Women Writers from the Middle Ages to the Present , 1990; K. N. Cameron (ed.),
Shelley and his Circ le 1773–1822 , vol. i, 1961; Janet Todd (ed.),
Dictionary of British and American Women Writers 1660–1800 , 1984; A. F. Wedd (ed.),
The Fate of the Fenwicks, Letters to Mary Hays (1798–1828), 1927; additional correspondence to Mary Hays in Pforzheimer Library, New York.]
David Watkin
,Charles (1782–1857), traveller, scholar, author, and amateur architect, was born in 1782, the son of Thomas Kelsall, a member of the council of the East India Company.
He was educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he became a fellow-commoner in 1800.
He left in 1803 without taking a degree and spent three years in a Wiltshire militia regiment.
In subsequently adopting the life of a travelling scholar, he was doubtless influenced by the academic study of Greece being undertaken around 1800 by a remarkable group of Cambridge scholars.
He first visited Sicily while he was still an undergraduate, and it was on a second visit to the island in 1808–9 that he wrote the first of his many privately published books, a translation of Cicero's The Last Two Pleadings…against Caius Verres (1812).
He unexpectedly appended to this a ‘Post Script containing remarks on the State of Modern Sicily’ in which his sympathy with contemporary trends in secular rationalist thought led him to argue that Sicily was in need of drastic modernization along liberal and democratic lines.
He adopted the cause of Greek independence in A Letter from Athens addressed to a Friend in England , a lengthy poem published in 1812, the same year as Childe Harold by Lord Byron [q.v.].
In a footnote he held up the Greek Doric style as the model for a reformed modern architecture.
In idealist language derived from J. J. Winckelmann, he praised Doric for its permanence and longevity, recording ‘the rapid progress of the present age to the attainment of true taste in architecture’.
He admired recent Greek Revival buildings in St Petersburg, Berlin, Trieste, London, and Cambridge, but reserved his greatest praise for Paris, where ‘grecian architecture triumphs’ and which is consequently ‘a better school for young architects than either Rome or Venice’.
Kelsall designed buildings in various styles, including Grecian, of which he published engravings by Henry Moses [q.v.]and other artists in Phantasm of an University (1814), a book which has something in common with Claude-Nicolas Ledoux's L'Architecture considérée sous le rapport de l'art, des moeurs, et de la législation (1804), with the proposals of Thomas Jefferson for the University of Virginia, and with the founding of London University.
Kelsall argued for the fundamental reform, academically and architecturally, of Oxford and Cambridge, urging them to ‘Take at last measures to keep peace with the improvements made in the present age, in all the departments of science and art.’
Denying that ‘universal science is centred in mathematics, in the classics’, he proposed as fields of study civil policy and languages, fine arts, agriculture and manufactures, natural philosophy, moral philosophy, and mathematics.
The course would be followed by a world tour.
The university buildings were themselves instructive, incorporating all the ‘orders to be seen in the ruins of Greece and Italy’ as well as English mediaeval styles.
In his Classical Excursion from Rome to Arpino (1820) he published designs for a monument to Cicero in the Amalthea at Arpino.
In 1841 he acquired a villa called Knightons in Hythe, Hampshire, which he renamed the Villa Amalthea, setting up busts of poets and scholars in the garden.
His Remarks touching Geography especially that of the British Isles (1822) proposed the introduction of Napoleonic departments, while his Horae Viaticae (1836) included a novel about a radical reforming pope.
Kelsall also published Esquisse de mes travaux, de mes voyages, et de mes opinions (1830).
On his death in 1857 he left his books and manuscripts to Morden College, Blackheath, where they survive in a building designed for them by Philip Hardwick [q.v.].
[D. J. Watkin, ‘Charles Kelsall: the Quintessence of Neo-Classicism’,Architectural Review , vol. cxl, 1966, pp. 109–12, and Thomas Hope (1769–1831) and the Neo-Classical Idea , 1968.]
M Mulvihill
,Charlotte (1844–1939), feminist and socialist reformer, was born on the family estate at Ripple Vale in Kent 15 June 1844, the third child and third daughter in the family of five daughters and one son of Captain William French, retired naval officer, and his wife Margaret Eccles.
Her brother became Field-Marshal Sir John French, first Earl of Ypres [q.v.].
Charlotte French had a conventional young lady's upbringing, and frequently lamented her lack of a thorough education.
Captain French died in 1854 and within a few years his wife was confined to a mental home.
In 1863 the family settled in London, where Charlotte attended finishing school.
For several years she made tours of the Continent with her elder unmarried sister, Caroline.
In 1870 she married Maximilian Carden Despard, an Anglo-Irish businessman.
They had no children, probably because of Maximilian's poor health, on account of which they travelled during every English winter.
Soon after her marriage Charlotte Despard became a writer of popular novels.
In 1890 Max Despard died and after months of seclusion Charlotte Despard emerged as a wealthy, philanthropic widow, operating in the Nine Elms district of Battersea, south London.
She opened one of the first child welfare clinics in the country, and ran a working men's club.
From this period onwards she adopted a distinctive dress and was always remembered for her lace mantilla, her plain sandals, and her austerely simple clothes.
She shunned luxury, was a vegetarian, and converted to Catholicism.
At the end of 1894 she was elected as guardian for the Vauxhall board of the Lambeth Poor Law Union.
As an activist within the Labour movement of the day, a supporter of the Social Democratic Federation and of the embryonic Labour party, she was a radical and exceptionally dedicated guardian until 1903.
She joined the Women's Social and Political Union and became its joint honorary secretary.
As a leading suffragette, she endured the first of two spells in Holloway gaol in 1907.
When the WSPU split in 1907, she helped to form the Women's Freedom League, and became president.
During World War I she was conspicuous for her public relief work on the home front.
After the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 her commitment to the international socialist movement intensified.
In 1918, after the vote had been granted to women over thirty, she resigned from the WFL presidency and devoted herself to a range of issues, including the Save the Children campaign, the Indian independence movement, theosophy, the Labour party and the early British Communist party, the London Vegetarian Society, and the Irish Self Determination League.
She stood for Parliament, unsuccessfully, as a pacifist Labour candidate in the general election of 1918, and was appointed as an alderman to Battersea borough council in 1920.
In the summer of 1921 she moved permanently to Ireland, in which country's affairs she had always taken a keen interest.
Her republican sympathies brought her into direct conflict with her brother Sir John French, who was viceroy, but they were reconciled before he died in 1925.
When civil war broke out in Ireland she became president of the Women's Prisoners' Defence League.
By 1923 she was living at Roebuck House, outside Dublin, with Maud Gonne [q.v.].
To provide jobs she started a small jam factory and she sponsored left-wing republican political initiatives.
Because of these interests she was designated as a dangerous subversive under the terms of the 1927 Public Safety Act.
However, although her household was frequently raided by police, she herself was not arrested.
She continued to visit London for her birthday parties, around which the WFL focused its annual gatherings.
She was fêted at celebrations to mark the Equal Franchise Act of 1928.
She also supported anti-appeasement initiatives and the Republican cause in the Spanish civil war.
Increasingly infirm, she was unable to visit Spain, but she did travel to London for her ninety-third birthday party in 1937.
She died in hospital 10 November 1939, after a fall at her new house in Whitehead, outside Belfast.
She was buried with republican honours at Glasnevin cemetery, Dublin.
[Margaret Mulvihill,Charlotte Despard , 1989; Andro Linklater,An Unhusbanded Life , 1980; Charlotte Despard's pocket diaries, 1913–26, Belfast Public Record Office; Charlotte Despard, ‘In the Days of my Youth’(unpublished memoir), Belfast PRO, and ‘How I Became a Suffragette’,Women's Franchise , July 1907.]
A W F Edwards
, Sir Edward Thomas Ffrench , second baronet (1789–1855), mathematician and landowner, was born in Dublin 26 March 1789, the eldest of three sons (there were no daughters) of General Gonville Bromhead (created first baronet in 1806) of Thurlby, Lincolnshire, and his wife Jane, daughter of Sir Charles Ffrench, baronet.
After schooling in Halifax and two years at Glasgow University, he entered Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in June 1808.
Bromhead won the college mathematical prize in 1809 and graduated BA in 1812.
He left Cambridge the following year, not having sat the mathematical tripos because of his delicate health, and became a barrister of the Inner Temple.
In 1817 he was elected to a fellowship of the Royal Society, in whose Philosophical Transactions his sole mathematical paper ‘On the Fluents of Irrational Functions’ had appeared in 1816.
He succeeded to the baronetcy in 1822 and spent the remainder of his life as a leading public figure in Lincoln, of which he became high steward, and its county.
Bromhead was a key figure in the renaissance of English mathematics brought about by the efforts of a generation of Cambridge mathematicians which included Sir John Herschel, George Peacock, and Charles Babbage [qq.v.].
The Analytical Society, their pressure group for reform, was Bromhead's suggestion, mooted at a gathering in his lodgings in 1812, and he read a paper ‘On Notation’ at its first meeting.
The prime object of the society was to secure the adoption of the continental, or Leibnizian, notation for the calculus, in preference to the Newtonian notation then used in England, and thereby to open English mathematics to the eighteenth-century continental developments.
Bromhead was the link between Robert Woodhouse [q.v.]and the society.
Woodhouse was a fellow of Caius, and in 1803 had published the first book in England employing the continental notation,Principles of Analytical Calculation .
When Bromhead contributed the article on Differential Calculus to the 1819 Supplement to the Encyclopaedia Britannica he emphasized Woodhouse's influence.
Bromhead rendered further service to mathematics through his support of two outstanding self-taught mathematicians from the east midlands, George Green and George Boole [qq.v.].
Bromhead was a subscriber to Green's first memoir, published in 1828, and the contact led to Green visiting Thurlby Hall and eventually to his career as a Caius undergraduate and fellow.
Bromhead was active in communicating Green's later memoirs to the Cambridge Philosophical Society and the Royal Society of Edinburgh (of which Bromhead had been elected a fellow in 1823).
George Boole's father had been curator of the Lincoln Mechanics' Institute when Bromhead was president, and the connection led to the latter's support and encouragement for the younger Boole, to whom he lent mathematical books.
Bromhead was shrewd in his advice and generous in his support.
Kindness and humour shine through his letters.
He combined the best English traditions of amateur science and patronage by the landed gentry, to the great benefit of mathematics.
Always of weak constitution, he suffered progressively from blindness in his last years, and died a bachelor 14 March 1855 in Thurlby.
[D. Phillips,George Green: His Academic Career , 1976 (Nottingham Castle Publications); A. Hyman,Charles Babbage, Pioneer of the Computer , 1984; D. MacHale,George Boole, His Life and Work , 1985; D. M. Cannell,George Green, Miller and Mathematician , 1988; John Venn,Biographical History of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge , 3 vols., 1897, 1898, 1901; private information.]
Rowan Strong
,George Hay (1821–1875), Episcopalian priest, scholar, and printer, was born 4 August 1821 in Edinburgh, the ninth child in a family of four sons and six daughters of John Hay Forbes (later Lord Medwyn, q.v.), judge of the Court of Session, and his wife Louisa, daughter of Sir Alexander Cumming Gordon of Altyre.
His brother was Bishop Alexander Penrose Forbes [q.v.].
In 1825 he became permanently crippled, probably due to poliomyelitis.
He had no formal schooling but was tutored privately, spending some years in France under orthopaedic specialists.
He read extensively in the classics and became an accomplished linguist.
His family were leaders in the Scottish Episcopal Church (SEC).
He was a founding member of the Gaelic Tract Society in the SEC in 1846.
He was ordained deacon in 1848 and priest in 1849.
In 1848 he began his life's work — the mission in Burntisland, Fife.
There he opened a day-school in 1849 and built a parsonage in 1854.
He planned a very large church but only the baptistry was ever completed (in 1856).
In 1869 he was elected to the Burntisland town council and chosen as provost.
In 1852 he began the Pitsligo Press as a vehicle for his own scholarship and theological views.
He edited two series of periodicals directed towards Scottish Episcopalians, wrote a number of works on liturgical theology, contributed articles to the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1874–5), and produced editions of several medieval missals.
He translated and edited several works, including those of St Gregory of Nyssa and Bishop Thomas Rattray [q.v.].
A frequent traveller to Europe, he corresponded with leading European scholars including Cardinal Jean Baptiste Pitra (the Vatican librarian), Charles de Montalembert (a leading French Liberal Catholic), and Jacques Migne (the editor and publisher of patristic literature).
The great cause of his life was the Scottish communion office, the eucharistic liturgy deriving from the 1637 Scottish Book of Common Prayer.
He was one of the revisers of the edition of 1850 issued by Patrick Torry [q.v.], bishop of St Andrews.
When in 1862 the general synod of the SEC removed the Scottish communion office from its primacy of authority over the English Book of Common Prayer he took the Episcopal bishops to court, appealing as far as the House of Lords; he defended his case himself but lost the action in 1867.
Forbes was the most knowledgeable liturgical scholar of his day in the SEC but his published work, and hence his influence, was reduced by an over-strained attention to detail and other scholarly opinion.
A man of great personal charm, he was yet stubborn and pugnacious towards those with whom he disagreed.
He was one of the most important scholarly forces upholding Scottish traditions in the SEC against the prevailing Anglicization of the nineteenth century.
In 1853 he married Eleanor Maria Irby, daughter of James Wemyss of Cariston, a major in the Scots Greys.
It was a happy but childless marriage.
They lived simply, most of their income going towards the building of the Burntisland church or the support of the printing press.
Forbes died at the parsonage, Burntisland, 7 November 1875.
[William Perry,George Hay Forbes , 1927; J. B. Primrose, ‘The Pitsligo Press of George Hay Forbes’,Edinburgh Bibliographical Society Transactions , vol. iv, 1962; Forbes genealogy in Sir William Forbes,Narrative of…
Dame Christian Forbes , 1875; George Hay Forbes archives, St Andrews University; registers of SS Paul's and George's church, Edinburgh.]
Isobel Grundy
,Susanna (1768–1842), writer, was born in Danett's Hall near Leicester, and was baptized 5 July 1768, the youngest of three daughters (the two elder of whom died young from tuberculosis) of John Watts, the last of an impoverished genteel family (related to Alaric A. Watts, q.v.), and his wife Mary Halley, an ‘uneducated country girl’ whom he had married for her beauty.
Susanna's father died when she was a baby.
To support her mother, she learned French and Italian in order to teach and translate.
Her remarkable landscapes composed of feathers won a medal from the Society for Encouragement of the Arts and Commerce.
Her first book was Chinese Maxims.
Translated from [Robert Dodsley's, q.v.]
The Oeconomy of Human Life.
Into Heroic Verse (1784).
Specimens of her verse translations of Tasso (Jerusalem Delivered ) and Verri (Roman Nights ) circulated to warm critical praise; but ‘unforeseen circumstance’ prevented their publication.
She wrote a scholarly life to preface the Tasso, and clearly identified with his confinement and melancholy.
She wrote for public occasions and for magazines, ‘fagging and scribbling whole summers & winters’.
Her Original Poems, and Translations, Particularly Ambra.
From Lorenzo de'Medici (1802) includes some items by others.
Her pioneer guidebook,A Walk Through Leicester (1804), remained anonymous until her death.
Maria Edgeworth [q.v.]mentions, in 1802, that Watts had sold a four-volume novel (untraced) to William Lane [q.v.]for ten guineas and that Richard Lovell Edgeworth [q.v.]doubted her talent too much to recommend her to the publisher Joseph Johnson [q.v.];
Watts seems to have kept a copy of Maria Edgeworth's condescending letter.
About 1806 her mother became insane; next year a relation of her friend Elizabeth Heyrick [q.v.]secured her twenty pounds from the Royal Literary Fund.
Her mother died soon afterwards.
She supported herself by teaching little girls, and, with Heyrick, won local fame for philanthropy: when slaves were emancipated in 1834, she was fêted.
She published in many forms (often with wit and playfulness) against slavery and cruelty to animals, and founded (c .1828) and held office in a Society for the Relief of Indigent Old Age.
Her anthology of poems for children,The Selector (1823), ranges eclectically from Alexander Pope to Lord Byron and Jane Taylor [qq.v.].
A well-kept secret until recently has been Watts's rendering of The Wonderful Travels of Prince Fan-Feredin, in the Country of Arcadia (Northampton, n.d.), from the French of 1735, reprinted 1788, of G. H. Bougeant), a spirited and intricate blend of romance and mock-romance.
Watts's anti-slavery periodical,The Humming Bird (twelve numbers, 1824–5), shows equal panache.
The professed editors are the three sisters Truth, Common Sense, and Philanthropy; when the magazine passes comment on pro-slavery views, Philanthropy is represented as so angry that Common Sense has to censor her.
On Watts's death an anonymous memoir appeared in a volume of her Hymns and Poems (1842).
A better picture of her lively intellectual life emerges from her scrapbook.
This begins with her Tasso and diverges into immense variety: from poems (manuscript and printed, by herself and many others), mementoes, statistics, portraits (many of women writers), and data on Hindu and Arabic languages, to diagrams of the hold of a slave ship.
She died in Leicester 11 February 1842 and was buried at St Mary de Castro church on 15 February.
She was unmarried.
[Royal Literary Fund MSS; John Heyrick,First Flights , 1797; Mary Pilkington,Memoirs of Celebrated Female Characters , 1811; MS sketch of her life by Clara Parkes, 1865, prefacing her scrapbook at Leicester Central Library; Maria Edgeworth to Mary Sneyd in F. V. Barry (ed.),
Maria Edgeworth: Chosen Letters , 1931; Jack Simmons, introduction to Susanna Watts,A Walk Through Leicester (facsimile of first edn. of 1804), 1967.]
M R D Foot
,William (1823/4–1872), rabble-rouser, was born in Ulster, into a Roman Catholic family which converted to Protestantism in his childhood.
The conversion was at first a family secret; when it leaked out to the neighbours the Murphys fled to Dublin, where William worked in his teens in a boot shop.
His father became a Protestant lecturer in England, and according to his son a Catholic mob stoned him to death.
Murphy followed in his father's footsteps.
The Protestant Electoral Union of 3 Craven Street, Charing Cross, employed him as a lecturer from the early 1860s.
His argumentative gifts as a popular orator attracted crowds willing to pay a penny or two to hear him.
At his most sensational lecture he sold shilling copies of a pamphlet,The Confessional Unmasked (1851).
This quoted the Roman Church's instructions to its clergy to enquire, during confessions, exactly how, and how often, married couples made love, and alleged that a woman who committed adultery, confessed to it, and was absolved, could thereafter tell her husband that she was and always had been faithful to him.
This was, and was meant to be, strong stuff.
His object was to attract hearers by his lubricious tone, and then to rouse anti-Catholic feeling through appeals to the right of privacy.
In 1867 and 1868, in the north midlands, his talks several times sparked off riots; notably one in Ashton-under-Lyne near Manchester, on 9, 10, and 11 May 1868, which left nineteen wounded, and a Roman Catholic chapel burned out.
In mid-June that year he lectured in Birmingham several nights running.
A Protestant mob was so incensed by what he said that they wrecked the Irish quarter, breaking in the fronts of houses and knocking down their roofs, and it took a battalion of troops to restore order.
The Home Office sanctioned this official display of force, but remained unwilling to prosecute Murphy — his right to free speech triumphed over the threat to public order.
His peregrinations round the countryside continued, often accompanied by disturbance.
On 20 April 1871 he was billed to speak in Whitehaven, on the Cumberland coast.
Three hundred Catholic miners marched in from Cleator Moor, four miles away, intercepted him outside the meeting-hall, beat him as hard as they could, and left him for dead.
It took him nearly eleven months to die, at Providence Place, Lady Pool Lane, his Birmingham home, on 12 March 1872.
A crowd of 40,000 rioters attended his funeral there six days later.
He was unmarried.
[Public Record Office, HO 45/9771;The Times , 22 April 1871; Donald C. Richter,Riotous Victorians , 1981, pp. 35–49.]
J H Edwards
,Reginald Crundall (1875–1967), geneticist, was born in Tonbridge 20 June 1875, the son of George Punnett, a builder, and his wife Emily Crundall.
(A strawberry-growing ancestor devised the wooden basket known as a ‘punnet’.)
He went to Clifton College, where he was taught by W. A. Shenstone [q.v.], the first schoolteacher to be elected FRS.
He won a scholarship to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where, after years of athletic inactivity on medical advice, he became an accomplished cricketer.
He obtained a second class in part i (1896) and a first in part ii (1898) of the natural sciences tripos.
In 1898 he worked for some months in Naples on the evolution of small sharks, and then became a demonstrator in the natural history department of St Andrews University.
In 1901 he was elected to a fellowship at Caius; among his colleagues there was (Sir) Ronald Fisher [q.v.], who was to succeed him in the chair of genetics.
A common interest in cricket brought him in touch with William Bateson [q.v.], with whom he began to collaborate on inheritance in 1903, first in mice and later in peas, fowls, and rabbits.
Bateson had already published a defence of Gregor Mendel's principles of heredity; in 1905 Punnett published his influential Mendelism , in both small and large versions.
The book was a popular success; its sales at one time were said to compete with those of Marie Corelli [q.v.].
It contained ‘Punnett's diagram’, a geometric representation of the consequences of fertilization.
In 1908, following discussions at the cricket nets after a lecture on Mendelism to the Royal Society of Medicine, he consulted G. H. Hardy [q.v.], his fellow cricketer and co-secretary of the committee for the retention of Greek in the previous examination.
The result was Hardy's law, a cornerstone of mathematical genetics.
Bateson and Punnett worked together for nearly seven years; they were the founders of experimental genetics in Britain, and the main exponents of Mendel's models of inheritance.
Both started as marine biologists, and in Cambridge both worked on animals and plants.
Each had a robust approach to mathematical exuberance, a deep respect for farmers and seedsmen, and an interest in the broader implications of Mendelism.
Their joint experimental work ended when Bateson was appointed director of the newly founded John Innes Horticultural Institute in south London in 1910.
In 1911 Bateson and Punnett founded the Journal of Genetics , which they edited jointly until Bateson's death in 1926.
(Punnett contributed the entry on Bateson to this Dictionary.)
In 1912 Punnett was appointed to the Balfour professorship of biology at Cambridge — effectively the first chair of genetics to be established anywhere — after Bateson had declined it.
He held the post until 1940.
In 1912 Punnett was elected FRS.
During the war of 1914–18 he served in the food production department of the Board of Agriculture, where he developed sex-linked plumage variants as a means of sexing chicks; this led to many of the commercial ‘self-sexing’ breeds.
In 1923 he published Heredity in Poultry , and produced a map of the X chromosome of the chicken.
In 1913 he married a widow, Eveline Maude Froude Nutcombe-Quicke (died 1965), daughter of John Froude Bellew of Stockleigh English, Devon; they had no children.
After his marriage, Punnett diverted his formidable athletic activities from cricket to tennis.
In 1943 he retired to Somerset, where he maintained his wide interests, which included Japanese prints, Chinese porcelain, biologists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and wine: he retained a personal cellar at Caius, which he visited annually.
At seventy-four, he published humorous verse in Latin.
He died 3 January 1967 while playing bridge at his home in Bilbrook, near Minehead in Somerset.
[F. A. E. Crew in Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. xiii, 1967; Joseph Needham in Caian , October 1967.]
J P Ferris
, Sir John , first baronet (c. 1615–1680), customs farmer, was born c .1615, the second in the family of three sons and two daughters of Robert Shaw, vintner, of Southwark, Surrey, and his wife Elizabeth, daughter of John Domelawe, vintner, of London.
His father, who was descended from an armigerous Cheshire family, was ruined by taking a share in the wine-licensing patent of 1631.
Shaw settled in Antwerp before the civil war as factor to the great Somerset clothier, John Ashe of Freshford, whose daughter he married.
Ashe was a prominent parliamentarian; but Shaw advanced £1,810 for the purchase of arms for the king's army, and during the Interregnum he provided the principal channel of communication between the English Royalists and the exiled court.
According to Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon [q.v.], without him the king at one time could not have got bread.
Returning to England at the Restoration, Shaw became one of Clarendon's chief business advisers, and held such a multiplicity of posts that Sir William Coventry [q.v.]described him sarcastically as ‘a miracle of a man’.
He was a commissioner of customs, trade, and plantations, and joint paymaster of the Dunkirk garrison until 1662, when he took a share in the great farm of the customs.
On obtaining a lease of the Crown manor of Eltham, Kent, in 1663, he employed Hugh May [q.v.]to build him a house (now the Royal Blackheath Golf Club).
He was fortunate to have been accepted as a member of the new customs syndicate in 1667 before Clarendon's fall deprived him of his patron; but the lease was cancelled four years later, when the farmers sought guarantees against the heavy defalcations to be expected in the imminent Dutch war.
Thenceforth Shaw held only minor offices.
As MP for Lyme Regis in the Cavalier Parliament, he was still reckoned a government supporter, though ‘apt to make the gout his excuse’ for absence from the House of Commons.
Shaw was knighted in 1660 and created a baronet, with three of his partners, in 1665.
By his first wife, Sarah Ashe, who died in 1662, he had a son, who succeeded to the baronetcy, and a daughter.
On 24 December 1663 he married Bridget, daughter of Sir William Drury of Besthorpe, Norfolk, and widow of a Cheshire landowner, Charles, fourth Viscount Kilmorey; she brought him two sons and another daughter.
He died in his town house in Bloomsbury Square 1 March 1680, and was buried at Eltham.
His younger children were well provided for, and his heirs retained the lease of Eltham until 1839.
His widow married as her third husband the royal physician, Sir John Baber [q.v.].
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983;A Visitation of the County of Surrey 1662–1668 (Harleian Society, vol. lx, 1910), p. 101; H. H. Drake (ed.),
Hasted's History of Kent Corrected: Hundred of Blackheath , 1886, p. 183; A. Browning,Thomas Osborne, Earl of Danby , 1944–51, vol. iii, p. 104; E. Kimber and R. Johnson,The Baronetage of England , 1766; G. E. Cokayne,Complete Baronetage , vol. iv, 1904.]
John Saville
,Henry (1858–1913), socialist and journalist, was born 30 January 1858 in Hungerford, Berkshire, the son of a village blacksmith, who was an invalid for the last twenty years of his life, and his wife, the daughter of an agricultural labourer.
He had at least one brother, Lorenzo.
The family was poor and the young Quelch began full-time work at the age of ten, migrating to London when he was fourteen.
He had a variety of unskilled jobs, and at the beginning of the 1880s, when he first became involved in radical politics, he was working in a wallpaper warehouse.
Always known as ‘Harry’, Quelch first joined the Bermondsey Radical Club and soon became known in London left-wing politics.
He became a member of the Democratic Federation, later the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), and was one of its few proletarian activists in the early days of the newly emerging socialist movement.
Quelch was entirely self-educated: one of the great autodidacts of the modern Labour period.
He taught himself French in order to read Karl Marx's Capital and later learned German.
He began writing for Justice , the weekly paper of the SDF, which first appeared in January 1884, and two years later he took over the editor's position from H. M. Hyndman [q.v.].
Quelch resigned from the editorship in 1889 in order to work full-time for the New Unionism, but returned to the editor's chair in 1891 and remained editor until his death.
In 1891 he also became manager of the newly established Twentieth Century Press.
He was a competent and careful administrator and retired in 1909, with unfortunate results for the publishing company for the next few years.
Quelch produced in Justice a lively and well-informed paper which remains invaluable for the history, especially the grass-roots history, of the modern Labour movement.
In politics he was usually to the left of H. M. Hyndman, whom he much admired, but he accepted the latter's scepticism towards trade unionism and its place in the socialist movement.
Quelch was inevitably involved in most of the many disputes and debates of the decades before 1914; and not only in Britain, for he was a constant attender at international conferences of the European Left.
He was a vigorous opponent of the ‘impossibilities’ in Scotland and London, anti-syndicalist in general, hostile to the Pankhursts [qq.v.], and only lukewarm on women's suffrage.
He was a wholehearted supporter of Indian independence, and he gave unstinted assistance to the Russian revolutionaries.
When Iskra had to be printed in London Quelch put all the resources of the Twentieth Century Press at the disposal of the Russians, who for a time included Lenin.
On the issue of Germany in the years before 1914 Quelch was not as xenophobic as Hyndman, but he supported the idea of a ‘citizen’ army and an ‘adequate’navy to counter German expansionist aims.
It was an issue that sharply divided the Marxist Left.
Quelch married twice.
There was one son, Tom, but it is unknown whether the first or second wife was his mother.
Quelch died 17 September 1913 in London, having been in increasing ill health for a number of years.
[C. Tsuzuki,H. M. Hyndman and British Socialism , 1961; J. M. Bellamy and J. Saville (eds.),
Dictionary of Labour Biography , vol. viii, 1987.]
Paul Brand
,William (c. 1260–1322), lawyer and judge, was probably born in or before 1260 in or near Dunstable in Bedfordshire, the son of Thomas Inge of Dunstable, a minor local landowner active in local administration.
Between 1281 and 1285 he acted as the attorney of a number of different litigants in the Common Bench and the Exchequer, perhaps while studying law as an apprentice of the king's court.
He was retained by the king as one of his serjeants between 1287 and 1293 and is to be found acting for him in the 1287 Gloucestershire eyre and in the northern circuit eyres of 1292–3 as well as in the Common Bench and in the Exchequer.
Surviving reports show that he also acted for other litigants during the same period, both in the Common Bench and in eyres.
In 1293 he became a regular assize justice but continued to act for private clients in the Common Bench until the court moved to York in 1298.
In 1303 he accompanied Edward I to Scotland and in 1305 and again in 1307 was appointed a justice of one of the trailbaston circuits.
By 1303 he had also entered the service of the future Edward II and become one of his closest and most trusted advisers.
In 1305 it was only Edward's intervention which prevented him being appointed a justice in Scotland.
William remained close to Edward II after his accession, being retained as part of the king's household; and in 1310–11 he was sent to Gascony as one of English commissioners at the process of Perigueux.
In Hilary term 1313 he was appointed a justice of the Common Bench and served in that capacity for just over three years.
When Roger Brabazon [q.v.]retired from the chief justiceship of King's Bench, Inge replaced him (at Easter term 1316).
But serious allegations had already been made against him by this date.
It was claimed that he had purchased the Surrey manor of Woodmansterne from its tenant while litigation about the manor was pending in the Common Bench before him and his colleagues.
This allegation seems never to have been proved, but, in connected proceedings brought against the sheriff of Surrey, a jury found that Inge had borrowed the plaintiff's original writ from the sheriff and tampered with it.
Inge was not himself a party to the latter proceedings and the verdict came only after his dismissal from the chief justiceship (in June 1317) but it seems probable that the dismissal was connected with these charges.
Inge took no further part in public life.
His first wife, Margery (whom he married between 1298 and 1300), was one of four daughters and co-heiresses of Henry Grapinel, a landowner in Essex and Sussex.
His second wife, Isolda (whom he married between March 1311 and March 1312), was the widow of Urian de Sancto Petro.
His only surviving issue at the time of his death was Joan, his daughter by his first wife, who was the wife of Eon la Zouche.
He died shortly before 10 May 1322.
[Public Record Office, Common Pleas Plea Rolls (CP 40) of the reign of Edward I; published and unpublished reports of cases;Calendars of Close and Patent Rolls ;Year Books 8 Edward II , Selden Society, vol. xli, 1925, pp. 216–20;Year Books 9 Edward II , Selden Society, vol. xlv, 1928, pp. xl–xliii;Calendar of Inquisitions Post Mortem , vol. vi, 1910, no. 3281.]
A L Le Quesne
,(Robert) Francis (1840–1879), diarist, was born in Hardenhuish, Wiltshire, 3 December 1840, the second child and elder son in a family of four daughters and two sons of the Revd Robert Kilvert, rector of Hardenhuish, and his wife Thermuthis Coleman.
He was educated privately at a small school run by his father at Hardenhuish rectory, and latterly at Claverton Lodge School, Bath, run by his uncle Francis Kilvert [q.v.].
He went up as a commoner to Wadham College, Oxford, in 1858, and took fourth-class honours in law and modern history in 1862.
He was ordained deacon in 1863 and priest in 1864, served for two years as his father's curate in Langley Burrell, Wiltshire, and then went as curate to Clyro, Radnorshire.
He stayed in Clyro till 1872, then returned to a further curacy under his father in Langley Burrell until 1876, when he was appointed vicar of St Harmon, Radnorshire.
He stayed at St Harmon little more than a year, being appointed vicar of Bredwardine, Herefordshire, at the end of 1877.
Kilvert's clerical career was entirely undistinguished, and although he wrote a quantity of verse and made a collection of Radnorshire folklore, none of his writings, except trivia, was published in his lifetime.
He had apparently kept diaries from the beginning of 1870 until his death, but he remained totally unknown to the public until the publication of a selection from these diaries in a three-volume edition, edited by William Plomer [q.v.], in 1938–40.
Some of the manuscript diaries had already been destroyed by his widow, and the bulk of the remainder were also destroyed in obscure circumstances by his niece, into whose hands they had passed, in the 1950s.
Only three of the manuscript diaries now survive (out of an original total of about thirty), and these have been published in their entirety, two by the National Library of Wales (1982 and 1989) and one by Alison Hodge (1989).
Of the rest of the text only a few small fragments survive.
The diary quickly achieved remarkable popularity: it has been republished in numerous editions, and in 1977 a successful television series based on incidents from it was produced by the BBC.
The great bulk of it depicts the periods of Kilvert's life as a curate in Clyro and Langley Burrell, and as a picture of the life of mid-Victorian rural society seen from the perspective of the gentry, it is questionable if the diary has ever been bettered.
Kilvert was very conscientious (and apparently much loved) in his discharge of his pastoral duties, and this gave him an acquaintance with an unusually broad spectrum of village society, which adds greatly to the interest of the diary.
He was a sharp, sensitive, and sometimes humorous observer of the life of the communities in which he lived, and although his judgements are generally conventional and his tastes often sentimental, the diary at its best is characterized by a naïve sensibility of great purity, rendered in a prose which sometimes rises to remarkable and even visionary heights of description.
Kilvert, a great lover of William Wordsworth [q.v.], himself possessed an acute romantic sensitivity to the beauties of nature and a particularly keen sense of colour, and some of his descriptions of the countryside of the Wye valley and the Welsh border are classics of landscape writing.
The range of the diary is extremely limited: Kilvert was not widely read, and he was uninterested in politics and ideas in general.
The public events of his time leave little mark; and, apart from occasional visits to London and Oxford and an account of a holiday in Cornwall, which is one of the diary's tours de force , his record hardly strays outside the very narrow circumferences of rural Radnorshire and rural Wiltshire.
(Kilvert paid at least two visits to France and Switzerland, but neither of these is covered by the diary: in 1878 he was also offered the English chaplaincy at Cannes, but refused it.)
It is also true that Kilvert had no gift for self-analysis, and further that the diary was impoverished by his widow's removal from it of the volumes which apparently described not only their courtship and marriage, but the two most profound of Kilvert's previous affairs of the heart; though she left the frequent passages describing Kilvert's passionate attachments to young girls, whose fundamentally erotic nature it is clear that neither she nor Kilvert himself recognized.
It is of some interest that these attachments are very similar to those of Lewis Carroll (Charles L. Dodgson, q.v.), whom Kilvert is said to have known at Oxford.
The nature of the diary is such as to feed twentieth-century nostalgia, and there is no doubt that it owes much of its popularity to this.
But to a remarkable extent Kilvert succeeded in turning its limitations — its narrow range of vision and the naïvety of his own judgements — into advantages, to give it a vividness and a simplicity shared by few similar journals; and it seems likely that it will retain its place as at once a major document of Victorian rural life and a minor but moving work of literature.
In August 1879 he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Rowland, landed gentleman of Wootton, near Woodstock, Oxfordshire.
Kilvert died in Bredwardine of peritonitis 23 September 1879, ten days after their return from the honeymoon.
The marriage was childless: his widow survived him till 1911, but did not remarry.
[Introduction by William Plomer to Kilvert's Diary , 3 vols., 1938–40; Frederick Grice,Francis Kilvert and his World , 1982; Kilvert Society publications,passim .]
Marianne Elliott
,Robert (1761–1843), Ulster businessman and radical, was baptized in Belfast 20 March 1761, the fifth child in the family of five sons and two daughters of Robert Simms, merchant and tanner, and his wife Elizabeth Stevenson of Belfast.
With his brother, William Simms [q.v.], he owned a tan-yard in North Street, Belfast (until 1794), a flour-mill in Crumlin (until 1798), and a paper-mill in Ballyclare (from 1798).
Robert subscribed to Belfast's New White Linen Hall in 1782 — a gesture marking him out as one of that group of successful and civic-minded merchants, for which Belfast was then noted.
The Simms family were members of the Third Presbyterian Congregation in Rosemary Street, and as such not opposed to subscription to the Westminster Confession of Faith.
Already a supporter of political reform in the 1780s, in October 1791 he was one of the thirteen founders of the Society of United Irishmen and a proprietor of its newspaper, the Northern Star .
From the outset Robert was the Society's key leader in the north.
In May 1794 he and his brother were tried and acquitted of publishing a seditious address in the Northern Star .
By May 1797, when the paper was finally suppressed, they were its sole remaining proprietors.
After 1795 — when the United Irish Society went underground as an armed, revolutionary movement — Robert remained prominent.
He was one of fewer than a dozen leaders conversant with the Society's policy of seeking French military help, and in 1796 he was appointed to the movement's first national executive committee.
He was arrested and detained in Newgate prison in Dublin from February to June 1797.
In late 1797 he was elected adjutant-general for county Antrim and preparations began for a rebellion.
When it erupted prematurely in Leinster the following May, Robert refused to lead a rising in Ulster before the expected French help arrived, and resigned his command.
Five days later the Ulster rising went ahead under new leaders and was savagely suppressed.
Simms maintained his silence on the reason for his withdrawal, and in 1842 refused to give an interview to R. R. Madden [q.v.], then writing his history of the United Irishmen.
This is why we know so little about Robert Simms, though most contemporaries thought him too moral a man to have acted dishonourably.
He was nevertheless arrested in 1798 and transferred in 1799 to Fort George in Scotland.
He was released back to Belfast in December 1801.
Although the government continued to suspect him, he seems not to have taken any further part in rebellious activities and tried to dissuade his old friend Thomas Russell [q.v.]from organizing another rebellion in 1803.
He was on the committee for the Belfast Harpers' Festival of 1792 and maintained an interest in Irish traditional music throughout his life.
He was secretary to the Belfast Society for Promoting Knowledge (the future Linen Hall Library), 1794–6, and assistant secretary to the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, 1812–43.
His personal character is difficult to fathom, but he had a capacity for deep and long-lasting friendships.
Affectionately nicknamed ‘the Tanner’ in the journals of T. W. Tone [q.v.], he appears as a person of wisdom and integrity.
On 8 August 1786 he married Mary Gilliland of Colin, who died in 1832.
They had four daughters and a son.
Robert Simms died in Belfast, at Franklin Place, 23 June 1843.
[Marianne Elliott,Partners in Revolution: the United Irishmen and France , 1982;idem ,Wolfe Tone: Prophet of Irish Independence , 1989; Charles Dickson,Revolt in the North: Antrim and Down in 1798 , 1960; George Chambers,Faces of Change, the Belfast and Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 1783–1983 , 1983; Norman E. Gamble, ‘The Business Community and Trade of Belfast 1767–1800’, Ph.D.
thesis (1978) for the University of Dublin; information from C. J. Woods and Robert Bonner.]
Geoffrey Alderman
,Simeon (1848–1906), rabbi, was born in London 5 November 1848, the youngest son of Julius Singer, a clothier from Raab (Hungary), and his wife Frederica Wolff of Hamburg.
Singer went to the Jews' College School, London, where he subsequently became a teacher.
In 1867 he became minister to the Borough New synagogue, south London, a post which he combined with a variety of Jewish and non-Jewish charitable and philanthropic endeavours, whilst busying himself also as a prison visitor.
In 1878 he was appointed minister of the New West End synagogue, then in the course of erection in St Petersburgh Place, west London; he served as its minister for the remainder of his life.
Singer thus moved from one of the poorest to one of the wealthiest of the Jewish congregations in London; the transition coincided with a turning-point in the development of the Anglo-Jewish ministry.
In 1870 the lay leaders of the Ashkenazi congregations in London had established the United Synagogue, over which ‘the cousinhood’— and pre-eminently the Rothschilds — presided.
Nathan Marcus Adler [q.v.], the ‘chief rabbi’, became the supreme ecclesiastical authority of this body; ministers of its constituent synagogues were not intended to be rabbinical authorities, but merely preachers and pastors.
Singer was an enthusiastic supporter of the concept of the United Synagogue; he moved easily within the world of wealth with which the New West End was associated, enjoyed the friendship of the Rothschild family, and acquired an unrivalled reputation as a preacher of great power and eloquence.
At the same time he immersed himself in public service beyond as well as within the Jewish and Anglo-Jewish worlds.
He edited, in conjunction with Solomon Schechter,Talmudical Fragments in the Bodleian Library (1896).
In 1890 he had published, with Nathan Adler's authority, the Authorised Daily Prayer Book , which combined accuracy of Hebrew with a vibrant and intelligible English translation.
That same year the rabbinical diploma was conferred on him by Rabbi Weiss, lector in Vienna.
Singer undertook this study partly as a protest against the lowly status of the Anglo-Jewish preacher, and partly to demonstrate that Anglo-Jewish scholars were capable of securing the rabbinical qualification.
As a Jewish theologian, however, Singer stamped himself as a radical and, in some respects, as a rebel.
Though a supporter of Jewish settlement in Palestine, and one of Theodor Herzl's earliest Anglo-Jewish patrons, he opposed Herzl's scheme for a Jewish state as impractical, contrary to the divine will, and subversive of the attachment of the Jew to the state of which he was a citizen.
Though orthodox in his religious beliefs, Singer deplored the division between the orthodox and reform camps, preached in the reform synagogue in Manchester, and was a supporter of the Jewish Religious Union, forerunner of the Union of Liberal and Progressive Synagogues; it was only under intense pressure from within the United Synagogue that he broke off this association.
On 21 April 1868 he married Charlotte, the youngest daughter of Samuel Pyke; they had five sons and one daughter.
Singer died at his London residence, 52 Leinster Square, 21 August 1906, and was buried in the United Synagogue's Willesden cemetery.
[Jewish Chronicle , 24 August 1906, pp. 11–15, 27; Israel Abrahams (ed.),
The Literary Remains of the Rev. Simeon Singer , 3 vols., 1908.]
George W Carpenter
,Oliver Vaughan Snell (1882–1970), mechanical engineer, was born 19 September 1882 in Invercargill, New Zealand, the eldest in the family of two sons and a daughter of William Bulleid, a businessman from North Tawton, Devon, and his wife Marian (daughter of Oliver Vaughan Pugh) from Llanfyllin, Montgomeryshire, to which she returned with her children in 1889 on the death of her husband.
Bulleid was educated at Spa College, Bridge of Allan, and at Accrington Technical School.
In 1901 he began a four-year premium apprenticeship for the Great Northern Railway at their Doncaster works, under Henry Alfred Ivatt, locomotive carriage and wagon superintendent, with academic studies at Sheffield and Leeds universities.
In 1908 he became assistant works manager and chief draughtsman at the French Westinghouse Company's brake and signal works in Paris, where he had his first contacts with French railway engineers.
In 1910 and 1911 he was mechanical engineer for the Board of Trade at the British pavilions at the Brussels and Turin exhibitions.
In 1911 he returned to railway service as personal assistant to (Sir) H. Nigel Gresley [q.v.], who had just taken over from Ivatt on the Great Northern railway.
This was the beginning of a close association and collaboration lasting for twenty-five years, interrupted only by Bulleid's war service from 1915 to 1919, when he was involved mainly in the operation of military railways serving ammunition dumps near the front in France.
He attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Engineers.
Shortly after his return Gresley appointed him assistant carriage and wagon superintendent, in which capacity he introduced numerous innovations including modernized train interiors; a completely articulated five-coach train set carried on only six bogies, in whose kitchen electric cooking was pioneered; and also twin articulated sleeping cars.
In 1923 Gresley became chief mechanical engineer of the London and North Eastern, the second largest group railway, formed from six individual companies, with Bulleid as his personal assistant.
Bulleid's innovative outlook on design matters and close study of overseas engineering practice complemented Gresley's and they were both closely involved in the technical work of the International Railway Congress Association.
Bulleid was closely involved with innovations and developments in locomotives and rolling stock and was a pioneer in the application of welding, including its use for boilers.
In 1937 he succeeded Richard Maunsell, chief mechanical engineer of the Southern Railway, which had concentrated its capital expenditure on widespread electrification and relatively little on improvement of its steam-operated services.
Bulleid strongly advocated the need for new and more powerful steam locomotives and obtained authority for this.
His first heavy main-line passenger and fast freight locomotive, of the 4–6–2 type, was built in 1941.
It was of striking ‘air-smoothed’ outline and embodied many innovations, including welded fire-box and totally enclosed internal driving mechanism housed in an oil-bath.
It rapidly demonstrated its power and haulage capacity despite teething troubles, and 140 of these and a slightly smaller variant transformed train operation over most of the steam-worked Southern lines.
From 1942 a class of more powerful 0–6–0 freight locomotives also gave excellent results.
Bulleid introduced new and more comfortable main-line and electric suburban trains, the latter including a double-deck prototype train for the crowded Kent lines and a revolutionary prototype general-purpose steam locomotive carried on two steam-driven power bogies.
Retiring in 1949, after the formation of the nationalized British Railways system, Bulleid was invited to join Coras Iompair Eirann, the Irish state transport system, as consulting mechanical engineer and later chief mechanical engineer.
He was responsible for introducing modern carriage and wagon designs embodying welded construction, workshop modernization, and, encouraged by the high cost of imported coal, diesel locomotives and railcars.
He also produced a prototype steam locomotive burning indigenous peat, which embodied features of the prototype Southern locomotive.
He retired again in 1958.
He was president of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1956–7, of the Institution of Locomotive Engineers in 1939–45, and of the Institute of Welding in 1949.
He was also an honorary member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
He was appointed CBE in 1949 and received an honorary D.Sc.
from Bath University (1967).
He combined great innovative ability and enthusiasm with charm, humour, and kindness to his staff, many of whom were devoted to him.
He was a devout Roman Catholic.
In 1908 he married Marjorie Campbell, youngest daughter of Henry Alfred Ivatt, locomotive carriage and wagon superintendent.
They had three sons (one of whom died in 1938 at the age of fifteen) and one daughter.
Bulleid died 25 April 1970 in Malta.
[H. A. V. Bulleid,Master Builders of Steam , 1963; Sean Day-Lewis,Bulleid, Last Giant of Steam , 1964; information from family and former colleagues.]
Alison Shell
,Jane (1652–1727?), poet and novelist, was baptized 17 May 1652 in Blatherwicke, Northamptonshire.
Her father Thomas was a former Royalist soldier, then agent for a local squire, who in 1675 received an annual grant of £80 from Charles II; from 1662 he leased the manor at Wilsthorpe, Lincolnshire, which had an annual value of £47 10s.
Her mother, Anne, was related to Colonel William Connock of Cornwall, who was to fight for James II in Ireland, and was cousin to Richard Lower, the physiologist [q.v.].
Jane Barker's education in Latin and medicine was mainly undertaken by her one surviving brother, Edward; he was a student at Oxford before his early death in 1675.
Many of Barker's other male relations also died young, fighting against James Scott, Duke of Monmouth [q.v.], at Sedgemoor.
Jane Barker's first poems were written for a small coterie including many Cambridge scholars, along the lines of the ‘Society of Friendship’ of her literary model Katherine Philips [q.v.]; and when she moved to London in the 1680s, some of these poems were published in the unauthorized Poetical Recreations (1688).
It was at about this time that Jane Barker became a Roman Catholic.
In a verse autobiography which survives in two manuscripts, she characterizes herself as ‘Fidelia’, and the political and theological reasons for her conversion are given in powerful Drydenesque polemic.
She left England after the 1688 Revolution and followed the Stuart family into exile at St Germain.
The coterie verse that she wrote there survives, and one manuscript copy of it is dedicated to James Stuart, then twelve years old.
Her sight was failing because of cataracts at the time these were written.
By 1713 she had travelled back to England to oversee the Wilsthorpe estate.
She figures in a list of Catholic non-jurors in 1715; and, remaining a fervent Jacobite, she conducted a political correspondence from London in 1718 with the exiled James Butler, second Duke of Ormonde [q.v.].
Her late years were spent in Richmond and at Wilsthorpe, under the patronage of the Countess of Exeter, probably the daughter-in-law of the well-known non-juror John Cecil, fifth Earl of Exeter.
Her literary output changed from poetry to novels: Edmund Curll [q.v.]published Love-Intrigues: Or, The History of Bosvil and Galesia in 1713, and Exilius: or the Banished Roman (a revision of an earlier unpublished romance Scipina ) in 1715.
The double-entendre title of the latter demonstrates the continuing autobiographical element in Jane Barker's work; a distinctive and omnipresent theme is how a chaste, single life, enhanced by art, study, and friendship, is to be preferred to marriage.
This is stated again in A Patch-Work Screen for the Ladies (1723) and the more fantastic A Lining of the Patch-Work Screen (1726).
These Scudéry-influenced romances played an important part in the genesis of the English novel.
In 1718, making use of the fluency in French she had acquired at St Germain, she also published The Christian Pilgrimage , a treatise translated from Fénelon.
She made a return visit to France in 1726–7, and may have died there.
[MS 343, Magdalen College, Oxford, and Add.
Ms. 21621, British Library; Germaine Greer et al .,
(eds.),
Kissing the Rod: an Anthology of Seventeenth-Century Women's Verse , 1988; information from Jeslyn Medoff; Karl Stanglmaier,Mrs. Jane Barker: ein Beitrag zur Englischen Literaturgeschichte , 1906.]
D A Carpenter
, Sir John (c. 1240–1275), baron and leading supporter of Simon of Montfort [q.v.], was the son of John Fitzgeoffrey [q.v.], justiciar of Ireland and a prime mover, with Montfort, of the political revolution of 1258.
In February 1259 John Fitzjohn fined in £300 for seisin of his father's lands while still under age.
He thus acquired a substantial magnate inheritance with the chief centre in Buckinghamshire, where he was lord of Aylesbury, Whaddon, and Steeple Claydon.
In 1261 Fitzjohn, as part of the abortive attempt to prevent the overthrow of the Provisions of Oxford, the revolutionary programme imposed in 1258, became sheriff of Bedfordshire–Buckinghamshire in opposition to the sheriff appointed by the king.
Two years later he joined Simon of Montfort when the latter returned to England and reimposed the Provisions.
While others deserted, Fitzjohn remained with Montfort to the end, bringing with him several Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire knights.
In July 1263 Fitzjohn's local influence was acknowledged and increased when Montfort's government made him keeper of the peace in Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire; in December, with the other Montfortians, he accepted Louis IX's offer to arbitrate on their quarrel with the king.
When Louis' verdict condemned the Provisions of Oxford outright, the Montfortians refused to accept the verdict and prepared for war.
In March 1264 Fitzjohn was involved in the seizure of Gloucester.
Next month he led the pillage of the Jews in London.
He killed the most famous, Kok Fitzabraham, with his own hands and was less than pleased when Montfort made him share part of the spoils.
Fitzjohn then took part in the siege of Rochester (17 April) before being knighted in London (4 May), just before Montfort marched out of the city to bring the king's army to battle.
However, according to the annals of Dunstable, Fitzjohn had been knighted earlier at Gloucester.
At the battle of Lewes (14 May 1264) Fitzjohn commanded the second division of Montfort's army with Gilbert de Clare, eighth Earl of Gloucester, and William de Munchenci [qq.v.].
‘He fought strenuously in the battle,’ the annals of Worcester recorded, ‘smashing steel helmets and taking many of his adversaries prisoner.’
In Montfort's subsequent regime, although involved in negotiations with the Marcher barons and with the increasingly disaffected Gilbert de Clare, his role was in the provinces rather than at court, in part perhaps because of his comparative youth.
As castellan of Windsor (from June 1264) he dragooned the local population into providing a garrison and munitions for the castle.
In addition, when his brother-in-law Robert de Vipont died in June 1264, he became custodian of Vipont's lordship of Westmorland.
After the desertion of Gilbert de Clare and the escape of Edward, the king's son [q.v.], from captivity, Fitzjohn was with Montfort on his final campaign and was captured at the battle of Evesham (4 August 1265), being saved from death by the royalist Roger de Clifford [q.v.], who had married his niece.
Roger de Clifford was not the only royalist to whom Fitzjohn was related, for he himself had married a daughter of the king's justiciar, Sir Philip Basset [q.v.].
Basset's eldest daughter, however, had married Hugh le Despenser [q.v.], one of Montfort's closest associates, and perhaps that tie, together with the role of his father in 1258, influenced Fitzjohn's political sympathies.
He was also one of a group of young and warlike men (Robert de Vipont and William de Munchenci were others), called contemptuously ‘the junior boys of England’ by the chronicler, Thomas Wykes [q.v.], who were attracted to Montfort's side, quite probably by the glamour of his military reputation.
Fitzjohn's career after Evesham provides a good example of how former Montfortians could be rehabilitated.
In July 1266 he was pardoned by the king for his past trespasses.
In the mean time, some of his lands had been occupied and doubtless protected by royalist kinsmen — by Roger de Clifford and by William de Beauchamp of Elmley [q.v.], who had married one of Fitzjohn's sisters.
The bulk of his lands had been given to Gilbert de Clare and, under the terms of the Dictum of Kenilworth, had to be repurchased by Fitzjohn at five times their annual value.
Perhaps the financial strain is reflected in Fitzjohn's sale of Ringwood Manor (Hampshire) for 2,250 marks; but he was on good terms with Clare, in and after 1267 appearing as a member of his entourage.
Later Fitzjohn gained the favour of Edward I, and, in 1274, he represented the king at a great council at Lyon.
His death (childless) in November 1275 caused grief to both king and court.
John Fitzjohn had given vigorous military support to the cause of Simon of Montfort.
In his career we catch a glimpse of the medieval miles strenuus .
[Chancery rolls;Calendar of Inquisitions Miscellaneous , vol. i, 1916; H. R. Luard (ed.),
Annales Monastici , 5 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1864–9; W. Stubbs (ed.),
The Historical Works of Gervase of Canterbury , 2 vols.
(Rolls Series), 1880; E. F. Jacob,Studies in the Period of Baronial Reform and Rebellion , 1925.]
Adrienne Reynolds
,Edward Leicester (1881–1929), surgeon-captain, was born 23 November 1881 at Sion Hill, St Vincent, Windward Islands, West Indies, the second of seven children and only son of Edward Leycester Atkinson, then an accountant at the Colonial Bank, Kingstown, St Vincent, and his wife Jane Anne Hazell.
Entering Forest School, Walthamstow, Essex, in October 1895, in the following five years he received prizes for mathematics, chemistry, and form work.
In 1900 he went to St Thomas's Hospital to study medicine, qualifying in 1906 as MRCS and LRCP, and he then went for a short time to Brompton Hospital and Convalescent Centre.
Atkinson entered the Royal Navy in 1908 and was recommended by the medical director-general to join as surgeon and helminthologist the 1910 expedition to Antarctica led by Captain Robert Falcon Scott [q.v.].
In 1912 the leadership of the expedition's remnant at Cape Evans devolved upon Atkinson, the sole remaining officer.
He initiated and led the search party which found and buried the bodies of Scott, Edward A. Wilson [q.v.], and H. R. Bowers, retrieving the diaries, drawings, and letters that revealed the epic story of their fate.
This scene is depicted in bas-relief on the plinth of the Scott memorial, Plymouth.
Atkinson also wrote the epitaph to Captain Oates: ‘Hereabouts died a very gallant gentleman…’
During World War I Atkinson served with the Royal Naval Division at Gallipoli in 1915, and the Royal Marine howitzer brigade in France 1916–18.
Mentioned in dispatches and twice wounded, he was appointed to the DSO in 1918.
In September 1918 his ship HMS Glatton blew up in Dover harbour.
Although severely wounded, Atkinson rescued five seamen and was awarded the Albert medal.
He was staff-surgeon (1913) and surgeon-commander (1918).
In 1919 he saw active service in north Russia.
Awarded the Chadwick gold medal in 1920, he retired from the navy in 1928, the year he became surgeon-captain.
The Journal of the Royal Naval Medical Service published nineteen articles written by Atkinson.
Physically short and slightly built, Atkinson possessed remarkable attributes.
He had a clear scientific mind but was self-effacing, modest, and a man of few words.
As a serviceman he was reliable, displaying grit, fearlessness, and devotion to duty, as well as being cheerful and optimistic.
During the 1910 Antarctic expedition Scott mentioned Atkinson, Bowers, and L. E. G. Oates [q.v.]as those on whom he particularly relied, describing them as ‘treasures’.
On 12 August 1915 at Rochford, Essex, Atkinson married Jessie Hamilton Fowler (died July 1928), daughter of Peter Ferguson, salesman.
They had no children.
Atkinson married secondly, in Glasgow 15 November 1928, Mary Flint, daughter of John Hunter, of Glasgow.
When he retired from the navy Atkinson joined SS City of Sparta as ship's surgeon and sailed to India.
During the return voyage he died in the Mediterranean 20 February 1929 and was buried at sea.
[Reginald Pound,Scott of the Antarctic , 1966;Scott's Last Expedition , 1913 (arranged by Leonard Huxley); private information.]
Nicholas Rogers
,John (1675–1741), printer and London alderman, was born at Gray's Inn Lane, London, in the parish of St Andrew Holborn.
He was baptized 11 April 1675.
His father Morgan Barber had been a journeyman barber-surgeon to Benjamin Tomlinson, whose widow Mary he subsequently married.
John was the only surviving child of the marriage.
With the help of his godfather Elkanah Settle [q.v.], the ‘city poet’, John was sent to a school in Hampstead.
In May 1689 Settle apprenticed him to George Larkin, a printer in Bishopsgate.
Barber served most of his time, however, with Mrs Hannah Clarke, a widow who continued her husband's printing business at Thames Street.
Barber became a manager for Mrs Clarke before setting up his own business in 1700.
His business prospered, but his rise to prominence in printing circles was attributable to his contacts with the Tory party.
The printer of the Examiner , he became a friend of Jonathan Swift and Henry St John, later first Viscount Bolingbroke [qq.v.], and the lover of Mrs Mary Delarivière Manley [q.v.].
When the Tories crested to power in 1710, Barber landed some lucrative contracts.
In 1711 he became the official printer of the London Gazette and the South Sea Company.
Two years later he obtained a reversion to the office of the queen's printer.
Although Barber found himself in the political wilderness with the Tories' fall from power after the death of Queen Anne in 1715, he remained loyal to his friends and true to his Tory principles.
In 1720 he speculated successfully in South Sea stock, and this enabled him to purchase an estate in East Sheen and a town house at Queen's Square, and to consider retiring from business.
His independent fortune also enabled him to focus his energies on civic politics.
Already a common councilman for Queenhithe (since 1711) and a well-known opponent of the great Whig financiers who dominated the City's upper court, he became alderman for the Tory ward of Castle Baynard in 1722 and a leading City critic of Sir Robert Walpole.
Among other things, he opposed the City Elections Act of 1725 and as sheriff (1729–30) facilitated the acquittal of Richard Franklin, the printer of the Craftsman , who had been prosecuted by the government for seditious libel.
As lord mayor (1732–3) he co-ordinated the City's opposition to Walpole's excise bill in 1733, and vigorously defended the raucous jubilation that accompanied its withdrawal from the Commons.
Barber's defence of the City's political liberties and trading interests made him very popular in London circles.
Even so, he was defeated in the City parliamentary election of 1734 and failed to make the opposition slate in 1740–1.
On both occasions his Tory-Jacobite past counted against him.
Although he was never formally implicated in any of the Jacobite plots, he was widely (and probably correctly) suspected of transmitting financial aid to the Stuart court during a tour of the Continent in 1722.
Barber's interest in City politics waned a little after 1738, but he was active in the controversial mayoral elections of 1740 when the Whig-dominated court of aldermen sought to exclude Sir Robert Godschall from the chair.
He died 2 January 1741 at Queen's Square, London.
The bulk of his estate went to his common-law wife, Sarah Dovekin or Dufkin, a former servant of Mrs Manley, with whom he had lived for over twenty years.
He had no children.
[Charles A. Rivington,‘Tyrant’, the Story of John Barber 1675 to 1741 , 1989; anon.,An Impartial History of the Life of Mr. John Barber , 1741; anon.,The Life and Character of John Barber , 1741; Corporation of London archives.]
John Springhall
, Sir William Alexander (1854–1914), founder of the Boys' Brigade, was born 27 October 1854 at Pennyland House, near Thurso, Caithness, the eldest in the family of three sons and a daughter of David Smith of Pennyland, a director of the Labuan Coal Company in China, and his wife Harriet, daughter of Alexander Fraser, merchant, of Glasgow.
He was educated at the local parish school, the Miller Institution, later Thurso Academy, but little is known of his academic record.
In 1868, when William was thirteen, his father died in China and so the widowed Harriet Smith sold the Pennyland property and moved with her family into Thurso, accepting the offer of her brother, Alexander Fraser, to take William into his home and warehouse business in Glasgow.
He soon settled into the routine of prosperous, middle-class, Protestant business life, attending YMCA lectures, revival meetings led by the Americans Dwight L. Moody and Ira D. Sankey, sailing trips, and soirées.
A growing estrangement led to William's departure from his uncle's home and business in 1878 to establish the exporting firm of Smith, Smith & Company with his younger brother Donald.
A major factor in his Free Church uncle's disapproval of his nephew's way of life was William's enrolment in the 1st Lanarkshire Rifle Volunteers (reaching the rank of lieutenant-colonel before retiring in 1908), which ran counter to Fraser's pacifist views.
In 1881 James G. Findlay, a friend and colleague, entered into partnership with William to form the firm Smith, Findlay & Company, dealing in a variety of shawls, plaids, and tartans for export.
William Smith, a hard-pressed Sunday-school teacher, started the first company of the Boys' Brigade on 4 October 1883 at the North Woodside Mission Hall of the wealthy College Free Church in the west end of Glasgow.
He used military discipline and drill, acquired in the Volunteers, and a simple uniform of haversack, belt, and cap, to instil Christian manliness into unruly boys.
The BB, a church-based, inter-denominational youth movement, was started twenty-five years before the first Boy Scouts appeared on the scene.
In 1888 Smith, a conscientious and outwardly austere man, gave up his business to become the first full-time secretary of the BB, his salary being donated by prominent Scottish businessmen.
The success of the BB, as the world's first voluntary uniformed youth organization, owed much to Smith's tireless stewardship during its first thirty-one years.
He toured Canada in 1895 to oversee BB progress at the invitation of his friend and supporter John Gordon, seventh Earl of Aberdeen [q.v.], the governor-general.
On 5 March 1884 Smith married Amelia Pearson, daughter of the Revd Andrew Sutherland, a former Presbyterian chaplain to the British army in Gibraltar.
They had two sons, both later prominent in the BB.
Smith's first wife died in 1898 and eight years later, in 1906, he married Hannah Ranken, daughter of William Campbell, wholesale and retail merchant of Glasgow, a cousin of the British prime minister, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.
Smith inspected the United Boys' Brigades of America with her in 1907 but she died in the same year of a tragic accident, not long after their return.
Smith absented himself for the shortest possible time during the annual 1st Glasgow Company camp at Tighnabruaich in July 1909 to receive his knighthood in London.
On 8 May 1914 he attended a meeting of the BB executive in London but was taken ill and admitted to St Bartholomew's Hospital, where he died 10 May 1914.
[Frederick P. Gibbon,William A. Smith of The Boys' Brigade , 1934; Roger S. Peacock,Pioneer of Boyhood , 1954; John Springhall (ed.),
Brian Fraser, and Michael Hoare,Sure and Stedfast: a History of The Boys' Brigade, 1883 to 1983 , 1983; BB archives in BB headquarters, Glasgow.]
Anne Baker
,Henry James (1811–1899), founder of Agapemonism, was born 13 January 1811 in Bath, the youngest son in the family of three sons and three or four daughters.
Nothing is known of his father.
He was brought up by his widowed mother and her elderly Catholic lodger, Martha Freeman, daughter of a rich West Indian planter, and at the age of sixteen he was articled to an apothecary in Wells, Somerset.
After qualifying as an apothecary in 1832, he was appointed medical officer to the General Hospital in Bath, where he spent three years before his health broke down and he went to London for an operation.
During his convalescence he was nursed by Martha Freeman, who converted him to Catholicism.
He subsequently decided to take holy orders in the Church of England and in 1836 entered St David's College, Lampeter.
A devout and earnest student, he formed a small group of fellow-students, known as the Lampeter Brethren, who fasted and spent their time in theological study and prayer.
His journal kept at this time shows the influence of Tersteegen, a German mystic.
Prince was ordained in 1840, became curate in Charlynch, near Bridgwater, Somerset, where the rector was the Revd Dr Samuel Starky, and started a religious revival in Charlynch and the surrounding area, which Prince described in The Charlynch Revival (1842).
But in May 1841 the bishop of Bath and Wells revoked his licence to preach, and he moved to Suffolk, where he became curate of Stoke-by-Clare, but was suspended by the bishop of Ely.
From then on he dissociated himself from the Church of England, and he and Starky preached in barns near Charlynch, drawing huge crowds.
In 1843 he declared that he was the Holy Ghost personified, and later that he was the prophet Elijah.
Prince and Starky also referred to themselves as the ‘Two Anointed Ones’.
In 1843 he published Testimony Hymns , religious parodies of popular songs, which were sung by his congregations.
As Prince and Starky told their followers to sell their lands and give them the money, in 1849 they were able to set up the Agapemone, the ‘Abode of Love’, on land they had bought in the village of Spaxton, near Charlynch.
Wealthy believers were encouraged to deposit their money in the Bank of England in the name of ‘Brother’ Prince and to join the community.
Prince and his followers lived a dissolute and ostentatious life of great luxury, and Prince drove around the neighbourhood in a carriage and horses, accompanied by bloodhounds.
In 1860 the scandalous situation at the Agapemone was exposed in a trial heard in the Court of Chancery,Nottidge v. Prince , when a former member of the Abode of Love sued Prince for the return of her property.
After 1860 Prince led a quiet life at the Agapemone until his death, writing and publishing religious works, including The Man Christ Jesus (1886) and The Counsel of God in Judgement (1887), which proclaims the withdrawal of the Holy Ghost from the church and the world into Prince and the Agapemone.
In the 1890s there was a revival of interest in the sect, and several members of the Salvation Army joined Prince.
In 1892 the ‘Children of the Resurrection’ built ‘The Ark of the Covenant’in Clapton.
The preacher at its official opening in 1896 was the Revd John Hugh Smyth-Pigott who later proclaimed himself to be Jesus Christ and who became Prince's successor at the Agapemone.
Prince himself was present at the opening.
Prince married Martha Freeman in 1840.
A few months after her death, in 1841, he married Julia Starky, the sister of the Revd Samuel Starky.
She, like Martha Freeman, was considerably older than him.
Prince died 8 January 1899 at the Agapemone, Spaxton, and was buried there.
[W. Hepworth Dixon,Spiritual Wives , 4th edn., vol. i, 1868; Conrad Noel,Byways of Belief , 1912; Edwin J. Dukes on ‘Agapemone’ in J. Hastings (ed.),
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics , 1908.]
Gillian Avery
,Frances Eliza Hodgson (1849–1924), author, was born 24 November 1849 in Cheetham Hill, Manchester, the third child and eldest daughter in the family of two sons and three daughters of Edwin Hodgson and his wife Eliza Boond.
Edwin Hodgson, wholesaler of decorative ironmongery, died in 1854 aged thirty-eight.
His widow struggled to run the business herself until her brother, who had established a dry-goods store in Knoxville, Tennessee, persuaded her in 1865 to emigrate with the children.
The early years in Tennessee were hard and the family was frequently hungry, but in 1868 Frances, who from her earliest childhood had been a compulsive inventor of romances, sold her first two stories to Godey's Lady's Book , raising the money for paper and postage by selling wild grapes.
Until her marriage she supported the family by a constant stream of magazine stories, her only object, as she said herself, being remuneration.
In 1873 she married an eye and ear specialist, Swan Moses Burnett, the son of John Burnett, a Tennessee doctor, and his wife Lydia Peck.
They had two sons.
Mrs Burnett seems to have taken marital and maternal duties lightly, and though she did not formally end the marriage until 1898, from early days she made a practice of absenting herself from her family, often for months on end, travelling in North America and Europe, and spending long periods in England, where she moved in high society and had many literary friends, Henry James and Israel Zangwill [qq.v.]among them.
In spite of frequent and prolonged separation from them, she was devoted to her sons and they to her, and the death of her elder son, Lionel, from tuberculosis in 1890 was a shattering blow.
In 1900 she married Stephen Townesend, a young doctor with stage aspirations whom she had tried to help.
Ten years younger than his wife, he was the youngest son of the Revd George Fyler Townesend and grandson of the Revd George Townsend [sic ][q.v.], a redoubtable cleric who had travelled to Italy in 1850 to try to convert the pope.
They were divorced the following year.
She had early had to turn herself into ‘a pen-driving machine’ to support the ever-increasing opulence of her lifestyle, and her adult fiction (she wrote over twenty novels and innumerable short stories) for the most part is facile and superficial.
She was never to equal her first novel,That Lass o' Lowrie's (1877), a robust account of a Lancashire mining community in which she had taken great care with background and dialect, though Through One Administration (1883), a study of a failed marriage against a turbulent background of Washington political life, was noteworthy, and the much shorter The Making of a Marchioness (1901) is a indictment of Edwardian society.
She adapted many of her novels, including the first, for the stage, with mixed success.
Her first children's book,Little Lord Fauntleroy , appeared in 1886.
This account of how a sturdy and friendly young American wins the heart of the irascible and hostile Earl of Dorincourt, the grandfather who has hitherto refused to see him, acquired a largely undeserved reputation for sentimentality.
This was in part due to Reginald Birch's illustrations which kept the boy always in black velvet and lace, even when he was riding his pony, and in part to the intense relationship between mother and son; Mrs Burnett here had in mind herself and her son Vivian, upon whom Fauntleroy himself was modelled.
It was a huge success, stage and film versions were made of it, and it led to thousands of unwilling boys being dressed in black velvet suits.
‘She wanted to be in the land of make-believe as often and as long as possible…dealing with people and things according to imagination's formulas,’ her son Vivian said of her.
In her books this is to be found at its most extreme in Sara Crewe (1888)— expanded, following the stage version, as The Little Princess (1905)— a Cinderella story where a bullied little drudge at a girls' school is restored to riches and esteem and the tyrannical headmistress humiliated.
Her finest book was undoubtedly The Secret Garden (1911), which achieved classic status.
This describes how two disagreeable and unloved children are transformed by the discovery of a hidden garden which they appropriate and which they watch springing into life as the year advances.
The garden depicted with such passionate intensity is based on one at Maytham Hall, a house in Kent which she rented for many years and last visited in 1907.
She had to the last a youthful enthusiasm, an erect carriage, and a firm step.
Round in childhood, she became stout in middle age and the auburn of her hair was maintained by henna.
She always loved clothes and dressing-up, particularly in ‘clinging, trailing chiffon things with miles of lace on them’.
The last years of her life were divided between Bermuda and Plandome, Long Island, where she built herself an Italian-style villa and where she died 29 October 1924.
[Vivian Burnett,The Romantick Lady , 1927; Ann Thwaite,Waiting for the Party: the Life of Frances Hodgson Burnett , 1974.]
Ludovic Kennedy
,John Reginald Halliday (1899–1953), murderer, was born 8 April 1899 at Black Boy House near Halifax, the fifth child in the family of two sons and five daughters of Ernest John Christie, carpet designer, and his wife Mary Hannah Halliday.
He won a scholarship to Halifax Secondary School, sang in the church choir, and became a Scout.
In later life he said that he was terrified of his father and found his mother over-possessive.
He served in the war of 1914–18 in the 52nd Nottinghamshire and Derby Regiment, and in France he was seconded to the Duke of Wellington's (West Riding) Regiment as a signalman.
After the war, in which he was gassed, he returned to Halifax and in 1920 married a typist, Ethel Waddington.
They had no children.
During the next eight years Christie served a number of prison sentences for theft and, on one occasion, assault.
In 1938 the Christies moved into the ground-floor flat of 10 Rillington Place (later demolished) in west London, where Christie found employment as a clerk.
During World War II, despite his criminal record, he became a war reserve policeman and won two commendations.
In 1948 an illiterate van-driver, Timothy Evans, who was twenty-three, and his pregnant wife Beryl moved into the upstairs flat.
In 1949 Beryl found that she was pregnant again, but did not want a second child.
Christie offered to abort the baby, impressing the Evanses with his first-aid certificates.
Later, Christie told Evans that the abortion had failed and that his wife had died.
He warned Evans that they were both guilty of a criminal offence, and advised him to leave London; Christie would dispose of Beryl's body and have the baby Geraldine adopted.
Evans agreed.
Eventually Evans went to the police, who found the strangled bodies of Beryl and Geraldine in Christie's wash-house.
Evans was brought to London where, after a lengthy interrogation, he signed a confession to both the murders, which he later retracted.
At his trial, Christie was the chief prosecution witness.
The jury did not believe Evans's story about his wife's abortion, as there was no evidence of it.
Evans was found guilty and hanged for murder in July 1949, protesting his innocence to the last.
In 1953 Christie left 10 Rillington Place.
Shortly afterwards, a number of bodies were found buried on the premises, in the garden, in an alcove behind the kitchen, and under the sitting-room floorboards.
They were identified as those of Ruth Fuerst, an Austrian nurse, who had been missing since 1943; Muriel Eady, who had been one of Christie's colleagues at work in 1944; Christie's wife; and three prostitutes.
All had been strangled, and according to Christie all except his wife had been subjected to sexual assault at or just after the time of death.
Christie was convicted of murder and hanged at Pentonville prison, London, 15 July 1953.
The case aroused public disquiet as demonstrating that Evans's conviction and execution had been miscarriages of justice; there were two inquiries, and after the second Evans was granted a posthumous free pardon.
The matter played an important part in the subsequent abolition of the death penalty in Britain.
[Ludovic Kennedy,10 Rillington Place , 1961 (revised paperback edn., 1971); F. Tennyson Jesse (ed.),
Trials of Timothy John Evans and John Reginald Halliday Christie , Notable British Trials series, vol. lxxxii, 1957.]
D A Carpenter
(c. 1205–1265), magnate, a leading supporter of Simon of Montfort, Earl of Leicester [q.v.](but no relation), was born around 1205, the son of Thurstin de Montfort III by his marriage to a daughter of William de Cantelupe, first Baron Cantelupe [q.v.], a steward of King John.
Although technically not a baron, for he held little directly from the king, Peter was a substantial magnate.
His chief seat was at Beaudesert, a low hill above Henley-in-Arden in Warwickshire, where extensive earthworks of the family castle still remain.
Another important base was at Preston in Rutland.
In 1166 Peter's great-grandfather, Thurstin de Montfort II, had held ten fees from the earl of Warwick, making him the second greatest of his tenants.
The connection with the earls of Warwick, however, played no discernible part in Peter's career, partly because the earldom was held from 1242 until 1263, in right of his wife, by a Poitevin favourite of the king, John de Plessis [q.v.], who established few local roots.
Much more important for Peter was the family of his grandfather, William de Cantelupe (died 1239), whose principal residence was at Aston Cantlow, only four miles from Beaudesert.
His father having died in 1216, Peter spent many years as William's ward, and became a lifelong friend of his son, Walter de Cantilupe [q.v.], bishop of Worcester from 1238 to 1265.
The fleurs-de-lys of the Cantilupe coat of arms were incorporated into Peter's seal.
It was probably ties of neighbourhood which brought both Peter and Walter de Cantilupe into the circle of Simon of Montfort, for Beaudesert and Aston Cantlow are respectively nine and twelve miles distant from Kenilworth, after 1244 Simon's great base in England.
In 1248 Peter was in Simon's retinue when the latter went out to Gascony as seneschal and thereafter there are numerous instances of the close connection between the two men.
Peter attests many of Simon's charters and was probably often in his company; in 1259 he was named as an executor of Simon's will.
His faithful service was rewarded with a grant of the manor of Ilmington in Warwickshire.
Part of that service was doubtless to help Simon build up his following of midlands knights, for Peter was well connected locally — in 1260–2, six Warwickshire/Leicestershire knights acted as his pledges (Public Record Office, JUST 1/953, mm.1d,7; 954, m.23d).
From 1254 onwards, while remaining close to Simon, Peter's career also developed independently.
He was employed by King Henry III on diplomatic missions, was given an important command in the Welsh marches, and by 1257 was on the royal council.
He was also closely connected with Edward, the king's son [q.v.], whom he had accompanied to Spain for his marriage to Eleanor of Castile [q.v.]in 1254.
Fear of being ousted from Edward's entourage by the king's Poitevin half-brothers perhaps gave him a personal interest in the political upheaval of 1258, which began with the half-brothers' expulsion from England.
In that upheaval Peter played a leading part.
He was one of the seven magnates whose confederation in April 1258 began the revolution; he was one of the baronial twelve who were to draw up the plans of reform; and he was one of the council of fifteen set up by the Provisions of Oxford to govern England in the king's name.
In all these capacities Earl Simon was a colleague.
Unlike Simon, however,(who withdrew to France) Peter accepted the king's recovery of power in 1261, and next year served the king and Edward as custodian of Abergavenny, which he tried in vain to protect from the attacks of Llywelyn ab Gruffydd [q.v.].
None the less, when Simon returned to England in April 1263 and raised once more the standard of the Provisions of Oxford, Peter joined him.
This time he was to remain with him to the end.
When the civil war commenced in March 1264, Peter was in command of the Montfortians in Northampton and was captured when the town fell to the king on 5 April.
Released after Simon's great victory at Lewes (14 May), Peter was one of the council of nine imposed on the king (June 1264) and thenceforth played a major part in the direction of central government.
In September he was one of those appointed to negotiate with the king of France and the papal legate in the abortive hope of finding some political settlement.
His rewards during this period of power included a grant from the king of the manor of Garthorpe in Leicestershire.
Peter accompanied Simon throughout his final campaign and died with him at Evesham 4 August 1265.
His eldest son, product of his marriage to Alice, daughter of Henry de Audley [q.v.], was wounded in the battle but survived to recover eventually the bulk of his father's properties.
The direct male line of the family died out in 1367.
The support Peter de Montfort gave Earl Simon was of the first importance.
While a close personal friend and follower, he also enjoyed his own power base in the midlands and an independent career in the service of the king and his son Edward.
He possessed considerable abilities as a soldier, diplomat, and councillor.
It is highly significant that Simon retained the loyalty of such a man to the last.
[Chancery rolls; H. R. Luard (ed.),
Annales Monastici , 5 vols.
(Rolls Series) 1864–9; R. F. Treharne and I. J. Sanders (eds.),
Documents of the Period of Baronial Reform and Rebellion , 1973; information from Dr David Crouch; H. W. Ridgeway, ‘The Lord Edward and the Provisions of Oxford (1258)’, in Thirteenth Century England I , ed.
P. R. Cross and S. D. Lloyd, 1986.]
Roy Strong
,Hans (fl. 1540–1573), painter, of Netherlandish origin, is first recorded as a freeman of the Antwerp guild of St Luke in 1540.
He is listed there as Jan Eeuworts and his name appears variously, including Ewottes, Eywooddes, and even possibly Suete.
Probably attracted to England in the aftermath of the death of Hans Holbein [q.v.]in 1543, he is first recorded in London in 1549.
On 19 October 1550 he was granted letters of denization and he is listed thereafter in various City parishes, the last being St Bride's in the ward of Faringdon Without, where he was described in 1571 as ‘Haunce, pictorer, a denizen, borne in Anwarpe, came into the realm about  xxviii yeres past, Douch’.
In 1572 he was brought in by the musician, Alfonso Ferrabosco [q.v.], to design the tournament staged to greet the French embassy in June of that year.
Payments indicate that he continued to be employed by the Revels Office for the next two years.
We know that Eworth can be associated with a long series of signed pictures bearing his monogram HE.
In the eighteenth century this was wrongly equated with Lucas de Heere [q.v.]and it was only in 1913 that (Sir) Lionel Cust [q.v.]made the connection with Eworth, thanks to his listing as a painter in the inventory made out in 1590 of the pictures belonging to John, first Baron Lumley [q.v.].
Some twenty-five paintings have so far emerged either signed or as pendants to signed ones.
About a dozen more are firmly attributable.
The earliest,A Turk on Horseback (Earl of Yarborough), is dated 1549 and the latest,Allegory of the Wise and Foolish Virgins (Royal Museum of Fine Arts, Copenhagen) 1570.
Amongst them are subject pictures but in the main they are portraits, including a major group of Mary I, to whom Eworth acted as court painter, albeit without any official status.
The most important of these is dated 1554 (Society of Antiquaries).
Many, but by no means all, of his sitters were adherents of the old faith, including Mary Neville, Baroness Dacre (painted twice in 1559, and undated)(National Portrait Gallery and National Gallery of Canada), Nicholas Heath [q.v.], archbishop of York (1566)(National Portrait Gallery), Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montague [q.v.](1569)(National Portrait Gallery), Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley [q.v.], and his brother Charles, Earl of Lennox (1562 and 1563)(both Royal Collection), and Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk [q.v.]with his second wife (1562 and 1563)(private collection and the Hon.
R. H. C. Neville).
It is noticeable that the young Elizabeth I did not sit for him, with the result that there was a sharp decline in royal portraiture during the 1560s.
Eworth was the most distinguished foreign painter to work in England in the Tudor period after Holbein.
His portraiture, like Holbein's, is remarkable for its wide variation in scale and included miniatures, small, two-thirds, and life-scale, and embraced everything from head and shoulders to full length.
His style stemmed from that of Jan van Scorel, using a strong three-dimensional rendering of the features, modified by late Holbein with its concern for a dazzling and exact record of magnificent dress and jewels.
His work has a high degree of finish and gloss.
Although some of his portraits include backgrounds, particularly his early work, he gradually evolved a formula of placing the sitter against a plain ground, upon which the shadow of the figure was cast and the age and date inserted in an idiosyncratic script.
Fine examples of his work are in the National Portrait Gallery and Tate Gallery, London.
Eworth died in 1573.
[Roy Strong,Hans Eworth: a Tudor Artist and his Circle , National Portrait Gallery exhibition, 1965;idem , ‘Hans Eworth Reconsidered’,Burlington Magazine , vol. cviii, 1966, pp. 225–33;idem ,The English Icon: Elizabethan and Jacobean Portraiture , 1969, pp. 83–106.]
I G Doolittle
,Joseph (c. 1764–1839), London parochial politician, was reputedly born, and certainly grew up, in Brick Lane, Bethnal Green.
His parents have not been identified, but members of his family were office-holders in the parish.
Bethnal Green was run by an ‘open’(i.e. elected) vestry, which offered opportunities for political manipulation.
Merceron's political career began in 1787, and within a few years he had became a vestryman, a tax commissioner, and a justice of the peace.
Supporters could be rewarded with favourable tax assessments or the renewal of public-house licences.
Bethnal Green fell under Merceron's domination and became notorious for corruption.
Merceron, according to Sidney and Beatrice Webb [qq.v.], ‘amassed a considerable fortune, which he invested in public houses and cottage property within the parish, thus adding the power of the landlord to that of the parish officer and licensing justice’.
His position was briefly threatened in 1804, when the vestry instigated an audit of the parish accounts.
Merceron promptly resigned as treasurer; but no one could be found to take his place, and he was re-elected in 1805.
A more serious challenge began in 1809, led by a new rector, Joshua King.
A prosecution for altering the parish assessments failed, and the vestry not only passed a vote of confidence in Merceron but paid his expenses out of parish funds.
The turning-point came when King was supported by the long-serving vestry clerk, who gave evidence against Merceron before a House of Commons committee in 1816, and then instigated a prosecution for the appropriation of £925 of parish funds and partiality in the renewal of liquor licences.
At the Easter vestry in 1818 Merceron was voted out, and shortly afterwards he was convicted of the charges against him and imprisoned for eighteen months.
However, the succeeding regime of the rector and the new vestrymen was less than efficient, and Merceron was able to make a comeback, through the manoeuvres of his son-in-law and those of his former supporters who were still in office.
Merceron was not reappointed as a justice of the peace, but in other respects he was as much in control (either directly or through his brother-in-law, who became vestry clerk) as he had been before 1809.
The abolition of the open vestry in 1823 did not, apparently, affect his position; he survived a parliamentary inquiry in 1830 without obvious difficulty.
He died in Bethnal Green 14 July 1839; he was reputed to be worth about £300,000, ‘though he always appeared to be in poor circumstances’.
His funeral was as well orchestrated as his political meetings had been.
[Sidney and Beatrice Webb,English Local Government , vol. i,The Parish and the County , 1906, pp. 79–90.]
George W Carpenter
,Thomas Longridge (1808–1882), civil engineer, was born in London 1 November 1808, the first son and second of ten children (five sons and five daughters) of John Gooch, cashier of Bedlington ironworks, near Morpeth, Northumberland, and his wife Anna, daughter of Thomas Longridge, iron-founder, of Newcastle upon Tyne.
His brother (Sir) Daniel Gooch [q.v.]was locomotive superintendent and later chairman of the Great Western Railway.
He was educated nearby at Crow Hall School, by the parson of Horton.
In 1823 he commenced an apprenticeship to George Stephenson [q.v.], working for two years in the shops of Robert Stephenson & Co. at Newcastle and then in the drawing office.
He also assisted Joseph Locke [q.v.]in taking levels and making plans and drawings for the proposed Newcastle and Carlisle Railway.
In 1826, with the passage of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway Act, he went with George Stephenson to Liverpool, where he prepared most of the working drawings and plans for this railway from Stephenson's rough sketches.
In 1829 he became resident engineer for the uncompleted Bolton and Leigh Railway and in 1830 resident engineer for the Liverpool section of the Liverpool and Manchester.
George Stephenson then appointed Gooch as resident engineer for the proposed Manchester and Leeds Railway, for which he worked almost continuously in preparing plans and drawings for the Bill to be presented in the 1831 session of Parliament.
However, strong opposition resulted in rejection of this Bill despite his excellent testimony as an expert witness.
Later in the same year he assisted Robert Stephenson [q.v.]in preparing plans and drawings for the London and Birmingham Railway Bill.
After its passage in 1833 he was appointed resident engineer for the northern section of the line.
In 1836 the Manchester and Leeds Bill was finally passed.
In 1837 Gooch was appointed joint principal engineer with George Stephenson and was responsible for the line's construction, which was his greatest achievement and required many heavy civil-engineering works, including a two-mile tunnel under the Pennine hills, the boring of which from thirteen shafts took over three years.
On the line's completion in 1841 Gooch was made responsible for the construction of branch lines to Heywood, Oldham, Halifax, and Ashton-under-Lyne.
He also prepared plans for the Manchester, Bury, and Rossendale (later East Lancashire) Railway.
During the subsequent ‘railway mania’ period he was engaged on proposals for several new lines, including the Stafford–Rugby line through the Trent valley, opened in 1847, for which he was principal engineer, working with Robert Stephenson and G. P. Bidder [q.v.].
After many years of almost continuous work, broken only by a short honeymoon in 1833, Gooch's health failed and he was taken ill in 1847 at his London office.
He was ordered complete rest and convalesced abroad for eight months before resuming work as consultant for the Skipton–Lancaster railway, at first jointly with Charles Vignoles [q.v.]and then as sole consultant.
However, in 1851 his health again gave cause for serious anxiety and he was compelled to give up full-time activity at the early age of forty-two.
He was a sociable man of great ability, but courteous and unassuming, and with great kindness and understanding of the problems of others.
His later years were devoted largely to charitable work, to which he contributed much in an unostentatious manner.
He was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1845.
In 1836 he married Ruthanna, daughter of Robert Scaife of Liverpool.
They had a son, who died aged eleven, and a daughter.
Gooch died in Newcastle upon Tyne 23 November 1882.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. lxxii, 1883; Alan Platt,The Life and Times of Daniel Gooch , 1987.]
R W Hoyle
, Sir William (c. 1506–1544), borderer, was born in or before 1506, the eldest son of Sir Edward Musgrave of Hartley near Kirkby Stephen in Westmorland and of Edenhall near Penrith in Cumberland, and his wife Jane, daughter of Sir Christopher Ward.
Knighted in 1523, he served as Sir Edward's under-sheriff in Cumberland in 1527–8; but his independent career was based on his royal service.
By 1529 he was a knight of the Body to Henry VIII; he was appointed marshal of Berwick on Tweed in the same year and was made constable or keeper of the border castle of Bewcastle in 1531.
He sat for Westmorland in the Reformation Parliament (1529–36) and may have held the same seat subsequently.
He was sheriff in Cumberland in 1532–3 and 1541–2.
Musgrave owes his reputation to the role he played in the complicated and imperfectly understood politics of the western Anglo-Scottish borders during the 1530s.
His appointment to the keepership of Bewcastle brought him into conflict with William, third Lord Dacre, of Gilsland.
Dacre is hardly likely to have welcomed the appointment of an ally of Henry Clifford, first Earl of Cumberland [q.v.], who had supplanted him as warden in 1525–7 and was to do so again in 1534, but relations between Dacre and Musgrave were worsened by a protracted dispute over rents in Bewcastledale.
In 1534 Dacre was tried before the House of Lords on charges laid by Musgrave of treasonable communications with the Scots during the Anglo-Scottish war of 1532–3.
Whilst it has been assumed that these charges were fabricated by Musgrave (and perhaps by Thomas Cromwell, q.v.), there is evidence to suggest that Dacre did indeed have private arrangements with the Scots which served to divert their raids away from his estates and on to Bewcastle.
The trial did nothing for Musgrave's popularity.
Neither did his eagerness to oppose the Pilgrims of Grace in 1536–7, which must be compared with Dacre's expedient withdrawal to London and with the discrete disappearance of Sir Thomas (later first Baron) Wharton [q.v.].
After 1537 Musgrave mostly abandoned Cumberland and moved to his house in London.
His second wife's correspondence with Cromwell suggests that the last years of his life were marked by an acute awareness of his unpopularity in the north and financial problems arising from his dependence on his father.
Yet he was active in the early stages of the Anglo-Scottish war after 1542 and was amongst those at the English victory at Solway Moss, but he died (it is not clear where) 18 October 1544.
Musgrave's career in the 1530s has sometimes been interpreted as that of a border gentleman working, with others, to displace the northern nobility.
He was certainly a loyal royal servant but it is uncertain whether he would have seen himself (or others of his generation) as the harbinger of a new government in the north.
Instead, much of Musgrave's life can be read as an attempt, through royal service, to secure a status and income independent of his father, who died in 1542 only eighteen months before Sir William's own premature death.
Musgrave married at least twice — first, by 1524, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Curwen of Workington, Cumberland, and second Elizabeth, daughter of Philip Denkaring and widow of Thomas Tamworth of Essex.
In 1540 he contemplated, and may have entered into, a third marriage, with a daughter of Thomas, third Lord Burgh.
His son and heir by the first marriage, Richard, married Agnes, daughter of Thomas, first Baron Wharton, and was MP for Cumberland in 1547 and 1553.
[S. T. Bindoff (ed.),
The History of Parliament ,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982; unpublished research.]