

John Saville
,John (c. 1798–1854), pioneer trade-unionist and political radical, was born in Ireland in about 1798, although the exact date of birth is still not certain.
He came of a labouring family and he himself began work in the local cotton industry at the age of ten.
In 1816 he joined the increasing flow of Irish migrants to Britain, and worked as a cotton-spinner in Manchester.
From the early days he seems to have become involved in trade-union activities, and for his part in the Manchester strike of 1818 he was sent to prison for two years in 1819.
At this time he was still a rank-and-file militant, but quickly, as the 1820s moved along, he came to be recognized as the outstanding trade-union leader in Lancashire in the textile industry.
He always remained a Catholic, with a remarkable capacity for organization, straightforward, provocative oratory, and a markedly shrewd political instinct.
His mentor in the early years was William Cobbett [q.v.], and although in his political radicalism Doherty went beyond Cobbett, the attack upon ‘Old Corruption’ always remained an essential part of his attack upon contemporary society.
As with many of his contemporaries in the 1820s, Doherty came to accept a version of ‘the right of the labourer to the whole produce of his labour’— an analysis of bourgeois society that developed out of the writings of William Thompson [q.v.]and his contemporaries.
By 1829 he had succeeded in bringing together most of the country's cotton-spinners into the Grand General Union of Operative Cotton Spinners, and, although it had disappeared by 1831, it was an important stage in the heightening of class-consciousness among certain groups of working people.
In the early months of 1830 he broadened his vision with the establishment of the National Association of United Trades for the Protection of Labour (NAPL) and during the next four years he was at the centre of the many radical and union initiatives that were such a notable feature of the period.
He was especially important in the Society for National Regeneration, and he was a major influence in the coming together of Owenism and trade unionism which culminated in the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union of February 1834.
Throughout his radical and union career Doherty produced a considerable number of journals and periodicals.
They included the Conciliator , the Voice of the People , the United Trades' Cooperative Journal , the Poor Man's Advocate , and the Herald of the Rights of Industry .
This last, which was published weekly from early February 1834 until the end of May, has become the best-known of Doherty's publications and is the least personal of all of them.
Much of the Herald was a sustained defence of the campaign for factory reform led by John Fielden [q.v.], as well as of Fielden's general ideas.
None of Doherty's publications lasted very long, but they were an important part of the general ferment of radical ideas in the years leading up to the Chartist movement.
Doherty married an English girl, Laura, a milliner, in 1821, and according to the 1841 census there were four children of the marriage, two sons and two daughters.
As a means of livelihood compatible with his politics, Doherty set up as a publisher, bookseller, and printer in Manchester from 1832, and he seems to have remained in this business until his death.
His great days were over by the middle of the 1830s, although he was still active, on a much reduced scale, until at least the middle of the next decade.
In 1838 he had made an important statement of evidence before the select committee on workmen's combinations.
He died, almost forgotten, in Manchester 14 April 1854.
[E. P. Thompson,The Making of the English Working Class , 1963; R. G. Kirby and A. E. Musson,The Voice of the People.
John Doherty, 1798–1854.
Trade Unionist, Radical and Factory Reformer , 1975; S. A. Weaver,John Fielden and the Politics of Popular Radicalism, 1832–1847 , 1987.]
Robert Ashton
, Sir Sackville , first baronet (1600–1683), projector and diplomat, was born in 1600, the son of William Crowe esquire of Socketts in Kent and his wife Anne, daughter of John Sackville esquire of Sussex.
He owed the rise of his fortunes in the 1620s to the patronage of George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], of whose accounts he was treasurer from 1624 to 1628.
Buckingham's influence was responsible for Crowe's being entrusted with the delicate mission of pawning some of the duke's and king's jewels at Amsterdam in 1626, his being created baronet in 1627, and his appointment as treasurer of the navy in March 1627.
He proved incapable of meeting the financial demands of this last office, and his predecessor Sir William Russell [q.v.]had to step into the breach and ultimately replaced him in 1630.
Crowe's long-standing ambition to secure the lease of the royal ironworks in the Forest of Dean was finally rewarded in 1635 when he and his partners obtained the lease after the existing lessees had fallen foul of the royal forest jurisdiction.
In November 1633 Crowe had been appointed ambassador at Constantinople, though he was unable to take up the appointment for another five years.
In the meantime he engaged in a fierce dispute, both with the Levant Company, which financed the embassy but no longer nominated its occupant, and with the retiring ambassador Sir Peter Wyche [q.v.].
The issue was the right to ‘strangers’ consulage', the duties payable by foreigners shipping goods under the protection of the English flag.
The Levant Company claimed the right to these dues, but both Wyche and Crowe claimed them for the Crown, and Charles I had provided further occasion for dispute between all three parties by formally alienating them to Crowe in 1636, though the latter, in return for compensating payments by the company, waived his right until his arrival in Constantinople in October 1638.
Thereafter the dispute grew fiercer and was to be further exacerbated by Crowe's royalist and the company's parliamentarian sympathies.
Believing that the merchants were responsible for his sequestration in 1644, following the interception of a letter of his to Charles I, Crowe retaliated in 1646 by bribing the grand vizier to arrest all the company's factory at Constantinople and some of its merchants at Smyrna.
However, the company's far greater resources of baksheesh soon restored them to liberty.
In January 1647 a new ambassador, Sir Thomas Bendysh, was appointed and, following his arrival in Constantinople, Crowe and his wife were forcibly deported in November.
On reaching London in April 1648, Crowe was sent to the Tower, where he remained until 1656.
While there he submitted to an unsympathetic government in 1652 and 1653 projects for the improvement of the manufacture of iron ordnance and for general economic improvement, similar to his later and, in the former case, more successful, schemes after the Restoration.
In other respects the Restoration did not bring the looked-for revival of Crowe's fortunes.
In 1662 the royal grant of control of the tapestry manufactory at Mortlake founded by Charles I brought disaster, even though coupled with an annual subsidy of £1,000.
Writing to the Countess of Rutland in 1670 from his ‘uncouth cell’ in the Fleet prison, where he had been committed for debt, Crowe was scathing about the quality of the tapestries produced by William, Earl of Craven [q.v.], and his associates who had taken over from him at Mortlake in 1667.
After his release the fairly lucrative office of secretary and clerk of the Signet in Wales and the Marches was bestowed upon him in October 1671.
He had acquired an estate at Llanherne in Carmarthenshire and became a deputy lieutenant of that county in July 1674.
But insolvency again intervened and he died in the Fleet prison in 1683.
One product of Crowe's earlier connection with Buckingham in the 1620s was his spectacular marriage into the duchess's family: to Mary, daughter of Sir George Manners and sister of John Manners, later eighth Earl of Rutland [q.v.].
The bride's mother bitterly deplored ‘my daughter's offence to God and disobedience to me’ in marrying so far beneath her, but Lady Crowe seems loyally to have shared her husband's sharp vicissitudes of fortune.
Crowe was succeeded by his only child, Sir Sackville Crowe, on whose death the baronetcy became extinct.
[A. C. Wood,A History of the Levant Company , 1935; R. Lockyer,Buckingham , 1981; R. Ashton,The Crown and the Money Market 1603–1640 , 1960, and ‘The Disbursing Official…
’,Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research , vol. xxx, 1957; State Papers Domestic and Venetian; Levant Company records;Historical Manuscripts Commission, 12th Report , 1888.]
Christopher Hogwood
,Robert (c. 1490–post 1546), Scottish composer, is known only through his work contained in the ‘Scone Antiphonary’(National Library of Scotland, Adv.
MS 5.1.15).
The manuscript suggests that he was born at some date between 1485 and 1492, and his latest completed work is dated 1546.
He was associated with the Augustinian abbey of Scone and the Scottish chapel royal at Stirling; the addition ‘alias arnat’ to his signature, which occurs three times in the manuscript, suggests that he may have been related to David Arnot, archdeacon of Lothian and later bishop of the chapel royal.
Five masses and two motets survive.
The earliest, a large-scale, elaborately contrapuntal mass Dum sacrum mysterium for ten voices, may have been performed at the coronation of James V [q.v.]in Stirling on 26 September 1513.
A four-part mass, probably dating from the 1520s, uses as its cantus firmus the popular French tune ‘L'homme armé’, the only known British use of a theme much used by continental composers.
This, and the presence in the manuscript of works by Dufay, Josquin, and Flemish-school compositions of the late fifteenth century, bears out a discernible continental influence on Carver's style; he may even have studied at Louvain.
Two other masses, and Carver's two surviving motets (in five and nineteen parts), also date from the 1520s, and display an interest in massive sonority similar to that of the English works contained in the contemporary Old Hall Manuscript.
The last dated work in the manuscript is the four-part mass,Pater creator omnium , a shorter piece in a very different style, simpler and more homophonic.
If the twenty-year gap in output apparent in the manuscript is real, it may be accounted for by the rise in influence of those hostile to the complex, polyphonic settings of Scottish church music, one of whom named the chapel royal in Stirling as an example.
If so, Carver's last mass is evidence of the profound stylistic changes brought about by the Reformation.
Recognition of Carver's importance was stimulated when an edition of the extant works was published in 1959; several recordings were made in the late 1980s, and a complete cycle of the masses and motets was performed in Glasgow in July 1990.
Charles Sebag-Montefiore
,John , second Baron Northwick (1769–1859), collector and connoisseur, was born 16 February 1769, the eldest son in the family of two sons and three daughters of Sir John Rushout (later first Baron Northwick) and his wife Rebecca, daughter of Humphrey Bowles of Wanstead in Essex.
He was descended from a Flemish family, who came to London as merchants in the reign of Charles I and settled at Northwick in Gloucestershire.
His father chose an unconventional education for him: instead of a public school followed by university, he was sent to a school in Hackney and then to Neufchâtel.
In 1790 Rushout visited Italy and spent eight years in Rome between 1792 and 1800 as an attaché to the ambassador to the king of Naples.
During his years on the Continent he made friendships among many of the most eminent men of the day, including Edward Gibbon, Horatio Nelson (Viscount Nelson), Sir William Hamilton and his wife, Richard Payne Knight [qq.v.],
Antonio Canova, and Vincenzo Camuccini.
He later wrote that he had developed ‘an unbounded admiration for the works of the most refined art in painting, sculpture and architecture, with which [Rome]then abounded…
These were the seductive amusements of my youth: they have clung to me through a long life, and they are now the solace of my old age.’
He returned to England on succeeding his father as second Baron Northwick in 1800, and was able to devote himself to the formation of the collection for which Northwick Park became famous.
In his introduction to the 1921 catalogue of Northwick pictures, Tancred Borenius wrote that Lord Northwick was a ‘collector of very high intelligence and discrimination.
Living at a time when the value of works of art in the market was one of taste and appreciation rather than of mere commerce, he was able to avail himself of an ample fortune to buy the finest specimens of the Fine Arts which came into the market.’
He also planted beeches, firs, and larches on the Northwick estate, and created ornamental cascades along the brook which flowed through his woodlands.
Northwick was a catholic collector, and bought actively at auctions for over half a century.
He acquired pictures of all schools, especially Italian pictures from all periods, Flemish pictures, and contemporary British paintings.
His pioneering interest was in Italian pictures of the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries.
So extensive did his collection become that he built a special picture gallery at Northwick Park in 1832, and some years later he acquired Thirlestane House in Cheltenham, the 1846 guide to which listed over 500 pictures.
By 1859 the collection exceeded 1,400 pictures; sculpture, bronzes, antique gems and cameos, enamels, coins, carvings, miniatures, and manuscripts also formed part of the collection.
Of liberal disposition, he opened Thirlestane House to the public and it became one of the greatest attractions of Cheltenham.
Northwick was an initial subscriber to the British Institution, founded in 1805, a member of the Society of Dilettanti, and a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries.
Northwick died, unmarried and intestate, at Northwick Park 20 January 1859.
He was succeeded as third Baron Northwick by his nephew, George Rushout-Bowles, MP.
As his property had to be divided equally among his nearest kin, it was necessary for Thirlestane House and the famous collections to be sold.
The auction was conducted by Harry Phillips, auctioneer of New Bond Street, in July and August 1859 and raised some £95,000 in eighteen days: four pictures were bought by the National Gallery, and others by collectors of the calibre of William Douglas, eleventh Duke of Hamilton, Walter Scott, fifth Duke of Buccleuch [qq.v.], the fourth Marquess of Hertford, and Baron James de Rothschild.
However, a considerable part of the collections was bought by George, third Baron Northwick, and taken to Northwick Park.
[Annual Register , 1859; Tancred Borenius,The Northwick Pictures , 1921.]
Patrick Buckland
,John Miller (1871–1956), politician, was born 17 July 1871 at Ardara, Comber, county Down, Ireland, the eldest child in the family of four sons and one daughter of Thomas Andrews, DL, flax spinner, also of Ardara, and his wife Eliza, daughter of James Alexander Pirrie, of Belfast, and sister of William James, Viscount Pirrie [q.v.].
His younger brother,(Sir) James Andrews [q.v.]became lord chief justice of Northern Ireland.
He was educated at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast.
Following his father in business and politics, he developed interests in a large number of commercial enterprises, not least in flax spinning and the Belfast and County Down Railway.
A liberal unionist, he was at one time president of the Ulster Liberal Unionist Association and a member of the committee of the Ulster Reform Club.
Throwing himself wholeheartedly into Ulster Unionist opposition home rule in the early twentieth century, he was an active member of the Ulster Unionist Council and first president of the Ulster Unionist Labour Association.
As one of the architects of Northern Ireland, he sat in its parliament for county Down (1921–9) and then for mid-Down and Down from 1930, and held high office for over twenty years, being successively minister of labour (1921–37), minister of finance (1937–40), and prime minister (1940–3).
He remained in parliament until 1953.
Although firm on the link with Britain and steadfastly opposed to a united Ireland, and although not immune to the pressures of extreme Protestant organizations, Andrews was never a strident unionist.
Only in 1941 did he first hold significant office in the Orange Order, reaching the highest rank in 1949 on his election as imperial grand master of the Grand Orange council of the world.
His ministerial career was characterized by tolerance, humanity, and dedication.
Unlike some of his colleagues he did not allow his recreations, such as hunting, yachting, and golf, to interfere with his ministerial duties.
As minister of labour he was concerned that the government should not become totally identified with the Unionist Party and was determined that people in Northern Ireland should have the same standards of living as those in the rest of the United Kingdom.
He particularly championed the ‘step-by-step’ policy which ensured the automatic adoption in Northern Ireland of the main British cash social services.
As minister of finance, however, he readily adopted a narrower approach to service delivery and his main concern was to keep a balanced budget and to maintain good relations with the British Treasury.
As a cabinet minister he was keenly aware of the increasing weakness of the government, as James Craig, first Viscount Craigavon [q.v.], prime minister since 1921, lost control of affairs in the 1930s.
Nevertheless, on becoming prime minister after Craigavon's death in 1940, Andrews was also at sea, his loyalty to old colleagues preventing him from bringing in new men.
His ageing government showed insufficient energy in pursuing the effort of World War II and its prestige and confidence were undermined by the German air raids in April–May 1941, indecision over conscription, the corruption of Belfast Corporation, what was seen as the weak and complacent handling of industrial relations, and confused planning for the post-war world.
Dissidents forced Andrews out of office and looked for leadership to Sir Basil Brooke (later Viscount Brookeborough, q.v.), the minister of commerce and war production, who had been completely identified with the war effort.
Although Andrews was convinced that his minister had conspired against him, Brooke seems to have played a passive role in the 1943 crisis, refusing to lead a party revolt, and becoming prime minister almost by default.
Excluded from Brooke's new cabinet in 1943, and missing departmental responsibilities, Andrews took little solace in becoming CH (1943).
He married in 1902 Jessie (died 1950), eldest daughter of Joseph Ormrod, stockbroker, of Bolton.
They had one son and two daughters.
His younger brother James married Jessie's sister.
He died 5 August 1956, at his home, Maxwell Court, Comber.
[B. Barton,Brookeborough: The Making of a Prime Minister , 1988; P. J. Buckland,‘Factory of Grievances’: Devolved Government in Northern Ireland 1921–39 , 1979; Northern Ireland cabinet papers and the diaries of Sir Wilfrid Spender, Public Record Office of Northern Ireland;The Times , 6 August 1956.]
Michael S Moss
, Sir Edward James , baronet (1831–1895), shipbuilder, was born 15 May 1831 in Scarborough, the fourth of six sons (the third of whom died in infancy) and seventh of ten children of Dr William Harland, physician, a close friend of the engineer George Stephenson [q.v.], and his wife Anne, daughter of Gowan Peirson of Goathland, Yorkshire.
He was apprenticed to Robert Stephenson & Co. at Newcastle from 1846 to 1851.
Through his uncle, Dr Thomas Harland, he got to know Gustav Christian Schwabe, a partner in the Liverpool shipping company of John Bibby & Sons.
Schwabe arranged for him to work for the Clyde engineering and shipbuilding firm of J. & G. Thomson, who were building ships for Bibby.
He returned to the Tyne in 1853 to manage a shipyard, leaving the following year to take up a similar post at Robert Hickson's shipyard in Belfast.
Here he quickly became notorious for his stern management which turned the shipyard round, allowing it to survive the financial embarrassment of the owner in 1855.
Two years later he recruited Gustav Wilhelm Wolff [q.v.],
Gustav Schwabe's nephew, as his personal assistant.
In 1858 he purchased the yard, renaming the business Edward James Harland & Co.
Immediately Bibby placed a contract for three boats.
They were so pleased with these that they ordered a further six vessels in 1860 of novel long design, with a narrow beam and flat bottom, which earned them the nickname of Bibby's coffins.
Harland and Wolff went into partnership in 1861 to form the company of that name.
Over the next thirty years the shipyard prospered.
Building on the technical success of the Bibby ships, the partners established a strong relationship with the White Star Line of Thomas Ismay, Cunard's principal competitor on the North Atlantic.
In 1879–80 the partners added an engine works to their enterprise and the following year equipped the yard to handle the newly introduced open-hearth steel.
By this time most of the contracts were being negotiated by William James (later Viscount) Pirrie [q.v.], who had become a partner in 1874.
During the home rule crisis in 1885, Harland made secret preparations to withdraw to mainland Britain if the situation became intolerable.
This proved unnecessary and massive investment followed to provide facilities for the construction of the latest generation of Atlantic liners.
In 1891, when shipbuilding was distressed, Harland was persuaded to introduce a system of cost plus contracts for favoured customers which secured a large volume of business over the next four years.
The success of the shipyard depended on improvement to the Lagan waterway made by the Belfast harbour commissioners.
Harland served as a commissioner from 1875 and was chairman from 1875 to 1885.
Although he was a Unionist in politics, he tried to pursue a policy of non-discrimination in the shipyard, strained by the sectarian troubles in 1864 and in 1884–5.
He was mayor of Belfast in 1885–7 and helped co-ordinate the campaign against the home rule bill.
He was elected MP for North Belfast in 1887, moving to London but rarely speaking in Parliament.
He was knighted in 1885 and created a baronet later the same year.
In January 1860 he married Rosa Matilda, of Vermont, near Belfast, the daughter of Thomas Wann, a stockbroker and insurance agent.
They had no children and the baronetcy became extinct when Harland died on Christmas eve 1895 at his Irish home, Glengorne Hall, county Leitrim.
[Michael Moss and John R. Hume,Shipbuilders to the World: 125 Years of Harland and Wolff, Belfast 1861–1986 , 1986; D. J. Jeremy (ed.),
Dictionary of Business Biography , vol. iii, 1985.]
P J L Frankl
,Christopher Palmer (1820–1885), consul in Zanzibar and major-general, was born 18 January 1820 at Yately Lodge, Yately, Hampshire, the youngest son and sixth child of a family of eight of Tipping Thomas Rigby (1774–1862), barrister and recorder of Wallingford, and his wife Ann Eliza Cousins.
Educated at Abingdon Grammar School (1831–3) and at the East India Company's military seminary at Addiscombe House (1834–5), Rigby commenced his military career in 1836 as an ensign in the 5th Regiment of Native Infantry stationed in Poona.
He remained in India, except for a posting in Aden from 1840 to 1843, until 1850 — with one leave in England.
During those years of service overseas he acquired fluency in eight oriental and African languages, and wrote a number of erudite articles which appeared in the Transactions of the Bombay Geographical Society .
Rigby returned to Bombay in April 1854 and soon afterwards was appointed president of the examination committee for native languages — his latest recreation being the study of Turkish.
At this period relations between Persia and Britain were worsening on account of Afghanistan.
Accordingly, in September 1854 Britain dispatched an expeditionary field force to the Persian port of Bushire, with Rigby as interpreter and, later, superintendent of police — with himself the only policeman in the town.
After returning to Bombay early in 1858 he was appointed the East India Company's agent in Zanzibar and British consul, the previous consul having died at his post thirteen months previously.
On 27 July 1858, the day of his arrival in Zanzibar, Rigby called on the sultan, Majid bin Sa'id al-BuSa'idi, aboard his flagship and was given a royal salute.
The sultanates of Muscat and Zanzibar had recently been separated by the terms of the Canning award, but Majid's position remained insecure; in 1859 his half-brothers Thuwayn of Muscat and Barghash, who was to succeed Majid as sultan, attempted to capture Zanzibar.
However, at Rigby's instance, the Royal Navy afforded Majid the necessary support and the insurrection failed, Barghash being sent to Bombay where he was compelled to remain for eighteen months.
While serving in Zanzibar Rigby met and assisted several celebrated explorers: Sir Richard Burton (who was to be accused by Rigby of withholding payment from porters and other members of the expedition to Lake Tanganyika — an accusation which was denied by Burton), J. H. Speke, and David Livingstone [qq.v.].
In particular, he befriended James A. Grant [q.v.].
Rigby's predecessor in Zanzibar, Atkins Hamerton, had signed a treaty with Majid's father in 1845; this restricted, but did not abolish, the East African slave trade.
Rigby worked with ardour to suppress trafficking in slaves and his efforts to enforce the 1845 treaty were unremitting.
Furthermore, he ordered the emancipation of all slaves in the possession of British subjects residing in Zanzibar; it is estimated that he emancipated 8,000 up to the time of his leaving Zanzibar.
In 1861 the Bombay government published Rigby's Report on the Zanzibar Dominions , a comprehensive and informative survey of the sultanate.
On 5 September 1861 Rigby left Zanzibar on grounds of ill health and returned to England.
In January 1864 he was appointed commissioner for the settlement of boundary disputes between the states of Baroda and Jamnagar.
Rigby resigned from the army in August 1867 with the rank of major-general.
Shortly before his death he lost all his savings in the collapse of the Oriental Bank.
In June 1867, in London, Rigby married Matilda, daughter of Charles Prater, esquire.
They had two sons (one of whom was killed in action near Armentières in 1915) and two daughters (one of whom died in infancy).
Their daughter Lillian (1875–1949) was a disciple of Albert Schweitzer, his first British helper at Lambarene, and the English translator of his philosophical lectures.
Rigby derived much pleasure from his family and the company of friends.
A photograph of him, taken by Grant in Zanzibar and dated 1860, is in the possession of the Royal Geographical Society.
Rigby died in London 14 April 1885.
[India Office records, India Office Library, London;The Times , 16 April 1885;Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society , vol. vii, part 6, 1885; C. E. B. Russell (Lillian Rigby)(ed.),
General Rigby, Zanzibar and the Slave Trade , 1935.]
Hamish Henderson
,William (‘Billy’)(1672? –1792), ‘king’ of the Galloway tinkler-gypsies, was born either in the parish of Kirkmichael, Ayrshire, or in Minnigaff, Kirkcudbrightshire.
The gypsy clan to which he belonged was ruled by a chief, or ‘king’, called Isaac Miller; tradition has it that Billy stabbed Miller to death and assumed the kingship in his place.
In the ‘additional note’ to Guy Mannering , Sir Walter Scott [q.v.]states that Billy was ‘pressed or enlisted in the army seven times, and deserted as often; besides three times running away from the Naval Service’.
He himself claimed to have been present at the battle of the Boyne, as a private soldier in King William's army; later he deserted from the Royal Regiment of Dragoons (Scots Greys) when serving under the first Duke of Marlborough [q.v.]in Flanders.
Back in Scotland, in 1712 he attempted to extend his dominions, which stretched from Dumfries to the braes of Glenapp in south-west Ayrshire, into the heart of the latter county; however, his troops were defeated at Newton of Ayr by ‘a powerful body of Tinkers from Argyll and Dumbarton’.
This was not his last military exploit, however.
In 1724 a popular insurrection was organized among farmers, crofters, gypsies, and labourers against the Galloway lairds, who were enclosing with dykes land considered by the people to be held in common.
These rebels, who became known as ‘levellers’, appointed Marshall their leader, and he directed successful operations, demolishing by night the dykes constructed during the day.
He also organized the insurgent peasants into companies, and instructed them in the use of firearms.
The government brought dragoons from Edinburgh to restore law and order, and after a skirmish at Duchrae 200 rebels were taken prisoner.
Marshall himself was captured, but escaped with the help of Andrew Gemmil (the original of Scott's ‘Edie Ochiltree’).
Basing himself in Minnigaff village, from which, when necessary, he could quickly retreat with his gang into the hill country, Marshall conducted a profitable trade for years with the local smugglers.
Mountain redoubts ideal for concealing plunder were the Fell o'Barullion in Wigtonshire — hence Billy's sobriquet ‘the caird o'Barullion’— and a large cave in the high grounds of Cairnsmore, in the Stewartry.
According to Scott, Marshall was seventeen times lawfully married, and after his hundredth year was the avowed father of four illegitimate children.
His reputedly Herculean virility long remained a byword throughout the district over which he held sway.
Furthermore, although he was believed to have committed more than one murder, he enjoyed a surprisingly mild and genial reputation.
A. McCormick summarizes the general opinion thus: ‘probably the very crimes attributed to him were essential to terrorize his gang and bring them to subjection.
A strong man physically; a  splendid wrestler; a good boxer; famous at the quarter-staff; a master handicraftsman, and member of the Hammerman's Guild; possessed of ingenuity and an ever-ready wit; quick to assert the rights and avenge the wrongs of his gang, he was an ideal leader for such a tribe.’
Marshall died in Kirkcudbright 28 November 1792 at the age of 120.
His tombstone, decorated on the back with two tups' horns and two horn spoons, is still to be seen in the kirkyard.
[Sir Walter Scott, additional note to Guy Mannering , 1828 edn.; Andrew McCormick,The Tinkler-Gypsies of Galloway , 1906; personal field-collecting of Scottish traditions.]
John Holmstrom
,Henry David (1822–1896), composer and conductor, was born in London 18 June 1822, the fourth of nine children (five sons and four daughters) and first son to survive infancy of John Leslie, a fashionable tailor and keen viola player, and his wife Mary Taylor.
He was educated at the Palace School, Enfield, before unenthusiastically joining the family firm.
Growing into a lugubrious-looking, bespectacled, and later whiskery young man, he began musical studies in his mid-teens, playing the cello, and studying with Charles Lucas [q.v.].
In 1840 he published his opus 1, a Te Deum and Jubilate in D .
In 1848 his Symphony in F was performed by the prestigious Amateur Musical Society under Michael Balfe [q.v.].
His anthem ‘Let God Arise’ was first performed at the Norwich Festival of 1849: Charles Lucas called it ‘the best antiphonal work since the days of Handel’, and The Times found in it ‘gifts that are accorded to few’.
The next decade saw a dramatic overture,The Templar , the oratorios Immanuel (1854) and Judith (1858), and some chamber music.
The Birmingham Gazette hailed Judith as a ‘great work’, but the second part of Immanuel probably contains the finest music Leslie wrote.
Around the same time came two cantatas, ‘Holyrood’(1861), and ‘Daughter of the Isles’(1862), and two works given at Covent Garden: the operetta Romance, or Bold Dick Turpin (1860) and the romantic opera Ida, or the Guardian Storks (1865).
The only major late work was a programmatic second symphony, ‘Chivalry’, first performed in 1881 at the Crystal Palace.
In 1847 Leslie became honorary secretary of the newly founded Amateur Musical Society, and from 1855 its conductor.
He had also taken charge of a madrigal society which performed in the Hanover Square Rooms and which from May 1856 was known as Henry Leslie's Choir.
A basic group of about thirty singers swelled on some orchestral occasions to 240, and over three decades gave several London concerts each year, prepared with a care for detail unique in Britain at the time, though its effects were later attacked as too calculated, even ‘effeminate’, and many regretted the drift from a pure part-song repertoire to grandiose ‘mixed concerts’ with popular soloists.
Leslie wrote 100 or so part-songs for the choir, including ‘O Memory’, ‘The Pilgrims’, and ‘Annabelle Lee’, which became best sellers.
By the late 1870s Leslie (and many critics) felt that some of his singers were ‘becoming a little ropy’ and that he himself was tired and stale.
A final triumph came at the Paris exhibition of 1878, where he and (Sir) Arthur Sullivan [q.v.]organized the British musical element, and Leslie's choir won first prize in the international choral competition.
Two years later, after a command performance at Windsor Castle, he disbanded it, and although it was resuscitated at public request, and attracted stars like (Sir) Charles Santley [q.v.], it finally expired in 1887.
In 1864 Leslie realized a long-held ambition in setting up a National College of Music to rival the continental conservatoires.
Although Sullivan,(Sir) Julius Benedict [q.v.], and other prominent musicians were among the professors, it collapsed after only two years.
A second attempt (in 1878) led to the foundation of the Royal College of Music in 1883.
In 1857 Leslie married one of his young music pupils, Mary Betsey, daughter of William Henry Perry, physician, and moved to her family home, Bryn Tanat, on the Welsh border.
They had four sons and one daughter.
The second son, William, became a master of the Musicians' Company, and the third, Charles, played cricket for Middlesex and England.
In retirement Leslie launched the Oswestry Festival of Village Choirs, which absorbed him for some years until underfunding brought it to an end.
He died 5 February 1896 in hospital near Llansantffraid, Montgomery, and was buried in Llanyblodwel churchyard.
[The Times , 12 February 1850 and 7 February 1896;Magazine of Music , September 1890;Célebrités Musicales , Dresden, 1882;Musical World , 25 March 1848, 24 May 1850, 2 March 1854, 26 June and 31 July 1858, 4 February 1860, 9 February 1861, 11 July 1863, 2 January 1864, 18 November 1865, 16 February 1867;Musical Gazette , 31 May 1856;Musical Times , 1 August 1878, 1 August 1880;Musical Standard , 24 December 1881;Oswestry Advertiser , 5 November 1879.]
Ann Christine Hess
,Hester (1586? –1660), midwife, was probably baptized in Allhallows parish, London, 11 April 1586, the only recorded daughter of Nicholas Essex, gentleman.
She began practising midwifery in London around 1610 and was licensed by the bishop of London before 1634.
In that year Mrs Shaw and Mrs Whipp led a petition of sixty midwives of the City in opposition to Peter Chamberlen the elder [q.v.], a man-midwife who planned to incorporate the midwives under his governorship.
The petition, which was presented both to the king and the College of Physicians and referred to the archbishop of Canterbury, alleged that Chamberlen had pecuniary interests in keeping midwives ignorant so that he could take on their difficult cases.
The petition was successful in aborting Chamberlen's scheme; however, it did not result in an improvement of the ecclesiastical licensing system, as the midwives had hoped.
In January 1650 Hester Shaw's house in Tower Street was destroyed by a gunpowder explosion while she was attending a childbirth.
Sixty-seven people were killed, including her son-in-law and three grandchildren.
Shaw claimed to have lost all her midwifery earnings in the explosion, and a total of over £3,000.
She also claimed that her minister, Thomas Clendon, had attempted to confiscate three bags of her money, worth £953 6s. 8d.
These had been blown out of her house and taken into his for safe keeping.
She explained the minister's ill-treatment of her as revenge for her withdrawal of an annual gift of £8 to the parish church when she found out that he had attempted to publish her charity.
In 1653 Clendon complained of her allegations in his pamphlet Justification Justified and she returned with A Plaine Relation of My Sufferings and Mrs. Shaw's Innocency Restored .
Affidavits taken before the lord mayor, a personal friend of hers, indicate that public opinion was on her side.
She was described by Clendon as a woman ‘by many reputed Religious, having by her good education, and volubility of tongue, and natural boldness, and confidence, attained some ability in prayer, and in speaking of matters of Religion’.
Hester was married to John Shaw, the churchwarden of Allhallows parish, before 1 April 1610, when their daughter Elizabeth was born.
Elizabeth became Dame Bludden, and Hester had at least one other daughter who married George Farrington.
John Shaw died before 1643.
Hester Shaw was buried in Allhallows parish 18 June 1660.
[J. H. Aveling,The Chamberlens and the Midwifery Forceps, Memorials , 1882; Jean Donnison,Midwives and Medical Men , 1977; Anne Crawford et al .
(ed.),
The Europa Biographical Dictionary of British Women , 1983; Hester Shaw,A Plaine Relation of My Sufferings , 1653,Mrs Shaw's Innocency Restored , 1653, and Death's Master-Peece , 1649; Allhallows parish registers of baptisms and burials.]
Jon Stallworthy
,Keith Castellain (1920–1944), poet, was born 24 January 1920 in Tunbridge Wells, the only child of Captain Keith Sholto Douglas, MC, soldier and chicken farmer, and his wife,(Marie) Josephine, daughter of Charles Castellain, a man of private means.
His childhood was spent in Cranleigh, and he was educated at Edgeborough School, Guildford, where he revealed precocious talents as artist, poet, and sportsman, and at Christ's Hospital, London.
In 1927 his father left home and, in due course, remarried.
Like Lord Byron [q.v.], who suffered a similar deprivation and whom he would grow to resemble in other ways, Douglas hero-worshipped the absent captain, at twelve beginning an autobiographical essay: ‘As a child he was a militarist, and like many of his warlike elders, built up heroic opinions upon little information — some scrappy war stories of his father.’
In 1938 he won a scholarship to Merton College, Oxford, where his influential tutor was Edmund Blunden [q.v.], soldier-poet of an earlier war than that for which Douglas enlisted in 1940.
A year later, now a second lieutenant, he sailed to Palestine to join the Nottinghamshire Sherwood Rangers Yeomanry, a cavalry regiment that had recently exchanged its horses for tanks.
Moving with them to north Africa, he was initially held in enforced inactivity behind the lines, a problem which he solved in characteristic style: ‘The Battle of Alamein began on the 23rd of October, 1942.
Six days afterwards I set out in direct disobedience of orders to rejoin my regiment.
My batman was delighted with this manoeuvre.
‘I like you, sir,’ he said, ‘You're shit or bust, you are.’
This praise gratified me a lot.’
So ends the introduction to Douglas's prose memoir of that battle and its aftermath,Alamein to Zem Zem .
Published posthumously in 1946, with his own illustrations and an appendix of poems, this rendered the war in the Western Desert as graphically as Blunden's Undertones of War (1928) had depicted life and death on the western front.
Douglas had an artist's eye for the horrors — and also the absurdities — of battle.
Technically, his war poems show the influence of those of Wilfred Owen [q.v.], but their language is simpler, more direct, and they have nothing of his indignation.
There was less cause for indignation in the desert than in the trenches, and Douglas never lost his insatiable appetite for experience.
Where Owen's preface to his poems had declared ‘This book is not about heroes’, Douglas in both his poetry and prose celebrates the last stand of the chivalric hero, men like his colonel, ‘Piccadilly Jim’.
In his poem ‘Sportsmen’ he asks: ‘How then can I live among this gentle/obsolescent breed of heroes, and not weep?’
His language, finely responsive to his theme, fuses ancient and modern: his fellow officers are ‘gentle’, like the ‘verray parfit gentil knight’ of Geoffrey Chaucer [q.v.], and at the same time ‘obsolescent’.
Douglas was wounded by a mine in January 1943, but survived the desert campaign.
Back in England for Christmas, he wrote some of his finest poems, collected and copied others, and by the end of March had completed manuscripts of Alamein to Zem Zem and a volume of poems.
He commanded a tank troop in the main assault on the Normandy beaches, and his death outside the village of St Pierre, 9 June 1944, robbed English literature — as had Owen's death in 1918 — of the most individual and accomplished poet of his generation.
He was unmarried.
[Desmond Graham (ed.),
Alamein to Zem Zem , 1979,The Complete Poems of Keith Douglas , 1978, and Keith Douglas: a Prose Miscellany , 1985; Desmond Graham,Keith Douglas 1920–1944: a Biography , 1974.]
Janet Howarth
,Bertha Jane (1846–1927), promoter of women's higher education, was born at 3 New Street, Charing Cross, London, 20 January 1846, the youngest of three daughters and third of four children of Robert Bentley Todd, FRS [q.v.], professor of physiology at King's College, London, and a supporter of nursing education, and his wife Elizabeth Hart.
She was educated at home, sharing lessons with her younger brother, and at the Slade School of Art.
She became an accomplished pianist and several of her pictures were exhibited at the Royal Academy.
In 1873 she moved to Oxford after her marriage to the Revd Arthur Henry Johnson, second son of Captain George John Johnson, gentleman, of London.
Her husband, by whom she had two sons, was chaplain of All Souls and lecturer in modern history at several undergraduate colleges.
The introduction of women students to an ancient residential university, already pioneered at Cambridge by Henry Sidgwick and S. Emily Davies [qq.v.], was a challenge that appealed to the ‘young married Oxford’ of the 1870s.
Bertha Johnson was on the committees that organized a series of lectures for ladies from 1874, set up the more ambitious Association for Promoting the Higher Education of Women in Oxford (AEW) in 1878, and founded the Anglican hostel, Lady Margaret Hall, which opened, together with the undenominational Somerville Hall, in 1879.
The success of these women's societies, which were not formally recognized by the university until 1910, depended on voluntary support by dons and their wives: Bertha Johnson made it her life's work.
She was secretary to Lady Margaret Hall from 1880 to 1914 and, as lady secretary to the AEW (1883–94), was responsible for organizing tuition for women students and for supervising those not attached to a hall, who lived at home or with ‘hostesses’ in the city.
Her encouragement also played a part in the success of two further women's halls, St Hugh's, opened by (Dame) Elizabeth Wordsworth in 1886, and St Hilda's, founded in 1893 by Dorothea Beale [qq.v.].
But the welfare of home students, as they were known after 1889, was her particular concern; in 1894 she was appointed by the AEW as their principal, a post which she held on a voluntary basis until 1921.
In 1910, when a delegacy for women students was set up, control of the home students was taken over by the university and Bertha Johnson became the first woman to hold a senior university appointment in Oxford as principal of the Society of Oxford Home Students.
In 1920, when women were admitted to degrees and membership of the university, she was the first of the five women principals to receive the MA by decree.
Bertha Johnson's conservatism, shown equally by her Unionist politics, her lifelong attachment to the flowing Liberty gowns fashionable in her youth, and her reluctance to see chaperonage rules relaxed, led her to resist the assimilation of women's education to patterns developed for men.
Herself no academic, she saw no value in the evolution of the halls into colleges with staffs of women tutors, nor in the opening of degrees to women while Oxford's matriculation requirement included Latin and Greek.
Forced to resign the secretaryship of the AEW when the Somerville council challenged her control of tuition arrangements, she became, with her husband, an influential opponent in 1895–6 of a bid to secure the admission of women to the Oxford BA.
In 1897 she supported moves, viewed with dismay by the established women's societies, to found a separate women's university to examine students at Oxford, Cambridge, and Royal Holloway College, London.
Yet within Oxford her energies and charm were employed chiefly in defence of the home students, a growing society that included mature students and foreigners and prospered under her quietly autocratic but kindly regime.
Twenty-five years after her death the society became Oxford's fifth women's college, St Anne's.
Her voluntary work outside the university included service as poor-law guardian, as vice-chairman of the Oxford Charity Organization Society, and as a member (1903–22) of the education committee of Oxfordshire county council.
She died in Oxford 24 April 1927 (her husband had died 31 January the same year).
There is a portrait of her at St Anne's College.
[R. F. Butler and M. H. Prichard (eds.),
The Society of Oxford Home-Students.
Retrospects and Recollections (1879–1921), 1930; Gemma Bailey (ed.),
Lady Margaret Hall, a Short History , 1923; Annie M. A. H. Rogers,Degrees by Degrees , 1938; Bertha Johnson MSS and ‘Bertha Johnson 1840–1927.
A Portrait’, by Beryl Harding, in St Anne's College archive.]
J H Andrews
,Robert (fl. 1556–1574), surveyor and map-maker, is first heard of as a cartographer who mapped the English pale at Calais in 1556, on the instructions of the royal auditor, John Chaloner.
Eleven years later, perhaps on Chaloner's recommendation, Lythe entered the service of the queen's deputy in Dublin, Sir Henry Sidney [q.v.], at a time when disorders in Ireland had created a demand for new official maps of the country.
He began work in September 1567 in Carrickfergus, and by the autumn of 1570 he had mapped parts of Ulster and almost the whole area south of a line from Killary harbour to Strangford lough.
Although there is no contemporary account of his methods, except that he surveyed several stretches of coastline from a boat, in general his maps are impressively accurate and much more detailed than anything previously available for most parts of Ireland.
His output included one large general map of Ireland (now lost) and a smaller general map in which the north was probably copied from earlier cartographers.
He also made a separate map of the area he had surveyed himself, several regional maps, two town plans, and (his only signed work) a fort plan.
By the 1580s Lythe's survey was being copied by other artists in simplified form and after 1590 the substance of it began to appear in print.
Through the book Theatre of the empire of Great Britaine by John Speed [q.v.](1612) it eventually provided several generations of British and foreign map-users with their cartographic image of central and southern Ireland.
In cartographic influence Lythe thus ranks with the later but better-known Elizabethan cartographers, Christopher Saxton and Timothy Pont [qq.v.].
Lythe left Ireland in poor health in November 1571 and is unlikely to have returned.
He mapped the Isle of Sheppey and a proposed fort at Swaleness, Kent, in 1574.
After that there is no record of him.
[J. H. Andrews, ‘The Irish Surveys of Robert Lythe’,Imago Mundi , vol. xix, 1965, pp. 22–31.]
Irvine Loudon
,Edward (1766–1838), physician, was baptized 5 November 1766 in Sefton, Lancashire, the son of Edward Harrison.
He studied medicine in London, Paris, and Edinburgh (MD, Edinburgh, 1784) before settling in Lincolnshire, first in Louth and then in Horncastle, where he founded the Horncastle Dispensary.
One of the first physicians to recognize the parlous state of medical education and the practice of physic, he was persuaded in 1804 by the Lincolnshire Medical Benevolent Society (which he had founded) to investigate medical practice in Britain.
His findings, which included a vivid account of the scandalous extent of quackery, were published in 1806 as a pamphlet entitled Remarks on the Ineffective State of the Practice of Physic in Great Britain; with Proposals for its Future Regulation and Improvement .
This caused such a stir that Harrison threw himself into the cause of medical reform.
His proposals for reform of the education and organization of all medical practitioners had much merit.
He moved to London where, with the backing of Sir Joseph Banks [q.v.]and the support of many influential physicians and members of Parliament, a bill for medical reform was drawn up.
William Pitt, the prime minister, promised his support, but died before anything could be done.
When success was near, however, the Royal College of Physicians of London, fearing loss of countenance and despising Harrison as an ‘outsider’ from the provinces, succeeded in defeating the bill.
Bitterly disappointed, Harrison abandoned medical reform, but his ideas lived on to provide a solid basis for future important developments, which culminated in the Medical Act of 1858.
From 1817 Harrison specialized in the treatment of spinal disorders, a subject on which his unorthodox views (Pathological and Practical Observations on Spinal Diseases , 1827, and Observations on Spinal Diseases , 1832?) were initially derided but accepted after his death.
A disappointed man, he died 6 May 1838, while travelling between Marlborough and Devizes, on his way to see a patient with a spinal affliction.
He appears to have been unmarried.
[British and Foreign Medical Review , vol. vi, 1838, p. 289;Journal of Health and Disease , vol. iii, 1847–8, pp. 65–9;Lancet , vol. ii, 1837–8, pp. 262–3.]
Ronald M Birse
,Thomas (1708? –1781), civil engineer, was of obscure origin.
Nothing is known of him before 1742 when he was manager of a cotton-mill in Northampton, and took a leading part in the intellectual life of the town, as a member of the Philosophical Society and a lecturer on scientific subjects.
In an advertisement in the Northampton Mercury of 27 April 1747 he describes himself simply as a millwright, but goes on to offer his services as a manufacturer and repairer of many kinds of agricultural machinery, weighbridges and ‘mathematical and philosophical instruments’, as a designer of all kinds of mills, as a maker of ventilators for hospitals, gaols, granaries, or ships, and as a surveyor of gentlemen's estates.
The cotton-mill at Northampton was built about 1741, the first to be driven by a water-wheel, and Yeoman was responsible for equipping it with spinning machines of a new type developed by Lewis Paul and John Wyatt [qq.v.].
Unfortunately the new machines were not sufficiently reliable, and about ten years later the mill ceased production.
Yeoman profited from his connection with John Wyatt, however, when the latter invented a weighbridge for use in determining the tolls to be paid by vehicles using turnpike roads.
Yeoman described and illustrated it in an article in the Gentleman's Magazine in March 1748, and is known to have erected one at Northampton.
He was also associated in the 1740s with Stephen Hales [q.v.]and his invention of the ventilator.
The manufacture and installation of ventilators became a substantial part of Yeoman's business, and, after making a start at Northampton hospital and gaol in 1748–9, he fitted them also to gaols in Shrewsbury, Bedford, Aylesbury, and Maidstone, and to the naval hospitals in Portsmouth, Gosport, and Plymouth.
In London he fitted ventilators in both Houses of Parliament and in Drury Lane Theatre, and probably also in Newgate prison.
Many of these early ventilators were driven by windmills.
In August 1756 Yeoman was put in charge of the ventilation equipment on all HM ships, allowing him to be described in his application for election to the Royal Society as ‘Chief Marine Superintendent of H.M.
Navy’.
Before moving to London permanently in 1757 he produced A Plan of the River Nene, from Thrapston to Northampton, with the Mills and Locks necessary for the Navigation (1754), and A Plan of the Road from Towcester in the County of Northampton, to Weston Gate in the County of Oxford (1756).
From about 1760 he was increasingly occupied in surveying and reporting on river and canal works, including those of the rivers Lea, Chelmer, Thames, Medway, and the Stour in Kent; the drainage of the Ancholme level and the north level of the Fens; the Forth and Clyde canal, and the Stroudwater canal.
Some of these reports were prepared in conjunction with other engineers, such as John Smeaton and Robert Mylne [qq.v.].
He was elected a member of the Society for the Promotion of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce in 1760, serving from 1763 to 1778 as the joint chairman of the committee on mechanics, and taking a leading part in its deliberations on such subjects as agricultural machinery, ships, and textiles.
In 1764 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, but does not seem to have been a very active member of that body.
The seal was set on his career in 1771 when he was elected president of the newly established Society of Civil Engineers, an exclusive ‘club’ admitting by invitation only the most eminent members of the profession.
The founder-members numbered eleven, and in the first ten years of its existence a further forty-three members were elected.
Yeoman served the Society as president until 1780, with Robert Mylne as vice-president and John Smeaton another of the original members.
The only detail known of his marriage is that his wife survived him, and died at Mile End in London in 1793, aged eighty-four.
Yeoman himself died at Castle Street, Leicesterfields in London, 24 January 1781.
[E. Robinson, ‘The Profession of Civil Engineer in the Eighteenth Century: a portrait of Thomas Yeoman, FRS’,Annals of Science , vol. xviii, no. 4, pp. 195–215;Transactions of the Newcomen Society , vol. xliv, 1971–2, pp. 23–47; A. W. Skempton,British Civil Engineering 1640–1840: a Bibliography , 1987.]
H G Pitt
, Sir Henry O'neal de Hane (1896–1930), land- and water-speed record holder, was born in Baltimore, Maryland, 22 December 1896, the only child of Charles William Segrave, Anglo-Irish landowner of county Wicklow, later county Tipperary, and his first wife Mary Lucy, daughter of James Kemp Harwood, officer in the US navy; she died in 1898.
Educated, unremarkably, at Eton and, briefly, at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Segrave was commissioned into the Royal Warwickshire Regiment before he was eighteen.
Wounded in France in May 1915, he transferred to the Royal Flying Corps in October, gaining his wings in January.
Twice shot down, wounded, and now a captain, he was grounded first at the War Office, later with the RFC headquarters in France, and finally at the Air Council before a posting to Washington (now a major) with the British Aviation Mission in June 1918, in his twenty-second year.
A keen owner of fast motor cycles and cars since he was fifteen, he set out after the war to be a racing driver.
On his showing at the Brooklands circuit with a prewar 4½-litre Opel and by persistent importuning, he was accepted, in 1921, as a team driver by Louis Hervé Coatalen [q.v.], designer and racing manager to Sunbeam (soon to be the Anglo-French concern, Sunbeam–Talbot–Darracq), the only English competitor in international events.
That year Segrave won the Brooklands 200-mile race from his team-mates, Kenelm Lee Guinness and (Sir) Malcolm Campbell [q.v.].
In 1923 he became, at Tours, the only Englishman until 1938 (and Sunbeam the only English car until 1957) to win a European Grand Prix.
He raced successfully with Sunbeam, preferring roads to track, winning three further Grands Prix, until the end of 1927 when he retired, believing that ‘owing to the near state of perfection which the automobile has reached…the need for carrying out experiments along unorthodox lines has diminished.
Therefore the need for constructing specialized cars will automatically diminish also…the curve of what is physically possible will intersect the curve of what is practically worthwhile.’
The proper place for fast engines would, in the future, be where they operated most efficiently — in the air.
Segrave then took to record breaking.
Already, briefly, holder of the world's flying-start kilometre (152.33 m.p.h. on Southport Sands in 1926), he was the first man to travel at 200 m.p.h. over the mile: on 29 March 1927 at Daytona Beach, Florida, driving the huge chain-driven Sunbeam, powered by two World War I Matabele 22½-litre aero-engines, designed by Coatalen, he averaged 203.988 m.p.h. over the mile.
Two years later, again at Daytona, on 11 March 1929, he recaptured the record from the American Ray Keech at 231.362 m.p.h. in Golden Arrow , designed by Captain J. S. Irving with a 900-hp aero-engine hired from Napier and originally designed for the Schneider trophy winner Supermarine seaplane.
For this feat he was received by President Herbert Hoover and knighted by George V.
In May 1927 he had started racing boats.
After limited success with Miss England I in America, he returned to the challenge in 1930 in Miss England II , using two Rolls-Royce racing aero-engines.
On Lake Windermere on Friday 13 June 1930, he took the world mile at 98.76 m.p.h., beating the record of the American holder, Commodore Garfield Wood, by 6 m.p.h.
On a third run, the boat hit a floating object, capsized at speed, drowning a mechanic and mortally wounding Segrave, who died hours later, the holder of both land and sea records.
Though of independent means, he worked first with KLG sparking plugs in 1920, as competition manager, then for Sunbeam from 1924, as head of their London sales department.
In 1927 he joined the Portland Cement Company, who denied him car-racing rights but went on to be a sponsor for Golden Arrow .
In 1927 and 1929 he designed stylish bodies for the Hillman 12 hp and then Straight Eight chassis; as technical adviser to the Aircraft Investment Corporation, which he joined in 1929, he shared in the design of the Segrave Meteor, an advanced four-seater, twin-engined monoplane.
Serious-minded and highly practical, he trained hard for everything he did.
Cool foresight and a quick mind enabled him to react swiftly in an emergency.
He never crashed a car while racing — a rare distinction.
Handsome and articulate, a keen patriot, he was greatly liked on both sides of the Atlantic.
Brave, adventurous, single-minded, he died a national hero.
As a Times leader put it: ‘A man of genius in his own field, he must be counted among those who have deserved well of his kind and his name will be remembered in honour.’
His ashes were scattered over Eton playing-fields from his own plane.
He married on 4 October 1917 Doris Mary, a comedy actress, daughter of George Stocker, gentleman.
There were no children.
[The Times , 14 June 1930; C. Posthumus,Sir Henry Segrave , 1961, and Land Speed Record , 1971; Major H. O. D. Segrave,The Lure of Speed , 1928.]
Joan Thirsk
,Benedict (1563–post 1626), clothier, was the third generation in the trade, following his grandfather, a small clothier (who died in Kingswood in 1558), and a father and uncles who were more substantial men, collecting aulnage in Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, and Bristol, exporting undressed cloth, and importing logwood.
Benedict worked under his father till he was sixteen years of age, was then apprenticed to a London linen-draper and merchant in the French trade, and went abroad.
For four to five years he was in Paris and Rouen, with occasional visits to Italy.
He admired the quality of foreign workmanship and noted all new techniques.
He had two foreign looms copied, and returned to England, setting up business in Taunton, where in 1589 he experimented with a multicoloured Spanish cloth, called medley or ‘Webb's’ cloth.
At his father's death, Webb moved to Kingswood to take over the business, married Alice Trobridge, and had many daughters, and one son, Benedict.
He traded with France in salt and cloth, and had landed and farming interests in the Vale of Berkeley and Forest of Dean.
His cloth trade encompassed a large, annual contract with George Mynne [q.v.], the London draper, for which he hired 500 additional workers.
He expected in normal years a clear trading profit of £400.
He successfully negotiated the repeal of a clause in the statute of 4 & 5 Philip and Mary, c.5, which seriously prejudiced west-country clothiers' interests (43 Eliz., c.10), and was one of three who persuaded the French to repeal, in February 1606, a decree prohibiting the import of English tentered cloth.
This French visit gave Webb the idea of growing rape-seed for oil to dress cloth.
He brought the model of a French oil-mill to England, and set up a copy at Kingswood in 1605.
In 1611 he was consulted by Londoners setting up the Londonderry plantation, and showed positive interest in joining an oil-milling venture there.
Milling at Kingswood expanded,c .1618, and in December 1624 Webb received a fourteen-year patent of monopoly, claiming that he was the first inventor.
His design of mill may have been original, but others had long been growing rape-seed in East Anglia and milling rape-seed around London.
A lawsuit in 1625 disclosed that Richard Warner, a soap-boiler of Bristol, had a mill in Caerleon, Monmouthshire, and by offering double wages, had secured some of Webb's workers to build it.
Webb was then growing at least 550 acres of rape-seed, and milling twenty gallons of oil a day.
In 1626 senior west-country clothiers strongly commended Webb's oil, for cheapness, economy, and effectiveness, even on their best quality cloth.
Webb, and others, stressed the amount of work he gave to the poor.
Webb was an immodest publicist of his achievements, and amassed wealth but also large debts.
Local creditors included his nephew, John Smith or Smyth of Nibley [q.v.], who preserved Webb's autobiography among his papers.
He was still alive in 1626.
[Esther Moir, ‘Benedict Webb, Clothier’,Economic History Review , vol. x, 1957–8, pp. 256–64; Public Record Office, lawsuits in Court of Exchequer; State Papers Ireland.]
Stephen Green
,Thomas (1755–1832), founder of the Marylebone Cricket Club, was born 23 November 1755 at Thirsk, Yorkshire, the son of William Lord, a labourer from a Roman Catholic family.
There was a legend that Lord's ancestors had suffered for their allegiance to the Jacobite cause and had had their lands sequestered, forcing William Lord to work as a labourer.
The family moved to Diss, Norfolk, where Lord was educated.
He then moved to London, and at the age of twenty-one got a job as attendant and bowler at the White Conduit Club in Islington.
In 1786 Lord was approached by several members of the club, most notably George Finch-Hatton, later ninth Earl of Winchilsea, and Charles Lennox, later fourth Duke of Richmond [qq.v.], who suggested that he should find a new ground for them, because they wanted the privacy of an enclosed ground near the centre of London.
They guaranteed to indemnify him against any financial loss.
Lord acted on this suggestion, and took out a lease on a seven-acre field on the Portman estate in Marylebone, later Dorset Square.
The venture was immediately successful.
On 31 May and 1 June 1787 Middlesex beat Essex on Lord's new ground in Dorset Fields.
By the end of the 1787 season the White Conduit Club had merged with the new Marylebone Cricket Club.
As early as 1788 the Marylebone Cricket Club revised the laws of the game, thus taking over the role of the celebrated Hambledon Club.
When the lease ended in 1810, Lord transferred his ground to North Bank, Regent's Park, in order to avoid a greatly increased rent bill, and the MCC moved there in 1811.
This venture was short-lived, as the Regent's canal was cut right through the middle of the pitch.
In 1814 Lord moved again, to another site in St John's Wood.
The first function to take place in the new headquarters of cricket was a reception for the bishop of London, who had just consecrated the adjacent St John's Wood church.
Lord's connection with his ground ceased rather abruptly in 1825.
He informed the MCC that he was going to build several houses on the ground, leaving only 150 square yards for cricket.
A member of the MCC, William Ward MP [q.v.], bought the ground for £5,000 and saved Lord's from such a fate.
Lord himself was a capable but not an outstanding player.
He generally fielded at point and his underhand bowling was formidable.
Possibly his best batting performance was scoring 56 for Middlesex against the MCC at Lord's in 1790.
Lord did not confine his ventures to cricket.
He ran a successful wine business in Marylebone, supplying wine to the royal family, and was a property speculator, buying and selling leases and properties.
In 1807 he was made a member of the Marylebone Vestry.
He was a handsome man, standing five feet nine inches and weighing twelve stone.
He possessed a charming personality which enabled him to deal easily with all members of the club.
In 1793 he married Amelia Smith, née Angell.
She came from a well-known north London family, and was the widow of a proctor.
They had one son.
Lord died at West Meon in Hampshire 13 January 1832 and was buried there.
[MCC archives, Lord's, London; Lord Harris and F. S. Ashley-Cooper,Lord's and the M.C.C., 1914; Sir Pelham Warner,Lord's 1787–1845 , 1946; Tony Lewis,Double Century, the Story of M.C.C. and Cricket , 1987; private information.]
Paul Slack
,Margaret , Lady (1571–1633), diarist, was baptized 10 February 1571, the only child of Arthur Dakins, gentleman and JP of Linton in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and his wife Thomasine Gye.
She was educated in the household of Henry Hastings, third Earl of Huntingdon [q.v.], president of the council in the north, and she learned there the Puritan habits of self-examination and regular religious exercises which she later practised in her own household.
As an heiress she was a valuable commodity in the Elizabethan marriage market, and she was married three times, to well-connected younger sons approved by the Hastings family.
In 1588 or 1589 she married Walter, son of Walter Devereux, first Earl of Essex [q.v.], the Irish adventurer.
The younger Walter was the brother of Robert, second Earl of Essex [q.v.], and stepson of the Countess of Huntingdon's brother, Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester [q.v.].
The manor and parsonage of Hackness in the North Riding were purchased for the couple, and remained Margaret's property after the death of Devereux at the siege of Rouen in 1591.
Before the end of the year she had been married again, to Thomas Sidney, brother of Sir Philip Sidney, the poet [q.v.], and nephew of the Countess of Huntingdon.
When Sidney died in 1595, Margaret agreed to Huntingdon's deathbed request that she marry another suitor of 1591, Sir Thomas Posthumous Hoby, second son of Sir Thomas Hoby [q.v.], of Bisham, Berkshire, and his wife Elizabeth [q.v.], one of the learned daughters of Sir Anthony Cooke [q.v.].
They were married 9 August 1596 and lived at Hackness, where Hoby established a political powerbase (he was JP and MP) and a reputation as a humourless Puritan and cantankerous opponent of rival, especially Catholic, gentry.
Margaret Hoby's diary — the earliest known by an Englishwoman — is notable for its depiction of the domestic disciplines of Elizabethan Puritanism.
Written between 1599 and 1605, it describes the religious exercises and prayers for the whole household as well as the private prayers and readings which occupied a large part of each day, and in which Lady Hoby was guided by her chaplain, Richard Rhodes.
The diary also shows other aspects of the household routine of a gentlewoman: managing the estate in her husband's frequent absences, supervising and paying servants, sorting linen, playing music, gardening, giving medical advice and treatment to neighbours and tenants.
It tells us little about the writer's private feelings.
It is a document written as a pious exercise, and its discipline and restraint spring from that.
References to Sir Thomas Hoby are, perhaps deceptively, formal, though Margaret was strong-minded enough to resist until 1632 his request that she make over her Hackness and other properties to him and his heirs.
She had no children herself.
Puritanism, the household, and property dominate the diary, as perhaps her whole life.
She died in 1633 and was buried 6 September in the chancel of Hackness church, where her husband erected an alabaster monument to her.
It still survives (1990), but St Margaret's chapel in Harwood Dale, which Hoby also built to her memory, is in ruins.
[Dorothy M. Meads (ed.),
Diary of Lady Margaret Hoby 1599–1605 , 1930; Claire Cross,The Puritan Earl , 1966; J. T. Cliffe,The Yorkshire Gentry, from the Reformation to the Civil War , 1969.]
D R Hainsworth
, Sir John , second baronet (1643–1706), parliamentarian and pioneer industrialist, was born in Whitehaven–St Bees in 1643 (he was baptized 20 November 1643), the son (there was also a daughter) of Sir Christopher Lowther and his wife Frances, heiress of the Lancasters of Sockbridge, Westmorland.
His grandfather was Sir John Lowther of Lowther [q.v.].
Orphaned in infancy, Lowther, together with his surviving sister, Frances, was in the guardianship of trustees, two of whom, his grandmother, Dame Eleanor Lowther, and his uncle, Sir William Lowther, were probably responsible for his upbringing.
He was educated at a school in Ilkley and at Balliol College, Oxford.
He married in March 1659 Jane (died 1678), daughter of Woolley and Elizabeth Leigh, and his uncle's stepdaughter, for Sir John Lowther of Lowther had married Jane's mother in 1651.
First establishing himself at Sockbridge Hall, Lowther moved to London permanently in 1663.
In 1665 a contested by-election began a long parliamentary career, Lowther representing Cumberland thereafter in every Parliament until illness compelled his retirement in 1699.
Lowther was a confirmed Londoner and absentee landlord who took a keen interest in the detailed affairs of his estate.
Making all decisions and directing all developments through his estate and colliery stewards, Lowther vigorously expanded his collieries, selling their produce to ships freighting to Dublin, and planned and developed the port town of Whitehaven, the first planned town built in England after the middle ages.
Lowther encouraged the building of a church and a Nonconformist chapel, built a mathematical school to encourage navigation, enlarged the pier, and invested in trading voyages to Virginia and the Baltic.
However, his relations with his tenants were never happy, because while Lowther believed his town and harbour should be developed largely at the expense of the inhabitants, with modest financial encouragement from himself, he could never bring himself to make those concessions of self-government which might have persuaded his tenants to co-operate.
His long struggle to prevent the development of a rival port in neighbouring Parton was finally lost in the last months of Lowther's life.
Lowther was an active parliamentarian, serving on 141 committees during his first decade, during which he was a reliable supporter of the government and received a grant of lands between the tides at St Bees–Whitehaven from Charles II which proved of considerable importance in his local battles.
However, by 1675 he was turning against the government although he voted against Exclusion in 1679.
He welcomed the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and William III appointed him a commissioner of the Admiralty, a responsibility he took very seriously, effectively using Whitehaven for gathering intelligence during the Irish war of 1689–90.
However, during the 1680s and 1690s it is difficult to distinguish his parliamentary activities from those of his younger but politically more significant cousin, Sir John Lowther of Lowther, first Viscount Lonsdale [q.v.],
William III's first lord of the Treasury and leader of the Commons.
In 1696 Lowther of Lowther, tired of contesting elections, employed his cousin to seek a viscountcy for him from the king.
A man of broad cultural interests, as his library and collection of pictures attest, Lowther was an active member of the Royal Society, serving on committees with Samuel Pepys, Sir Christopher Wren, and Sir Isaac Newton [q.v.].
Illness permanently trapped him in Whitehaven on a rare visit in 1698.
(For most of his adult life he suffered in wrists and legs a condition diagnosed as ‘gout’ but which may have been rheumatoid arthritis.)
He died in January 1706 (he was buried on the 17th), having disinherited his heir, Christopher, third baronet, who was a compulsive drinker and gambler, in favour of his younger son James (1673–1755, q.v.) who, building on his father's industrial foundations, came to be reputed the richest commoner in England.
James never married, and as Christopher and Lowther's only daughter Jane left no offspring the Whitehaven dynasty died with James in 1755.
[Cumbria County Record Office, Lowther of Whitehaven archives; D. R. Hainsworth (ed.),
Commercial Papers of Sir Christopher Lowther 1611–1644 , Surtees Society, vol. clxxxix, 1977;The Correspondence of Sir John Lowther of Whitehaven 1693–1698 , 1983; J. V. Beckett,Coal and Tobacco , 1981; Hugh Owen,The Lowther Family , 1990; B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983.]
Robin Bidwell
,George Forster (1789–1859), the first European to cross Arabia from coast to coast, was born 19 January 1789 in Cork, the younger son of James Sadleir, cotton manufacturer, and his wife Joanna, daughter of George Forster of Cork.
In April 1805 he was gazetted ensign in the 47th Regiment of Foot, being promoted lieutenant in 1806 and captain in 1813.
In 1807 he was in the expedition that failed to take Buenos Aires and subsequently went with his battalion to India.
Towards the end of 1812 Sadleir commanded a party sent to Tabriz to join a military mission engaged in training the Persian army.
His services were recognized both by the shah, who presented him with a sword, and by the governor-general, Lord Hastings (Francis Rawden, later first Marquis of Hastings, q.v.).
After leaving Persia in 1815 Sadleir took part in campaigns in India on the political staff of Sir John Malcolm [q.v.].
In the early nineteenth century the followers of Shaykh Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab troubled the British by their preying upon commerce in the Persian Gulf and raids off the Indian coast.
In August 1818 Ibrahim, son of Muhammad Ali Pasha, viceroy of Egypt, captured the Saudi capital of Dara'iyyah.
Lord Hastings determined to send an envoy to Ibrahim to propose an alliance, together with Muscat, to destroy the Qawasim pirates.
He was also to present a letter of congratulations and a sword and gather military and geographical information.
Sadleir was chosen, received formal instructions on 14 April 1819, and sailed at once from Bombay.
The first part of his mission was a failure because Sa'id ibn Sultan, imam of Muscat, although receiving him affably, was unwilling to co-operate with the Egyptians.
Sadleir arrived at Qatif on 21 June at a time when no European had been more than a few miles inland and no maps existed of the interior.
He went inland to Hufuf, where he was informed that Ibrahim was near Dara'iyyah, and decided to join a convoy that was going to his camp.
He arrived to find that Ibrahim had recently departed and was at Rass, another ten days away in the very centre of the peninsula.
At Rass he heard that Ibrahim was evacuating all but the Hijaz and had withdrawn to Medina.
Sadleir felt that he had done enough and wished to return to the coast.
The Egyptian commander, however, said that the journey would need a large escort which he could not provide, so Sadleir had no choice but to continue.
Near Medina he at last found Ibrahim, who declined to discuss politics.
Sadleir then went down to the Red Sea coast at Yenbu, which he reached on 20 September.
There was no other crossing of the peninsula until 1914, when Captain W. H. I. Shakespear travelled from Kuwait to Aqaba.
Sadleir's diary, published in 1866, describes a critical period of history for which there are no other accounts in European languages and few in Arabic.
It is a valuable geographical document noting wells, compass readings, and periods on the march.
In 1904 D. G. Hogarth wrote that it was still the only source for many places.
Sadleir is unique amongst Arabian explorers, for his journey was involuntary and he loathed both the place and its ‘turbulent barbarians’.
He resolutely refused to conform to local customs and made not the slightest effort to understand the people.
He showed himself stubborn, resilient, conscientious, brave, and not devoid of humour.
Sadleir continued to serve in India, took part in the Burma war, and returned to England in 1828.
He retired as a major in 1837 and became a sheriff of Cork in the same year.
He married a Miss Ridings of Cork in 1847 or 1848 and then emigrated to New Zealand, where he died in Auckland 2 December 1859.
[G. Forster Sadleir,Diary of a Journey Across Arabia , 1866 (reprinted 1977 with introduction by F. M. Edwards).]
Eric Midwinter
,Stan (1890–1965), comic, was born Arthur Stanley Jefferson at his grandfather's house in Ulverston, Lancashire, 16 June 1890, the second son in the family of four sons and one daughter of Arthur Jefferson, known as ‘A.J.’, of Bishop Auckland, theatre manager, and his wife Margaret (‘Madge’) Metcalfe, actress, of Ulverston.
He attended schools in Bishop Auckland, Gainford, and Glasgow, after which his family connections helped him to gain entry to the music-hall, as a ‘boy’ comedian.
It was while touring the United States with Fred Karno [q.v.]in 1912 that he tried his luck on American vaudeville, principally in a duo with his common-law wife, Mae Dahlberg, who suggested his stage name, Laurel, although he did not adopt it legally until 1934.
In 1916 he saw the opportunities for music-hall pantomimists in the silent movies, and sought a mixed fortune in films and the stage.
He lived in the USA from this period.
He became acquainted with Oliver ‘Babe’ Hardy in the early 1920s, but it was 1927, under the auspices of the Hal Roach studio, before they were first paired with any success.
From that point they were to make over a hundred films together, some thirty of them silent ones, and with their best work probably deriving from the phase 1929–35, when they were engaged in creating coherent and sparse twenty-minute cameos.
The Laurel and Hardy set piece was the ordinary situation from which sprang a coiling spiral of disaster.
Nervy, flustered, even tearful, Stan Laurel, ‘the thin one’, exacerbated these accumulating troubles, to the growing chagrin of ‘the fat one’, the ever-earnest Oliver Hardy.
Laurel, in effect, made two contributions to the partnership: as Hardy was quick to concede, Laurel was the creator and rigorous controller of their comedy, as well as a member of what was widely recognized as the best comic double act of its time.
An important reason for this was their eschewal of the conventional ‘straight’ man, two-dimensional and irritable.
Each developed a detailed and complete persona of his own.
The endearing bathos and crassness of Laurel found an admirable foil in the elephantine smugness of his rotund partner.
Laurel's marital toils were convoluted and confusingly reported.
The nearest to an exact listing would be to record that he was married to Lois Neilsen in 1926; to Virginia Ruth Rogers in 1935 (after a possibly illegal ceremony in Mexico the previous year); to Illeana Shuvalova in 1938; to Ruth Rogers again in 1941; and to Ida Kitaeva Raphael, who survived him, in 1946.
His only children were a daughter, Lois, who survived him, and a son, Stanley Robert, who lived but a few days: both were by his first wife.
He died 23 February 1965 in Santa Monica, Hollywood, USA.
[Laurel and Hardy Museum, Ulverston; F. L. Guiles,Stan , 1980.]
Elizabeth Longford
, Sir John Ponsonby , first baronet (1786–1854), courtier, was born 21 October 1786 in Caehrun, Caernarfonshire, the eldest in the family of five sons and one daughter of John Ponsonby Conroy, barrister, and his wife Margaret Wilson, who were both Irish-born.
Commissioned in the Royal Artillery in 1803, he became equerry to the Duke of Kent when Edward married Princess Victoire of Leiningen in 1818 to ensure the succession, Princess (later Queen) Victoria being born in 1819.
Conroy was an organizer of genius.
He made it possible for the duke and his eight-months pregnant duchess to rush back from Germany to Kensington Palace for the birth, putting up the royal cavalcade at his home in Shooter's Hill on the way.
When the duke died suddenly in 1820, Conroy became comptroller of the Duchess of Kent's household.
In 1822 he retired from the army as captain on half pay.
At first Conroy shared his influence on the duchess with her brother, Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, but after Leopold ascended the Belgian throne in 1830, Conroy ruled supreme.
He survived the ‘Cumberland plot’ in 1829, when a rumour said to have been started by Ernest, Duke of Cumberland [q.v.], circulated, saying that the Duchess of Kent was Conroy's mistress.
This was intended to discredit the duchess and have Princess Victoria removed from her care, and even, Conroy feared, killed.
William IV angrily called him ‘King John’.
He established the ‘Kensington system’, by which Victoria should be suitably educated as heir presumptive to the Crown, her mother should be created regent if the king died before Victoria was eighteen, Conroy should be appointed Victoria's private secretary with a peerage, and a rival court should develop at Kensington, cut off from William IV's Tory politics and morals.
Victoria had no youthful companionship except Conroy's daughters and no personal champion but her German governess, Baroness Lehzen [q.v.],
Conroy's implacable foe.
In order to make Victoria known to the people, Conroy would run her around the country on semi-royal tours, after the last of which, in 1835, she succumbed to typhoid.
While still on her sick-bed, Conroy tried to force her to appoint him as her personal secretary when she became queen.
Afterwards she told Lord Melbourne: ‘I resisted in spite of my illness.’
As William IV lay dying, Conroy's final desperate attempt to coerce Victoria failed.
Succeeding to the throne on 20 June 1837, she dismissed him from her household.
But he continued to serve her mother, being partly responsible for the tragedy of the duchess's lady-in-waiting, Lady Flora Hastings [q.v.], who died of a tumour while suspected of being pregnant by Conroy.
The duchess, too, was reported to be Conroy's mistress, though without evidence.
However, he cannot be absolved of mismanaging her funds and those of Princess Sophia, Victoria's aunt and Conroy's ‘spy’, from whom he also received gifts.
In 1839 Wellington persuaded him to resign from the Duchess of Kent's household and go abroad for a time.
He had a Guelphic knighthood, an honorary DCL from Oxford, and foreign honours.
He was created baronet in 1837, but Sir Robert Peel refused him the Irish peerage promised him by Melbourne.
‘JC’ was not the arch-villain Victoria painted, but the victim of his own inordinate ambition.
In 1808 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Major-General Benjamin Fisher and niece of Dr John Fisher, bishop of Salisbury [q.v.], who had tutored Prince Edward, Duke of Kent.
They had four sons, one of whom died young, and two daughters.
Conroy believed his wife to be the Duke of Kent's natural child.
This fantasy may have accounted for the arrogance of Conroy towards Queen Victoria.
He died at Arborfield Hall, Berkshire, 2 March 1854.
He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, Edward (born 1809).
[Conroy papers in Balliol College, Oxford; Elizabeth Longford,Victoria R.I. , 1964; ‘All Sir John's Invention’, MS life of Conroy, 1990, by Katherine Hudson (in her possession).]
Janet E Grenier
,Evelyn (1869–1955), writer and campaigner for women's suffrage and for peace, was born in London 4 August 1869, the ninth child and third daughter of the ten children (one of whom died in infancy) of (John) James Sharp, slate merchant of London, and his wife Jane, daughter of Joseph Bloyd, lead merchant of London.
Evelyn was the younger sister of Cecil James Sharp (1859–1924, q.v.), musician and collector of folk-songs.
She was educated at home until the age of twelve, when she became a day-boarder at Strathallan House, London, until the age of sixteen.
She left home to earn her own living, by teaching and writing, in 1894.
In 1895 she published a novel,At the Relton Arms , and a short story in the Yellow Book , the staff of which she then joined.
She became friendly with many of the young intellectuals of the day, and her lifelong devotion to Henry Wood Nevinson (1856–1941, q.v.), writer, war correspondent, and suffrage campaigner, dates from this period.
She became a prolific writer: her output included articles, novels, short stories, and children's books.
In 1906 she joined the militant Women's Social and Political Union, and became editor of Votes for Women in 1912.
She was twice imprisoned in Holloway, and went on hunger strike.
She refused to call a truce during the war of 1914–18, and her refusal to pay income tax resulted in her belongings being seized by the bailiff in 1917.
A pacifist, she did relief work under the Quakers in Germany after the war, on leave from the Daily Herald .
In 1921 she went to Ireland to undertake her own enquiries into the ‘excesses’ of the Black and Tans.
She supported the Russian revolution, and travelled twice to the famine regions in Russia (1922–3), sending back articles to the Manchester Guardian .
She went to Germany to write a series of articles for the Daily Herald in 1923.
Her concern with poverty, especially as it affected children, led to her writing The London Child (1927) and The Child Grows Up (1929), studies of working-class life.
The African Child (1931) was an account of an international conference on African children which she attended in Geneva.
She joined the Labour party in 1918 and was asked to stand for Parliament; she refused, feeling that she could accomplish more through journalism.
She wrote a play,The Loafer (1926), to be performed by amateur actors within the Labour movement.
Here We Go Round (1928) followed her involvement in the folk-dance movement.
She wrote the libretto for The Poisoned Kiss (1936), an opera by Ralph Vaughan Williams [q.v.].
The death of Nevinson's first wife, Margaret Wynne (née Jones), allowed Evelyn Sharp to marry him in 1933.
He was the son of George Nevinson, solicitor, and his wife Mary Basil Woodd.
After he died in 1941, she edited a book of his essays and poems,Visions and Memories (1944).
Evelyn Sharp wrote with skill, humour, and sympathy, getting across her point without preaching.
She seemed able to find interest in any topic, a gift which led to her becoming the first regular columnist for the Manchester Guardian 's women's page.
She was a fellow of the Royal Society of Literature.
She died in London, 17 June 1955.
She had no children.
[The Times , 21 June 1955;Manchester Guardian , 20 June 1955; E. Sharp,Unfinished Adventure , 1933; Mary Stott (ed.),
Women Talking: an Anthology from the Guardian Women's Page , 1957.]
Marilyn L Brooks
,Mary (1760–1843), author, was born in 1760 in Southwark into a family of Rational Dissenters which included an older brother.
As a very young woman she cherished ‘exquisite sensibility’ and exhibited ‘a restless melancholy’.
In 1778, while living with her recently widowed mother and two unmarried sisters at Gainsford Street, Southwark, she began a correspondence with John Eccles, and after much opposition from both families, it was agreed that the two could marry.
Eccles died weeks before the ceremony, however, and she never recovered from the ‘irrevocable blow’.
She sought solace in her religion under the tutelage of Robert Robinson [q.v.], and attended the newly established dissenting academy at Hackney.
The attack by Gilbert Wakefield [q.v.]there on public worship roused her to its defence in Cursory Remarks on an Enquiry into the Expediency and Propriety of Public Worship (1792), using the pseudonym ‘Eusebia’.
The pamphlet was widely acclaimed and a second edition produced.
Its success precipitated her acceptance into the radical circle surrounding the publisher Joseph Johnson [q.v.], which included William Blake, Thomas Paine, and William Godwin [qq.v.].
The following year she published Letters and Essays, Moral and Miscellaneous .
She wrote articles for the Monthly Magazine during 1796 and 1797, joining in debates about the female intellect and, under the influence of Claude-Adrien Helvétius, insisting on the recognition of environmental and educational influences.
She felt that this sensationalism legitimated the passions within rational philosophy.
During 1795–6 she engaged in a one-sided correspondence with the radical William Godwin, who had taken over the role vacated by Eccles.
Her initial encouragement led to his marriage to her friend Mary Wollstonecraft [q.v.].
She had also met and won approval from leading Dissenters such as George Dyer, Joseph Priestley, John Disney, and William Frend [qq.v.].
At his instigation, she formed a close but unresolved relationship with Frend, which formed the substance of her scandalous first novel Memoirs of Emma Courtney (1796).
It is unapologetically autobiographical and her frankness about her fictionalized feelings for Frend won her notoriety, despite the preface's insistence that it was ‘calculated to operate as a warning , rather than as an example’.
Her second novel The Victim of Prejudice was published in 1799 and delineates ‘the mischiefs that have ensued from the too great stress laid on the reputation for chastity in women’.
She continued to write, including books for children and an acclaimed Female Biography: or Memoirs of Illustrious and Celebrated Women of All Ages and Countries (6 vols., 1802).
Her forthright depictions of female passion made her a target for satire, most notably as Bridgetina Botherim in Memoirs of Modern Philosophers (1800–1) by Elizabeth Hamilton [q.v.], and as Lady Gertrude Sinclair in Edmund Oliver (1798) by Charles Lloyd [q.v.].
She never married and died 20 February 1843 in Camberwell.
Despite her wish to become accepted within rational circles she insisted on the acceptance of ‘the affections’ and may have been instrumental in Godwin's revisions of his writings.
Her ‘exquisite misery’ and longevity were ironic comments on her search for happiness and frequent wishes to be dead.
[J. O. Baylen and N. J. Gossman (eds.),
Biographical Dictionary of Modern British Radicals , vol. i, 1979; Hays and Godwin correspondence, Pforzheimer Library, New York; A. F. Wedd (ed.),
The Love-Letters of Mary Hays , 1925.]
Richard Greene
,William (1685–1717), poet, was born in 1685 in Bridgwater, Somerset, the son of Joseph Diaper.
Nothing is known of his family or early life.
In his poetry he describes himself as ‘one bred up in homely Cott’.
He matriculated on 3 April 1699 at Oxford where he studied at Balliol College as ‘pauper puer’.
He took his BA in 1702, and remained as a scholar until 1705.
His name reappears in the college books in 1710 as a BA commoner.
Diaper was ordained deacon in Wells on 19 June 1709, and served subsequently as curate in Brent in the same diocese.
This appointment may not have been entirely happy.
His stark but also amusing topographical poem ‘Brent’ describes the place as ‘nature's gaol’, where winter flooding leaves its inhabitants isolated with scant food and ‘unwholesome ale’.
Diaper may have taken another cure in Crick, Northamptonshire, and by March 1713–14 was serving in Dean, near Basingstoke.
As a poet, he made his mark first in 1712 with the publication of Nereides: Or, Sea-Eclogues, Callipædia and Dryades .
He came to the attention of Jonathan Swift [q.v.], who wrote: ‘I have contrivd to make a Parson of him; for he is half a one already, being in Deacon's Orders, and serves a small Cure in the Country, but has a sword at his A[rse] here in Town.
Tis a poor little short Wretch, but will do best in a Gown.’
Swift introduced Diaper to his circle where he was taken up by Henry St John, first Viscount Bolingbroke, and Sir William Wyndham [qq.v.].
On 13 February 1713 Swift speaks of him ‘in a nasty Garret, very sick’.
On this occasion Swift brought him a gift of £20 from Bolingbroke.
Swift was soon appointed dean of St Patrick's in Dublin, though he assured Diaper: ‘I will move Heaven and Earth that something may be done for you.’
In the same letter he advised Diaper to control his extravagant similes, and write more like a mortal man.
Swift could do little, however, to relieve Diaper's poverty, and following the death of Queen Anne, his other patrons were deprived of influence.
Diaper published An Imitation of the Seventeenth Epistle of the First Book of Horace in 1714, and addressed the poem to Swift.
His last literary project was a verse translation of Oppian's Halieuticks , of which he completed two books, published posthumously (1722).
Diaper's best poetry is contained in Nereides and the translation of Oppian, where his descriptions of the ocean and of aquatic life are startling and individual.
There is an unconfirmed suggestion that Diaper was ordained priest in 1715.
By May 1716, however, he was again ill.
He died sometime in 1717, though neither the date nor location is recorded.
[Bodleian Library, Rawl.
MS J 4°, fol. 405; Geoffrey Grigson, ‘William Diaper, an Unknown Poet’, in The Harp of Aeolus , 1948;The Complete Works of William Diaper , ed. and with introduction by Dorothy Broughton, 1952; Jonathan Swift,Journal to Stella , ed.
Harold Williams, vol. i, 1948, p. 586; Harold Williams (ed.),
The Correspondence of Jonathan Swift , vol. i, 1963, pp. 345–6.]
D M Lang
,Anne (1791–1840), traveller and diarist, was born in Welton, South Cave, Yorkshire, 3 April 1791, the elder daughter of Captain Jeremy Lister of Shibden Hall, Halifax, and his wife Rebecca Battle of North Cave, Yorkshire.
Captain Lister had fought in the American war of independence and been wounded in 1775 at the battle of Lexington.
Anne had four brothers, three of whom died young, and when the youngest brother Jeremy died in 1813 she inherited Shibden Hall (now a folk museum), Halifax, and went to live there in 1815 with her aunt and uncle.
It would appear from a portrait at Shibden Hall that as a young woman she was very attractive.
She was also highly intelligent and managed the Shibden Hall estate efficiently, developing the farms and coalmines that formed part of it.
During the late 1820s and the 1830s Anne Lister travelled widely in Europe.
She spent three years in Paris studying biology under Baron Georges Cuvier, and then went on to Switzerland, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, and Spain.
In those countries she visited not only ancient monuments and museums but also factories, prisons, and orphanages, in which she took a keen interest.
She was also interested in methods of agriculture and horticulture and in France, Belgium, and Sweden explored coal, iron, and silver mines.
Throughout her adventurous journeys she kept careful notes of her experiences, from which it is clear that, although she often stayed in grand hotels and the mansions of her friends, she was also prepared to sleep in monasteries, roadside inns, and, if necessary, peasants' cottages or even in her own carriage.
In 1839–40, together with her friend, Anne Walker of Lightcliffe, she made a grand tour of Russia, including the Caucasus and Persia (Iran), climbing Mount Ararat en route .
After an eventful passage down the frozen Volga river she arrived in Georgia at Tiflis (Tbilisi) in April 1840.
She went on to Baku, where she recorded in her journal information about the young naphtha/oil industry and described the Zoroastrian fire temple and the Maiden's Tower.
She travelled on to western Georgia and reached the Black Sea, but there her journeys ended as she suffered an infection from the bite of a tick which resulted in her death in Kutaisi, the west Georgian capital, 22 September 1840.
In an obituary in the Halifax Guardian of 31 October 1840, she was compared with Lady Mary Wortley Montagu and Lady Hester Stanhope [qq.v.].
Anne Lister's journal and diaries are a valuable source of information about social life and conditions in Yorkshire at the time of the Industrial Revolution and also about social and economic conditions in Russia and many other parts of Europe.
She never married, but her diaries reveal that she was involved in numerous lesbian affairs.
[Phyllis M. Ramsden, ‘Anne Lister's Journal, 1817–1840’,Transactions of the Halifax Antiquarian Society , 6 January 1970; Helena Whitbread (ed.),
I Know My Own Heart: the Diaries of Anne Lister 1791–1840 , 1988.]
Eric Midwinter
,Kenneth (1911–1941), cricketer, was born at 141 Wallwood Road, Leytonstone, Essex, 8 July 1911, the younger son (there were no daughters) of Sydney Heath Farnes, brewer's clerk, and his wife Florence Susanna Georgiana Shipston, both of Leytonstone.
He was educated at the Royal Liberty School, Romford, and, after a brief sojourn in banking, at Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he won cricket blues in 1931, 1932, and 1933.
He obtained a third class in part i of the geography tripos in 1932 and a second class in part ii of the history tripos the following year.
Thereafter he was a schoolmaster at Worksop College, but was best known as a fast bowler for Essex and England.
He made his début for Essex in 1930 and during the 1930s was regarded as the most effective amateur bowler in English first-class cricket.
He first played for England in 1934, when he had match figures of 10 for 179 against Australia.
Altogether he won fifteen caps for England, and, in the 1938 series against Australia, he took the most wickets, 17 at a cost of 34.17 each.
An unpretentious batsman and an excellent field near the wicket, his towering height — he was 6 ft. 5 ins. tall, and delivered the ball, it was claimed, from a height of eight feet — enabled him both to bowl effortlessly off a short run and to produce stinging lift off a good length.
In all first-class cricket, including several fiery outings for the Gentlemen versus the Players, he took 720 wickets at an average of 20.55 each.
Of these victims 367 were claimed in Farnes's games for Essex, for whom he once performed the hat trick — against Nottinghamshire in 1939 — and for whom his best performance was 15 for 113 against Glamorgan in 1938.
Unmarried, he was interested in painting and music, and his cricketing memoir,Tours and Tests , was published in 1940.
With the coming of war, he became a pilot officer in the RAF, and, after training in Canada, he aimed to specialize in night-flying.
He was killed during the night of 20 October 1941, when the Wellington bomber he was piloting crashed in Chipping Warden, Northamptonshire.
He was buried at the Brook military cemetery, Woking.
[Wisden Cricketers' Almanack s; private information.]
A V Simcock
,John (1679–1729), museum curator and experimental philosopher, was born in Kirkham, Lancashire, and baptized 2 November 1679, the son of George Whiteside, glazier, of Kirkham, and his wife Margaret.
He entered Brasenose College, Oxford, on 16 May 1696, graduating BA in 1700 and MA in 1704.
He took holy orders, and was subsequently chaplain of Christ Church, Oxford (from 1713), and absentee vicar of King's Walden, Hertfordshire.
On 14 December 1714 Whiteside was elected keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.
His dedication to his duties, and his cultivation of friends and benefactors, helped to consolidate the museum's reputation, both antiquarian and scientific.
He restored its administrative and accounting system and revived (though not thoroughly) the documentation of its collections, all of which his predecessor had neglected.
He took special interest in the numismatic collection, rehung the museum's pictures, and made the library more useful and accessible to scholars.
In the museum's lecture room about 1715 he began to hold courses of experimental philosophy (physics), similar to those recently pioneered by John Keill in Oxford and William Whiston in London [qq.v.].
For this purpose he built up at his own expense a large collection of apparatus, which by 1723 he valued at £400.
In that year he extended his syllabus by adding architecture, magnetics, and astronomy to the standard topics of mechanics, hydrostatics, pneumatics, and optics.
He was a keen astronomer, and two of his observations were communicated to the Royal Society by Edmund Halley [q.v.].
On at least one occasion, in 1720, he also taught a chemistry course.
He was elected FRS on 3 July 1718.
In 1721 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of astronomy at Oxford.
Whiteside was highly esteemed as an experimental philosopher; his courses had considerable influence, and were continued after his death by James Bradley [q.v.].
He was thus the founder of physics teaching in Oxford University.
Whiteside moderated his obvious industriousness with a love of convivial drinking, gossip, and good humour.
From 1715 he was an intimate friend of the diarist Thomas Hearne [q.v.], who recorded various insights into his character.
He never married, notwithstanding his ‘great Affection’ for Deborah Wrench.
He died in Oxford 22 October 1729, as a result of gangrene following a fall from his horse while visiting his Hertfordshire parish, although he blamed his illness on ‘drinking a pretty deal of bad small beer’.
He was buried in Christ Church Cathedral.
[C. E. Doble and others (eds.),
Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne , vols. v–x, 1901–15; R. F. Ovenell,The Ashmolean Museum 1683–1894 , 1986; archival sources including Ashmolean Museum archives in Ashmolean Library; MS Ashmole 1820a and MS Bradley 48 in Bodleian Library, Oxford; various editions of Whiteside's syllabus in Bodleian Library and Museum of the History of Science, Oxford.]
J V Beckett
,John Christian (1756–1828), agriculturist and parliamentarian, was born 12 July 1756 at Ewanrigg, Dearham, Cumberland, the eldest to survive infancy of the sons of John Christian of Ewanrigg and his wife Jane, eldest daughter of Eldred Curwen of Workington Hall.
He assumed the surname Curwen by royal licence, 1 March 1790.
He was educated at Eton and Peterhouse, Cambridge; he left the university without a degree.
A Whig in politics, Curwen was returned to the House of Commons for Carlisle in 1786, and held the seat until 1812, and again in 1816–20.
He represented Cumberland from 1820 until his death.
He was an active parliamentarian who supported Catholic emancipation, parliamentary reform, and the repeal of the corn laws.
To emphasize his concern for his constituents he once appeared in the House of Commons dressed like a Cumberland labourer and carrying a loaf and a cheese under his arms.
In 1796 he made an ineffectual bid to reform and virtually abolish the game laws.
Curwen's interest in agriculture probably dated from a long journey through Europe following the death of his first wife in 1778.
He was a friend of Arthur Young [q.v.]and knew the leaders of progressive agricultural opinion in Scotland.
In Cumberland he embarked on an improvement programme on his estates.
In 1805 he inaugurated the Workington agricultural society, which had a profound impact on local agriculture in the first half of the nineteenth century.
In 1807 he received the gold medal of the Society of Arts, Commerce, and Manufactures, for his agricultural innovations.
Many of his ideas were published in Hints on Agricultural Subjects (1809), and his views on Ireland, where he spent time between 1813 and 1816, in Observations on the State of Ireland, Principally Directed to its Agriculture and Rural Population (1818).
Part, at least, of his motive in studying agriculture was to improve the lot of the labouring poor.
To the latter end he was also responsible for establishing a savings bank at Workington, and for various friendly societies.
Curwen's estates lay on the west Cumberland coalfield, and he took a particular interest in the collieries inherited from his father and his second wife, as well as others which he purchased and leased in the area.
However, he was hit by the trade depression after the Napoleonic wars, and by the 1820s Workington colliery was in decline.
Increasing costs and declining profits forced him to borrow and from 1819 until 1827 Curwen owed more than £120,000.
Consequently he was not able to invest in improved mining techniques in the later years of his life.
Curwen married, on 10 September 1775, Margaret, daughter of John Taubman of Castletown, Isle of Man.
She died in 1778 leaving a son, also John Christian.
He married, secondly, on 5 October 1782 at Edinburgh, his cousin Isabella, daughter of his uncle and guardian Henry Curwen; they had five sons and three daughters.
He died at Workington Hall, 11 December 1828.
[Henry Lonsdale,The Worthies of Cumberland , vol. i, 1867; O. Wood,West Cumberland Coal 1600–1982/3 , 1988;Gentleman's Magazine , vol. i, 1829, pp. 178–9; R. G. Thorne (ed.),
The House of Commons 1790–1820 , vol. iii, 1986, pp. 548–53.]
John Bold
,Peter (1598–1670), bricklayer, surveyor, and architect, was baptized 12 February 1598, the son of John Mills, tailor, in East Dean, Sussex.
He was apprenticed in 1613 to John Williams, a London bricklayer.
From 1643 until c .1660, Mills was bricklayer to the City of London and from 1649 until 1660 was master of the Tylers' and Bricklayers' Company.
From 1644 he was a governor of St Bartholomew's Hospital, his landlord at the time of his death, and he played an active part in rebuilding its property.
His standing in the City at the Restoration was such that he was invited, with Sir Balthazar Gerbier [q.v.], to design the four triumphal arches erected for Charles II's coronation progress and to organize the celebrations on the Thames for Charles and Queen Catherine in 1662.
After the great fire, he was appointed as one of the supervisors of the rebuilding of the City, for which he produced a plan himself which does not survive, and, together with Robert Hooke [q.v.]and John Oliver (d .
1701, q.v.), he surveyed the destroyed areas and made directions for laying out the new streets.
Mills's activity as a surveyor and architect has been traced back to 1638, but his claim to architectural celebrity was his building in 1654–6 of Thorpe Hall, near Peterborough, for Oliver St John [q.v.],
Oliver Cromwell's lord chief justice.
He may also, four years later, have been responsible for the designing of the stylistically similar Wisbech Castle, now demolished, for St John's parliamentary colleague, the secretary of state John Thurloe [q.v.].
Thorpe, a building of considerable power, is one of the most important houses of the Interregnum.
Built in the hybrid style which has been dubbed ‘artisan mannerism’, the house is exuberantly detailed and entirely lacking in the Italianate sophistication of the court style of Inigo Jones [q.v.].
Its plan is both innovative, in being an early example of the three rooms deep triple-pile, and retardataire in retaining the off-centre hall, entered at one end.
By the time of his remodelling of the central block of Cobham Hall, Kent, in 1661–3, for the Royalist Charles Stuart, sixth Duke of Lennox and Richmond [q.v.],
Mills had modified his style to one more in keeping with the sober classicism of the court.
Among his works, Mills was responsible for building in London a handsome, pilastered terrace of houses in Great Queen Street,c .1640; houses in Holborn in 1641 and in Budge Row in 1668–9; and for extensive works at Christ's Hospital in 1667–8.
In his will (PCC 147 PENN), dated July 1670, Mills made bequests to his wife Elizabeth, his son Peter, and his nine grandchildren by his four daughters.
He also bequeathed ten shillings each to the governors of St Bartholomew's Hospital, in whose neighbouring church of St Bartholomew the Less he was buried 25 August 1670.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978;idem , ‘Peter Mills and Cobham Hall’, in H. M. Colvin and J. Harris (eds.),
The Country S eat , 1970; O. Hill and J. Cornforth,English Country Houses Caroline , 1966; J. Summerson,Architecture in Britain 1530–1830 , 1983.]
Asa Briggs
,David (1912–1970), historian, was born in Edinburgh 13 January 1912, the only son and elder child of Robert Thomson, printer, and his wife Isabella Barr.
Educated at Sir George Monoux Grammar School and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, he was to remain in the college for the rest of his life.
Deeply attached to it, he served it first as a scholar, obtaining first-class honours in both parts of the historical tripos (1933 and 1934); second, as research fellow (1938–45), receiving a Ph.D.
in 1938 for a thesis on eighteenth-century English political history; third, as a tutorial fellow (1945) who effectively combined a heavy teaching programme with research; fourth, as senior tutor (1946–53), a long period which greatly widened his experience; and, finally, as an outstanding master from 1957 until his death.
The college benefited greatly, not only from his gifts as an astute chairman of committees and as a calm and efficient administrator, but from the warmth of his personality.
Large in frame, he completely lacked fussiness.
Busy as he was with college duties and with exceptional writing obligations, many of them with journalistic deadlines, he was always accessible to undergraduates and to old members, particularly his ex-pupils.
He was university lecturer in history (1948–68) and reader in modern French history (1968–70).
It was from the vantage point of the Master's Lodge, a family place, that Thomson, cheerful and generous, made his most distinctive contribution to university affairs, although he had already been active since the 1930s in adult education, as both a part-time tutor and a committee member, and from 1950 to 1958 he had sat on the council of the senate.
From 1958 to 1960 he was chairman of the faculty board of history and from 1962 to his death he was chairman of the governors of the Cambridge Institute of Education.
He was also the first chairman of the colleges' committee set up after the 1962 report of the commission on the relationship between the colleges and university, chaired by the first Baron Bridges [q.v.].
Keenly interested in school education, Thomson was a strong believer in the species of grammar school which he himself had attended.
He also thoroughly enjoyed his duties as chairman of the governors of the Perse School.
He was suspicious of all educational innovations that did not seem to him to have been carefully thought through, and he was critical, too, of the report of the committee on higher education (1961–4) chaired by Baron Robbins [q.v.]and of large-scale university expansion.
According to his historian colleague and former pupil, Derek Beales, Thomson ‘saw no clear line between his historical and other activities’.
Given the range of the latter, his historical output was substantial, with his work in English history, best represented by England in the Nineteenth Century, 1815–1914 (1950), eclipsed in quality by his work on French history, which was attractively written and distinctive in approach and content: his several books on the subject included Democracy in France (1946), which ran into five editions before his death.
It was fitting, therefore, that when he became a reader in 1968 it was in modern French history.
Thomson also wrote Europe since Napoleon (1957) and a World History from 1914 to 1968 (1969, 1st edn. to 1950, 1954), while among the books that he edited was the controversial volume xii of the Cambridge Modern History .
The historian was at his best, he maintained, not as an analyst but as ‘a craftsman of synthesis, a weaver of other men's threads (and some of his own) into patterns which they had not foreseen or even suspected’; and he was forthright in claiming, at a time when it was not fashionable, that the contemporary historian was just as capable of such synthesis as historians of earlier centuries.
In 1943 Thomson married Margaret Gordon, daughter of James Dallas, schoolmaster.
She shared his interests, being as hospitable as he was.
They had two sons.
Thomson died in Cambridge 24 February 1970.
[Personal knowledge.]
John Wolffe
,Alexander (1800–1882), barrister and newspaper proprietor, was born in Edinburgh 15 October 1800, the second of three sons, one of whom died young, and fifth of nine children of James Alexander Haldane [q.v.], religious writer, and his first wife Mary, daughter of Major Alexander Joass of Culleonard, Banffshire.
His half-brother was the physician Daniel Rutherford Haldane [q.v.].
He was educated at Edinburgh High School and the University of Edinburgh before migrating to London, where he entered the Inner Temple in 1820.
Haldane's personal convictions and family connections caused him quickly to assume a prominent role on the more extreme wing of Anglican Evangelicalism.
He was associated with Edward Irving and Henry Drummond [qq.v.]and participated in the early prophetic conferences at Albury, but later distanced himself from the movement that was to result in the formation of the Catholic Apostolic Church.
In 1828 he began to write for the fledgling Record newspaper and subsequently became its chief proprietor and the dominant influence on editorial policy for half a century.
Under his leadership the Record was the major public voice of a new school of Evangelicals that emerged around 1830.
The ‘Recordites’, as they were called, followed Haldane in affirming the verbal inspiration of the Bible, attacking liberal theology and Catholicism, maintaining a rigorous sabbatarianism, and staunchly defending the Established Church.
Haldane further contributed to Evangelical self-awareness by writing the lives of his father and uncle, Robert Haldane [q.v.], describing their careers as itinerant evangelists.
Although never an MP, he was keenly interested in politics and was an active force in a variety of parliamentary and ecclesiastical networks.
He was a close friend and adviser of Anthony Ashley Cooper, seventh Earl of Shaftesbury [q.v.], and through him, between 1855 and 1865, influenced the church appointments made by the third Viscount Palmerston.
A vigorous and intellectually acute controversialist, Haldane worked with great energy to sustain the Protestant character of the English Church and nation and hence contributed substantially to the entrenched conservatism of Victorian Anglican Evangelicalism.
In 1822 Haldane married Emma Corsbie, youngest daughter of Joseph Hardcastle of Hatcham House, Surrey, a merchant and treasurer of the London Missionary Society.
She died in 1867.
They had one son, James Robert Alexander Chinnery-Haldane, later Episcopalian bishop of Argyll and the Isles, and five daughters.
Haldane died in London 19 July 1882 and was buried at Paddington cemetery.
[Alexander Haldane,Memoirs of the Lives of R. Haldane, of Airthrey, and of his Brother J. A. Haldane , 1852; anon.,A Biographical Sketch of Alexander Haldane…communicated to the ‘Record’ of July 28, 1882 ; J. A. L. Haldane,The Haldanes of Gleneagles , 1929; information from Dr I. S. Rennie.]
George E Dixon
,(Edward) Stanley (1840–1913), postage-stamp dealer, was born 21 June 1840 in Plymouth, the youngest child in the family of three sons and two daughters of William Gibbons, pharmaceutical chemist, and his wife Elizabeth Langridge of Portsea, Hampshire.
He left Hallorans' Collegiate Establishment, Plymouth, at the age of fifteen to become a junior clerk in the Naval Bank.
On the death of his eldest brother only a few weeks later, he was apprenticed to his father as a chemist.
Already interested in the new hobby of stamp-collecting, he started to trade in stamps in 1856 from a desk in his father's shop.
He began trading as E. S. Gibbons, then as E. Stanley Gibbons, and later as Stanley, Gibbons & Co.
A lucky deal in 1863 caused his business to take off: he bought two sacks of Cape of Good Hope triangular stamps for £5 from two sailors who had won them in a raffle in Cape Town.
He later claimed to have made £500 on the deal.
In November 1865 he issued a sixteen-page price-list and catalogue, the forerunner of Gibbons's catalogues.
On his father's death in 1867 he took over the business, and in the 1871 census he was described as ‘chemist and dealer in foreign stamps’.
He sold the chemist's business in 1872 and moved to new premises at Plymouth Hoe.
Here he published his first Gibbons ‘V.R.’ stamp album, followed by the ‘Improved’and illustrated ‘Imperial’albums.
In 1874 he moved to London, first to Clapham Common, and then in 1876 to 8 Gower Street.
He started a monthly magazine, the Philatelic Record , which was superseded by the Monthly Journal in 1890.
At the age of fifty, in 1890, he retired and sold his business to Charles J. Phillips of Birmingham for £25,000.
It became a private limited company, continuing as Stanley Gibbons Ltd., and he remained chairman until his death.
The firm first moved to the Strand in 1891.
In his retirement he travelled all over the world, visiting San Francisco, Egypt, Japan, Cochin, and the Hanoi exhibition, witnessing the crash of the Orient Express at Tirnova in Bulgaria in 1894.
Gibbons was married five times.
His first wife, whom he married in 1872, was Matilda Woon, daughter of a Congregational minister.
She died in 1877.
He married his second wife, Maggie A. Casey, daughter of a Twickenham publican, in 1887.
She died in 1899 and he married again, a woman called Georgina, who appears to have died in 1905.
His fourth wife, whom he married in 1905, was a widow, Mrs Bertha Barth of Chelsea, daughter of Edwin Boswith, a railway clerk.
She died during a visit to Ceylon in 1908.
His final marriage, in 1909, was to a widow, Mrs Sophia Crofts, of Kensington, daughter of a wine merchant.
Stanley Gibbons died 17 February 1913 in London.
He had no children.
[Charles J. Phillips, ‘Fifty Years of Philately — the History of Stanley Gibbons Ltd.’, in Gibbons Stamp Weekly , January–April 1906; John Holman in Gibbons Stamp Monthly , July–August 1990; catalogue of Gibbons Catalogue Centenary Exhibition, 1965; personal philatelic collection.]
Sybil Oldfield
,Edith Mary (1876–1965), midwife and international relief organizer, was born 20 October 1876 in London, the eldest daughter in the family of three daughters and four sons of William Arthur Pye, JP, wine merchant, and his wife Margaret Thompson, daughter of James Burns Kidston, writer to the signet, of Glasgow; she was the sister of Sir David Randall Pye, FRS [q.v.].
The niece of an eminent surgeon, Edith Pye trained as a nurse (SRN) and midwife (SCM) and by 1907 was superintendent of district nurses in London.
In 1908 she joined the Society of Friends.
In December 1914 Edith Pye went to Châlons-sur-Marne to set up a maternity hospital for women refugees from Reims in what had been an insane asylum, without hot water or electricity, fifteen miles from the fighting line.
One thousand babies later, in April 1919, Edith Pye departed, one of very few women to have been made a chévalier of the Legion of Honour.
From March 1921 until October 1922 Edith Pye joined her lifelong friend Dr Hilda Clark, granddaughter of John Bright [q.v.], to try to feed all the severely undernourished children under the age of four in Vienna.
Together they successfully masterminded the acquisition and distribution of British and American hard currency, with which they bought Croatian fodder to feed the Swiss cows donated to Austria which then provided free milk.
In May 1923 the Quakers sent Edith Pye to report on conditions in the French-occupied Ruhr.
She found ‘a complete absence of civil justice’ and the seeds of implacable future enmity.
Throughout the 1920s and 1930s her moderate and conciliatory personality worked to mediate between the revolutionary and the gradualist wings of the Women's International League (founded under Jane Addams at The Hague in 1915) as she served on its international executive.
‘She was not the sort who enjoyed a scrap.’
In May 1928 the League sent her on a three-month visit to China to study the status of women.
In 1934 Edith Pye was elected president of the British Institute of Midwives; simultaneously she was vice-chairman of the Friends German emergency committee, dealing with German refugees from Adolf Hitler.
During the Spanish civil war Edith Pye instigated the formation in Geneva of the international commission for the assistance of child refugees in Spain.
Between January 1939 and June 1940 she worked on the French–Spanish border to alleviate the wretchedness of the defeated Spanish Republicans, only leaving on the last boat to sail for Britain from Bordeaux.
Between 1940 and 1945 she worked as honorary secretary to the famine relief committee (chaired by G. K. A. Bell, bishop of Chichester, q.v.) which tried, via the Red Cross, to send food, vitamins, and medical aid to children in German-occupied Europe, against the wishes of the British Ministry of Economic Warfare.
In 1952 Edith Pye and Hilda Clark retired to Street, Somerset.
Edith Pye complemented her friend's daring breadth of vision with her own genius for detailed organization.
Both women were exceptionally free from egotism, always drawing out the talents of their co-workers and being very willing to delegate authority.
Both believed that ‘there is something that is contagious other than hate’; both were a credit to ‘the secular arm’ of the Society of Friends.
Edith Pye died in Street 16 December 1965.
She was unmarried.
[Edith Pye (ed.),
War and its Aftermath , 1956;Friend , 31 December 1965; O. A. Saunders in Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society , vol. vii, 1961.]
Anne Baker
, Sir (Francesco) Paolo (1846–1916), songwriter and singing teacher, was born 9 April 1846 in Ortona sul Mare, Abruzzi, Italy.
In 1858 he went to Naples, where he entered the Conservatorio di San Pietro a Majella.
There he studied the violin under Pinto.
His teachers of composition were Mercadante, the director of the Collegio di San Sebastiano, the leading conservatory in Naples, and a prolific composer of operas, and Carlo Conti, professor of counterpoint and composition at San Pietro a Majello until 1858, and later director, regarded by Rossini as the most remarkable Italian contrapuntal composer of the time.
His success as a pupil led Mercadante to appoint Tosti ‘maestrino’(pupil-teacher) at a salary of sixty lira a month.
His health broke down under the strain of overwork, and he returned to Ortona in 1869 to convalesce.
During the seven months he spent there he wrote two songs,Non m'ama più and Lamento d'amore , which he had difficulty in publishing at the time, but which later became popular.
In 1870 he went to Rome, where the pianist Sgambati, a pupil of Liszt and a leading figure in the musical life of Rome, recognized his talent and encouraged him.
A crucial event in launching Tosti's career was a concert at the Sala Dante in Rome, at which Tosti sang a ballad composed specially for the concert by Sgambati,Eravi un vecchio , as well as some of his own songs.
In the audience was Princess Margherita of Savoy (later Queen of Italy), and she appointed him as her singing teacher.
She later made him keeper of the musical archives of the Italian court.
His reputation as a songwriter meanwhile grew rapidly.
In 1875 Tosti made his first visit to London, and after this returned every year to the city, where he became very popular in fashionable circles.
In 1880 he decided to settle in London permanently, and, also in 1880, Queen Victoria appointed him teacher of singing to the royal family.
He gave lessons to Princess (later Queen) Alexandra, and sang duets with Queen Victoria.
In 1894 he became teacher of singing at the Royal Academy of Music, and many famous singers were his pupils.
His popularity as a songwriter rested mainly on his English ballads, much used in drawing-rooms.
The most famous,Goodbye , with lyrics by George Whyte-Melville [q.v.], is a prime example of the genre:
What are we waiting for?
Oh, my heart!
Kiss me straight on the brows!
And part!
Again!
Again! my heart! my heart!
What are we waiting for, you and I?
A pleading look — a stifled cry.
Goodbye, for ever!
Goodbye, for ever!
Goodbye, Goodbye, Goodbye.
(verse 3)
Other popular English ballads included Parted , with words by F. E. Weatherly, the librettist for many of Tosti's songs,Mother ,Forever ,Beauty's Eyes ,At Vespers ,My Dreams , and That Day .
He also continued to write Italian songs, including fifteen aeroduets,Canti populari abruzzesi .
His later songs,Mattinata and Serenata , were particularly successful.
Of his French songs,Ninon ,Chanson de l'adieu , and Pour un baiser were all great favourites in England.
He was appointed KCVO in 1908.
Homesick for Italy, he returned there in 1913, and he died in Rome 2 December 1916.
[The Times , 4 December 1916; Harold Simpson,A Century of Ballads 1810–1910 , 1910; E. A. Mario,Francesco Paolo Tosti , 1947; Michael Turner,The Parlour Song Book , 1972; Keith Horner in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed.
Stanley Sadie, 1980.]
Sheridan Gilley
,John Edward Courtenay (1853–1925), author, was born 6 June 1853 at King Street, Hanley, Staffordshire, the son of Edward Fisher Bodley, commercial traveller and later a wealthy pottery owner, and his second wife Mary Ridgway.
Bodley was educated at Mill Hill School, and in 1873 matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford; at Oxford his friends included Oscar Wilde and Cecil Rhodes [qq.v.].
He took a pass degree in 1877 (MA 1879).
Called to the bar by the Inner Temple in 1874, he practised as a barrister on the Oxford circuit, and then in June 1880 became political secretary to Sir Charles Dilke [q.v.], his father being so disappointed at his abandoning law that he was disinherited in favour of a younger brother.
In 1884 Dilke appointed Bodley as secretary of the royal commission on the housing of the working classes.
Bodley wrote the three reports on housing for England, Scotland, and Ireland, but his political hopes were dashed when Dilke was ruined by a divorce scandal in 1885.
Bodley visited South Africa in 1887–8 and the United States and Canada in 1888–9, meeting senior officials, politicians, and churchmen, and in 1890 he settled in France, where he wrote France (2 vols., 1898) on French political institutions, an instinctively conservative work informed by an encyclopaedic knowledge of French local custom and tradition.
A companion work on the French Church was researched but never written, though Bodley published two lectures in 1906 on the separation of Church and State.
The Romance of the Battle-Line in France (1919) recounts the historic associations of the departments ravaged in the war of 1914–18.
Bodley was a corresponding member of the Institut de France (Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques), and he was praised by Charles Maurras as the Englishman who knew France, so that‘he became almost a Frenchman without ceasing to be an Englishman.’
Cardinal H. E. Manning [q.v.]intended Bodley to be his biographer, an intention thwarted by Bodley's absence in France when Manning died, and by the guile of Edmund Sheridan Purcell, who wanted the job for himself.
Bodley drew Manning's portrait in Cardinal Manning and Other Essays (1912), and wrote by royal command the official record of Edward VII's coronation (published 1903).
The king personally rewarded him with the Victorian Order, fourth class, but broke off relations when the disgruntled recipient of the decoration returned it the following day.
Bodley's life was one of disappointments, over Dilke's disgrace, the Manning biography, the coronation record, and the lack of English official acknowledgement of his work for Anglo-French relations.
He failed to make a wholly satisfactory career.
In 1891 he married Evelyn Frances, daughter of John Bell of Rushpool Hall, Yorkshire; they had two sons and a daughter.
They were divorced in 1908.
In 1920 he married Phyllis Helen, daughter of the Revd Henry Joshua Lomax of Stoke Golding.
Bodley died at his home at Cuckfield 28 May 1925.
[Shane Leslie,Memoir of John Edward Courtenay Bodley , 1930;The Times , 29 May 1925.]
Charles Sebag-Montefiore
,John (1709–1784), collector of prints and drawings, was born in London in 1709 (he was baptized 25 August 1709 at St Lawrence Pountney), the eldest of the three children and only son of Sir John Barnard [q.v.]of Greenwood, MP for the City of London, and Jane, daughter of John Godshall, a London merchant trading with Turkey.
Barnard inherited a large fortune from his father: over a period of fifty years he devoted himself to the formation of a collection of prints, drawings, and paintings, becoming one of the foremost connoisseurs of his day.
The earliest printed account of his collection dates from 1761: it lists sixty-five pictures and records a collection of ‘about 12,000 prints, engraved and etched by the most celebrated masters of the three last centuries…
They are contained in 50 large volumes, besides above 60 volumes in sculpture and architecture.’
His collection of prints included works of Italian, French, Flemish, German, and Dutch artists, and was distinguished by a nearly complete representation of the work of Marcantonio Raimondi, Wenceslaus Hollar [q.v.],
Rembrandt, Van Dyck [q.v.], and Rubens.
His collection of drawings was also very fine and sheets with a provenance from his collection are usually of the highest calibre, both in quality and in the state of preservation.
Several of his Rembrandt drawings were said to have a provenance from the Six collection in Amsterdam, and other purchases were made from distinguished contemporary sales such as those of the Earl of Arundel, Sir Peter Lely [q.v.],
Lord Somers, Richard Mead [q.v.], and Sir Uvedale Price [q.v.].
The sculptor Joseph Nollekens [q.v.]was reputed to have been removed from Barnard's will for having shown inadequate admiration for Barnard's Italian drawings.
Barnard established himself in Berkeley Square, becoming a neighbour of many prominent contemporaries.
His younger sister Sarah had married Alderman Sir Thomas Hankey: his youngest sister Jane was the mother of the second Viscount Palmerston [q.v.], a patron of Nollekens.
His wife was previously the mistress of John Wilkes [q.v.].
Her infidelity continued after her marriage, which produced one daughter who died young.
Barnard had originally bequeathed his prints, drawings, and books to John Wilkes.
This bequest was revoked because of a cooling in the friendship, brought about by the continuing closeness between his wife and Wilkes.
Barnard died at Berkeley Square in 1784.
His drawings were sold first by Greenwood, auctioneer of Leicester Square, on 16 February 1787 and seven days following.
His prints were sold next by Harry Phillips, auctioneer of New Bond Street, on 16 April 1798 and twenty-five days following.
He left his pictures to his nephew, Thomas Hankey of Bedford Square: these were sold at Christie's on 7–8 June 1799.
His pictures are distinguished by having his monogram in black letters with an inventory number at the back.
[R. and J. Dodsley,London and its Environs Described , vol. i, 1761, pp. 279–94; Thomas Martyn,The English Connoisseur , vol. i, 1766, pp. 1–11; F. Lugt,Les Marques de Collections, de Dessins et d'Estampes , 1921, pp. 255–7.]
J R Maddicott
,Hugh , Earl of Gloucester (c. 1291–1347), baron, was the second son of Sir Hugh Audley (c .1267– c .1326) of Stratton Audley, Oxfordshire, by his marriage to Isolt, widow of Sir Walter de Balun and daughter of Edmund Mortimer of Wigmore, Herefordshire.
Audley senior was a minor baron, with lands in Gloucestershire as well as Oxfordshire and a long record of service to the Crown.
This was the route by which his son rose into the higher nobility.
First appearing as a newly created knight of the household of Edward II in November 1311, he rapidly became a central figure at court, obtaining in April 1317 one of the greatest prizes at the king's disposal: marriage to Margaret de Clare, widow of the former royal favourite, Piers Gaveston, Earl of Cornwall [q.v.], and co-heiress to the estates of her brother, Gilbert de Clare, ninth Earl of Gloucester [q.v.], who had died at Bannockburn.
From 1316 to 1319 Audley was one of a small group of courtiers, including Roger Damory [q.v.]and Hugh Despenser junior [q.v.], husbands of the other two Gloucester co-heiresses, who kept a tight grip on Edward II's patronage and favour; though he was perhaps the least prominent of the three.
During this period he contracted to serve Edward for life and from 1317 he was summoned to Parliament.
The violent opposition to the king's friends of Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, forced Audley to leave the court in 1318, but he returned to serve in the royal army at the siege of Berwick in September 1319.
By this time the acquisitiveness of the younger Despenser was beginning to fracture the unity of the court, and Audley was one of Despenser's first victims.
His holdings in south Wales, the gains of his marriage, made him vulnerable to Despenser's territorial ambitions in that area, and by May 1320 he had lost control of Gwynllwg and Newport.
These and similar provocations led Audley to join other marchers and former courtiers in rebellion, under the leadership of Lancaster, their one-time enemy.
Audley's lands were confiscated in April 1321 and in March 1322 he was captured at Boroughbridge, in Yorkshire, where Lancaster's forces were conclusively defeated.
Between 1322 and 1326 Audley was in prison, escaping execution only through the influence of his wife, Edward's niece and the younger Despenser's sister-in-law.
After Edward II's overthrow in 1326 he was restored and he received back a substantial portion of his estates.
This did not prevent him joining the revolt of Henry, third Earl of Lancaster [q.v.], against the corrupt government of Queen Isabella [q.v.]and Roger Mortimer, first Earl of March [q.v.], in 1328.
In January 1329 he surrendered and was fined £10,000, a sum eventually remitted.
After the coup which established Edward III on the throne in 1330 he once again became an active royal agent, serving as envoy to France in 1331 and fighting in the Scottish campaigns of the mid-1330s.
In March 1337 he was created Earl of Gloucester: a title which he owed to his wife's inheritance, to his own services to the Crown, and to his popularity with the baronage.
For the remainder of his career he continued to serve Edward III, fighting in Scotland, at the siege of Dunbar, in 1337–8, joining Edward in Flanders in 1339, and taking part in the battle of Sluys in 1340 and in Edward's Brittany campaign of 1342.
He died 10 November 1347, leaving only a daughter, Margaret, who married Ralph Stafford, later first Earl of Stafford [q.v.].
He was buried among his wife's Clare ancestors at Tonbridge Priory.
In surviving the conspicuous favour of Edward II in order to go on to win that of Edward III he had followed a course unusual enough to suggest both his high abilities and his political dexterity.
[J. C. Davies,The Baronial Opposition to Edward II , 1918; J. R. Maddicott,Thomas of Lancaster, 1307–22 , 1970; J. R. S. Phillips,Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, 1307–24 , 1972; G. E. Cokayne,Complete Peerage , new edn., vols. i and v, 1910 and 1926.]
Noël Annan
, Sir John Tressider (1881–1968), classical scholar and provost of King's College, Cambridge, was born 7 November 1881 in Peckham, London, the fourth of the five children (three sons and two daughters) of Alfred Henry Sheppard, a wool-broker's clerk of Peckham, London, and his wife Harriet Winifred, daughter of the Revd James Sears, a Baptist pastor and printer.
He was educated at Dulwich College and was taught Greek there by A. C. Pearson [q.v.]who in 1921 was preferred to his pupil for the regius chair at Cambridge.
Among his school friends were (Sir) P. G. Wodehouse [q.v.]and Alic Halford Smith, later warden of New College, Oxford.
When Sheppard was provost of King's he and Smith revived the amicabilis concordia between the two colleges.
After winning a scholarship in 1900 to King's College, Cambridge, he came under a brilliant scholar, Walter Headlam,[q.v.], and a born teacher, Nathaniel Wedd.
But he often said that he owed as much to Oscar Browning [q.v.], who had to get his Baptist parents' permission to take him to the theatre.
He was an Apostle and a prizeman, though his zeal as president of the Union condemned him to a second in part ii (1904) after a first in part i (1902) of the classical tripos.
In 1906 he won a fellowship at King's and in 1911 published his book,Greek Tragedy .
His best work was his edition of the Oedipus Tyrannus (1920) which won him a Manchester honorary Litt.D. at the age of forty; and The Pattern of the Iliad (1922) was based on his Manchester lectures on Homer.
He held the Brereton readership from 1931 to 1947.
Sheppard was a remarkable lecturer.
Never using notes, he would sit on a table swinging his legs, his long underpants showing between his trousers and boots, or perch on a chair at an angle so perilous that disaster threatened.
He became the characters in Homer or the tragedies, and made his audience feel they were seeing the drama as well as listening to an interpretation.
More than any scholar of his generation (G. Gilbert Murray, q.v., apart) he kept Greek literature alive at a time when it had ceased to be a compulsory subject in many schools.
A school had only to ask and he would talk to the boys and girls, and dozens of boys came to King's because he had met them in a train or at school.
He produced the triennial Greek plays eleven times and was made Knight Commander of the Order of the Redeemer by the Greek government.
(Dame) Peggy Ashcroft acted in his Electra and Joyce Carey in Oedipus .
In 1950 he was knighted for his services to Greek (he had been appointed MBE in 1919).
His other passion was King's.
At King's dons treated undergraduates as equals and Sheppard developed the tradition, steering many benefactions in their direction.
He knew every undergraduate and undertook long post mortem s on scholarship as well as tripos examination results.
Elected vice-provost in 1929, he was a unanimous choice as provost in 1933; and such was the hold he established over the college that the fellows prolonged his tenure as provost for two years so that he retired in 1954.
He was an exacting colleague, and college meetings lasted for hours as he reminisced about the past; but it was his way of educating the fellows in the traditions of the college.
As a young don, the friend of J. Maynard (later Baron) Keynes, Bertrand (third Earl) Russell, G. Lytton Strachey, and Lady Ottoline Morrell [qq.v.], he had been an iconoclast, but as he grew older he preferred the company of the innocent to the clever.
He was proud to be ex officio senior fellow of Eton and was much moved by the visit of King George VI, Queen Elizabeth, and Princess Margaret to the college.
In later years he visited the four dominions, for each of which he established a graduate studentship; and Melbourne and New Zealand followed St Andrews in conferring honorary degrees.
He created an amicabilis concordia with Queen Mary College, London (evacuated to King's during the war), and another with Berkeley College, Yale, where his contemporary at King's, Charles Seymour, was president.
He was a character.
Shrewd yet naïve, tough yet appearing to be tottering on the verge of senility, tirelessly interested in people, helping them by stealth, histrionic in the highest degree, quick to spot the comic and to mock the pompous, the processor of a gargantuan ego that was directed almost entirely to good ends, he was one of the most remarkable dons of his day.
He died unmarried in London 7 May 1968.
[The Times , 8 May 1968; Patrick Wilkinson,JTS, a Memoir , privately printed for King's College, Cambridge, 1969; personal knowledge.]
Francis J Bremer
,Simon (1603–1697), governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony, was born in March 1603, the son of Simon Bradstreet, Puritan vicar of Horbling, Lincolnshire.
He received the BA degree (1620) and the MA (1624) from Emmanuel College, Cambridge.
His tutor, Dr John Preston [q.v.], recommended Bradstreet to the Earl of Lincoln, who employed him as an assistant steward on his estates.
He joined the group planning a Puritan colony and in March 1630 he was named secretary of the Massachusetts Bay Company.
He was chosen an assistant in the following month, shortly before he and his family accompanied Governor John Winthrop [q.v.]to New England on the Arbella .
Bradstreet served as an assistant (councillor and justice of the peace) in the Massachusetts Bay colony for the next forty-nine years.
He served on important committees and helped organize the United Colonies of New England, a confederation of the Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Haven, and Plymouth colonies.
Bradstreet was one of the commissioners of the United Colonies for thirty-three years.
In 1662 he represented Massachusetts as an agent to King Charles II.
He received confirmation of the colony's charter, but the king demanded greater religious toleration and Bradstreet temporarily lost some popularity as a bearer of bad tidings.
In 1678 he was chosen deputy governor and in the following year was elected governor of the colony.
Bradstreet was a moderate who was increasingly unpopular with those who wished to fight royal attacks on the colony's charter.
Despite this he was re-elected governor annually until the charter was revoked and the colony subsumed into the dominion of New England in 1686.
He refused a seat on the dominion council because the new government lacked a representative assembly.
Following the revolt that overthrew the dominion in April of 1689, he was a member of the council of safety that ran the colony's affairs until a popular convention voted to resume the old charter government.
Bradstreet again served as governor until May of 1692 when the governor appointed under the new royal charter arrived.
Bradstreet's first wife Anne [q.v.]achieved note as a distinguished poet, much of whose work described aspects of their family life.
They had four sons and four daughters.
After Anne's death in 1672, Bradstreet married Anne Gardner, the daughter of Emmanuel Downing and niece of John Winthrop.
Bradstreet died in Salem in March 1697.
[Cotton Mather,Magnalia Christi Americana , 1702; Richard Johnson,Adjustment to Empire , 1981; Michael Hall,Edward Randolph and the American Colonies , 1960.]
Alan Palmer
, second Duke of Cumberland and King George V of Hanover (1819–1878), was born in Berlin 27 May 1819, and was thus three days younger than his cousin, Queen Victoria.
He was the only child of Ernest Augustus (fifth son of George III), first Duke of Cumberland, and his wife Friederike Caroline Sophia Alexandrina of Mecklenburg.
Ernest Augustus succeeded his brother, William IV, as King Ernst August II of Hanover in 1837.
Most of Prince George's boyhood was spent at Kew where, in March 1833, he lost the sight of both eyes after an unexplained accident.
He acceded to the throne of Hanover upon his father's death, 18 November 1851.
Bismarck, received in audience two years later, left a vivid, pitiless account in his memoirs of the blind king's handling of government business, without a minister in attendance, in a study ‘littered with every imaginable kind of public and private papers’.
In 1866 loyalty to the German Confederation made George side with Austria and oppose Prussia in the contest for German primacy.
He was present when his troops repelled the Prussians at Langensalza but, within a few days, his kingdom was overrun and he escaped to Austria.
From Hietzing he protested in vain at Prussia's annexation of Hanover and the sequestration of his estates.
In 1843 he married Princess Marie Alexandrina, daughter of Joseph, Duke of Saxe-Altenburg.
They had a son and two daughters.
George's last years were spent in Paris, the tedium of exile relieved by the pleasures of music; he died there suddenly 12 June 1878, after a drive through the Bois de Boulogne.
To avoid political embarrassment Queen Victoria had discouraged her cousin from settling in England but, as a prince of Great Britain, he was buried at St George's chapel, Windsor, where his Garter banner had hung since 1835.
His only son, Ernest Augustus William Adolphus George Frederick (1845–1923), resumed the title of Duke of Cumberland, as third duke.
[E. Rosendahl,König Georg V von Hannover , Hanover, 1928; G. M. Willis (ed.),
Hannovers Schicksalsjahr 1866, im Briefwechsel König Georgs V mit der Königin Marie , Hildesheim, 1966; Alan Palmer,Crowned Cousins: the Anglo-German Royal Connection , 1985.]
Richard Morphet
, Sir Cedric Lockwood , ninth baronet (1889–1982), painter and plantsman, was born in Sketty, Swansea, 11 December 1889, the only son and eldest of three children of George Lockwood Morris (later eighth baronet), iron founder (died 1947) and his wife, Wilhelmina Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Cory of Swansea.
He was educated at Charterhouse.
Though living chiefly in England, Morris was proud to be Welsh, admiring the Welsh character and abhorring the English class system.
He worked to foster Welsh self-confidence in the arts.
After failing his examinations to enter the army, he sailed to Canada and worked on a farm.
On his return, he entered the Royal College of Music to study singing, but later turned to art, and in April 1914 he enrolled in the Académie Delacluse in Paris.
On the outbreak of World War I he returned to England, but his health prevented him from fighting.
Instead, as a civilian, he joined the Remounts, training horses to be sent to the front.
When the Remounts were taken over by the army in 1916, he was discharged.
Morris lived in the Cornish art centre of Newlyn in 1917–20.
In 1918 he met the painter Arthur Lett-Haines (1894–1978), and despite other liaisons the two lived together for sixty years until Haines's death in 1978.
Difficult but fundamental, theirs was a partnership of complementaries.
Morris was quiet, humorous, impractical, country-loving, and determined to concentrate on his art (with its key activity of human observation) and on the world of plants and animals.
Lett-Haines was complex and sophisticated, a natural organizer and dedicated to expanding recognition of Morris's art.
The two lived in Paris 1921–6, London 1926–9, and Higham, Suffolk 1929–40, travelling extensively and always the centre of a lively circle in the arts.
Morris's first one-man exhibition, closed by the Fascists, was in Rome in 1922.
He was elected to the Seven and Five Society in 1926, being proposed by Winifred and seconded by Ben Nicholson [qq.v.], and he was close to Frances Hodgkins [q.v.]and Christopher Wood.
Morris was one of the finest twentieth-century British painters of flowers and garden produce.
His wide engagement with the natural world was reflected equally in his remarkable paintings of birds (shown in their habitats, yet often seen almost as personalities), of animals, and of British and foreign landscapes.
No less distinguished was his achievement as a portrait painter, his approach extending from the satirical to the deeply affectionate.
Unblinkingly observed, his portraits seem close at times to the spirit of the German Neue Sachlickeit .
Although he attended académies libres in Paris (1914 and from 1920), Morris was self-taught.
In all periods his work was strikingly fresh in conception and observation, the motif being conveyed very directly and with formal economy.
The main subject was usually juxtaposed boldly with its background, imagery ranging from the startlingly forceful to the extremely delicate.
Morris's use of colour was original and his paint texture distinctive at once in its richness, its simplicity, and its tactility.
In 1937 Morris and Lett-Haines founded the East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing in Dedham, with Morris as principal.
In 1940 the school was moved to Benton End, Hadleigh, Suffolk.
Students included Lucian Freud and Maggi Hambling.
Inspiring and unconventional, the teaching aimed to develop a student's own free yet serious self-realization.
It was enhanced both by fusion of the School with the teachers' personal circle and by the remarkable resource of Morris's last and finest garden.
A lifelong plantsman, who established rare species collected overseas, Morris won national acclaim as a breeder of irises.
Morris empathized with the underdog.
A strong sense of right and wrong inspired paintings satirizing puritan hypocrisy and the destruction of wildlife.
During and after the depression years he taught in an educational settlement at Dowlais near Merthyr Tydfil.
Well known and successful as an artist between the wars, Morris sank from fashionable consciousness after 1940, though a major and admired figure in the art community of East Anglia.
Deteriorating eyesight compelled him to give up painting in 1975, but he lived to see the beginning of a major revival of his reputation.
He died in Ipswich 8 February 1982.
[Richard Morphet,Cedric Morris , 1984; personal knowledge.]
Arthur G Credland
, Sir Samuel (1725–1801), mariner, was born at Bridlington Quay in 1725.
He was the great-grandson of Robert Standidge (or Standish), master mariner, shipowner, and chamberlain of Hull in 1675.
Samuel's father left the whole of the family property to another son, by his first wife, observing that Samuel ‘had brains enough to work his own way’.
He entered the merchant service and in 1744, as a mate of a vessel returning from Virginia to Hull with a cargo of tobacco, was taken prisoner by a privateer.
After six weeks at Hispaniola, Standidge and his companions were put on a sloop destined for Rhode Island.
Knowledge of his locality was to be a great boon in 1749 when, as master of The American (owned by Christopher Scott, a Hull merchant), he was able to recognize the coastline at Nantucket after a severe storm had blown the vessel off course.
By 1752 Standidge was freighting his own ships to Rhode Island and in 1766, when he also owned a shipyard, he equipped the Berry for a voyage to the Greenland fishery.
This venture laid the foundations for the Hull Arctic whaling trade, which prospered for the next sixty years.
Daines Barrington, FRS [q.v.], sought his advice regarding conditions for reaching the North Pole and, owing to long delays in any national effort being mounted, Standidge himself equipped a craft for the task in 1775.
Unfortunately, his position as high sheriff of Hull prevented his leaving the town and the expedition was abandoned.
In 1789 he chartered three vessels to Tsar Paul I for use as troop transports in his war with Turkey.
Following the defeat of a superior Turkish fleet in the Scio channel, Standidge was made a knight of Russia, and presented with a gold Maltese cross with a topaz overlaying a lock of hair of the Tsarina Catherine.
He was also elected a member of the Russian Free Economical Society on 23 May 1797.
He was a member of the committee, chaired by William Hammond [q.v.], which led to the foundation of the Hull Trinity House Navigation School in 1787.
While mayor of Hull in 1795 he presented in person the congratulatory addresses from the Hull Corporation and Trinity House to George III, following the king's escape from an attack by the London mob protesting against the French wars and the price of bread.
Standidge was knighted on this occasion and was five times warden of Hull Trinity House (1777, 1782, 1788, 1795, and 1800).
Standidge retired from business in 1798 and died at his home in High Street, Hull, 10 February 1801.
His wife was named Mary and there appears to have been only one surviving child, a daughter.
He left an estate comprising a house and shipyard in Hull, a country house in Thorngumbald, where he had established a dissenting chapel, and various farms and properties in Hull and east Yorkshire.
He was buried in a vault at St Mary's, Lowgate, Hull.
[Naval Chronicle , vols. ii and iii, 1799–1800; J. T. Sheehan,History of the Town and Port of Hull , 1866; Hull City Record Office; County Record Office, Beverley.]
Ivan Roots
,, or  (1612–1671), lawyer and parliamentary diarist, of King's Lynn, Norfolk, was born in 1612, the only son of Thomas Goddard of Stanhoe by his wife Mary, daughter of William Guybon of Watlington.
Both families were of long standing in Norfolk.
He matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1629, entered Lincoln's Inn in 1631, and was called to the bar in 1639.
In pursuit of a professional legal career Goddard was prominent in the affairs of King's Lynn over three decades — freeman in 1645, deputy recorder from 1645 to 1651, and then recorder (succeeding Miles Corbet, q.v.) until the Restoration.
In 1656 he secured from the Protector a new charter for the borough.
During the 1650s he sat on various commissions: for example, for the assessment in Norfolk and for oyer and terminer in London.
A bencher of Lincoln's Inn in 1657, he became a judge in the sheriff's court of London in 1659.
Ten years later he was appointed a serjeant-at-law.
Something of an antiquarian, Goddard collected a great deal of (chiefly) Norfolk documents upon which later historians were to draw, notably Francis Blomefield (1705–1752, q.v.) for his classic History (1739) of the county.
But like many contemporary lawyers he combined this taste with a concern for current politics.
He was elected to the first Protectorate Parliament in 1654 for King's Lynn, and again to the second in 1656, this time on a double return which was rejected.
Returned ‘without any seeking or soliciting’ on his part to Richard Cromwell's Parliament in 1659 for Castle Rising, again on a double return, he was allowed to sit but was inactive until the election was overturned a few days before the dissolution in April.
He did not sit in any subsequent Parliament.
For both the 1654 and the 1659 Commons he kept a sort of diary.
That for 1654 was printed in 1828 by J. R. Rutt as an introduction to his edition of the diary of Thomas Burton, MP [q.v.].
Rutt also drew upon the 1659 record to annotate, supplement, and modify Burton's.
For 1654 Goddard produced not a plain ‘on-the-spot’ piece of reporting but rather more of a compilation, in which, sometimes with reference to the Commons journal, he summarized proceedings and debates, naming very few participants, but indicating the general drift of attitudes and conclusions, occasionally at length but often very briefly.
Compared with Burton's or that of Sir John Gell [q.v.]for 1659 his diary is somewhat slight, but as the only internal account and commentary on the debates it has unique value.
Goddard gives the impression of a House working seriously and in accordance with traditional procedures towards the performance of its roles, especially the legislative one.
Though in the event this was an addled Parliament, it was by no means fainéant.
A good many bills, public and private, quite apart from the major one intended to revise in a parliamentary way the Instrument of Government, were introduced and pursued, as Goddard, who was a conscientious attender, suggests, mostly without acrimony, though references to ‘the court party’ and ‘the soldiery and courtiers’indicate underlying partisanships.
Unfortunately and inexplicably, he breaks off in mid-sentence (about finance) on 18 December, leaving us uninformed on the major discussions leading to the abrupt dissolution on 22 January 1655.
The diary is rather colourless, no doubt like its author, but there are some shrewd comments and occasional lively touches.
On the first day some members cry ‘sit still’ when summoned to the Painted Chamber to hear the Protector.
In November they are making ‘themselves a little merry with puns’.
Tearing into the Instrument, some behave ‘as if they had been in the schools, where each man had liberty to propose his own Utopia , and to frame commonwealths according to his own fancy…
’ Goddard himself seems to have leaned towards ‘the more moderate sort’in these matters, as is shown by his reaction to the Protector's requirement of a written recognition by MPs on 12 September that government by a single person and a Parliament was an unalterable fundamental.
He and fellow Norfolk members dined together and decided (most of them) to comply with ‘the breach of privilege’ rather than to risk putting ‘the nation into another combustion and confusion’.
In 1642 Goddard married Mary, daughter of John Greene, serjeant-at-law, a match which brought him useful connections, notably with Edward Bysshe [q.v.], who was appointed Garter king of arms by Parliament in 1646.
Guybon Goddard, oddly for a scribacious lawyer, died intestate in 1671.
[Congregation books, King's Lynn; British Library Add.
MS 5138;Visitations of Norfolk , Norfolk Record Society; H. J. Hillen,History of King's Lynn , 1907; J. R. Rutt (ed.),
The Diary of Thomas Burton M.P.,
1828, 2nd edn. by I. Roots, 1974;Commons Journal ; Savernake Papers, Wiltshire Record Office.]
Peter Turvey
,Joseph (1779–1844), engineer, was born 13 June 1779 in Great Asby in Westmorland, the son of Thomas Clemmet, a hand-loom weaver, and his wife Sarah.
He was educated at the village school, learning to read and write, but otherwise he was self-taught.
He first worked as a weaver, then as a slater, but in his spare time began to learn metal-working skills from the local blacksmith, building a lathe.
Clement decided that he preferred engineering, and by 1805 was making power looms at a nearby factory.
He moved to Glasgow in 1807 and, taking lessons in drawing, became a highly skilled draughtsman.
In 1813 he moved to London, then the foremost engineering centre in the world.
His rare combination of mechanical and drawing skills enabled him to find work quickly, soon becoming works manager at Bramahs, and by 1815 he was chief draughtsman at Maudslay, Sons & Field.
His experience at two of the most renowned engineering firms in the world was to prove invaluable.
In 1817 Clement left Maudslays and set up his own business, specializing in technical drawing and the manufacture of high-precision machinery.
His works were on a small scale until in 1823 he became engineer for the Difference Engine project of Charles Babbage [q.v.], which gave him the opportunity to build highly accurate large machine tools for his workshop, the best known of which was his large planing machine, built in 1831.
Machine tools of its size and accuracy were so rare at that time that it could earn £10 a day, and it was Clement's principal source of income for ten years.
Clement was an outstanding toolmaker and draughtsman.
He was awarded three medals by the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, which published illustrated descriptions of several of his tools and inventions.
He introduced both headless and fluted screw-cutting taps, and urged the adoption of a standard system of screw threads.
His works were regarded as ‘one of the best schools of its time for the training of practical mechanics’, the most distinguished engineer to work there being (Sir) Joseph Whitworth [q.v.].
Clement set a high value on his work, often astonishing customers by his charges.
He was described by the engineering historian Samuel Smiles [q.v.]as a ‘heavy-browed man without any polish of manner or speech’ whose head was ‘a complete repertory of inventions’and who liked nothing better than a ‘tough job’.
He died in 1844.
[Samuel Smiles,Industrial Biography , 1863; L. T. C. Rolt,Tools for the Job , 1965.]
Margaret Gibson
(c. 1110–1175), biblical scholar and abbot of Wigmore, was born in England c .1110.
He studied as a young man in Paris, where he became a canon of the Augustinian house of St Victor.
There he explored the historical and literal sense of the Old Testament, in contrast to the allegorical exegesis of many of his contemporaries.
He wrote commentaries, still largely in manuscript, on the Heptateuch, Judges to II Chronicles, the Wisdom literature, and the Prophets.
Among the Parisian masters Andrew was a pioneer in the serious study of the Hebrew text, available in bilingual form with a Latin interlinear translation.
Although his linguistic command of Hebrew, spoken or written, was not extensive, he could communicate with contemporary Jewish scholars in French, learning much viva voce.
Thus, in his own commentary, he was able to make apposite reference to Hebrew etymology and exegesis, and to Jewish tradition.
In focusing so sharply on the literal meaning Andrew largely avoided the central issue for a Christian analyst of the Old Testament: in what ways was its interpretation affected by the life of Christ and the establishment of the Christian Church?
He was no theologian, neither a traditionalist maintaining the views of the Fathers nor a scholastic systematizing a body of doctrine.
Andrew remained a specialist within his own field.
In or after 1147 Andrew returned to England for a few troubled years as the first abbot of Wigmore, a daughter house of St Victor in Herefordshire.
Although the Wigmore chronicle refers to him as prior of St Victor, he seems to have had no experience of monastic government, and showed no talent when the need arose.
In 1154–5 Andrew returned to his scholarly work in Paris.
A few years later, however, he was recalled to Wigmore (1161–3), where he remained as abbot until his death 19 October 1175.
Andrew was not a man of many pupils.
Those whom he taught within St Victor provoked the criticism of a younger fellow-canon, Richard, that they were ‘judaizing’— that is, understanding the Old Testament primarily as Jews rather than as Christians.
Andrew's own orthodoxy was never impugned.
His greatest immediate influence was on another Anglo-Norman, master Herbert of Bosham [q.v.], a scholar of much greater linguistic competence but less of a historian.
Andrew's commentaries remained available in Paris.
They were used by the small group of masters who established the teaching credentials of the University of Paris, notably Stephen Langton [q.v.].
But it was the learned friars of the thirteenth century who discovered Andrew's work and used it extensively both in France and England.
Andrew was a familiar author to Roger Bacon [q.v.]and to the circle of Robert Grosseteste [q.v.].
[B. Smalley,The Study of the Bible in the Middle Ages , 3rd edn. 1983; F. Stegmüller,Repertorium Biblicum Medii Aevi , nos. 1295–1329, Madrid, 1950–80; C. Lohr and R. Berndt,Expositio super Heptateuchum , 1986.]
Brian Trowell
,John (fl. 1415–1450), composer, has left us about twenty compositions whose style proclaims him to have been a slightly younger contemporary of John Dunstable [q.v.], perhaps a close disciple.
Nothing is known of his parentage or birth and very little of his life.
It is likely that he was the John Benet of London, clerk, who in 1443 was appointed master of the six choristers of St Anthony's Hospital in the City of London.
The indenture suggests that he was then approaching the end of his career.
A citizen's will of July 1449 implies that the mastership had by then become vacant, but no date of death is known.
A John Benet, very probably the same man, was listed in 1448–9 as an existing member of the confraternity of St Nicholas, the London guild of parish clerks, to which several known composers and their wives belonged; his wife, Agnes, is also named.
Benet's motet ‘Lux fulget ex anglia — O pater pietatis —[Salve Thoma]’, a complex large-scale composition honouring St Thomas de Cantelupe of Hereford [q.v.], has plausibly been connected with Hereford Cathedral, which was dedicated to the saint and contained his tomb.
The likely occasion for the motet would seem to be the centenary in 1420 of St Thomas's canonization.
Dunstable was a canon of Hereford, and there is certainly a close stylistic relationship between his music and that of Benet, who was one of the last practitioners of a form brought to its apogee by Dunstable, the mathematically proportioned isorhythmic motet.
Three examples survive from Benet's pen; the other two are in honour of St Mary Magdalene and St Alban [q.v.], which may suggest connections with Magdalen College in Oxford and St Albans Cathedral.
Benet's other works are all settings of items from the ordinary of the Mass, and include an entire five-movement Mass cycle and fragments of two more.
The first is not based on chant, but relies on a repeated and varying ‘motto’ in the tenor, with similar beginnings to each movement in the upper voices; its authorship is sometimes allotted to Lionel Power [q.v.]or Dunstable.
Of the incomplete cycles, one also employs ‘motto’ openings, and the other is based on a tenor plainsong.
Both these methods of construction were taken up by continental masters, and Benet holds an important place as one of the early creators of the Mass cycle, the leading musical form of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
He has also left us a remarkable four-voiced canonic Kyrie .
[B. Trowell, ‘Some English Contemporaries of Dunstable’,Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association , vol. lxxxi, 1954–5, p. 77; B. Trowell and A. Wathey, ‘John Benet's ‘Lux Fulget ex anglia — O pater pietatis — Salve Thoma’‘, in St Thomas Cantilupe, Bishop of Hereford: Essays in his Honour , ed.
M. Jancey, Hereford, 1982, pp. 159–80.]
C H Talbot
(b. c. 1096), recluse and prioress, was born c .1096, the daughter of an Anglo-Saxon nobleman, Auti, whose family had large possessions in Huntingdon.
At an early age she was taken to the abbey of St Albans, where she made a secret vow of virginity and scratched a cross on its walls as a sign.
Some years later her aunt, Alveva, who had been the mistress of Rannulph Flambard [q.v.]before he became bishop of Durham, entertained him on his way to London, and after the feast Christina was left with him in his room, where he attempted to seduce her.
On the plea that she feared others might intrude, she asked permission to lock the door and promptly did so from the outside.
The bishop, enraged at being deluded by a mere girl, determined to have his revenge.
He persuaded her parents to give her in marriage to a friend of his and by constant threats and ill-treatment she was forced to consent.
On refusing to consummate the marriage she was brought before the prior of Huntingdon.
She defended her case so well that the prior gave judgement in her favour.
The parents then appealed to Robert Bloet [q.v.], bishop of Lincoln, who also declared in her favour.
Subsequently he was persuaded by liberal bribes to reverse his judgement.
From that time she was kept in close confinement and treated with cruelty.
Eventually, she secretly engaged a local hermit to describe her plight to Ralph d'Escures [q.v.], archbishop of Canterbury, and on hearing that he supported her case, she decided to escape.
She arranged with the servant of a local hermit to bring horses early one morning whilst her parents were away, and, dressed in man's garb, she escaped on horseback, riding thirty miles to Flamstead, where she took refuge with Alfwen, a recluse.
She stayed hidden at Flamstead for two years, eventually moving to Markyate, another hermitage ruled over by Roger, a former monk of St Albans.
She remained there for four years, confined to a cell that would allow her neither to sit nor lie down: it was closed by a large stone that could be moved only by Roger.
After four years Roger died and, owing to the enmity of the bishop of Lincoln, she appealed for protection to Thurstan [q.v.], archbishop of York.
In 1123 she returned to Markyate.
By 1130 her reputation had spread far and wide and she was sought after as superior for many communities.
Archbishop Thurstan wanted her to rule his foundation of St Clement in York, and suggested her as abbess of Marcigny and Fontevrault in France.
By this time she had become friendly with Geoffrey of Gorham [q.v.], abbot of St Albans, who persuaded her to make her monastic profession before Alexander [q.v.], bishop of Lincoln.
Her life now became peaceful.
Acting as Geoffrey's spiritual adviser, she played an indirect part in the church's struggle with King Stephen between 1139 and 1141.
At this point the manuscript containing her biography is cut short, but we know from other sources that a priory for her was built at Markyate in 1145, and that in 1155 she sent gifts of embroidery to Pope Adrian IV.
The date of her death is not known.
[C. H. Talbot,The Life of Christina of Markyate , 1987.]
P M Fraser
,Henry Fanshawe (1829–1916), traveller, geographer, and classical scholar, was born in Plymouth 18 May 1829, the only son (there was also a daughter) of Captain Aaron Tozer, RN, and his wife Mary Hutton of Lincoln.
He was educated at Winchester and at University and Exeter Colleges, Oxford, where he obtained a second class in literae humaniores in 1850.
Elected a fellow of Exeter in 1850, he was ordained (deacon in 1852 and priest in 1853) and remained a fellow (from 1893 honorary fellow) until his death, save for the period from 1868, when he vacated his fellowship on his marriage, until 1882, when the passing of the statutes of the second university commissioners enabled him to be readmitted as a fellow.
A versatile and hardy traveller, his earliest journey was to Italy and Sicily, the prelude to an extended and detailed tour of Greece as far as Thessaly.
Thereafter he made regular journeys in Greece and Turkey, some of which formed the subject of two of his major travel books,Researches in the Highlands of Turkey (2 vols., 1869) and Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor (1881).
The first of these described two arduous journeys from Constantinople via Salonika (taking in Mount Athos, which he climbed) across the Scardus and Bertiscus ranges, then further north into Montenegro and across the Mirdita country of central Albania; while the second described a journey from Samsun across the Anatolian plateau, through Cappadocia, past Lake Van to Erzerum, and so back to Trebizond, the latter stretch roughly across the route taken by Xenophon and the Ten Thousand.
On these travels Tozer was usually accompanied by T. M. Crowder, bursar of Corpus Christi College, whose sixteen volumes of closely written journals, recording these and many other travels, are preserved in the college library.
Tozer travelled after the pioneer journeys of W. M. Leake [q.v.]in Greece and Macedonia, and W. J. Hamilton [q.v.]in Asia Minor had opened up these countries to archaeologists, and his main interest was not in the discovery of archaeological material but in physical and human geography.
In Greece especially he absorbed much local folklore, and all his life he continued to write articles on modern Greek legends and folk-songs and allied topics.
He was also deeply interested in Byzantine history and literature, and one of his lasting achievements was to re-edit the massive A History of Greece (7 vols., 1877) of George Finlay [q.v.].
This was a task of considerable complexity and Tozer's edition remains the standard one.
The geographers were, however, never far from his thoughts, and in 1893 he produced his admirable Selections from Strabo , still the most sympathetic introduction to Strabo, to be followed in 1897 by A History of Ancient Geography , which remains one of the best, if not the best, handbook on both ancient geography and geographical writers, Greek and Latin, down to the end of the western Empire.
This is in a way a companion volume, in its emphasis on the geographers, to his much earlier book,Lectures on the Geography of Greece , based on lectures given in Oxford in 1872 (1873).
His later travels in the Aegean formed the subject of his delightful The Islands of the Aegean (1890).
In addition to this intensive work on his especial subjects, and those, like the study of modern Greek, of which he knew the language and traditions very well, and which arose naturally out of his other activities, Tozer had an abiding love for Dante, and published both an elegant three-volume commentary on the Divina Commedia (1901) and a prose translation of the poem (1904).
Tozer's writings are invariably simple in style and straightforward in substance, but he had a direct appreciation of landscape, which carries its own charm, and, like his friend Edward Lear [q.v.], a sharp eye for human foibles and vanities revealed by the activities of local officials in the Turkish provinces.
His main contribution to the understanding of ancient geography lay in his personal knowledge of the relevant topography over a wide area, combined with a natural appreciation of the writings of the geographers themselves, especially Strabo.
His eminence in his field was signalled by his inclusion in the original list of fellows of the British Academy in 1903.
In the Oxford of the second half of the nineteenth century, parochial, preoccupied with spiritual and philosophical problems, the Oxford of Benjamin Jowett, Walter Pater, and Mark Pattison [qq.v.], his interests and experiences must have set him apart; he rarely figures in the histories and biographies centred on the life of the university.
In 1868 Tozer married Augusta Henrietta, daughter of H. D. C. Satow of Upper Clapton.
There were no children of the marriage.
Tozer died 2 June 1916 in Oxford.
[The Times , 3 June 1916; W. W. Jackson in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol. vii, 1917/18;Register of Exeter College, Oxford, 1894; L. R. Farnell,Bibliography of the Fellows and Tutors of Exeter College Oxford in recent times , privately published, 1914; T. M. Crowder's Journals, MSS CCC 453–5, Corpus Christi College library, Oxford.]
Harry Hodgkinson
,(Mary) Edith (1863–1944), Balkan traveller, writer, and anthropologist, was born in London 8 December 1863, the eldest of nine children (three girls and six boys) of Arthur Edward Durham, senior consulting surgeon of Guy's Hospital, and his wife Mary, daughter of William Ellis [q.v.], an economist colleague of John Stuart Mill [q.v.].
A brother, Herbert, worked with (Sir) Ronald Ross [q.v.]on malaria research, and a sister, Hermia, was the first woman assistant secretary in the Civil Service.
After attending Bedford College (1878–82), Edith Durham decided to become an artist, and trained at the Royal Academy Schools.
She illustrated the reptiles volume of the Cambridge Natural History, and one of her London scenes is in the Guildhall Gallery.
Following an illness, and dismayed at the prospect of remaining a home-bound spinster, she began, when already nearly forty, to travel rough in the then hardly visited Balkans, and she described her experiences in a series of vivid and forthright books.
While doing relief work after the Macedonian insurrection of 1903, she found that cash in transit was entrusted to Albanians.
Intrigued, she made a series of forays on horseback into the trackless tribal areas of northern Albania, and quickly became the champion of the mountaineers, whose lands were coveted by neighbouring nations.
As a woman she evoked a protective courtesy, mingled with astonishment, in her hosts.
Unable to imagine anyone travelling for pleasure, or out of curiosity, they assumed that the king of England must have sent her to discover and redress their grievances.
Overarching local events was the process of terminal collapse of the Ottoman Empire.
Almost alone, she rightly interpreted the situation as a conflict less of religious faiths than of nationalities, with overlapping claims based on transitory periods of medieval greatness.
The Albanians, as a predominantly Muslim people, were at a disadvantage compared with their Christian neighbours, despite their keen sense of nationality and their ethnic links with the indigenous Illyrians of pre-classical times.
Edith Durham sought to redress the balance in dispatches for The Times and the Manchester Guardian and through indefatigable lobbying in Whitehall and elsewhere.
Aubrey Herbert [q.v.], with whom she founded an Anglo-Albanian association, said that ‘she restored Albania to the memory of Europe.’
In Albania she was known as the queen of the mountaineers, and streets there have remained named after her through all changes of regime.
Her studies of Balkan ethnography led to gifts of artefacts to the British Museum, the Pitt-Rivers Museum in Oxford, and elsewhere, and she wrote a pioneering book on the subject,Some Tribal Origins, Laws and Customs of the Balkans (1928).
She gave her collection of folk costume to the Bankfield Museum, Halifax, and her photographs and sketches to the Royal Anthopological Institute, of which she was a council member and the first woman vice-president.
Edith Durham died in London 15 November 1944.
She was unmarried.
[M. E. Durham,Through the Lands of the Serb , 1904,The Burden of the Balkans , 1905,High Albania , 1909 (reprinted with introduction by John Hodgson, 1985),The Struggle for Scutari , 1914, and The Serajevo Crime , 1925;Man , vol. xliv, 1944, pp. 47–8 (80th birthday tributes by members of the Royal Anthropological Institute); Margaret FitzHerbert,The Man who was Greenmantle , 1983; personal knowledge.]
A Lentin
,Walter , first Baron Cunliffe (1855–1920), merchant banker and governor of the Bank of England, was born 3 December 1855 at 29 Kensington Gate, the eldest of the four sons and second of the six children of Roger Cunliffe, merchant banker, of Tyrrell's Wood, Leatherhead, and his wife Ann Edge.
He was educated at Harrow (1870–3) and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he won the inter-university mile race in 1877.
He travelled widely after graduating with a second-class BA (ordinary degree) in 1878 and spent a year as a stockman in Queensland, Australia.
He began his City career in 1880.
In 1890 he and his brothers Arthur and Leonard founded the merchant-banking firm of Cunliffe Brothers, in Cornhill.
The family association with City banking went back to his grandfather, James Cunliffe, of Blackburn, and continued through his father, who died a millionaire in 1895, leaving him a substantial fortune and estates in Surrey.
In 1895 he was made a director of the Bank of England, becoming deputy governor in 1911 and governor in 1913.
His decisive handling of affairs at the outbreak of war in 1914 helped avert a financial crisis, and he was invited to remain in office beyond the normal two years.
In fact his tenure lasted until March 1918, an unprecedented five years.
As governor of the Bank in August 1914, he took two bold and effective decisions: to place guards on the enemy banks, which prevented the removal of foreign securities, and to meet all outstanding bills of exchange, which calmed the money markets.
At the lord mayor's banquet in November 1914, the prime minister, H. H. Asquith, announced his peerage, the first of the war.
He went on government missions to France, Italy, and Russia, and accompanied the foreign secretary, A. J. Balfour (later Earl of Balfour), to the United States in 1917.
Cunliffe ruled the bank autocratically.
He was slow to make up his mind, but once decided, inflexibly determined to have his way.
Some of his decisions, in particular the one to raise the bank rate to 6 per cent in July 1916, were criticized.
It was also objected that he wielded excessive personal power over the nation's financial assets, for he continually asserted the Bank's independence from the Treasury in a manner both arbitrary and overbearing, ignoring the protests of Reginald McKenna [q.v.], chancellor of the Exchequer.
When Andrew Bonar Law succeeded McKenna in December 1916, Cunliffe overreached himself.
He demanded the removal of the permanent secretary to the Treasury, Sir Robert (later Baron) Chalmers [q.v.], and he countermanded on his own authority a Treasury request for the transfer of gold from Canada.
Bonar Law insisted that Cunliffe accept the Bank's accountability to the government, a principle which Cunliffe rightly foresaw would some day lead to nationalization.
Cunliffe's successor was announced in November 1917.
After his retirement, he chaired the committee on currency and foreign exchanges and served on the cabinet committee on indemnity.
In 1919 he was a member of the reparations commission in the British delegation to the Paris peace conference.
He was a director of the North Eastern Railway.
On 1 January 1920 Cunliffe Brothers were absorbed by Fruhling & Goschen, and six days before his death Cunliffe became a special partner with the second Viscount Goschen in the new merchant-banking house of Goschen & Cunliffe.
Over six feet tall, of broad physique and rolling gait, with imposing features and a walrus moustache, Cunliffe gave an impression of massive strength and assurance.
Such an image was valuable in maintaining confidence in Britain's wartime credit.
An expert shot, a big-game hunter, fisherman, and gentleman farmer, he was a man of action rather than of intellect, of few words, and those often blunt and laconic.
His gruffness, which stemmed partly from reserve, was, however, tempered by jovial outbursts and by real kindness, and his bluff exterior belied a connoisseur of silver and antiques.
His professional judgement, on which so much depended, suggested intuition rather than ratiocination.
Asked how he knew which bills to approve, he replied, ‘I smell them.’
Notorious was his initial estimate of reparations to be extracted from Germany — £20 billion —‘and if anybody went for forty billions, I should not disbelieve him’.
Adherence to astronomical figures at Paris won him and his colleague, Lord Sumner (John Andrew Hamilton, later Viscount Sumner, q.v.), the nickname ‘the heavenly twins’.
Cunliffe admitted that his knowledge of Germany was inadequate and that his figure was ‘little more than a shot in the dark as he had been pressed to arrive at it between a Saturday and a Monday’.
At home, he successfully advocated a return to fiscal orthodoxy, ‘sound money’, and the gold standard.
He was appointed GBE in 1917.
He received decorations from many allied states, including the Legion of Honour (1918), and was a freeman of the Goldsmiths' Company.
There are portraits by Augustus John (1919) and Francis Dodd (1932)[qq.v.], both in the Bank of England.
In 1890 Cunliffe married Mary Agnes, daughter of Robert Henderson, a merchant, of Randalls Park, Leatherhead.
They had no children.
She died in 1893 and in 1896 he married Edith, daughter of Colonel Robert Tod Boothby, of St Andrews.
They had three sons and three daughters.
Cunliffe died suddenly at his home, Headley Court, Epsom, 6 January 1920, and was succeeded in the barony by his eldest son, Rolf (1899–1963).
[The Times , 7 January 1920; D. Lloyd George,War Memoirs , 1938; Lord Beaverbrook,Men and Power 1917–1918 , 1956; Andrew Boyle,Montagu Norman: a Biography , 1967; Kathleen Burk,Britain, America and the Sinews of War 1914–1918 , 1985; A. Lentin,Guilt at Versailles , 1985; private information.]
S Russell Tailby
,Hugh (1891–1954), consulting chemical engineer, was born at 34 Dunning Road, Middlesbrough, 28 July 1891, the only child of Hugh Griffiths, blast-furnace manager, and his wife Emma Jane Watson.
At school, by hard work and natural ability, he won at the age of fifteen, in free competition, with no age limit set, a national scholarship in chemistry at Imperial College, London.
In the following years he took the diploma of ARCS and B.Sc.
(first-class honours, 1910).
He accepted an appointment with Nobel's Explosive Company in Ayrshire in 1911 and began to examine the physical analysis of chemical plant performance.
The onset of World War I made him responsible for the design and erection of explosives plant for the Ministry of Munitions, as well as plants for heavy chemicals, dyestuffs, intermediates, and synthetic drugs which, until that time, had been imported from Germany.
In 1917 Griffiths set up as a consulting chemical engineer in the City of London, a career which he pursued with increasing success until his death.
His collaboration with Dr Emil Passburg, the German designer of vacuum driers, led to a lifelong interest in high-vacuum techniques.
His paper in the 1945 Proceedings of the chemical engineering group of the Society of Chemical Industry was the definitive work on the subject.
Of great importance was his work on the development of commercial crystallizers, which he dealt with in his 1947 presidential address.
In 1932 he joined the board of British Carbo-Union and his work on vapour absorption and recovery — the subject of his 1946 presidential address — resulted in the design and erection of the largest installation in the world for the recovery of benzene from coal gas.
He gave great service to the Institution of Chemical Engineers.
He took on the lectures, started by J. W. Hinchley [q.v.]in 1909 at Battersea Polytechnic, in 1917 when Hinchley was made an assistant professor at Imperial College.
Griffiths continued the lectures until 1934 when he was succeeded by his former pupils.
He was a prime mover in the creation of the Society of Chemical Industry in 1917 and the Institution of Chemical Engineers in 1922.
A member of the board of examiners from 1925 to 1952, he took the chair in 1929.
He was a member (at times chairman) of the education committee from 1924 to 1949.
He was president of the Institution in 1945 and 1946.
He was a man of strong individuality and forcefulness of character.
His leonine aspect and the mischievous twinkle in his eye made his appearance as arresting as his personality.
With his immense practical experience he was suspicious of academics; he was a perfectionist and would not tolerate any sort of inaccuracy.
After the presentation of a complicated paper at a meeting it was a joy to watch Griffiths, with his invariable appeal to ‘first principles’, strip the paper of its frills and expose the essential bones of the contribution.
He was a champion against humbug in all its forms.
In 1919 he married Marion, daughter of John Stilt, railway clerk.
They had no children.
Griffiths died in Bexley, Kent, 26 June 1954.
[Personal knowledge.]
Anne Hudson
,William (fl. 1382–1392), was a disciple of John Wycliffe [q.v.], in the 1380s and 1390s.
His origins, date of birth, and education are unknown.
He is first recorded in Leicester in 1382, but was apparently not a native of the town; he was called a priest, but doubts about his ordination were later expressed.
Late in his recorded career he described himself as ‘only simply lettered’, but his extensive citation of biblical, patristic, and canonistic authorities in both Latin and English suggests that he must have been familiar with academic sources.
Before his association with William Smith and other Lollards of Leicester he had acted as a preacher and for a time as a hermit, with varied reception but some support from the Augustinian canons at Leicester Abbey.
He then began preaching Wycliffite views to enthusiastic congregations in and near the town.
After an attempt to silence him failed, John Buckingham, bishop of Lincoln [q.v. under Bokyngham], in May 1382 ordered the investigation of sixteen articles brought by three friars; in July Swinderby abjured six heresies and five errors.
Punishment was allegedly mitigated by the intercession of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster [q.v.], and of his son.
Swinderby was freed, but prohibited from further preaching without licence; he returned to Leicester briefly but soon left for Coventry.
Little is known of his activities there, but he seems to have resumed the preaching of similar views and to have been forced to leave the town.
His next certain appearance was in the diocese of Hereford, whose bishop John Trefnant in 1390 obtained a transcript of the 1382 condemnation; evidently Swinderby's preaching was notorious along the Welsh border.
In June 1391 Swinderby appeared before Trefnant, and produced a justification of his position on the articles in the Buckingham condemnation and other charges; because of a safe conduct, he was allowed to depart unharmed.
In the following months he was summoned to appear before Trefnant; this he repeatedly failed to do, though he sent a further document.
In October Swinderby appeared and handed in another defence of a longer set of opinions; on these he was adjudged heretical, but he managed to escape from custody.
Swinderby appealed in writing from Trefnant's condemnation to the king and Parliament.
This appeal went unheard, and by early March 1392 he was being sought in Wales.
No more is known of his history.
The charges against Swinderby reveal him to have taught characteristic Wycliffite doctrines concerning the eucharist, absolution, tithes, preaching, and ecclesiastical temporalities; he seems to have gone further than some Wycliffites in urging the spiritual incompetence of clerics in mortal sin.
It would seem that, despite the obscurity of much of his career, Swinderby was a considerable influence in the early spread of Lollardy.
[Episcopal register of Bishop Buckingham of Lincoln, Buckingham ff. 236–44, Lincolnshire Archives Office; W. W. Capes (ed.),
Registrum Johannis Trefnant , Canterbury and York Society, vol. xx, 1916, pp. 231–78, 408–9; J. R. Lumby (ed.),
Chronicon Henrici Knighton , vol. ii (Rolls Series), 1895, pp. 189–97; K. B. McFarlane,John Wycliffe and the Beginnings of English Nonconformity , 1952; A. Hudson,The Premature Reformation , 1988.]
Kenneth Fincham
,John (1585–1654), dean of Winchester, was born in Seaton, Angus, 25 June 1585, the sixth of eight sons and the eighth of twelve children of Sir Peter Young [q.v.], tutor to James VI of Scotland, and his first wife Elizabeth Gibb.
He attended St Andrews University, and took his MA by 1606, when he was incorporated at Cambridge and elected a fellow of Sidney Sussex College.
He is alleged to have been one of the first Scots to take a degree at Cambridge.
He received his BD by 1611, his DD by 1613, was ordained priest (1610), and for a time was tutor to Lord Wharton's son.
As son of the king's tutor and brother of Patrick Young [q.v.], the royal librarian, Young enjoyed excellent court connections, which explains his steady preferment after 1611.
He was created chancellor of Wells Cathedral (1611) by Bishop James Montagu [q.v.], and probably received a canonry at York (1613); he became a royal chaplain, and in 1615 dean of Winchester.
He and his heirs were granted free denization (1616), and he became rector of Over Wallop in Hampshire (1620).
As dean of Winchester he was an active servant of James I. Between 1616 and 1621 he made repeated visits to Scotland on royal business, accompanying the king in 1617, and attending the general assembly in Perth (1618) in support of the king's ‘Five Articles’ of ceremonial reform.
Young's Scottish background, Calvinist convictions, and diplomatic skills made him an ideal emissary, and he was praised by the archbishop of St Andrews, among others, for his persuasive performance.
During the Synod of Dort (1618–19) he was an important intermediary between Samuel Ward (d. 1643)[q.v.], one of the British delegates, and the king, whom he persuaded to moderate the British position on the universality of divine grace.
In 1622 he was ordered to interview the archbishop of Spalato, a convert on the point of returning to Rome, and letters between the two survive.
Though Young could have reasonably expected a bishopric, he was repeatedly passed over and in 1626 apparently offered £15,000 for the vacant see of Winchester.
Although he remained a royal chaplain until at least 1644, Young evidently did not enjoy the same regard from Charles I or Archbishop William Laud [q.v.]as he had from James I. His activities as dean of Winchester are recorded in his diary, preserved in Winchester Cathedral.
He regularly urged the chapter to attend prayers, observe the preaching rota, and practise collegiality.
In the 1630s, in particular, he presided over a fractious chapter, divided by personal and some ideological conflict.
In about 1615 Young married Sarah, daughter of Andrew Bourman of Wells.
They had three sons and two daughters, all of whom predeceased him except his youngest son, John.
Young took little part in the civil war, was ejected from his deanery (1645), and retired to Over Wallop, where he died 20 July 1654.
He was buried in Exton.
His will, dated 2 August 1652, was proved 18 September 1654.
[F. R. Goodman (ed.),
The Diary of John Young STP , 1928; N. Tyacke,Anti-Calvinists , 1987;Calendar of State Papers Domestic ; Richard Neile,M. Ant.
De Dnis Arch-Bishop of Spalato , 1624.]
R J Goulden
,Augustus (1788–1871), inventor and printer, was born 17 June 1788 in Stepney, the second child of Augustus Joseph Applegath, a sea captain employed by the East India Company, and his wife Ann Parker.
He was educated at Dr Nicholas Wanostrocht's school at Peckham Road, south London.
In or before 1814 Augustus Applegath and his younger brother Joseph ran a printing establishment in Covent Garden, until 1815 when Augustus Applegath took over the printing firm of Cornish & Co. at Nelson Square, Peckham.
His first partner was Henry Mitton and his second Edward Cowper [q.v.](later his brother-in-law), around 1817.
As partners, both men put forward proposals in 1817 to the Bank of England for production of inimitable banknotes.
Encouraged both financially and materially by the Bank, the partners, in great secrecy, first at Croydon and then at the Bank itself, between 1818 and 1821 produced banknotes by offset.
This project was halted in 1821, partly because the Bank's engraver was able to produce banknotes similar to theirs and partly because in that year the restriction on cash payments was lifted, reducing the need for banknotes.
Applegath and Cowper received compensation for the cessation of their project.
The partners also made a name for themselves in modifying, improving, and building printing machinery, especially for The Times from 1818.
By 1826 no less than ten newspaper presses were using Applegath & Cowper printing machines.
The Times owed its dramatically rising circulation to the partners' innovations: in 1827 an Applegath & Cowper four-feeder machine was installed, and in 1846 two Applegath eight-feeder machines were used.
These giant machines, including a nine-feeder installed in 1847, were considerable feats of engineering and enabled The Times to have an enormous circulation by 1850, reducing its rivals to pygmies.
In 1826 Applegath sold his Blackfriars workshops to another printer, William Clowes the elder [q.v.], and by 1828 he was a calico and silk printer, with his main plant in Crayford in Kent and a presence in London in various places at various times.
His specialization was silk handkerchiefs.
In the mid-1840s the Crayford business was sold and by 1845 he was working in Dartford, as both a silk printer and a printing-machinery manufacturer.
There he remained until his death 9 February 1871.
He was survived by seven children of his marriage to a daughter of Captain John Drew.
[Dartford Chronicle , 25 February 1871; Ellic Howe,Newspaper Printing in the Nineteenth Century , 1943.]
Alan Davidson
,Robert (c. 1560–1621), clerk of the parliaments, was the younger son of William Bowyer of Wimbledon, Surrey, bailiff of Westminster and keeper of the records in the Tower, and his wife Anne, daughter of Sir John Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt, Oxfordshire, and widow of John Knyvet of Ashwellthorpe, Norfolk.
His only brother died young; his sister married Richard Highgate.
His father came of a well-known Sussex family, and left him a lease of Selsey prebend in his will of 15 April 1569.
Bowyer received his BA at Oxford in 1579, and went on to Clifford's Inn, and in 1580 to the Middle Temple.
He attached himself to the Sussex magnate Thomas Sackville, then Lord Buckhurst and later lord treasurer and first Earl of Dorset [q.v.], who in 1594 recommended him to act as deputy to John Parker in a Chancery post as ‘of honest sort and behaviour, of such good knowledge and skill for the discharge of such a place, and withall having so good means and ability to live’.
He received the appointment, but Parker himself was never sworn into office.
Even with Sackville's favour Bowyer failed to secure more than the reversion in 1597 to the clerkship of the parliaments, the successful candidate averring that he was unfit ‘by reason of a great imperfection he hath in his speech’.
Sackville took him into his own service as secretary, and secured his return to the Parliament of 1601 for the Sussex borough of Steyning.
He left a distinctive mark of his presence, protesting on 12 December that a member had been ‘pulled back’ from voting in a close division, and fainting six days later: ‘It was said he had a spice of the falling sickness.’
In 1604 he was appointed with a relative Henry Elsynge [q.v.], to his father's post of keeper of the Tower records.
On 31 October 1605 he was by-elected for Evesham, taking the place of a man who had been an Exchequer colleague of one of his Bowyer cousins.
He was more active as a member of the first Jacobean Parliament, often called upon in his official capacity to supply precedents, but he is best remembered for his diary of the Parliament, which has been described as ‘indispensable’.
On a more personal level, he concerned himself with a land bill for William Essex, who had married a Harcourt, acting as a feoffee for his Berkshire estate.
He was sworn clerk of the parliaments on 30 January 1610, relinquishing his seat in the House of Commons.
He devoted the rest of his life to bringing order to the parliamentary records after what he called the ‘negligence’ of his predecessors.
Among his achievements was the recovery of the Lords Journal for 1536.
He died on 14 or 15 March 1621.
He had never married, but his will shows that he regarded Elsynge, his successor in the clerkship, more or less as a son.
He was particularly grateful to him for the ‘extraordinary kindness’ he had shown his wife, Bowyer's niece Blanche Highgate, near whom he was buried in St Dunstan in the West.
[D. H. Willson (ed.),
Parliamentary Diary of Robert Bowyer 1606–1607 , 1931; P. W. Hasler,The House of Commons 1558–1603 , 1981;Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Library of the Inner Temple , 1972.]
Mavis Batey
,Gertrude (1843–1932), garden designer, writer, artist, and craftswoman, was born 29 November 1843, in Grafton Street, London, the fifth of seven children and second daughter of Edward Joseph Hill Jekyll (the son of Joseph Jekyll, q.v., wit and politician), a retired Grenadier Guards officer, and his wife Julia, daughter of Charles Hammersley, banker.
Among her forebears were Sir Joseph Jekyll, master of the Rolls; Thomas Jekyll, clergyman; and Thomas Jekyll, antiquary [qq.v.].
She was educated at home by her intellectual and artistic parents.
Her father was an expert on classical Greek art and her mother a pupil of Felix Mendelssohn.
The family moved to Bramley in Surrey when she was five and there she developed a passionate interest in wild flowers.
From 1861 to 1863 she studied at the Kensington School of Art.
She used to copy the paintings of J. M. W. Turner [q.v.], learned ‘colour beauty’ from Hercules Brabazon [q.v.], and studied The Principles of Harmony and Contrast of Colours (1854) by Michel Chevreul, director of tints at the Gobelin tapestry factory.
She met John Ruskin [q.v.], whose writings greatly influenced her; also William Morris [q.v.], who inspired her ideas of craft ideology.
She travelled in Greece, Italy, and Algeria, where she studied the flora and drew plants in their natural habitat.
When the family moved to Wargrave Hill in Berkshire in 1868 she supervised every aspect of the renovations.
Her artistic talent was soon recognized and her advice was sought on interior decoration at Eaton Hall and Girton College, Cambridge.
After her father's death in 1876 the family returned to their beloved West Surrey.
In 1891, after she learned that she was suffering from progressive myopia and would have to give up painting, embroidery, and other close work, she turned whole-heartedly to garden designing.
At this time she met the young (Sir) Edwin Lutyens [q.v.], also a native of West Surrey, and together they drove around the narrow lanes in her dogcart, sketching and photographing details that appealed to them: a buttressed wall, a patterned chimney, the angle of a building which, although the result of chance, was pleasing in design.
For her it was the accompaniment of cottage gardening with the domestic buildings which was especially noted and assimilated into a garden style: lavender and hollyhocks by an old weather-boarded barn, snapdragons along a brick wall, cottage porches with roses, ferns in dipping wells, patterns of brick and millstones set in garden paths.
For Gertrude Jekyll the arts and crafts creed of unity of the arts was not just an artistic concept but fundamental to her special art and skills in home-making which she passed on to Lutyens, inspiring him to build not just houses but homes.
In 1894 she was in a position to build her own home at Munstead Wood and it was Lutyens, sharing her feelings for the Surrey vernacular and the arts and crafts lifestyle, who designed it for her.
Deeply religious, serene, and hard-working, Lutyens, who affectionately called her ‘Aunt Bumps’, wanted to provide ‘a little of the feeling of a convent’.
The garden she created there was an inspiration for a new garden art, combining the skills of a painter with a deep appreciation of colour beauty, and a gardener who understood the living materials of her art, where and how to grow plants, and when they would flower in her colour schemes.
She went on to design over 300 gardens, some in continental Europe and America, often to accompany house plans sent by Lutyens.
A list of her commissions is in Jane Brown's Gardens of a Golden Afternoon (1982).
Her gardens at Hestercombe in Somerset, Lindisfarne in Northumberland, and Upton Gray in Hampshire have been authentically restored.
The Jekyll plans from the Reef Point Gardens Collection are at the University of California, Berkeley, and on microfilm at the National Monuments Record.
There is a permanent Jekyll exhibition at Godalming Museum and Guildford Museum houses the collection of her West Surrey craft objects, including fine examples of Wealden ironwork.
It is through her writings that her influence has been greatest.
She reconciled styles seemingly at variance with each other, the formal one advocated by Reginald Blomfield and the so-called wild gardening of William Robinson [q.v.].
She contributed extensively to garden magazines, including Robinson's The Garden , and was Country Life 's chief garden adviser.
Her books, among them Wood and Garden (1899),Home and Garden (1900), and Colour in the Flower Garden (1908), were widely read and followed in Britain and her ideas were taken up by Mrs Francis King, a founder of the Garden Club of America, who recognized her as having ‘made the planting of gardens in the English-speaking countries one of the Fine Arts’.
She received the Victoria medal of honour and the Veitch gold medal from the Royal Horticultural Society.
Gertrude Jekyll died at Munstead Wood, Godalming, 8 December 1932.
Her portrait by Sir William Nicholson is in the National Portrait Gallery and his painting of her famous boots in the Tate Gallery.
She was unmarried.
[The Times , 10 and 12 December, 1932; Francis Jekyll,Gertrude Jekyll: a Memoir , 1934; Michael J. Tooley (ed.),
Gertrude Jekyll…
Essays (with a bibliography of G. Jekyll's articles), 1984; Sally Festing,Gertrude Jekyll , 1991.]