

Ronald M Birse
,Henry (1816–1888), civil engineer, was born in Banff 11 January 1816, the youngest of the twelve children of Duncan Robertson, Inland Revenue official, and his wife Christian Anderson.
With the aid of a scholarship he studied at the University of Aberdeen, where he graduated MA before he was twenty years old.
At about that time his father died and the family moved to Glasgow; soon afterwards Robertson decided to become an engineer.
He began work as a mining engineer in Lanarkshire and applied to Alexander Hamilton Douglas, tenth Duke of Hamilton [q.v.], for permission to open a new mine on his land, but was refused on the grounds that he was too young for such responsibility.
Instead he became a pupil of Robert Stephenson [q.v.]and was engaged on the construction of railway lines in central Scotland and elsewhere.
In 1842 he was asked to report on the practicality of restoring the Brymbo ironworks in Denbighshire, which belonged to John Wilkinson [q.v.]but had been allowed to become derelict.
He was so favourably impressed by the industrial potential of the area that he and some friends raised the necessary capital to revive the works, and as a result he moved to Shropshire.
Robertson realized that the improvement of communications throughout the area was a pressing need, and became involved in the construction of many of the railway lines on both sides of the Welsh border, including the North Wales Mineral Railway which served the Brymbo ironworks, the GWR Shrewsbury to Hereford line, the LNWR central Wales line from Craven Arms to Llandovery, the Ruabon to Dolgelly line, and the branch to Bala and Blaenau Ffestiniog.
As part of these works he built a number of fine masonry viaducts, such as those at Cefn and Chirk, as well as the Kingsland bridge over the Severn at Shrewsbury, then one of the largest single-span iron bridges in Britain.
When steel began to supersede iron in the 1880s he developed the Brymbo ironworks into the largest steelworks in north Wales, and by that time he had also acquired a number of important collieries and other industrial concerns.
In 1855 he had been brought in as a partner to Beyer & Peacock's Gorton factory in Manchester, recently built for the manufacture of railway locomotives, and he maintained an active role in the management of Beyer, Peacock & Co. until his death.
He was also a partner in the firm of Robertson & Mackintosh, civil engineers, with offices in London.
Robertson was chairman of three of the railway companies of north Wales as well as the Wirral Railways Company; chairman of the Minera Lime Company, the Broughton and Plas Power Coal Company, the Brymbo Steel Company, and the Brymbo Water Company; and director of the Wrexham, Mold & Connah's Quay Railway Company.
He was also an active politician, elected to represent Shrewsbury as a Liberal in Parliament 1862–5 and 1874–85.
In 1885 he was elected MP for Merionethshire.
He was a JP for Merionethshire and Denbighshire.
Robertson was elected a member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1848, and the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1849.
In 1846 he married Elizabeth, daughter of William Dean of London.
They had one son and three daughters.
He died 22 March 1888 at his mansion in Palé, Merionethshire, and was buried in Llanderfel churchyard.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers , vol. xciii, 1887–8, pp. 489–92; G. G. Lerry,Henry Robertson, Pioneer of Railways into Wales , 1949; R. L. Hills,Beyer, Peacock: Locomotive Builders of Gorton, Manchester , 1982; Robertson collection in National Library of Wales.]
Peter J T Morris
,(Edward) John (1856–1921), analytical chemist, was born 11 December 1856 at 8 Argyle Street, Birkenhead, the son of Edward Bevan, master watchmaker, and his wife Matilda Prosser.
After an education in private schools, he became a laboratory assistant at the Runcorn Soap & Alkali Co.
Advised to continue his education, Bevan went to Owens College, Manchester, between 1877 and 1879.
He then worked for three years for Alexander Cowan & Co. at Musselburgh Paper Mills.
At Owens College he had met Charles Frederick Cross [q.v.]and the two chemists joined forces at the Jodrell laboratory, Kew Gardens, with the aim of exploring the chemistry of cellulose, the major constituent of wood, cotton, flax, and paper.
They went into partnership as analytical chemists at Lincoln's Inn in 1885.
Bevan was appointed public analyst for Middlesex county council in 1892.
He was president of the Society of Public Analysts in 1905–6, and vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry in 1905–8 and 1914–17.
Cross and Bevan's interest in the chemistry of cellulose led them to the study of the viscose solutions produced by treating cellulose with a strong solution of caustic soda and then carbon disulphide vapour.
An aqueous solution of this ‘xanthogenate’ regenerated cellulose on standing or when heated.
They filed the key patent in May 1892, with their colleague Clayton Beadle (1868–1917).
The three partners set up the Viscose Syndicate in 1893, with the aim of producing adhesives, films, coatings for natural fibres, and mouldings, and British Viscoid Ltd. followed in 1896.
The manufacture of fibres from viscose was pioneered by Charles Henry Stearn (1844–1919), who established the Viscose Spinning Syndicate with Cross in 1898.
The British rights to viscose rayon fibre were acquired in July 1904 by Samuel Courtauld & Co., which began production at Coventry a year later.
In May 1894 Cross and Bevan patented the manufacture of cellulose acetate, which was later developed and sold as a fibre by the British Celanese Company, in competition with viscose rayon.
Bevan was described by Charles Cross as ‘genial and generous’ and was popular with his fellow chemists.
He seems never to have married.
He died at 16 Dorset Square, Marylebone, London, 17 October 1921.
[Papers and patent abstracts in Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry , 1893–5; obituaries in Journal of the Chemical Society , 1921, pp. 2121–3;Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry Review , 1921, p. 418R; D. C. Coleman,Courtaulds , vol. ii, 1969.]
Kathryn Fuller
,Constance Antonina (‘Nina’)(1865–1943), women's rights campaigner, was born in Bexley, Kent, 21 December 1865, the daughter of Robert Boyle, captain in the Royal Artillery, and his wife Frances Sydney Sankey.
She had a brother, Sydney Herbert Boyle.
Little is known about her early life or education.
Around the turn of the century Nina Boyle spent several years in South Africa, where she worked as a journalist and founded the Women's Enfranchisement League of Johannesburg.
Shortly after her return to England in 1911, she joined the Women's Freedom League (WFL), a militant non-violent organization concerned with the extension of suffrage and other rights to women.
She became head of the WFL's political and militant department in 1912.
She made speeches all over Britain, wrote on a regular basis for the Vote (the journal of the WFL) and took part in demonstrations and deputations to government officials.
She was arrested on several occasions and imprisoned three times.
In the autumn of 1914 Nina Boyle and Margaret Damer Dawson established the first voluntary women's police force, the Women Volunteer Police Corps.
In late 1916 Nina Boyle went to Macedonia and Serbia to do war-relief work, for which she was awarded the Samaritan medal and the Allied medal.
Although women over thirty gained the vote in 1918, there was some doubt as to whether women were eligible to stand for Parliament.
In March 1918 Nina Boyle, offering herself as a test case, announced that she would stand in the Keighley by-election.
A technical flaw in her papers invalidated her nomination, but the fact that the returning officer was prepared to accept her candidature ended the controversy about women's eligibility.
During the 1920s and 1930s Nina Boyle's interests reflected the diversity of feminist concerns of that time.
She campaigned on behalf of the National Union of Women Teachers, the Women's Election Committee, the Open Door Council (which aimed to remove protective barriers that restricted women's employment opportunities), and organizations concerned with the welfare of women and children in developing countries.
The most important of these was the Save the Children Fund (SCF); Nina Boyle went to the USSR in 1921 to work in an SCF famine-relief programme, she wrote articles for SCF publications, and she made frequent speeches as a representative of the organization.
On 20 May 1936 the SCF honoured her with a tribute at the Lyceum Club.
In the 1920s and 1930s Nina Boyle wrote a number of novels.
She was, by all accounts, an accomplished, entertaining, and witty storyteller.
There were many highlights in her career as a campaigner for women's rights, but it may be that her greatest contribution was the way she inspired others.
She was an excellent organizer, and an effective writer and speech-maker, and her words influenced both prominent and grassroots members of the women's movement.
A courageous and independent woman who expressed strong indignation at injustice, her passion for the causes she was committed to was tempered by a sense of mischief and an ability to take herself not too seriously.
She was modest and unconcerned that others were often given credit for ideas that she had originated.
She never married.
She died in London 4 March 1943.
[Vote , 1911–18,passim ;Record , 1921–2,passim ;World's Children , 1927–38,passim ; private information.]
J D Y Peel
,Edwin William (1876–1957), missionary and anthropologist, was born 7 September 1876 in Aliwal North, Cape Colony, where his father, the Revd John Smith (later president of the Primitive Methodist Church) was serving as a missionary.
He was one of five brothers and two sisters.
He completed his education at Elmfield College, York, and returned to southern Africa in 1898 as a mission teacher of the Primitive Methodist Church, first in Basutoland and then (from 1902) in Northern Rhodesia, where he established Kasenga mission.
Apart from his evangelistic work, Smith made significant linguistic studies and in 1920 published (with Captain A. M. Dale) a classic ethnography,The Ila-speaking Peoples of Northern Rhodesia .
Returning to Europe in 1915, Smith served for a year as a military chaplain in France before joining the British and Foreign Bible Society, first as its secretary in Rome and then in other capacities, rising to be its editorial superintendent (1933–9).
During these years, when social and educational policy became important concerns of colonial administration in Africa, he emerged as an articulate spokesman of what might be called ‘the progressive missionary outlook’.
Smith strongly supported the work of the Phelps–Stokes commissions on African education in 1920–4, and the foundation of the International African Institute in 1926.
He took a leading part in the epochal missionary conference at Le Zoute, on which he based his study,The Christian Mission in Africa (1926).
Smith's most influential book,The Golden Stool (1926), which went through five impressions in its first year, addressed the issue of ‘culture contact’ in Africa.
Its theme of ‘the disintegration of African social life’ pointed to a concept of applied anthropology —‘a dynamic science of man in the service of Africa’— which Smith was to advocate over the next two decades.
Other writings of his later years spoke more of the missionary in him: the influential symposium he edited,African Ideas of God (1950), and a series of missionary biographies, of Robert Moffat [q.v.](1925), the Mabilles of Basutoland (1939), Lindley of Natal (1949), and Price of Bechuanaland (1957).
His Aggrey of Africa (1929), a study of a leading African educator in the Gold Coast, is perhaps the best expression of his Christian, liberal, and multiracial ideals.
Smith was elected president of the Royal Anthropological Institute for 1933–5.
He was awarded the Rivers memorial medal in 1931 and the silver medal of the Royal African Society in 1939; he gave the Frazer lecture in 1946 and the Henry Myers lecture in 1952.
During 1939–44 he spent several years teaching in North America, at Hartford Seminary and at Fisk University, and he received an honorary DD from Wesley College, Winnipeg.
The variety of Smith's endeavours was informed by a vision of great coherence and simplicity.
Tolerance and generosity were the keynotes of his relations with his colleagues and younger associates.
In 1899 he married Julia, daughter of James Fitch of Peasenhall, Suffolk.
They had one daughter.
He lived in retirement in Deal, Kent.
He died in Victoria Hospital, Deal, 23 December 1957.
[I. Schapera in Man , vol. lix, 1959, p. 213; D. Forde in Africa , vol. xxviii, 1958, pp. 93–4;Aldersgate Primitive Methodist Magazine , 1915–26,passim ;Minutes of the Annual Conference of the Methodist Church , 1958, pp. 182–3.]
Timothy C F Stunt
,Benjamin Wills (1807–1899), Plymouth Brother, was born in Devonport, Plymouth, 12 December 1807, the only child of Quaker parents, Benjamin Newton, a draper of Plymouth dock who died ten days before the birth of his son, and his widow Anna, a daughter of Roger Treffry of Lostwithiel, with whom Newton lived until the age of twelve.
He was educated at the grammar schools of Lostwithiel and Plymouth, and tutored by the Revd Thomas Byrth [q.v.]of Diptford, before matriculating at Oxford in 1824.
When only eighteen he became a fellow of Exeter College in 1826, two years before obtaining first-class honours in classics.
He was allowed to take his degree only in 1829.
At Oxford, influenced by H. B. Bulteel [q.v.], he experienced an evangelical conversion which brought him into a circle of somewhat radical piety.
In 1831 he abandoned the idea of taking holy orders and was also involved in the removal of (Cardinal) J. H. Newman [q.v.]from the local secretaryship of the Church Missionary Society.
His marriage in 1832 to Hannah Abbott (a daughter of John Abbott, a flour merchant of Plymouth) was only the ostensible reason for the vacation of his fellowship in the same year, as he had already in effect seceded.
Back in Plymouth he worked with J. N. Darby [q.v.]and became a leader of the newly formed community at Providence Chapel who were soon nicknamed ‘Plymouth Brethren’.
He was an elder of the assembly in Raleigh Street, Plymouth, until 1840, and when the church moved to Ebrington Street he was an elder there until 1847.
His energies were mainly given to evangelism and the study of prophecy, but he also tirelessly opposed the teaching of Catholics, Irvingites, and the Quakers whose communion he had earlier abandoned.
Of his Quaker relatives who followed him in this course, S. P. Tregelles [q.v.]and the banker Samuel Lloyd were the most prominent.
His writings included Thoughts on the Apocalypse (1843).
In 1847 Darby and other Brethren who had previously been critical, both of his eschatology and his authoritarian style of leadership, accused Newton of Christological heresy.
The death of his wife in 1846 and the acrimony of controversy led Newton to leave Plymouth in December 1847.
He moved to London, where for many years he regularly preached in a chapel in Bayswater.
His published writings were valued by a wide circle of biblical students but his later life was spent in a secluded retirement.
His second wife Maria whom he married in 1849 was the daughter of William Hawkins of the Madras Civil Service.
Their only child Maria died in 1855.
Newton died in Tunbridge Wells 26 June 1899.
[H. H. Rowdon,The Origins of the Brethren, 1825–1850 , 1967; T. C. F. Stunt, ‘John Henry Newman and the Evangelicals’,Journal of Ecclesiastical History , vol. xxi, 1970; Newton's papers in Christian Brethren archive, John Rylands University Library, Manchester.]
Mavis Batey
,(Alfred) Dillwyn (1884–1943), classical scholar and cryptographer, was born 23 July 1884 in Oxford, the fourth of six children (four sons and two daughters) of the Revd Edmund Arbuthnott Knox [q.v.], a tutor at Merton College (later bishop of Manchester) and his first wife, Ellen Penelope, daughter of Thomas Valpy French, bishop of Lahore.
By any standards his family was remarkable, with the evangelical father and Dillwyn's three brothers: ‘Evoe’, for seventeen years editor of Punch , Wilfred, an Anglo-Catholic priest, and Ronald, Roman Catholic priest and translator of the Bible [qq.v.].
Ellen Knox died in 1892 but three years later Edmund Knox remarried.
‘Dilly’, as he was called, went to Summer Fields, Oxford, at the age of eleven and after a year was first in his election to Eton.
He went to King's College, Cambridge, in 1903 as a scholar.
He obtained a first class in part i (1906) and a second (division I) in part ii (1907) of the classical tripos.
A friend of G. Lytton Strachey and J. Maynard (later Baron) Keynes [qq.v.], he was not an ‘Apostle’ himself, although his name was put forward for election to the society.
He was greatly influenced by Walter Headlam [q.v.]and inspired by his great love and knowledge of Greek literature.
When Knox became a fellow of King's in 1909 he inherited the then deceased Headlam's work on Herodas and applied himself to the fragmentary texts of the Herodas papyri in the British Museum.
The inconsequential and bawdy mimes proved difficult to unravel but Knox was determined to succeed, exercising on them the scholarship combined with inspired guesswork which was to be his forte in his future career.
Like his brothers, he was addicted to puzzles and a devotee of Lewis Carroll (Charles L. Dodgson, q.v.).
The sort of question he was apt to ask, ‘Which way does a clock go round?’, was pure Carroll.
Soon after war broke out in 1914 he was asked to join ID 25, the department of naval intelligence known as Room 40, as a cryptographer.
By 1917 he had succeeded in breaking much of the German admirals' flag code, detecting, with his ear for metre, lines of poetry in the repeated bigrams of a message, which provided a crib.
Instead of returning to Cambridge, he decided to continue working in Room 40, renamed the Government Code and Cipher School.
He did, however, finally manage to get the Headlam–Knox Herodas published in 1922.
Following German intervention in Spain he solved the Spanish military code and collaborated with the French on Italian naval codes used in Abyssinia.
Immediately before Hitler's invasion of Poland Knox went with A. G. Denniston [q.v.], the head of GC and CS, to a secret base at Pyry, where he was shown a reconstruction of the Enigma cipher machine, which was used by the Germans.
The Polish replica moved the breaking of Enigma on from a theoretical exercise to a practical one and Knox always gave the Poles credit for the part they played.
His own section, Intelligence Services Knox (ISK), which worked in ‘the Cottage’ at Bletchley Park, achieved some notable cryptographic successes, including breaking the Italian naval code which enabled the Matapan signals to be read in March 1941.
Although absorbed to the point of stuffing his pipe with sandwiches when obsessed with puzzle-solving, it would be wrong to see Knox's code-breaking as a detached intellectual exercise.
It was he who insisted that in order not to compromise Ultra (the breaking of the German high command codes), there should be an immediate press release that aerial reconnaissance had made possible the important naval victory off Cape Matapan in southern Greece (1941).
Although ill with cancer, he worked tirelessly on breaking the Abwehr (a German secret service) traffic.
A typical short cut was the successful assumption that some indicators set up by the operators in the four machine windows were not random but girls' names or four-letter dirty German words.
Knox worked from his bed to the last, only getting up and dressing in order to receive the CMG (1943) from the Palace emissary appropriately.
He died 27 February 1943 at his home, Courn's Wood, near High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire.
There is a drawing of him by Gilbert Spencer [q.v.]in the possession of the family.
In 1920 he married his former secretary, Olive, daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Roddam.
They had two sons.
[Penelope Fitzgerald,The Knox Brothers , 1977; personal knowledge.]
D J Birkett
,Mary Mitchell (1848–1915), missionary, was born 2 December 1848 in Gilcomston, a suburb of Aberdeen, the first of five daughters and the second of seven children (four of whom reached adulthood) of Robert Slessor, shoemaker, of Buchan, and his wife Mary Mitchell, weaver, of Old Meldrum.
Robert Slessor's alcoholism lost him his job, and in 1859 the family moved to the industrial town of Dundee, looking for work.
Mary, aged eleven, became a weaver in the textile mills and the family's principal breadwinner.
She received some education at night school, but was largely self-taught.
Active in the local United Presbyterian church, she was a voluntary teacher at Queen Street mission and followed the activities of the church abroad.
Her younger brother John's early death and the missionary fervour aroused by the death of David Livingstone [q.v.]in 1873, spurred Mary into applying for work further afield.
Accepted by the Foreign Mission Board as a teacher in Duke Town, Calabar, in August 1876 she sailed for West Africa, never before having left Scotland.
Quickly picking up the Efik language and immersing herself in work amongst the women, Mary applied for a remote station where she could live frugally and send more of her £60 salary to her family in Scotland.
Her move three miles up river to Old Town was the first step in a gradual journey into the district of Okoyong and away from European settlement on the coast.
When her mother and her beloved sister Janie died in 1886, Mary's last links with home were broken: ‘Heaven is now nearer to me than Britain,’ she wrote.
Moving still further inland, she dispensed with the trappings of the colonial lifestyle — she drank unboiled water, used no mosquito-net, walked barefoot, and even went without the indispensable hat.
Visitors commented upon the tiny Scotswoman's sunburnt face and unkempt appearance.
When the traveller Mary Kingsley [q.v.]visited her at Ekenge in 1895, she found Miss Slessor ‘has lost most of her missionary ideas and bullies the native chiefs in their own tongue…and is regarded by the other missionaries as mad and dangerous’.
Her insistence on setting up lone stations cut off from the central missionary settlement led her into conflict with the authorities, who often thwarted her persistent applications to go further ‘up-country’.
In 1891 she was briefly engaged to Charles Morrison, a Scottish missionary teacher at Duke Town eighteen years her junior, but when the Mission Board refused to allow him to join her in Okoyong, the relationship was broken off.
Her family became the twins she adopted, whose lives were in danger through local belief that twin births were the result of a coupling with evil spirits.
Anxious about leaving ‘my bairns’ when she visited Britain, she began to take them with her, first bringing Atim Eso to Dundee in 1883, where the six-month-old baby was christened Janie Slessor.
In 1892 she was appointed vice-consul in Okoyong, presiding over the native court, and later (1905) vice-president of Ikot Obong native court.
A natural meddler with an iron will, the role of magistrate suited her well.
Even after her resignation, she continued to petition the district officer concerning injustices and disputes, particularly on behalf of the women for whose rights she continually campaigned.
It is said that no woman lost a case while Mary Slessor was presiding.
A heroine of popular culture in Britain and heralded as ‘the White Queen of Okoyong’, she was shy of the publicity greeting her infrequent visits to her homeland and only reluctantly agreed to lecture to raise money and consciousness for pioneer missionary work.
By 1907 rheumatoid arthritis had almost crippled her and she suffered long periods of inactivity, but refused either to move to the comfort of Duke Town or to return to Britain.
In 1913 she received the order of St John of Jerusalem.
She died 13 January 1915 and was buried in Calabar.
[W. P. Livingstone,Mary Slessor of Calabar, Pioneer Missionary , 1915; Carol Christian and Gladys Plummer,God and One Redhead , 1970; Mary Slessor papers in Dundee City Museum and in the National Archives, Ibadan, Nigeria.]
James Darragh
,Charles Petrie (1817–1902), first archbishop of Glasgow in the restored Catholic hierarchy of Scotland, was born in York 7 November 1817, the fifth of nine children and third of five sons of John Lewis Eyre, later founder of the South Western Railway Company, and his first wife Sarah Parker (died 1825).
The Eyre family had been settled in Derbyshire since the thirteenth century but had lost most of their lands by confiscation at the Reformation.
The family, however, remained faithful to the Catholic Church and four of the five sons of John Lewis Eyre were ordained priest.
Charles Eyre was educated at Ushaw College in Durham, of which his great-uncle, Thomas Eyre [q.v.], had been first president.
He entered on 28 March 1826, was made deacon in May 1838 and, much too young for priest's orders, went in December 1839 to the English College, Rome, where he was ordained on 19 March 1842.
Eyre's working life was spent in almost equal parts between north-east England, mainly in Newcastle upon Tyne as assistant priest, priest, and rector from 1856 to 1868, and in the west of Scotland in Glasgow as archbishop from 1869 until his death.
By his forties he was already recognized as a future bishop.
In the Hexham vacancy of 1866 the diocesan chapter included him in its terna, and in the same year Henry Manning, archbishop of Westminster [q.v.], suggested him to Rome as coadjutor archbishop of Sydney, Australia.
Two years later he was appointed vicar-general of the diocese of Hexham and Newcastle and, at the end of that year, apostolic delegate to Scotland, being consecrated in Rome titular archbishop of Anazarbus on 31 January 1869.
Eyre had two main tasks in Scotland: to prepare for the restoration of the national hierarchy and to bring peace to the church in the west, where relations between Scottish clergy and ever-increasing Irish immigrant laity had become seriously embittered.
Within months he embarked on an extensive programme of reforms covering the conduct of the clergy, the building of churches and schools, and in 1874 the opening of St Peter's College, Partickhill, a seminary for the training of local-born priests.
Despite some opposition the hierarchy was restored on 4 March 1878, Eyre himself being translated as first archbishop of Glasgow.
Diocesan synods were held in 1881, 1888, and 1897, and the cathedral chapter erected in 1884.
A lifetime of historical study culminated in Eyre's last years in the publication of several books, including a revised third edition (1887) of his History of St. Cuthbert (first published in 1849).
Eyre was a man of commanding physical presence, the very model of a Victorian prelate, but his manner was natural and unaffected, and this greatly contributed to his success in Glasgow.
From the first he closely identified himself with the city, its people, and their aspirations in ways which helped to break down many of the prejudices of his people and their Presbyterian neighbours.
All of this was fully recognized when he was awarded an honorary LLD by the University of Glasgow in 1892.
His long episcopate, during which he had reconstructed the Catholic Church in the west of Scotland, ended with his death in Glasgow 27 March 1902.
[Obituary in The Catholic Directory for the Clergy and Laity in Scotland , 1903; James Darragh,The Catholic Hierarchy of Scotland: a Biographical List, 1653–1985 , 1986; baptismal register, St Wilfrid's, York.]
Ralph Mann
,Edward (1702–1768), discoverer of aspirin, was born in Lacey Green, Princes Risborough, and baptized 5 November 1702, the only son of Edward Stone, yeoman, and his first wife, Elizabeth Reynolds.
He matriculated at Wadham College, Oxford, in 1720 and graduated BA (1724) and MA (1727).
In 1727 he was ordained as curate of Saunderton, Buckinghamshire, and made a priest three months later as curate of Charlton-on-Otmoor, Oxfordshire.
He remained there till 1730 when he was elected a fellow of Wadham.
In 1738 John Grubb presented him as rector of Horsenden, Buckinghamshire, and in 1741 he resigned his fellowship to marry Grubb's daughter, Elizabeth.
They had one son and a daughter who died in infancy.
Sir Jonathan Cope presented him as rector of Drayton, Banbury, which he held in plurality with Horsenden till his death.
In 1745 he moved to Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, as chaplain to Sir Jonathan Cope at Bruern Abbey.
In the 1754 Oxfordshire election, Stone was agent in Chipping Norton on behalf of the Whig candidates.
He was described as ‘a good man, but slow for a very celebrated canvasser’.
Subsequently he was a JP for Oxfordshire and active in enforcing the poor law.
He served curacies around Chipping Norton.
On 25 April 1763 Stone wrote to George Parker, second Earl of Macclesfield [q.v.], president of the Royal Society, describing the use of dried willow bark as a remedy for fevers and agues.
He had experimented in administering the powder to about fifty people over a period of five years ‘and never failed in the cure’, except in some cases of severe or chronic ague, which required the addition of some grains of quinine.
Using the ‘doctrine of signatures’—‘that many natural maladies carry their cures along with them, or that their remedies lie not far from their causes’— Stone had turned his attention to the willow, which ‘delights in a moist or wet soil, where agues chiefly abound’.
He had thus unwittingly stumbled on salicylic acid, the active ingredient in aspirin.
Willow bark thereafter received occasional mention in herbals, and nineteenth-century pharmacists experimented in producing salicylic acid from willow bark and meadowsweet.
Unacceptable side effects were mitigated by the development in 1853 of a new compound between acetyl chloride and sodium salicylate which proved more digestible.
This was produced commercially by Felix Hoffmann and Heinrich Dreser in 1899, and was marketed by Bayer under the name ‘aspirin', derived from Spiraea , then the Latin name for meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria ).
Stone died intestate in Chipping Norton 26 November 1768 and was buried at Horsenden.
[Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , vol. liii, pp. 195–200; documents in Buckinghamshire County Record Office, Oxfordshire County Record Office, and Wadham College, Oxford; R. J. Robson,The Oxfordshire Election of 1754 , 1949; Peter A. Fairley,The Conquest of Pain , 1978; Aspirin Foundation,The Amazing Story of Aspirin , 1981.]
H F Oxbury
,George Ernest (1862–1920), foreign correspondent and traveller, was born 4 February 1862 in Geelong, Australia, the second child and first son of the five sons and two daughters of Dr George Morrison, founder and principal of Geelong College, and his wife Rebecca Greenwood, from Yorkshire.
Morrison went from his father's school to Melbourne University in 1879 to study medicine.
In 1882–3, while still a student, he began his travels by crossing Australia on foot from north to south from Normanton to Geelong, some two thousand miles in 123 days.
Thinking that he preferred to make a career in journalism, after failing his second professional examination in 1882, he signed on as an able seaman, went from Port Mackay to the South Sea Islands to study the traffic in Kanaka islanders, and published his findings in the Melbourne Age , arousing considerable controversy.
At the age of twenty he led a pioneer expedition to New Guinea and was wounded in the thigh by a native's spear.
When, in 1884, he resumed his medical studies at Edinburgh University, he still had pieces of weapon embedded in his thigh until they were removed by John Chiene, professor of surgery, to whom Morrison subsequently dedicated his book,An Australian in China (1895), for restoring his ‘power of locomotion’.
He graduated MD, CM in 1887 and after further wanderings in the USA and the West Indies returned to Australia.
In 1891 he was appointed resident surgeon at Ballarat hospital.
He stayed there for two years until his urge to move on took him to Hong Kong, and then, in 1894, on a journey on foot and by horse from Shanghai to Rangoon.
In 1895 Morrison was in London, thinking again about a career in journalism, when C. F. Moberly Bell [q.v.], manager of The Times , offered him work as a secret correspondent to Siam (Thailand).
In this post he continued his excursions into China, and in 1897 was appointed resident correspondent of The Times in Peking.
In the following year he crossed Manchuria from Statensk in Siberia to Vladivostok, and during his time as Far Eastern correspondent of The Times he visited every province of China except Tibet.
His value to the paper was demonstrated when, during the Boxer rebellion in 1900, he was seriously wounded in the defence of the legations and was thought to have been killed.
His obituary, published in the paper on 17 July, stated, ‘No newspaper anxious to serve the best interests of the country has ever had a more devoted, more fearless, and more able servant than Dr Morrison…
It is not too much to say that, throughout the last three critical years in China, it is to Dr Morrison that the British public has looked from day to day for the earliest and most accurate intelligence concerning events in which the interests of this country have been so largely involved.’
Morrison survived to be, during the next ten years, a determined exponent of events impinging upon British interests in the Far East, particularly in respect of the activities of the Germans and Russians in that area.
He supported the Japanese at the time of the Russo-Japanese war and represented The Times at the Portsmouth peace conference in 1905.
In 1910 he made the last of his great journeys across China, travelling from Honan in Central China to Russian Turkestan, a distance of 3,750 miles in 174 days.
In 1912 Morrison left The Times to become political adviser to Yuan Shih-K'ai, president of the new Chinese republic.
In 1912 he married his secretary, Jennie Wark, daughter of Robert Robin.
They had three sons.
Morrison died, while on leave in England, in Sidmouth 30 May 1920.
[The Times , 31 May 1920;The History of The Times , vol. iii, 1884–1912, 1947; Cyril Pearl,Morrison of Peking , 1967.]
Mark Goldie
, Sir Walter , third baronet (1653–1731), politician and friend of John Locke [q.v.], was baptized 8 September 1653, the first surviving son of Sir Walter Yonge, MP, of Colyton, Devon, and his wife Isabella, daughter of Sir John Davie of Sandford, Devon.
He matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, in 1670.
His background was Presbyterian, his great-grandfather, Walter [q.v.], and grandfather, Sir John, having sat on the parliamentarian side in the civil war.
Yonge's father sat in Richard Cromwell's Parliament and at the Restoration was active for religious comprehension.
Yonge first stood for Parliament at Newport, Cornwall, in 1678, but soon turned to the family seat of Honiton, where he was the leading proprietor.
He was MP for that town in eleven Parliaments from 1679 to 1708, and once for Ashburton in 1689.
He was moderately active for Anthony Ashley Cooper, first Earl of Shaftesbury [q.v.], in the Exclusion Parliaments and was a member of the Green Ribbon Club.
To dissenters he was ‘sober’, to Tories a ‘fanatic’.
He withstood the intrusion upon the Honiton corporation by the high churchman Sir Thomas Putt.
Under James II Yonge's position was ambiguous.
One historian places him with the revolutionary underground: he entertained James Scott, Duke of Monmouth [q.v.], in 1680, was eyed by the Rye House plotters in 1683, and briefly arrested in 1685.
But another historian calls him one of James II's ‘Whig collaborators’: he avoided Monmouth's rebellion, distrained on three rebel tenants, and in 1688 was appointed JP and nominated by James's electoral agents.
Yonge was sufficiently tainted to have to fall back on his brother-in-law's, Richard Duke's, borough of Ashburton.
However, he was soon busy in Parliament demanding redress against the agents of ‘popery and slavery’, and sat on the committee for the Toleration Act.
John Locke called his west-country friends ‘the Row’: Edward Clarke of Chipley [q.v.];
Yonge, who built a new house at Escott, near Colyton, in the 1680s; and Richard Duke of Otterton.
In 1686 the Yonges and Dukes visited Locke in Holland.
Yonge received presentation copies of three of Locke's publications.
In the 1690s Yonge, with Clarke, John Freke, and John Somers [q.v.], was part of Locke's ‘College’ of parliamentary advisers.
He interested himself in fiscal, banking, and trade policy.
In 1694 he was appointed a customs commissioner, a post he held until 1701 and again from 1714 onward.
He remained loyal to Somers and the junto Whigs, although in 1697 opposed the government over wine duties, preferring to defend the west-country textile trade with Portugal.
He became politically inactive in the new century.
Yonge was deputy lieutenant for Devon from 1688 onward; commissioner for assessment for Devon, 1677–80 and 1689–90; freeman of Lyme Regis (1680) and Plymouth (1696); and colonel of militia foot from about 1697.
He married, first, in 1677, Gertrude, daughter of William Morice, Presbyterian MP, who died in 1679; and second, in 1691, Gwen, daughter of Sir Robert Williams, baronet, of Penrhyn, Cornwall, by whom he had one son and three daughters.
Yonge died 17 July 1731.
His son, Sir William Yonge, fourth baronet [q.v.], was one of the most loyal and unpopular supporters of the prime minister, Sir Robert Walpole.
[B. D. Henning,The House of Commons 1660–1690 , 1983.]
Alan Davidson
, Sir William (1520–1600), politician and administrator, was born 30 January 1520, the fifth but only surviving son of (Sir) Christopher More, Exchequer official, who had purchased Loseley, near Guildford, Surrey, by 1509, and his first wife Margaret, daughter of Walter Mugge of Guildford; five of his nine sisters lived to marry.
Nothing is known of his education, but he was returned to the Parliament of 1539 for an unknown constituency, possibly at a by-election during the shrievalty of his father, himself a knight of the shire for Surrey.
He was to sit in at least thirteen further Parliaments, six times for Guildford and five times for Surrey.
This was an impressive record; only two other men sat in nine out of the ten Elizabethan Parliaments.
Despite sharing parliamentary control of Surrey with the Howards of Effingham throughout the Elizabethan period, he is remembered as an efficient, hard-working, and trusted county administrator, and that work is best studied in his voluminous private papers.
He succeeded his father on 16 August 1549, taking up thereby his first office, that of alnager of Surrey and Sussex.
In 1552 Sir William Parr, Marquess of Northampton [q.v.], appointed him his provost marshal in Surrey, praising his ‘wisdom, modesty and circumspection’.
He served on a number of local commissions, but seems to have failed to secure inclusion in the commission of the peace until the accession of Elizabeth I, when he was also made her first sheriff of Surrey and Sussex.
As one who had ‘stood for the true religion’(that is, Protestantism) in Mary I's first Parliament, he was assured of a leading place in local government, serving as vice-admiral of Sussex (1559–94), deputy lieutenant of Surrey from 1569, and sheriff again in 1579; he was knighted on 14 May 1576.
In the following year his son-in-law (Sir) John Wolley [q.v.]told him that he had been recommended for the vice-presidency of Wales.
Nothing came of this, but in 1591 he was appointed to his only national post, the chamberlainship of the Exchequer, setting up office on his Blackfriars property.
He was able to reduce the cost of building a new house at Loseley (over £1,600) by taking material from Waverley Abbey, then the property of his Catholic friend Anthony Browne, first Viscount Montague [q.v.].
It was an association that made him an appropriate keeper at Loseley of Montague's imprisoned son-in-law Henry Wriothesley, second Earl of Southampton [q.v.]in 1570.
Elizabeth also visited her ‘black husband’ More on several occasions.
In 1545 he married Mabel, daughter of Mark Digneley of Wolverton in the Isle of Wight, by whom he had no children, and in 1551 Margaret, daughter of Ralph Daniell of Swaffham, Norfolk, by whom he had one son,(Sir) George [q.v.], and two daughters; the elder, Elizabeth, married Richard Polsted, Wolley, and in 1597 Lord Keeper Sir Thomas Egerton (later Baron Ellesmere and Viscount Brackley).
More died 20 July 1600, and was buried in Guildford, ‘evermore a zealous professor of the true religion’.
[A. J. Kempe (ed.),
Loseley Manuscripts , 1835;Historical Manuscripts Commission , 7th Report, 1879; S. T. Bindoff,The House of Commons 1509–1558 , 1982.]
Alec Hyatt King
,Cecil Bernard (1894–1969), bibliographer, was born 2 April 1894 in London, the only child of Frederick James Oldman, a builder and contractor with a business in New Cross Road, south-east London, and his wife Agnes Barnes Nightingale.
From City of London School Oldman won a scholarship to Exeter College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1917 with second class honours in literae humaniores .
After some war service in the Honourable Artillery Company, he entered the department of printed books in the British Museum as an assistant (later assistant keeper) in 1920.
Having mastered all aspects of the department's work, Oldman rose rapidly through its senior ranks during and just after the war.
Promoted a deputy keeper in 1943, he became a keeper in 1946, under Sir Henry Thomas [q.v.]as principal keeper.
When the latter retired in 1948, Oldman succeeded him and held office with great distinction until his own retirement in 1959.
Oldman continued to tackle the difficulties of postwar reconstruction.
He also faced the increasingly urgent problem posed by the slow progress of the scholarly revision of the general catalogue of printed books, which, seriously disrupted by the war, had only reached a point early in the letter D. When reporting the matter to the trustees in 1953, Oldman had to recommend one of two courses: either, having attempted to secure more staff, to press on with revision, or (as was vigorously advocated by F. C. Francis, the senior of the two keepers serving under Oldman), to terminate the work and then reprint volumes photolithographically together with the unrevised remainder, but with accessions from 1905 to 1955 intercalated.
It was a bitter blow when the trustees preferred the reprint.
Oldman was totally dedicated to the department and was highly regarded by his colleagues.
Throughout his career he was noted for the calm, far-sighted judgement which, combined with appreciation of scholarship, made him such an outstanding administrator.
Of medium stature and with strong, sensitive features, he was reserved by nature and a man of few words, but had a delightful, dry sense of humour.
Oldman specialized in the bibliography of the music of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven.
His study Musical First Editions (1934) is a classic for its lucid exposition of new ideas.
He was also by far the finest English Mozart scholar of his generation.
Though he published little under his sole name, the best testimony to his erudition is to be found in the prefaces of numerous books on Mozart by both English and foreign authors who readily acknowledged his guidance.
His pioneering work, with O. E. Deutsch,Mozart Drucke: eine bibliographische Ergänzung zu Köchels Werkverzeichnis (1931–2) became invaluable.
Oldman's own Mozart collection included the unique letters written by Constanze Mozart to the publisher J. A. André which first appeared in his English translation within volume three of Emily Anderson's The Letters of Mozart and his Family (1938).
Oldman also owned the so-called Attwood manuscript, which contains the musical exercises written by Thomas Attwood [q.v.]under Mozart's supervision in 1785 and 1786.
In collaboration with others Oldman published this source (originally published in 1925) as part of the Neue Mozart-Ausgabe in 1965.
He was awarded the silver medal of the Mozarteum in 1950.
Oldman was appointed CB in 1952 and CVO in 1958 (the latter in recognition of his services as honorary curator of the queen's music library).
He served as president of the Library Association in 1954.
In 1956 he received an honorary D.Mus. from the University of Edinburgh and was elected an honorary fellow of Exeter College, Oxford.
In 1933 Oldman married Sigrid, daughter of Vice-Admiral Adolf Sobieczky, formerly of the Austrian navy, and his wife Adele, Baroness Potier des Echelles.
They had no children.
Oldman died in his flat at 37 Gower Street, London, 7 October 1969.
[Publications listed in the Music Review , 1964; personal knowledge.]
Blake
,Frederick Winston Furneaux , second Earl of Birkenhead (1907–1975), biographer, was born 7 December 1907 at 70 Eccleston Square, London, the only son and second of three children of Frederick Edwin Smith [q.v.], known always as ‘FE’, who became in 1922 first Earl of Birkenhead, and his wife Margaret Eleanor, second daughter of the Revd Henry Furneaux, fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford.
‘Freddie’, as he was called, was a godson of his father's closest friend,(Sir) Winston Churchill.
He was educated at Eton, where he was elected president of ‘Pop’ and won the Rosebery history prize, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he played tennis, squash, and fives for the university.
He obtained a second class in modern history in 1931.
His father was a powerful and dominant figure.
Although devoted to his family and always kind to them, he expected and strongly pressed his only son to follow the legal and political career in which he had been such a brilliant success.
Freddie's talents did not lie in that direction.
Although he inherited FE's dark, almost saturnine good looks and something of his addiction to alcohol, which he later overcame, he had neither his father's gift of oratory nor his boundless energy.
He preferred literature to law and biography to politics.
In 1930 he succeeded to the earldom and to an alarming load of debt.
Although devoted to his father's memory he always resented his extravagance and improvidence.
He wrote his father's life in two volumes (1933 and 1935) and produced a revised version,F. E. (1959).
He followed this in 1938 with an unmemorable life of Thomas Wentworth, first Earl of Strafford [q.v.].
He was much better about people whom he knew, and the seventeenth century is a minefield for amateur historians.
In 1935 he married Sheila, daughter of William Ewart Berry, first Viscount Camrose [q.v.], proprietor of the Daily Telegraph .
A year later his sister Pamela, later a great political hostess, married Camrose's second son, Michael (later Baron Hartwell).
Birkenhead's marriage (of which there were a son and a daughter) put his finances and the succession to Charlton, near Banbury, his father's beloved country house, on to a secure basis.
The place became after World War II a notable social centre for (suitably selected) members of the literary, academic, and political worlds.
The memory of the Birkenheads' hospitality will not readily vanish from the minds of its recipients.
Birkenhead, after a spell in the Oxford Yeomanry, became attached to the British military mission to the Yugoslav partisans in 1944–5, along with Randolph Churchill and Evelyn Waugh [qq.v.].
There are many anecdotes about this ill-assorted trio, some recounted by Birkenhead himself in his chapter in Evelyn Waugh and his World (1973, ed.
D. Pryce-Jones).
After the war Birkenhead made biography his main occupation despite a major set-back.
His plan, with the apparent co-operation of the heiress and owner of the papers, was to write a life of Rudyard Kipling [q.v.], but he unwisely signed a contract with her (Mrs Bambridge) which gave her sole control over the book as a condition of full access to the family papers.
After three years' work he submitted a draft only to have it irrevocably vetoed without any intelligible reasons given or any consideration of amendment.
Many people read it in typescript.
T. S. Eliot [q.v.]found it ‘slight’, but Sir Roderick Jones, Sir Desmond MacCarthy, Sir John Betjeman [qq.v.], and the author of this entry found her decision incomprehensible.
The book was eventually published (as Rudyard Kipling ) with much acclaim in 1978, after both parties to the dispute had died.
Birkenhead's next book was a most entertaining and vivid memoir (1953) of his highly eccentric novel-writing, gypsy-loving (she believed quite wrongly that the family had gypsy descent) elder sister, Eleanor.
He then embarked on the serious biographies which made his name.
The first was of Professor F. A. Lindemann, Viscount Cherwell [q.v.],
Churchill's friend and scientific adviser,The Prof in Two Worlds (1961).
This was followed by a life of E. F. L. Wood, first Earl of Halifax [q.v.], whom he had served as parliamentary private secretary in 1938–9, published as Halifax (1965).
Four years later he produced Walter Monckton (1969).
All three are models of serious ‘first’ official biographies, carefully researched, admirably written, and as unlikely to be superseded in the near future as any such books can be.
When he died in Oxford 10 June 1975 after a long illness, he was engaged on a biography of his famous godfather.
It was published in 1989,Churchill 1876–1922 .
The plan had been for his son (Frederick William) Robin (born 1936), who succeeded as third earl and was himself the author of an excellent life of William Wilberforce [q.v.], to complete it.
But he died suddenly in 1985.
His draft, ending in 1940, has been privately published.
Robin never married and the earldom became extinct.
[Works already quoted; John Campbell,F. E. Smith , 1983; private information; personal knowledge.]
Brian Trowell
or ,John (c. 1410? –1484), composer, was one of the leading musicians of the generation following Lionel Power and John Dunstable [qq.v.].
He was also, from 1444 to 1455, the first holder of the newly created post of master (or warden) of the children of the chapel royal, the household chapel of the English kings.
Nothing is known of his parentage or birth.
He first appears in the records as a junior clerk or singing-man in Henry VI's chapel royal, in 1441.
The document authorizes an unusually large payment, and it has been plausibly conjectured that it was intended to reimburse him for expenses connected with the ‘impressing’ of choirboys for the chapel, which had been ordered in 1440.
In 1444 he was officially entrusted with the care, maintenance, and teaching of the eight chapel children: the creation of Plummer's post probably reflects the growing use of treble voices in part-music as well as in plainchant.
On giving up the mastership, Plummer became verger of the royal free chapel of St George at Windsor Castle, with important administrative as well as processional duties, and retained this post until his presumed death in 1484.
Though the surviving attendance registers attest his regular presence in Windsor, he continued as a clerk of the chapel royal (under Edward IV), no doubt on an occasional basis, becoming senior clerk by 1465.
In Windsor he was active as a man of property and left money, with his wife Agatha, to endow a chantry.
He may have been married before: a Johanna (Joan) Plummer was a member of the London confraternity of St Nicholas or guild of parish clerks at the same time as himself, and died in 1457.
Six surviving compositions may be ascribed with certainty to Plummer, namely two movements of a four-voiced tenor Mass with the antiphon ‘Nesciens Mater’ as its tenor, and three three-voiced settings of Marian antiphons which do not use the chant and must have been sung as votive memorial pieces; his masterpiece,Anna Mater Matris Christi , sets a respond, again without the chant, in a remarkable texture of three equal tenors with an optional treble part riding above — certainly a fitting example of the art of the master of the chapel children.
Plummer was one of the first composers to experiment with pervasive imitation and invertible counterpoint, a generation before Josquin des Prez.
Two further Mass cycles and a votive antiphon, anonymously transmitted, are also believed to be his.
[Four Motets by John Plummer , ed. with introductory monograph by Brian Trowell [Banbury], PMMS, 1968; C. Johnson, ‘John Plummer, Master of the Children’,Antiquaries Journal , vol. i, 1921, pp. 52, 94; J. N. Dalton (ed.),
The Manuscripts of St. George's Chapel, Windsor Castle , Windsor, 1957; M. and I. Bent, ‘Dufay, Dunstable, Plummer — a New Source’,Journal of the American Musicological Society , vol. xxii, 1969, pp. 394–424; G. Curtis,(ed.),
Fifteenth-century Liturgical Music: III, The Brussels Masses , Early English Church Music, vol. xxxiv, 1989.]
Francis J Bremer
,Cecil , second Baron Baltimore (1606–1675), colonial promoter, was baptized 2 March 1606, the son of George Calvert, first Baron Baltimore [q.v.], and his wife Anne, daughter of George Mynne of Hertingfordbury.
George Calvert (a protégé of Sir Robert Cecil, q.v., after whom he named his eldest son) was a member of the privy council and principal secretary of state.
He resigned his office but was retained on the council when he announced his reversion to Roman Catholicism.
Cecil matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, on 16 July 1621 but did not proceed to a degree.
A year before his father avowed his change in faith, Cecil had journeyed to Rome and made his own profession of Catholicism.
In 1628 Cecil married Anne (died 1649), the Catholic daughter of Thomas Arundell (first Baron Arundell of Wardour, q.v.), and became firmly identified with the Catholic faction.
They had at least two sons, the elder of whom died in infancy.
Calvert shared his father's interest in the new world and was actively involved in his effort to establish a colony.
When the charter to Maryland sought by George Calvert passed the Great Seal on 20 June 1632 Cecil Calvert was named the grantee, since his father had died earlier in the year.
The charter granted Calvert palatinate powers over a domain of almost seven million acres from what had once belonged to Virginia.
Disputes with that Chesapeake neighbour would trouble the new Lord Baltimore for the remainder of his life.
He was himself forced to remain in England to defend his interests and never settled in his colony; he appointed first his brother Leonard [q.v.]and then his second son Charles to the post of governor.
Although concerned like his father to offer relief to Catholics, he was primarily motivated by the desire for profit that characterized most colonial promoters.
The manuscript ‘Account of the Colony of the Lord Baron of Baltimore’, written by the Revd Andrew White and edited by Calvert (1633), enthused about the natural blessings of the region.
Calvert favoured large investors who would bring indentured servants with them and granted large manors to these planters.
Vulnerable to the attacks of his enemies because of his religion, he publicly said little of the role of Catholics in the colony and urged them not to put themselves forward prominently.
He worked to prevent the Jesuits from acquiring land and influence, though he supported their spiritual ministry to the Catholic settlers.
In 1648 and 1649 he encouraged disgruntled Virginia Puritans to settle in Maryland.
Through his instruction he was partly responsible for the 1649 Act Concerning Religion which was the earliest legislation in the English-speaking world that explicitly guaranteed toleration to all Christians.
Though he sought to remain neutral during the English civil war, commissioners empowered by Parliament took control of the colony in 1652 and continued to administer Maryland until Oliver Cromwell restored Calvert's proprietary rights in 1657.
Calvert's last years as proprietor were troubled by growing divisions in Maryland.
He responded with policies that restricted the franchise and gave the governor power to manipulate the composition of the lower legislative house.
These in turn prompted greater resistance, and eventually a successful uprising against the proprietary in 1689, fourteen years after the death of Cecil Calvert, which had occurred 30 November 1675 in London.
He was buried at St Giles-in-the-Fields, Middlesex.
He was succeeded in the barony by his second son, Charles (born 1637).
[William Hand Browne,George Calvert and Cecilius Calvert , 1890; David B. Quinn (ed.),
Early Maryland in a Wider World , 1982; David W. Jordon,Foundations of Representative Government in Maryland, 1632–1715 , 1987.]
Edmund King
,William (fl. 1150), financier, is first noted in the early 1150s and was dead in 1166, when a note of his debts came to the Exchequer.
It shows that he was owed around £5,000 by about two hundred individuals.
In just a few cases the bonds that lie behind these transactions have survived, which show how his loans were arranged and secured.
Cade occurs frequently in the early pipe rolls of Henry II's reign, where payments to him of around £5,600 are recorded, in settlement of various loans that he had made to the Crown.
These records establish his importance (his operations were crucial to the establishment of the Angevin dynasty in England) but supply little by way of biographical information.
It is clear that he was a Fleming from St Omer: he had a house there, close connections with local monasteries, and members of his family have Flemish names.
The names of his parents are not known, nor is that of his wife, but he had brothers Baldwin and Eustace, and sons Eustace and Ernulf.
The last-named gave to the Hospitallers land in Stalisfield and Oare close to Faversham in Kent; and a descendant of the same name held a manor at Ospring, which was known as Cade's manor as late as the eighteenth century.
Faversham was one of the main centres in England of the honour of Boulogne, which country lay against the border of western Flanders, whose mercantile centre was at St Omer.
The supply of wool from England to Flanders provided the main economic link between the two areas; and it is not surprising to find a merchant financier with a base at each end of this trade.
The Flemings who surrounded King Stephen and sustained his cause were not popular in England, and the peace settlements of 1153 provided that they be sent home.
William Cade, however, was clearly indispensable to the financial operations of the Crown.
The Exchequer was functioning, but in a limited and ad hoc way.
Cade could provide for both the Crown and its debtors credit and financial expertise.
He was one of a select group, which included the justiciars Robert de Beaumont, first Earl of Leicester, and Richard de Lucy, and the treasurer Nigel, bishop of Ely [qq.v.], who provided continuity between the old and the new regimes.
Cade was the man behind the men behind the scenes.
The evidence for Cade's operations suggests that they shared many of the characteristics of the better known Italian merchant bankers of the late middle ages.
It was a family firm.
Cade was in partnership with his brother and son, and debts were repayable to any partner, in London or in St Omer.
Careful arrangements were made to secure loans.
The Crown's credit was good, but still it needed to assign some regular revenue: thus Cade had the farm of Dover from 1154 (and presumably earlier) until 1161.
Individuals might assign the income from specified lands to pay off their debts, pledge their own faith, and produce guarantors.
The position of churchmen in such transactions caused some debate, and their giving security was forbidden in the Constitutions of Clarendon of 1164.
This was because of the element of usury involved.
At times it was blatant, as when the sheriff of Hampshire, presumably in order to enable him to settle a debt at the Exchequer, borrowed £61 12s. 8d., paying ‘for each pound 2d. in interest a week’.
More often, Cade exacted a bond for a sum larger than the amount of cash advanced.
Cade towards the end of his life was being superseded by Jewish moneylenders, and as a Christian usurer he would come to appear as something of an anomaly after his death.
He was, however, long remembered.
About 1202 the canonist Robert de Courcon cited him as a man ‘who became immensely rich through lending money to innumerable merchants throughout the world’, objecting that in his partnerships he shared the profits but kept the capital safe.
Cade founded no dynasty, but in his day he was a major operator in what R. H. Tawney [q.v.]called ‘that seductive border region where business greases the wheels of politics and polite society smiles hopefully on both’.
[Articles by H. Jenkinson, J. H. Round, and C. H. Haskins in English Historical Review , vol. xxviii, 1913; article by H. Jenkinson in Essays in History Presented to R. L. Poole , ed.
H. W. C. Davis, 1927; H. G. Richardson,The English Jewry under Angevin Kings , 1960.]
Mary R S Cresse
,Ethel (1863–1918), botanist, was born at 45 Regent's Park Road, London, 28 October 1863, the third daughter in the family of three daughters and three sons of Henry Sargant, barrister and conveyancer of Lincoln's Inn, and his wife Catherine Emma, daughter of Samuel Beale, MP for Derby.
One of her brothers was (Sir) Charles Henry Sargant [q.v.].
She was educated at North London Collegiate School and at Girton College, Cambridge, which she entered in 1881.
She obtained a second class in part i of the natural sciences tripos (1884) and a third class in part ii (1885).
She spent one year (1892–3) at the Jodrell laboratory at Kew Gardens, studying under D. H. Scott [q.v.]and gaining valuable training in research methods, especially in plant anatomy.
From 1893 onwards she worked at home, first in a laboratory built in the grounds of her mother's house in Reigate, and later at her home in Girton village, Cambridge.
Over some years she was much occupied with the care of her mother and an invalid sister.
From time to time she acted as research adviser to the Cambridge students who came to her laboratory for instruction.
She was elected to an honorary fellowship of Girton College in 1913.
Ethel Sargant carried out research in two separate areas — cytology and anatomical morphology.
Her earliest work in cytology concerned the presence of centrosomes in higher plants; she then moved to a general study of oögenesis and spermatogenesis in Lilium martagon .
Her most important results in this area, constituting her demonstration of the existence of the synaptic phase in living cells, were published in the Annals of Botany in 1896 and 1897.
She later moved away from cytological research, partly because constant use of the high-power microscope was a strain on her eyes, and in the second period of her career she concentrated on anatomical and phylogenetic questions.
Her best-known work concerned the anatomy of seedlings.
Her theory of the origin of monocotyledons, put forward in 1903, was based on her extensive investigations of the anatomical structure of very young monocotyledonous seedlings.
She offered a new interpretation of the relationship between mono- and dictotyledons, suggesting that both evolved from a common ancestral stock, and that the single seed-leaf in the monocotyledon was homologous to the pair in the dicotyledon.
The implications of these findings were discussed in three major papers published between 1903 and 1908.
She was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1904, and was the first woman to serve on its council.
At the 1913 Birmingham meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science she was elected president of section K (botany), thus becoming the first woman ever to preside over a section.
Though primarily a research botanist and unwilling to be distracted by teaching, she gave a course on the ancestry of the angiosperms at the University of London in 1907.
She published over twenty papers.
All her writings are characterized by an outstanding clarity and vigour of presentation, qualities which were a reflection of her keen interest in English literature.
As president of the Federation of University Women she gave much time near the end of her life to compiling the register of university women for war work.
She died 16 January 1918 in Sidmouth, after a short illness.
She was unmarried.
[Obituaries in Nature , vol. c, 1918, pp. 428–9,Proceedings of the Linnean Society , October 1918, pp. 41–2,Annals of Botany , vol. xxxii, no. 126, April 1918, pp. i–v, and New Phytologist , vol. xviii, March–April 1919, pp. 120–8.]
Howard Temperley
,John (1790–1854), West African explorer and consul, was born near Whitby.
Little is known about his early years beyond the fact that in 1805, while serving aboard a coasting vessel, he was captured by a French privateer and held prisoner until the peace of 1814.
He subsequently joined the merchant service, rising in due course to become commander of a transport vessel, in which capacity he accompanied one of the expeditions to Greenland led by Sir William Parry [q.v.].
The significant part of Beecroft's career began in 1829 with his appointment as superintendent of works at Fernando Po, where Britain was establishing a base for combating the slave trade.
Beecroft pressed ahead with building docks and shore installations.
Very quickly, however, his superiors recognized his talent for understanding and winning the goodwill of Africans, as when he successfully resolved a dispute with the rulers of Old Calabar, upon which the settlement was largely dependent for foodstuffs.
In 1830, when the governor, Edward Nicholls, returned to England on sick leave, Beecroft took over as acting governor, a post he held with distinction for the next two years.
Finding that Spain was unwilling to part with Fernando Po, Britain gave up its settlement in 1833.
Beecroft, however, stayed on as a partner in the firm of Dillon, Tennant & Co., which took over the shore establishments.
Strictly speaking he was simply a private citizen, but effectively he continued to govern the island, maintaining a court of justice, and generally overseeing its affairs.
His other principal concern was using steam power to open up the interior of Africa to trade.
The great difficulty was that, although steamers could ascend the Niger and other rivers, the effectiveness of quinine as a prophylactic against malaria had not yet been fully grasped, with the result that the death rate among Europeans was appallingly high.
However, Beecroft's attempts, little noted at the time because they were mounted from Fernando Po, proved much more successful than the highly publicized expeditions that set out from England.
Employing crews composed largely of Africans he systematically explored the rivers flowing into the Gulf of Guinea, ascending the Niger as far as Raba, 400 miles from the coast, on more than one occasion.
As a result he became the most knowledgeable and influential European in that part of Africa and was continually being called on by traders, missionaries, and humanitarians for advice or to sort out local disputes.
He was thus already something of an institution when, in 1849, the third Viscount Palmerston [q.v.]appointed him consul to the bights of Benin and Biafra.
Although Britain had long had trading connections with these areas, hitherto she had had no territorial ambitions there.
Under Beecroft that changed.
As the senior resident British official on the coast he was largely responsible for the British occupation of Lagos in 1851 and the deposition of King Pepple of Bonny in 1854.
If the years 1829–49 show Beecroft's genius for winning the friendship and respect of Africans, the period 1849–54 reveals him as a forceful interventionist, determined to establish British paramountcy over what was eventually destined to become the colony of Nigeria.
Beecroft died 10 June 1854 and was buried in Fernando Po.
[K. O. Dike, ‘John Beecroft’,Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria , vol. i, part 1, 1956, pp. 5–14, and Trade and Politics in the Niger Delta, 1830–1865 , 1956; J. F. Ade Ajayi,Christian Missions in Nigeria, 1841–1891 , 1965.]
Margaret Pelling
,Robert (1803–1880), surgeon and factory inspector, was born 15 August 1803 in York, the second son of John Baker, druggist of High Ousegate, York, and his wife Hannah.
His career shows many parallels with that of the better known Charles Turner Thackrah, but evidence of association is lacking.
In March 1818 Baker was apprenticed to (Sir) William Pearson for five years, Pearson being surgeon to the Hull General (later Royal) Infirmary.
Baker's medical education was continued at Guy's Hospital, London.
He passed the Society of Apothecaries' qualifying examination in 1823, apparently while under age, and then gained the MRCS.
He appears on the Royal College of Surgeons' registers only from 1828 to 1843.
His first appointment was in Leeds as a poor law surgeon, which he later described as ‘an ordeal all the medical men of the town go through as the high road to better practice’.
The direction of Baker's career was determined by the cholera epidemic of 1831–2.
Baker's sanitary reports on the cholera in Tyneside, and on housing and environmental conditions in Leeds, included a use of maps which brought him to wider notice.
On Baker's own account he abandoned medical practice for factory work as a result of contracting cholera in the course of his poor-law duties.
In the early 1830s he was employed as factory surgeon to the mill of Hindes and Derham and later claimed credit for the half-time education system for child factory workers whose health appeared precarious.
On 22 October 1834 Baker was appointed a ‘superintendent’(equivalent to sub-inspector) according to the Factory Act, 1833.
By 1837 he had ceased acting as a certifying surgeon, which involved some conflict of interest.
He was still the only factory inspector with medical qualifications at the time of the famous Sanitary Report of 1842 by (Sir) Edwin Chadwick [q.v.], to which Baker was a contributor.
In spite of local support, Baker was not promoted until 15 June 1858.
In 1861, as the result of the retirement of (Sir) John Kincaid [q.v.]he became, with his younger colleague Alexander Redgrave, one of two inspectors covering the British Isles.
Baker's area included the north-west, the midlands, the west country, Wales, and Northern Ireland.
In this capacity Baker submitted biannual reports and advised on legislation, which was elaborated and then codified by the Factories Act of 1878.
Baker retired in the same year and was appointed CB.
Baker's publications were occasional.
He was most consistent in his concern for working children and in his advocacy of some form of comprehensive medical supervision of all factories.
In his later career he was hard-working and respected, especially by those in whose interests he was acting, but not innovative, as he had been during the heroic period of sanitary reform.
The medical qualifications which at first gave him distinction tended later to restrict his outlook on what might be achieved in the field of occupational health.
Baker had a wife Maria, who died in 1903.
They had a numerous family, of whom four sons and four daughters were living in 1878.
Baker died at home at Milverton Hill near Leamington 6 February 1880.
[British Medical Journal , 1880 (i), p. 383; W. R. Lee,British Journal of Industrial Medicine , vol. xxi, 1964, pp. 85–93, 167–79; E. Chadwick,Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population…1842 , ed.
M. Flinn, 1965; will proved 17 September 1880, Somerset House, London; bibliography of Baker in the library of the Wellcome Institute, London; information from Peter Bartrip.]
G H L Le May
,Ernest William (1866–1921), writer, was born in Middlesbrough 7 June 1866, the youngest son of John Peter Hornung, solicitor.
He was at school at Uppingham; then, suffering from asthma, he went for three years to Australia (1884–6).
His Australian experience was woven into his early books,A Bride from the Bush (1890),Under Two Skies (1892),The Boss of Taroomba (1894), and, later,Stingaree (1905), the adventures of a gentlemanly bush-ranger.
On his return to London he made his living as a novelist and freelance journalist; between 1886 and 1889 he published ten novels.
In 1893 he married Constance, daughter of Charles Altamont Doyle, clerk in the Board of Works and artist, and sister of (Sir) Arthur Conan Doyle [q.v.].
They were to have one son.
In 1899 he wrote The Amateur Cracksman , a book of short stories in which he created A. J. Raffles, the character who was to make Hornung famous.
Raffles was an ex-public schoolboy, a distinguished amateur cricketer —‘perhaps the very finest slow bowler of his decade’— who shone in society and at Lord's by day, and burgled by night.
What Hornung had done was to take his brother-in-law's famous detective, Sherlock Holmes, and put him on the wrong side of the law; a friendly dedication acknowledged the debt.
Raffles was equipped with a Watson figure, Bunny Manders, the narrator of most of the Raffles stories.
Two further volumes of Raffles stories appeared —The Black Mask in 1901 and A Thief in the Night in 1905.
The stories were an immediate success, though a novel,Mr Justice Raffles (1909), was a failure, after which Hornung abandoned his creation in book form.
Raffles was, however, to have a long career on the stage and in films.
Hornung collaborated with Eugene Presbrey in writing a play in four acts —Raffles, the Amateur Cracksman — which was produced by Sir Gerald du Maurier [q.v.]with himself as Raffles, and ran in London for two years and in New York for 168 performances.
In 1905 Raffles was the subject of a silent film lasting ten minutes; in 1917 John Barrymore played Raffles in a full-length film.
Over the years, four more films and a television series were to follow: the heroes found some difficulty in impersonating Raffles the cricketer, the arts of slow bowling being in short supply among leading actors.
In spite of his asthma and short-sightedness, Hornung was a competent club cricketer, a game for which he had a passion; he was proud of his membership of the MCC, to which he was elected in 1907.
During World War I, he served in an anti-aircraft unit and then, in 1916, was sent to France by the YMCA to organize rest-houses and libraries for troops out of the front line.
He was greatly saddened by the death of his only son in action at Ypres, and in 1917 he published two poems in The Times , ‘Bond and Free’ and ‘Wooden Crosses’, which aroused wide interest.
He was in Arras when the last great German offensive began in March 1918, and he wrote a vivid description of the bombardment of the town in his last book,Notes of a Camp Follower on the Western Front , published in 1919.
After the war, his health failing, he retired to St Jean de Luz, in France, where he died of pneumonia 22 March 1921.
[The Times , 24 March 1921; Peter Haining, foreword to E. W. Hornung,The Complete Short Stories of Raffles — the Amateur Cracksman , 1984.]
Janet E Grenier
,Clementina Maria (1853–1922), campaigner for social and industrial reform for women, suffragist, and writer, was born 27 July 1853 in Brighton, the eldest girl in the family of five daughters and three sons of David Black, solicitor, town clerk, and coroner of Brighton, and his wife, Clara Maria, daughter of George Patten [q.v.], portrait painter to the prince consort.
Educated at home, mainly by her mother, she became fluent in French and German.
When she was twenty-two her mother died, leaving her to look after the family, including an invalid father.
A teaching job added to her duties but she began to write short stories.
These were followed by her first novel,A Sussex Idyll (1877), and a three-volume novel,Orlando (1879).
In the 1880s she and her sisters (one of whom was Constance Garnett, q.v.) moved to Fitzroy Street, London.
Here she divided her time between private studies at the British Museum library, literary work, and lecturing on eighteenth-century literature.
She began associating with both Marxist and Fabian intellectual socialists.
Ill health forced her abroad in 1885 and she returned to England to the Trafalgar Square riots of 1886.
This event made her determined to become actively involved in social issues.
In 1886 she became secretary to the Women's Protective and Provident League (founded by Emma Patterson) but resigned in 1889 when events in London's East End convinced her that a more radical, socialist approach to women's trade unionism was needed.
She was one of the founders of the Women's Trade Union Association in the East End in 1889, and served as secretary until 1891.
The failure of the WTUA in 1894 led to the formation of the Women's Industrial Council.
The WIC sent out its mainly middle-class women investigators to see for themselves conditions of working women and suggest and promote improvements.
Clementina Black became editor of its journal, the Women's Industrial News , in 1895 and later president of the WIC, resigning in 1909 when the Council decided to take no action on wages boards.
She became increasingly active as a speaker and writer on problems facing women workers.
She saw low pay as the root of the problem and from 1896 began to campaign for the legal minimum wage.
She was especially concerned with the plight of women homeworkers.
She was on the executive committee of the National Anti-Sweating League and one of the organizers of the Daily News sweated industries exhibition of 1906.
Her two books,Sweated Industry and the Minimum Wage (1907) and Makers of Our Clothes, a Case for Trade Boards (which she wrote jointly with Mrs C. Meyer, 1909) were powerful works of propaganda.
The Trade Boards Act was passed in 1909 but her interest in improving conditions for working women remained.
In 1918 she wrote on ways of improving housing and housekeeping so that women could be freed for employment.
A non-militant suffragist, she inaugurated the Suffrage Declaration of 1906 which was signed by thousands.
She became one of the vice-presidents of the London Society for Women's Suffrage and was acting editor of the Common Cause in 1913.
She was a well-known author in her day, writing fiction, biographies, translations, and even plays for children.
One novel,An Agitator (1894), was described by Eleanor Marx as a realistic account of the British working-class movement, but her other fiction avoided social concerns.
A non-revolutionary socialist, she believed in legislative action.
A deceptively fragile and refined appearance belied her dedication and untiring industry in the cause of justice for women.
Her cheerful disposition, sympathy, and tact made her popular.
In recognition for her endeavours on behalf of women, she was granted a civil list pension of £75 a year in 1913.
Unmarried, she took her niece Speedwell, daughter of her brother Arthur, into her house when Arthur and his wife committed suicide, and brought her up herself.
Clementina Black died in Barnes, Surrey, 19 December 1922.
[Mary Cameron, ‘Clementina Black: a Character Sketch’, in the Young Woman , vol. i, 1893, pp. 315–16; Liselotte Glage,Clementina Black, a Study in Social History and Literature , 1981;The Times , 20 December 1922; personal knowledge.]
Nicholas Vincent
(d. 1238), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was in all likelihood a native of Stainby, Lincolnshire, where his brothers Gilbert and Master William of Stainby held land.
His parentage and schooling are obscure, though he may well have been a pupil of Stephen Langton, later archbishop of Canterbury [q.v.], himself the native of a village less than ten miles from Stainby.
Master Alexander makes his first recorded appearance as witness to a settlement presided over by Archbishop Langton in 1216.
A tradition passed down by early historians of the Dominican Order would make Alexander already a teacher of theology at Toulouse in 1215, when his lectures were attended by the order's founder, St Dominic.
In due course he moved, like Dominic, to Bologna, from whose schools he was promoted chamber clerk to Pope Honorius III before 1224.
A Master Alexander the theologian was indeed associated with the Dominicans of Bologna between 1221 and 1223, whilst in due course Bishop Alexander of Stainby is credited with the foundation of Dominican houses at Chester and Derby and with assisting the establishment of the Dominicans in Oxford.
Several members of his episcopal household joined the friars, including his brother, Master Richard of Stainby, author of a revised alphabetical concordance to the Bible, and the great scholar, Alexander of Hales [q.v.], subsequently the first Franciscan doctor of theology in Paris.
Despite Alexander's own scholarly reputation, his only writings to survive are two short tracts, on the seven deadly sins and on confession, circulated together with his diocesan legislation.
The tracts show a keen awareness of the reformist approach to preaching, instruction, and penance common both to Dominican spirituality and to the tradition of Stephen Langton and the schools of Paris.
None the less, there can be no certainty that they are the works of Alexander himself rather than some member of his entourage.
Alexander was resident at the papal curia at the time of his election to Coventry in 1224.
It was Honorius III who conferred the see upon him, acting as mediator in an election disputed between the secular canons of Lichfield and the monks of Coventry.
The monks' election of their own prior as bishop had recently been quashed by Archbishop Langton, who almost certainly approved, though he may not have engineered, the election of Alexander.
Alexander's episcopate was to witness the elevation of Lichfield to equal status with Coventry, and from c .1226 the bishop himself adopted the joint style of bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, in preference to Coventry alone.
Following further argument in Rome, it was decided that episcopal elections were to fall to the convents of Coventry and Lichfield by turn.
Alexander also did much to augment the common fund for resident canons at Lichfield, reserving pensions to it from several churches appropriated to monastic houses, securing the endowment of Lichfield's sacristy and of chaplains celebrating masses to the Virgin, and continuing the rebuilding of Lichfield Cathedral begun by his predecessors.
He added new prebends to the cathedral's endowment, several of them being bursaries financed from the proceeds of the obsolete papal tax known as Peter's Pence.
In addition he purchased estates to augment the temporal endowment of his see.
In 1236, following a long legal battle, he secured visitation rights over the monks of Coventry.
Assiduous in the correction of monastic abuses, he established resident vicars in many churches appropriated to the religious.
Outside the diocese his cosmopolitan early training ensured that he was much in demand as a diplomat.
He was sent by Henry III to Rome in 1226, 1227, 1228, and 1234; to Antwerp for negotiations with envoys of the Emperor Frederick II in 1227; and on several occasions to France or Wales to renew truces.
His trip to Rome in 1228 was intended to secure the succession to Archbishop Langton whom Alexander served also as executor.
Politically, Alexander's interventions were made in company with Langton's other protégés amongst the English bishops.
In 1224 he acted as envoy to the disgraced courtier, Falkes de Breauté [q.v.], during the siege of Bedford Castle.
A decade later he was one of several bishops to oppose the controversial regime of Peter des Roches, bishop of Winchester [q.v.].
Accused before the council in January 1234 of favouring the rebellious Richard Marshal, third Earl of Pembroke [q.v.], he denied the charge, at the same time excommunicating those whom he dubbed the king's true enemies, a group taken to include Peter des Roches and his alien associates.
Besides being one of Henry III's most frequent ambassadors to Rome, Alexander served many times as papal judge delegate.
He died 26 December 1238 in Andover, where he had gone to assist the cause of a papal clerk.
By a deathbed grant he ensured the foundation at Denhall in the Wirral of a hospital to care for the poor and for those shipwrecked on the passage to Ireland.
[J. Cox Russell, ‘A Dictionary of Thirteenth Century Writers’,Bulletin of the Institute of Historical Research , special supplement no. 3, 1936; W. A. Hinnebusch,The Early English Friars Preachers , 1951; C. W. Foster and K. Major (eds.),
The Registrum Antiquissimum of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln , 8 vols., Lincoln Record Society 1931–58, vol. ii, no. 474, vol. iii, no. 879; H. E. Savage (ed.),
The Great Register of Lichfield Cathedral known as Magnum Registrum Album , William Salt Archaeological Society, 1926.]
R A Buchanan
,Lionel Thomas Caswall (1910–1974), engineering historian, was born in Chester 11 February 1910, the only child of Lionel Caswall Rolt, a minor country gentleman, and his wife Jemima Clarke (subsequently Timperley).
Rolt was distantly related to Kyrle Willans, the son of Peter Willans, inventor of the enclosed vertical central valve steam engine, and himself a mechanical engineer.
It was Willans who advised Rolt's parents to apprentice him as a mechanical engineer, and it was with great enthusiasm that in 1926 the boy left Cheltenham College, which had been a miserable experience for him, to serve as a pupil at Bomfords, an agricultural engineering firm at Pitchill near Evesham.
In 1928 Rolt began a three-year apprenticeship at Kerr, Stuart & Co.
Ltd., locomotive engineers of Stoke-on-Trent, but the firm collapsed before his term had been completed, and he finished his apprenticeship with R. A. Lister & Co.
Ltd. of Dursley.
He then moved to a succession of short-term jobs until in 1934 he joined some friends in establishing a garage near Basingstoke, specializing in veteran and vintage cars.
By now he had become an enthusiastic car owner and repairer, and with his colleagues he formed the Vintage Sports Car Club.
This was Rolt's first substantial contribution to the preservation of the artefacts of industrial history.
At the same time he acquired an affection for canals as a result of joining the Willans family for holidays on their narrow boat Cressy .
In 1939 he bought Cressy and abandoned his career as a practising engineer in favour of a life spent writing on board a canal narrow boat.
He and his first wife lived on Cressy until 1951.
The voyage which they made in 1939 resulted, in 1944, in the publication of Narrow Boat , a passionate evocation of the British canals and of the lives of those who lived and worked upon them.
It was largely responsible for the formation of the Inland Waterways Association in 1946, with Rolt as its first secretary.
Cressy had been moored at Tardebigge for four years while Rolt undertook various forms of engineering war-work, but when peace returned he threw himself into the task of preserving the canal system.
He envisaged a restoration of commercial activity on the canals, and was not at first sympathetic to their conversion into a leisure amenity.
This and other more personal disagreements between the founders of the IWA led in 1951 to Rolt's withdrawal from the association.
In 1950 he became involved in the effort to revive a narrow-gauge quarry railway in north Wales — the Talyllyn Railway.
This was a great success, setting the pattern for many other preservation schemes.
He and his second wife settled in the family house at Stanley Pontlarge, Gloucestershire, and here he resumed his literary programme, writing over forty books, covering canals, railways, motor cars, and many other aspects of engineering history.
His most impressive works were the biographies of the great engineers, especially the outstanding Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1957).
All these books were lucidly written, illuminating the technical principles of engineering in a way which was comprehensible to the non-technical reader.
But Rolt was not content to pursue this full literary career.
He was called upon repeatedly to take an active part in the burgeoning preservation movements of the 1950s and 1960s.
He became a vice-president of the Newcomen Society for the study of the history of engineering and technology; he became a member of the Science Museum advisory council, and took an active part in the discussions which resulted in the establishment of the Railway Museum in York; the National Trust made him a member of its properties committee, to advise on industrial archaeology; and he was appointed chairman of the Council for British Archaeology research committee on industrial archaeology.
The new discipline of industrial archaeology, which emerged in the 1950s, was largely inspired by Rolt's writing, and it was entirely appropriate that he should become the first president of the Association for Industrial Archaeology when this was founded in 1973.
The effect of all this activity in committees and small consultative groups is incalculable, but it certainly represented a formidable contribution to the growth of interest in the conservation of industrial buildings and machines.
In 1939 he married Angela Orred, daughter of a retired army major.
She left him in 1951 and joined Billy Smart's circus.
His second wife was Sonia, former wife of George Smith, a working canal boatman, and daughter of a colonial civil servant.
She had worked on the canals during World War II.
They had two sons.
Rolt died at Stanley Pontlarge 9 May 1974.
[L. T. C. Rolt,Landscape with Machines , 1971, and Landscape with Canals , 1977; Ian Mackersey,Tom Rolt and the Cressy Years , 1985; personal knowledge.]
Mary P English
,Mordecai Cubitt (1825–1914), naturalist and mycologist, was born 12 July 1825 in Horning, Norfolk, the eldest in the family of five sons and three daughters of Mordecai Cooke, village shopkeeper, and his wife Mary, postmistress, daughter of William Cubitt, schoolmaster, of Neatishead, Norfolk.
Cooke was educated at the village dame school until he was ten, and then to the age of thirteen by his uncle, James Cubitt, a Baptist minister in Ilford, who shortly afterwards moved to Stratford upon Avon.
Cooke then spent a year at a commercial school at Neatishead before being apprenticed for five years to a wholesale draper in Norwich.
In 1844 he moved to London, obtaining employment as a clerk.
Then, influenced by his aunt Naomi Treen (née Cubitt), a teacher at an elementary school practising Pestalozzian methods, he obtained in 1851 the post of master at Holy Trinity National School, Lambeth, where the progressive vicar, the Revd James Gillman, allowed him to pioneer revolutionary teaching methods in natural history and to set up a school museum.
Cooke published influential articles in the School and the Teacher and helped to found a museum for London teachers.
In 1859 he passed first class in botany in the first examination for teachers organized by the Department of Science and Art, and this was his sole academic qualification.
The same year he resigned from teaching and, helped by influential friends made while collecting material for his museums, undertook a variety of part-time jobs and published his first books, until in 1862 he became a civil servant on the staff of the India Museum, where he remained until 1880.
His lifelong passion for natural history began in childhood, and he made it his prime duty to popularize the subject, writing fourteen books for the layman.
In 1862 he founded the Society of Amateur Botanists; in 1865 he was co-founder, with his publisher Robert Hardwicke, and editor, of the immensely popular magazine Science Gossip , and soon afterwards founded the Quekett Microscopical Club.
He regarded field-work as of fundamental importance in the study of natural history.
Cooke's interest in fungi began while he was teaching, and in 1862 he published the first popular book on toadstools,A Plain and Easy Account of British Fungi .
This was followed by Rust, Smut, Mildew and Mould (1865), on plant pathogenic fungi, which was used in teaching in America.
He was now in close touch with the Revd M. J. Berkeley [q.v.], the ‘father’ of British mycology, whom he eventually succeeded as Britain's leading mycologist, but whom he always acknowledged as his master.
As Cooke's name became known through his huge output of taxonomic works, especially the two-volume Handbook of British Fungi (1871) and the journal Grevillea , which he founded in 1875 and edited himself, he entered into a vast correspondence with distinguished mycologists world-wide.
In 1880 he was seconded to the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, as its first cryptogamic botanist, and redoubled his mycological studies, publishing, among much else, his monumental eight-volume Illustrations of British Fungi (1881–91).
In all he published about 350 books and papers.
In 1892, with an international reputation, he retired, having sold his herbarium to Kew, but he continued to write, his Fungoid Pests of Cultivated Plants (1906) being very well received.
He became a scientific adviser to the Royal Horticultural Society and travelled the country attending the fungus forays of natural history societies and popularizing fungi among the public.
Cooke could never forget his humble origins.
He had no financial reserves, and lived in an unfashionable part of London.
He was ill at ease with the gentleman scientists of his day and was treated as a mere technician by many.
Consequently he never achieved any position of responsibility.
He was happiest at the field meetings of natural history societies and the subsequent festivities, where he could give free rein to his talents as a ballad singer and after-dinner speaker.
He was a not inconsiderable artist, illustrating many of his own books.
Though politically progressive in his youth, he later joined the Primrose League.
The modest honours he received were mainly from natural history societies, but in 1873 he was awarded the honorary degree of MA by Yale University, in 1902 the Victoria medal of honour by the Royal Horticultural Society, and in 1903 the gold medal of the Linnean Society.
He was an honorary member of American, French, and Italian scientific societies.
In 1846 Cooke married Sophia Elizabeth Biggs, the daughter of a tobacconist.
The mother of his seven children, five boys and two girls, was his step-daughter, Annie Elizabeth Thornton Biggs.
His wife remained in residence with the family.
He died 12 November 1914, at his daughter's home in Southsea, Hampshire.
[Mary P. English,Mordecai Cubitt Cooke: Victorian Naturalist, Mycologist, Teacher and Eccentric , 1987.]
D Llwyd Morgan
,Howell (1717? –1770), was one of the leaders of the Methodist revival in Wales, The date and place of his birth are not known.
Historians usually refer to him as a Monmouthshire man; his family connections and his early employment as a schoolteacher at Talgarth suggest that he could have been brought up in Breconshire, where, in 1737, he was converted by Howel Harris [q.v.].
On Harris's advice, in 1738 Davies went to Llanddowror to study under Griffith Jones [q.v.].
After his ordination in 1740 he served as curate at Llandeilo Abercywyn, but he could not resist the urge to preach in the Methodist way far outside his curacy, a practice Jones severely criticized: ‘it is the cry of the crowd that he will be governed by.’
In 1741 he became curate of Llys-y-frân near Haverfordwest.
The parish soon became the chief meeting-place for Pembrokeshire Methodists.
From 1743 until his death, Davies was the undisputed leader of the Pembrokeshire Methodists: his power as a preacher (a power not discernible in his only printed sermon,Llais y Priodfab , 1768), his standing as an ordained clergyman, and his financial independence gave him a rare combination of spiritual and social advantages.
Ill health was his main disadvantage.
He worked in both the English and Welsh parts of the county; in 1755 he opened, at Woodstock, the first chapel built especially for a Welsh Methodist society.
His staunch Calvinism allied him to George Whitefield [q.v.], whose pulpits in London and the west country he sometimes filled, and made him ‘violent against John Wesley’[q.v.].
Through Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon [q.v.], he became one of the Countess of Walsingham's chaplains.
Several of his contemporaries describe him as tender and gentle, modest, ‘shy’ even.
No doubt he was, in private.
The public man who earned for himself the title ‘Apostle of Pembrokeshire’ must have been tenacious and fearless, like most of the Methodist revivalists.
He married, first, in 1744, Katherine (daughter of John Poyer) of Parke, Henllan Amgoed (‘a wife with a thousand dracmas’ as Lewis Morris sarcastically noted).
She died in childbirth a year later.
The daughter who was born died before the age of two.
Then, sometime before the summer of 1747, he married Elizabeth, daughter and only surviving child of Philip and Luce White (née Phillips) of Prendergast.
A son born to them died in infancy; their daughter Margaret (‘Peggy’) survived both and in 1776 married Nathaniel, son of Daniel Rowland [q.v.].
On the title-page of Williams Pantycelyn's elegy to Davies, the poet notes that he died 13 January 1770, ‘in the fifty-third year of his age’.
He died in Parke and was buried in Prendergast cemetery.
[W. T. Watson, ‘Rev. Howell Davies, Woodstock’,Cylchgrawn Cymdeithas Hanes y Methodistiaid Calfinaidd , vol. xx, part 1, pp. 74–80;idem , ‘Revd.
Howell Davies, Pembrokeshire’,ibid .,
vol. xxiii, part 4, pp. 128–30; Walter T. Morgan, ‘A Note on Howell Davies’,ibid .,
vol. xxxii, part 4, pp. 109–11.]
Judith Champ
,George (1816–1886), papal official, was born in 1816, the fifth son in the family of seven sons and five daughters of James Talbot, third Baron Talbot of Malahide, and his wife Anne Sarah, daughter of Samuel Rodbard from Somerset.
His further education was at St Mary's Hall, Oxford.
He followed the familiar path of aristocratic younger sons to ordination in the Church of England and in 1840 was appointed to a family living at Evercreech in Somerset.
Talbot was received into the Roman Catholic Church by Nicholas Wiseman (later cardinal archbishop of Westminster, q.v.) in 1843 at St Mary's College, Oscott.
He studied for the Catholic priesthood at Oscott alongside Edmund Stonor and Edward Howard (later cardinal, q.v.).
Both men were lifelong friends of his and also had influential careers in Rome.
In June 1846 Talbot was ordained priest by Wiseman at Oscott.
He applied to join the Oratorian Congregation newly formed by John Henry Newman (later cardinal, q.v.), but was turned down in March 1847.
Until 1849 he worked as a pastoral priest at the Cathedral of St George in Southwark, which he was reluctant to leave.
However, through Wiseman's influence he was appointed a canon of St Peter's, Rome, and a chamberlain to Pope Pius IX.
As a recent convert with only brief pastoral experience, Talbot's knowledge of the English Catholic scene was limited and partial.
However, he gained the confidence and personal friendship of Pope Pius IX and exercised considerable influence for the next twenty years.
Despite the fact that the rector of the English College in Rome acted as agent for the English bishops, Talbot became a self-appointed and unofficial agent working assiduously for the interests of Wiseman and Henry Edward Manning (later cardinal, q.v.).
He was an inflexible, even fanatical supporter of the ultramontane line taken by Wiseman and Manning and often machinated against the other English bishops, exacerbating disputes and misrepresenting them to the pope.
The other bishops resented him.
Even his close confidant Manning described him in later years as imprudent.
Talbot was implacably opposed to Newman, describing him as ‘the most dangerous man in England’ and colouring the attitude of the Roman authorities to him.
In the jurisdictional dispute between Wiseman and his coadjutor George Errington [q.v.]
Talbot plotted against Errington and did all he could to bring about the coadjutor's eventual resignation.
His presence and his influence in Rome undermined that of successive rectors of the English College.
He exercised increasing influence over the College and in 1860 was appointed delegate protector.
In 1852 he was mainly responsible for establishing the Collegio Pio within the walls of the English College, for the training of convert and older clergy.
In 1866 he launched an ambitious plan to rebuild the college chapel and began fund-raising with a donation of £100 from the pope himself.
By 1867 his influence was such that he was able to force the resignation of the rector in office and persuade the pope to accept his nominee.
However, Talbot's days close to the papal throne were by then limited.
His extraordinary conceit and capacity for intrigue spilled over into a genuine mental instability and in 1869 he was removed from Rome to a lunatic asylum in a convent at Passy, a suburb of Paris.
For many years the pope kept Talbot's apartments in the Vatican ready in case he should return.
He was cared for by the sisters of Bon Secours at Passy until his death 16 October 1886, and was buried quietly in the cemetery of Père Lachaise in Paris.
[Shane Leslie,Henry Edward Manning: his Life and Labours , 1921; E. R. Norman,The English Catholic Church in the 19th Century , 1986;Wiseman Review , no. 502, 1964, p. 290.]
K E L Simmons
,Edmund (1857–1934), field ornithologist and author, was born in London at Holgate Lodge, Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, 14 August 1857, the youngest son in the family of two surviving sons and three daughters of Frederick Lokes Slous, a wealthy stockbroker, and his third wife Ann Holgate, daughter of John Sherborn.
He was first registered at birth as ‘Herbert’.
He was the brother of Frederick Courteney Selous [q.v.], the hunter and African explorer, and the nephew of the artist Henry Courtney Selous and the dramatist Angiolo Robson Selous.
Educated privately, he matriculated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1877 (leaving without a degree), was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1878, and called to the bar in 1881.
After trips to southern Africa and India, he practised briefly as a barrister, married, and settled down to the life of a gentleman, pursuing the two great passions of his life — the study of natural history and of great literature (French, German, and Spanish, all read in the original languages, as well as English).
A conventional Victorian naturalist at first, Selous developed an aversion to blood sports and to all forms of scientific collecting involving cruelty to animals — against which, as a self-styled ‘life-loving naturalist’, he campaigned for the rest of his life, earning the enmity of certain important figures in the ornithological establishment of the day.
In 1898 he began observing the habits of wild birds in earnest, making detailed notes on the spot, and became a key pioneer (as observer and interpreter) in the ethological study of bird behaviour, introducing the words ‘bird-watcher’ and ‘bird-watching’into the language and producing a large output of influential scientific papers and books — the latter including Bird Watching (1901),The Bird Watcher in the Shetlands (1905),Bird Life Glimpses (1905),Realities of Bird Life (1927),Thought-transference — or What?— in Birds (1931), and Evolution of Habit in Birds (1933)— as well as many essays (mostly in the Saturday Review ) and several other books on popular natural history and for children.
Most of Selous' observations were made within walking or cycling distance of his various homes in England and abroad, but he also visited the Shetlands, Sweden, Holland, and Iceland.
Bird display was his speciality and he made a number of seminal studies.
He was one of the first to seek evidence in the field for the concept of natural selection held by Charles Darwin [q.v.], maintaining (then heretically) that a species' behaviour was as characteristic of it as any morphological feature.
Above all, and once more against the tide of contemporary scientific opinion, he championed the Darwinian idea of sexual selection, obtaining evidence of female choice in two species (the ruff and the black grouse) in which mate-selection is made communally, thus earning the later approbation of the distinguished geneticist, Sir R. A. Fisher [q.v.].
Also obsessed by the problem of the co-ordinated flight manoeuvres of flocking birds, Selous (again ahead of his time) sought the explanation in some form of extrasensory facility such as telepathy.
In 1886 Selous married Fanny, daughter of John Maxwell, publisher, and his wife Mary Elizabeth Braddon [q.v.], novelist.
They had a son (Gerald Holgate Selous, diplomat and Arabist) and twin daughters.
Selous went on bird-watching and writing nearly to the end of his life and died at home in Weymouth 25 March 1934.
[Personal research by author (Edmund Selous' biographer); family information and memoirs; field-notes and other archive material in Edward Selous Collection (Edward Grey Institute, Oxford).]
G E Aylmer
,John (1624–1701), republican administrator and colonial governor, was the son of John Blackwell, a Puritan-inclined London businessman, who at one time supplied the royal household with groceries and latterly settled in Mortlake in Surrey, and his wife, who came from the Smithesby family, royal household servants.
Blackwell was an ensign in the City's horse militia as early as 1642 and a cornet in the parliamentary army by 1644; in 1645 he became a captain in Oliver Cromwell's own cavalry regiment, in which he served until June 1648.
For most of the time he combined this with the very important post of deputy treasurer-at-wars.
A political as well as a religious Independent, Blackwell's appointment may have been intended to reassure the army, since the war treasurers themselves were London aldermen of Presbyterian persuasion.
In 1649 the Rump Parliament rejected a motion to make him a full treasurer, but in 1652 he became co-treasurer with an obscure backbench MP, and from 1653 with Richard Deane [q.v.]; they were also joint receivers-general of assessments, and thus responsible for the entire system of direct taxation and military expenditure.
Blackwell and Deane received a basic salary plus poundage according to the level of military spending.
Although Charles Fleetwood [q.v.], the lord deputy, grumbled about his getting priority for his Irish land claims — Blackwell and his father both having invested in Ireland as ‘adventurers’ and part of his own pay arrears being due in this way — two years later John Thurloe [q.v.], secretary of state, thought his conduct perfectly reasonable.
In the 1656–8 Parliament, as a member for Surrey, he was active in committees but took little part in the debates.
Although he might have seemed to be a committed Cromwellian, Blackwell like Deane supported the Wallingford House faction, led by Charles Fleetwood and John Lambert [q.v.], who were responsible for the overthrow of Richard Cromwell [q.v.]as protector and the return of the Rump in May 1659.
If a little less politically active than his colleague Deane, he too continued to act under the military junta of October–December; and not surprisingly the restored Long Parliament replaced both of them as war treasurers early in 1660.
After the Restoration he was one of those not actually attainted but perpetually disabled from holding any office.
He was able to satisfy Royalist investigators that an out-payment which he had made in connection with the king's trial and execution had simply been a routine matter, in no way implicating him in the actual regicide.
This was fortunate, since his father had served on the second high court of justice in February–March 1649, which had tried and condemned James (first Duke of Hamilton), Henry Rich (first Earl of Holland)[qq.v.], and other Royalist leaders in the second civil war of 1648.
The elder Blackwell's religious commitment was at least as strong as his son's; he seems to have died in some poverty, having previously calculated the debts owing to himself at nearly £36,000 (Bodleian MS Rawl.
A xxxiv, fol. 259).
Like his father he married a Smithesby — Elizabeth, daughter of James.
John Blackwell's Irish lands had been confirmed by a special Act in the second Protectorate Parliament (of 1656–8).
In the autumn of 1659, when he was even appointed (very briefly as it turned out) to be a treasury commissioner, he was also elected an alderman of the City; early the next year he was excused from this dignity owing to lack of means.
At the Restoration his ex-church and ex-crown lands and those belonging to the Butler (Ormonde) family in Ireland were all forfeit, but he managed to retain other Irish interests, through the friendship and protection of the first Baron Kingston, who as Sir John King [q.v.]had been a Cromwellian until 1659.
In spite of this Blackwell was threatened with arrest at least once in the 1660s.
He seems to have divided his time between Dublin and Chester.
In 1672, having been a widower for two years, he married a daughter of the imprisoned republican general, John Lambert, which hardly argues any diminution in his commitment to the ‘Good Old Cause’.
And it was Lambert, a son by this marriage, who became a household official and diplomatic envoy under William III, was knighted, and then made a baronet (1718): a nice reminder of the continuities between the Protectorate and the post-1689 monarchy.
From his two marriages John Blackwell had seventeen children.
The next phase of Blackwell's career was in the colony of Massachusetts Bay, where he arrived in 1684.
In spite of the charter having been called in and the old Puritan ruling party apparently crushed, he rapidly attained considerable influence, as was sourly noted by the ardently imperialistic customs official, Edward Randolph [q.v.].
Blackwell produced an ingenious if not wholly convincing scheme for a land bank, to provide credit and to help overcome the colony's chronic shortage of specie.
It is not clear whether the plan foundered because of legal or constitutional doubts about the governor's interim council lacking authority to incorporate such a bank, or due to opposition from the mercantile, creditor interest.
Blackwell had already been in touch with William Penn [q.v.], when the Quaker proprietor offered him the deputy governorship of the infant colony of Pennsylvania, in a desperate attempt to reassert his authority over the resident Quaker oligarchy based in Philadelphia.
Blackwell's effective period as governor lasted only a year, from the end of 1688 to New Year 1690, and is generally reckoned a failure.
Given the balance of social and political forces and the lack of coercive power, Pennsylvania was in fact ungovernable except by, or with the tacit agreement of, the local élite.
The governor expressed his disillusionment in letters to Penn and others: ‘the hosts of mosquitoes are worse than armed men, yet the men without arms [are]worse than they’; and attacked what he saw as Quaker hypocrisy: ‘each praying with his neighbour on First Days, and then preying on him the other six’.
Having declined Penn's offer of a lesser post as receiver-general of all proprietarial revenues in the colony, Blackwell returned to Massachusetts in 1690 and then to England in 1693 or 1694.
His wealth in his latter years is problematic; he lived in Bethnal Green, died intestate, and was buried in Kensington 6 July 1701.
The baronetcy became extinct in 1801.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; History of Parliament Trust, draft biography by E. A. Reid;Papers of William Penn , general eds.
R. S. and M. M. Dunn, vol. iii,1685–1700 , ed.
M. Wockeck et al .,
1986;Burke's Extinct and Dormant Baronetcies , 1841; J. Dorfman,The Economic Mind in American Civilisation 1606–1865 , vol. i, 1947, book 1, ch. vii; D. B. Horn (ed.),
British Diplomatic Representatives 1689–1789 , Camden Society, 3rd series, vol. xlvi, 1932.]
G E Aylmer
,Gualter or Walter (1628–1652), surveyor, college servant, political agent, and administrator, came from a modest East Anglian background.
He was baptized in Chevington, Suffolk, 15 January 1598, the son of William Frost.
Having it would seem obtained a training as a land surveyor, he was manciple of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, by 1628.
He held this post until 1639, and was involved in the construction of Hobson's conduit, or ‘the new river’, providing a water supply for his own and Christ's College.
In 1639–40 he acted as a secret courier, disguised as a commercial traveller, for the English opposition leaders in their clandestine — if not treasonable — correspondence with the Scottish Covenanters.
One source connects him with Thomas Savile (first Viscount Savile of Castlebar, q.v.), another — more reliably — with Robert Greville (second Baron Brooke, q.v.).
In 1642 he was acting as a commissary, or supply officer, at Chester, sending provisions over for the Anglo-Scottish forces in Ireland.
In 1642–3 he apparently served as an intelligence officer under the Long Parliament's committee of safety.
His promotion in 1644 to the important post of co-secretary to the new committee of both kingdoms may have been partly because he was already known to, and trusted by, its Scottish members, but also suggests more direct patronage.
Since Brooke was already dead and Savile discredited, Sir Robert Rich, second Earl of Warwick (an old member of Emmanuel), and William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele (whose eldest son had been there)[qq.v.]appear as possible links.
When the Scots dropped out, Frost moved with the committee to Derby House in 1647–8, and after the establishment of the Commonwealth in 1649 he became secretary to the newly created council of state.
He held this, the most senior post in the republican central executive, until his death.
Presumably efficient and discreet as an administrative organizer and record keeper, his were less successful essays into political propaganda, on behalf of the regime against its radical critics, the Levellers.
It was important for the future of the English republic that Frost was succeeded not by his eldest son, who had become assistant secretary and treasurer for the council's contingencies, but by the candidate of Oliver St John and Oliver Cromwell, John Thurloe [qq.v.].
Frost married Phoebe Seffray in Chevington, Suffolk, in 1619.
He died in London 29 March 1652, leaving a large family and considerable debts.
He showed some nepotistic, or rather patrimonial skill in getting his sons placed in the public service; his failure to have amassed even a modest competence of wealth may be taken to argue either extreme probity or reckless extravagance, but more likely arose from having over-extended his credit in trying to send supplies to Ireland back in 1642.
The younger Walter, who seems to have succeeded his father in the service of the City of London as its official chronologer, remained on the council staff until 1660, as did one of his brothers, a third having died in its service earlier, and a fourth having been appointed to the staff of the council in Ireland under Henry Cromwell [q.v.].
From having been at the very centre of public affairs, the Frost family sank back into almost impenetrable obscurity.
[G. E. Aylmer,The State's Servants , 1973; C. Russell,The Fall of the British Monarchies , 1991; information from Dr A. S. Bendall, Emmanuel College, Cambridge.]
C B Phillips
, Sir John (1582–1637), landed gentleman and barrister, was born at Lowther 4 February and baptized in Lowther church 24 February 1582, the second (but first surviving) son in the family of eight sons and one daughter of Sir Christopher Lowther of Lowther and his first wife Eleanor, daughter of William Musgrave esquire of Hayton, Cumberland.
He was educated at Appleby grammar school and at eighteen was admitted to the Inner Temple.
He was called to the bar in 1609.
Lowther was active as a barrister and, according to his autobiography, the circuit judges nominated him in 1616 as a JP for Westmorland; he joined his father on a bench which welcomed his legal knowledge.
The nomination helped him avoid the feuds between Francis Clifford, fourth Earl of Cumberland, and Lord William Howard (1563–1640, q.v.), and signalled that he was ‘tied to none in dependancie’.
Westmorland elected him MP in 1623, twice in 1625, and, with his son John, in 1627; and he kept diaries of proceedings in the Commons.
In Parliament he seems to have been happiest with the common-law politics of Sir Edward Coke [q.v.], but disapproving of faction.
Nevertheless, in June 1626 he was introduced to George Villiers, first Duke of Buckingham [q.v.], who had him knighted and appointed KC on the council of the north.
If Buckingham's policies fitted Lowther's perception of good government, his reputation as an unaligned member survived his links with the duke.
He was active in Westmorland over the forced loan.
In October 1626 he had been drafted on to the loan commission for Yorkshire, and was also a commissioner in June 1627 to finance shipbuilding using recusancy fines, which commissions were headed by Sir John Savile (later first Baron Savile of Pontefract, q.v.).
Lowther's service under Savile probably explains why Sir Thomas Wentworth (later first Earl of Strafford, q.v.) removed him from the commission to compound with recusants in July 1630.
Notwithstanding, Lowther remained active in the council of the north until his death.
Until he inherited in 1617, Lowther's professional income and a jointure estate of £72 per annum supported him.
Thereafter his landed income always exceeded that from the law, and was wisely diversified by moneylending, often on mortgage, and by investment in trade, coalmining, and salt manufacture.
In 1617 in Westmorland £710 gross was the income of a substantial landed family.
Lowther purchased additional land worth over £1,200 a year at a cost of £28,085, mostly in Cumbria though some was in Yorkshire.
He kept a demesne farm, and improved both land and rents, so that his landed income was over £2,000 at his death.
Land was the basis of Lowther's county and parliamentary position; the law gave him added influence and opportunity.
Sir John had married in 1602, at his father's prompting, Ellinor, daughter of William Fleming esquire of Rydal, Westmorland.
They had two daughters and three sons.
Sir John died at Lowther 15 September 1637, and was succeeded by the eldest son, John, later Sir John Lowther of Lowther, first baronet (created 1638).
Christopher (created baronet in 1642) was given the manor of St Bees by his father, in which, with his son (Sir John Lowther of Whitehaven, q.v.), he founded the port of Whitehaven, and the Lowther of Whitehaven family.
William, the youngest son, married without his father's blessing, but eventually founded the Swillington (Yorkshire) branch of the family.
In 1802 his successor, William Lowther, first Earl of Lonsdale (created 1808)[q.v.], inherited the Lowther and Whitehaven estates.
[Cumbria County Record Office, Carlisle, Lowther manuscripts; C. B. Phillips (ed.),
Lowther Family Estate Books 1617–1675 , Surtees Society, vol. xcci, 1979; C. H. H. Owen,The Lowther Family , 1990.]
Valerie Drake
,Anna (fl. 1642–1660), prophet, was born in Poplar, Stepney, the daughter of William Trapnel, shipwright, and a ‘godly’ mother.
After visiting different Puritan congregations in her teens, and undergoing several spiritual trials, she had a revelation on 1 January 1642, in the Baptist church of John Simpson [q.v]in Aldgate, London.
She joined this congregation in 1650 and became a Fifth Monarchist in 1652.
Her first pamphlet,Strange and Wonderful Newes from Whitehall (1654), chronicles the twelve-day trance into which she fell on 7 January 1654, when she went with Vavasor Powell [q.v.]to Whitehall, where he was questioned for subversive preaching.
Large audiences gathered to hear the verse prophecies which she uttered from her bed in Mr Roberts's lodgings nearby, swallowing occasionally ‘very little toast in small Bear’.
The Cry of a Stone (1654) also records these events.
Her words were written down by recorders, whom she sometimes exhorted to write faster to keep pace with her.
As well as prophesying the triumph of ‘the Saints’ and the destruction of their enemies, Anna also declared God's displeasure at Oliver Cromwell's being made lord protector on 16 December 1653.
For example, she asserted: ‘If he were not (speaking of the Lord Cromwell) backsliden, he would be ashamed of his great pomp and revenue, whiles the poore are ready to starve.’
Thus (in the role of God's vessel) Anna Trapnel made public, political criticisms alongside her spiritual predictions.
People who came to listen to her included Colonel William Sydenham [q.v.]of the council of state and Thomas Allen, later lord mayor of London.
After this, God and the Fifth Monarchists sent her to Cornwall to preach, until she was arrested on 23 March 1654, and imprisoned in Plymouth, then Portsmouth, and finally Bridewell in London, accused of witchcraft, madness, and whoredom.
Friends gave her much support in Bridewell, assuring the jailer that ‘this our sister is no vagabond, its well known by many in the City, her civil manner of life from a child.’
During her imprisonment,A Legacy for Saints was published by her congregation, All-Hallows the Great, London, describing her conversion.
Details of her Cornwall experiences appeared in Anna Trapnel's Report and Plea (1654).
Her high public profile, and her talent for talking her way out of tight corners, seem to have led to her release on 26 July.
In 1656 she revisited Cornwall and, from August 1657 to mid-1658, she fell into another trance, avoiding further arrest.
Her utterances, including condemnation of the Quakers as well as politicians, were recorded in A Voice for the King of Saints (1658) and an untitled folio volume (1659) now in the Bodleian Library.
Anna was referred to and criticized in a number of publications until 1660.
Unmarried and sustained by her ‘sisters’, Anna asserted the importance of ‘handmaids’ to Christ, and the unimportance of worldly knowledge; and blamed both Eve and Adam for the Fall.
She demonstrated that some women could make their voices heard on political as well as spiritual matters during the Interregnum.
[C. Burrage, ‘Anna Trapnel's Prophecies’,English Historical Review , vol. xxvi, 1911, pp. 526–35;Mercurius Politicus , no. 312, 29 May–5 June 1656;The Public Intelligencer , no. 13, 24–31 December 1655;Several Proceedings , no. 225, 12–19 January 1654.]
Isobel Grundy
,Dorothy (1767–1831), missionary, was born 24 April 1767 in Whitby, Yorkshire, the second daughter in the large family of Dorothy and William Ripley of Whitby.
Her father was a master mason and a leading local Methodist.
She learned to pray at two or three, and felt chosen to preach the gospel to the heathen from eleven.
Her teenage years were turbulent, marked by a suicide attempt and (the next year, 1784) the death of her beloved father.
At about twenty, on her way ‘to meeting’, she encountered a group of sailors who had just stripped, tarred, and feathered a beautiful girl ‘ruined by a snare’.
Ripley ‘became servant to this miserable female’, helped her on with borrowed clothes, ‘lifted up my eyes to Heaven, and asked, Why is this not me Lord?’
In her later prison visiting she always sought out prostitutes for kindness.
In 1802, already a minister for ten years, she set out to preach to ‘Ethiopia's children’ living under ‘base tyranny’in ‘the large cities of America’.
Several times she returned home because of illness, but never for long.
She maintained links with the Quakers but made a point of religious independence: ‘As I am not a member of any community, no society can answer for my irregular conduct.’
She valued herself on being self-supporting, ‘enabled to pay my own expenses many times, at Inns, by printing’.
At Chester in England in October 1807 she spent two days editing a slim volume of letters addressed to her by ‘Several Africans and Indians’, including a black bishop, proto-feminist Indian women, and a convicted felon.
In New York in 1810 she issued her Extraordinary Conversion, and Religious Experience…with her First Voyage and Travels in America , calling it ‘vol. i’; she reprinted it in London in 1817, but never got round to a second volume.
A similar work prepared for the press soon after this one appeared only in 1819, in Philadelphia, as The Bank of Faith and Works United .
That year she also published an account of a nineteen-year-old woman executed for arson.
Her memoirs in jaunty verse (‘A Hymn from my Nativity’, written 1819) and prose (written late 1821, in Mythe near Tewkesbury) appeared together at Bristol as An Address to all in Difficulties .
A second, revised and expanded edition of The Bank (Whitby, 1822) earned a passage to the southern states of America, her ninth Atlantic crossing.
On yet another, from New York to France in 1826, she found time to write a preface to her father's recently discovered memoirs, published in Philadelphia in 1827.
Ripley's texts reflect the contradictions of her career.
The language of her faith and preaching is other-worldly, yet she is deeply concerned with social issues and the roots of crime and poverty.
She is selfless in religious commitment, yet delights in displaying herself in print as a spiritual heroine.
Dorothy Ripley died 23 December 1831 in Mecklenburgh, Virginia.
She was unmarried.
[Dorothy Ripley,The Bank of Faith and Works United , Philadelphia, 1819, and The Extraordinary Conversion, and Religious Experience of Dorothy Ripley , 1810; Joseph Smith,A Descriptive Catalogue of Friends' Books , 1867.]
Tim Mowl
,Thomas (1750–1820), architect and speculative builder in Bath, was born in 1750, of unknown parentage.
He began his career as clerk to the influential local builder, Thomas Warr Atwood, and was his spokesman in a long dispute with rival builders over the design for a new guildhall.
When Atwood died suddenly in 1775, the young Baldwin was well placed to submit his own design.
This combined a modish interior suite in the style of Robert Adam [q.v.]with a conventional but delicately detailed Palladian exterior and was accepted by the corporation in 1776, the year of Baldwin's appointment as city surveyor.
From this base he mounted a successful practice executing public works and speculative building on the grandest scale, only halted by bankruptcy in the financial crash of 1793.
Baldwin was master of two related styles.
His public buildings were conceived in a robust stylar Palladian but display the refined ornaments of neo-classicism and command the city centre with both authority and elegance.
His Cross Bath of 1786, with subtle serpentine curves and refined neo-classical forms, confirmed his connection with the city's hot springs.
He was made inspector of the baths in 1787 and between 1788 and 1792 built the Great Pump Room with its exquisitely ornamented twin colonnades.
For his speculative housing, Baldwin devised shallow elevations that gave an impression of expensive surface detail but were relatively cheap to construct.
Northumberland Buildings (c .1788) was his first experiment in this style.
After 1788 Baldwin took over the development of the Bathwick estate, a project conceived on the most ambitious scale.
Great Pulteney Street alone is 1,100 feet long and 100 feet wide, though the thin pilasters and applied pediments of Bathwick's terraces prevent them from ranking alongside the Royal Crescent and the King's Circus as works of European significance.
Bath Street, which he was building in the old centre after 1791, is probably his finest work, with sweeping quadrant arms and a covered promenade of Ionic columns.
Baldwin continued to work after his bankruptcy, rebuilding Hafod in Cardiganshire for Thomas Johnes in 1807 and designing the town hall in Devizes, Wiltshire (1806–8).
On 15 September 1779, at St James's church, Bath, Baldwin married Elizabeth, daughter of John Chapman, alderman of Bath.
They had at least one daughter and one son.
Baldwin died at 3 Harington Place, Bath, 7 March 1820, and was buried in St Michael's church.
[H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; Walter Ison,The Georgian Buildings of Bath , revised edn. 1980; Bath city council minutes, 1776–92.]
Michael Zell
,John (c. 1590–1651), royal gun-founder and patentee, was born in Chiddingstone, Kent, about 1590, the son of Thomas Browne, founder of iron ordnance to Queen Elizabeth I and James I. He joined his father's thriving business, although not apprenticed in ironmaking, and took over Thomas's patent in 1615.
The Brownes cast iron ordnance for both the Crown and private merchants, and exported guns when permitted by the Crown.
John Browne supplied ordnance to the Dutch until 1619, at which time he employed 200 men at ironworks in Brenchley and Horsmonden, Kent.
Half of his production was exported, and from 1618 to 1621 he also cast cannon for Spain.
In 1621 his domestic sales were cut sharply by a patent issued to Sir Sackville Crowe [q.v.]to supply ordnance to all English merchants.
The rival patentees quarrelled for over a decade, taking the fight to Parliament in 1624.
Crowe sub-contracted half his sales to Browne in 1626 and finally resigned his patent in 1635.
From the mid-1620s Browne developed new, lighter, iron cannon.
These ‘turned’ guns (or drakes) weighed a third less than conventional iron cannon and were intended to replace the costlier (but lighter) bronze guns on ships.
The tempo of Browne's gun-founding business followed the cycles of peace and war from the 1620s to the 1640s.
A stagnant market and trade rivalries in the early 1620s were followed by expansion in the later 1620s (between 1625 and 1629 Browne's sales to the Crown were over £4,300 per annum), and then another slow period in the early 1630s.
Renewed efforts to sell ordnance in the Netherlands, from 1629, met with intense competition from Swedish suppliers and resulted in substantial losses, including the £12,000 Browne paid the king for the licence.
But within a few years Browne's fortunes were restored: he acquired monopolies of the manufacture and sales of both iron and bronze ordnance, as well as iron pots, kettles, chimney backs, and iron weights ‘in the French manner’.
The Crown renewed purchases of bronze and iron naval guns, and the ordnance market expanded further with the Scottish rebellion of 1639–40 and the outbreak of civil war in 1642.
Browne, the king's gun-founder, became Parliament's gun-founder.
His business grew as Parliament gave him control of a number of ironworks, including the former royal ironworks in the Forest of Dean.
Browne's prosperity and monopolies were only once endangered, in 1645, when an intercepted letter named him as a Royalist sympathizer.
He and his son John protested their innocence to a Parliamentary committee, and nothing could be proved against them.
When, in 1651, the Rump ordered guns from a former employee of his, Browne delivered an emotional remonstrance to the House of Commons: the state's security, he claimed, depended upon a single gun-founder; his enterprise employed a ‘stock’ of £30,000, had overheads of at least £4,000 per annum, and had to be kept busy.
Browne resided in Brenchley from about 1615 to 1635, then in Horsmonden.
His stock in trade was valued at £16,000 in c .1650.
Browne married Martha, daughter of Henry Tilden, gentleman, in 1616.
They had a daughter and three sons.
After Martha's death in 1644 Browne married Elizabeth, daughter of Lancelot Bathurst, alderman of London.
His will, made 15 May 1651, included cash legacies totalling £14,000, and named his son George and his son-in-law Thomas Foley [q.v.]as executors.
He was buried in Horsmonden 13 June 1651.
[Browne MSS (West Kent archives); State Papers, Domestic (Public Record Office); Brenchley and Horsmonden parish registers; H. Cleere and D. Crossley,The Iron Industry of the Weald , 1985.]
Laurence Worms
,William (1749–1836), engraver, map-maker, and geographer to the king, was born in London 11 July 1749, the younger son and sixth of eight known children of William Faden (1711–1783), formerly Mackfaden, and his wife Hannah.
His father, a well-known printer, then of Salisbury Court, Fleet Street, had abbreviated the family name at the time of the 1745 rebellion.
Faden was apprenticed to the Fleet Street engraver, James Wigley, on 4 July 1764.
At the expiry of his term he became free of the Clothworkers' Company on 7 August 1771.
By 1773 he was in partnership with the family of the recently deceased map-maker Thomas Jefferys [q.v.], at Jefferys's premises on the corner of St Martin's Lane.
In 1776 he became an active member of the (Smeatonian) Society of Civil Engineers, the influential dining club of John Smeaton [q.v.]and other leading practical men of the day.
In the years of the American wars Faden came to prominence with maps and atlases of considerable historical note, some of the materials for which survive in the Library of Congress.
We glimpse him at this time as the ‘very accurate, industrious young man’ commended by ‘Governor’Thomas Pownall [q.v.].
In 1783 his father's will enabled him to establish full control of the business.
That same year he was appointed to ‘the place and quality of Geographer in Ordinary to his Majesty’.
Systematic in the acquisition of the best available maps, Faden developed the most competent cartographic service of the period.
His was an international concern, in contact with map-makers throughout Europe.
He supplied government departments and commissioned fresh surveys.
A gold medallist of the (Royal) Society of Arts in 1796, his activities foreshadowed the emergence of national cartographic agencies.
He brought out the first published Ordnance Survey map,An Entirely New & Accurate Survey of the County of Kent (1801).
Some of his plates were likewise adopted as official Admiralty charts.
When he moved at this time to larger premises at no. 5 Charing Cross, his maps were reputed the finest being engraved anywhere in the world.
Of his personal life little is known.
His sister Hannah married the painter and astronomer John Russell [q.v.], and there is an excellent Russell pastel (in a private collection) of Faden, in an attentive and determined pose.
The brothers-in-law collaborated on the earliest extant lunar globe.
Faden retired in 1823, the business passing to his former apprentice, James Wyld [q.v.].
He died in Shepperton, where his nephew William Russell was then rector, 21 March 1836, leaving a considerable fortune.
There is an elegant memorial to Faden and his sister Jane (1753–1833) in the parish church.
[British Museum Catalogue of Printed Maps, Charts and Plans , vol. v, 1967; Clothworkers' Company archives; J. B. Harley, ‘The Society of Arts and the Survey of English Counties’,Journal of the Royal Society of Arts , vol. cxii, 1964; parish registers and rate-books, St Andrew Holborn, St Bride Fleet Street, and St Martin-in-the-Fields; W. A. Seymour (ed.),
A History of the Ordnance Survey , 1980.]
Peter Leach
,Robert Dennis (1793–1872), architect, was baptized 24 January 1793 in Newington, Southwark, the son of Robert Chantrell, gentleman, of Newington, and his wife Mary Ann Dennis.
He was an articled pupil of Sir John Soane [q.v.]from 1807 to 1814.
In 1818 he was employed to carry out repairs on the parish church in Halifax, West Yorkshire, and the following year he settled in Leeds, from where he developed a substantial practice in the Yorkshire area, particularly as a designer of churches.
From 1823 onwards he built over twenty in the region, a number of them for the commissioners for building new churches established under the Million Pound Act, and in 1829 he was appointed surveyor to York Minster.
In 1846, however, he returned to London to become architect to the Incorporated Church Building Society, the Yorkshire practice being continued by his son John Boham Chantrell, and thereafter he built relatively little.
Chantrell's secular buildings were in the Greek Revival manner — notably the South Market at Leeds (1823–4, demolished), which was centred on an ambitious, circular, market cross of the Doric order — but his churches were mainly in the Gothic style.
Most of them are of the lancet type particularly associated with the commissioners' buildings and many — for example, Christ Church, Meadow Lane, Leeds (1823–6, demolished) and Honley near Huddersfield (1842–3)— had thin arcade piers of cast iron; but Chantrell was a serious student of Gothic.
His essentially pre-ecclesiological manner was given a variety and solidity by the use of carefully copied detail, and some of his later churches of the 1840s, such as Armitage Bridge near Huddersfield (1847–8), were based on a system of proportions derived from medieval Gothic buildings, a subject on which he published a paper in the Builder in 1847.
His most important work, St Peter's Leeds (1837–41), a rebuilding of the town's old parish church, was one of the key ecclesiastical projects of the 1830s, a landmark in both the scholarly revival of the Gothic style and the High Church revival of Anglican Christianity, in which an accurate use of Perpendicular Gothic detail was combined with an approximation to a medieval plan-form, complete with a fully developed chancel.
A further dimension to his work was his occasional use of the neo-Norman style, for example at Shadwell church near Leeds (1841–2); while the steeple he added in 1839 to the early eighteenth-century Holy Trinity church in Leeds is an ingenious pastiche in the manner of Sir Christopher Wren [q.v.], which shows an unusual sympathy for the architecture of that period.
Chantrell exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1812–14 and in Leeds at the Northern Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts from 1822, and became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1836.
In 1814 he married Elizabeth Caroline Boham; they had four sons and four daughters.
In 1863 Chantrell retired to Sussex, and he died in Norwood, south London, 4 January 1872.
[A. T. Bolton,The Works of Sir John Soane , 1924;Builder , vol. v, 1847; H. M. Colvin,A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects 1600–1840 , 1978; D. Linstrum,West Yorkshire, Architects and Architecture , 1978; M. H. Port,Six Hundred New Churches , 1961; information from Christopher Webster.]
Patrick Nairne
,Alfred John (1895–1982), calligrapher, was born 12 July 1895 in Grimsby, the elder son (there were no daughters) of Alfred John Fairbank, engine fitter, and his wife Emma Greetham, a Salvation Army officer.
His parents moved to Gillingham when his father became a chargeman of engine fitters in Chatham dockyard.
He was educated at the Wesleyan Higher Grade School, Gillingham, and at Chatham Dockyard School.
When fifteen he joined the dockyard as a boy writer.
It was a modest beginning to a career culminating in the rank of senior executive officer, but it was a family triumph in 1911.
Competition for Civil Service entry was stiff: success depended on good handwriting.
Thus Fairbank developed the interest and skill which led the first Baron Bridges [q.v.]to write of him when seventy ‘No man of our time has done more for good handwriting, whether for the individual or the community, than Alfred Fairbank.’
A dockyard colleague introduced Fairbank to the arts and crafts movement and calligraphy.
Transfer to the Admiralty enabled him in 1920 to attend evening classes in writing and illuminating at the Central School of Arts and Crafts.
He came to know Edward Johnston [q.v.], whose seminal book,Writing and Illuminating and Lettering (1906), stimulated his study of Renaissance handwriting and of palaeography, where he found the inspiration for the italic script and type associated with his name.
A founding member of the Society of Scribes and Illuminators (SSI), he became honorary secretary in 1931, and then in 1934 joint honorary secretary of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society.
His fame as a calligrapher grew, highlighted by the success of A Book of Scripts , the Penguin book of the year in 1949.
He was appointed CBE in 1951, the year in which he began twelve years as the first president of the SSI.
During his presidency (1951–63) he completed the best-known of his many calligraphy projects, the design and direction of the RAF Book of Remembrance at St Clement Danes.
Fairbank's contribution to handwriting made him known to a larger public.
In 1932 A Handwriting Manual was published by the Dryad Press, which also produced his writing cards for schools.
The Beacon Writing Books followed in the post-war years.
The adoption of the italic script by many schools and a wider interest in the reform of handwriting encouraged him to initiate the founding of the Society for Italic Handwriting in 1952, with a director of education, Joseph Compton, as chairman; it soon had more than 500 members.
Fairbank's later books included A Roman Script for Schools (1961) and The Story of Handwriting (1970).
Fairbank's personality reflected wide cultural interests and a gift for friendship.
Tall and spare, he was a scholar penman — exacting and conservative in his craft, but with a sense of humour and a love of beauty which his colleagues and pupils relished.
He described handwriting as a ‘dance of the pen’: so it was when he himself wrote.
Fairbank retired from the Admiralty to Hove.
He had married in 1919 Elsie, daughter of George Kneeshaw, master bricklayer.
They had one son, John, a chartered civil engineer, and one daughter, who died as an infant in 1922.
Fairbank died 14 March 1982 in Hove.
[A. S. Osley (ed.),
Calligraphy and Palaeography, Essays presented to Alfred Fairbank…, 1965; ‘In Memoriam A. J. Fairbank’ in Journal of the Society for Italic Handwriting , no. 107, summer 1982.]
J V Beckett
, Sir James , fourth baronet (1673–1755), landowner and coalmining entrepreneur, was born 5 August 1673 in London, the second son and the youngest of the three children of Sir John Lowther, second baronet [q.v.],
MP and landowner of Whitehaven, and his wife Jane, daughter of Woolley Leigh of Addington, Surrey.
He was educated privately in London, at Queen's College, Oxford, and the Middle Temple.
He succeeded as fourth baronet in 1731.
In 1694 he was returned to Parliament, beginning a Commons career which lasted for more than sixty years as MP for Carlisle 1694–1702, Cumberland 1708–22 and 1727–55, and Appleby 1723–7.
He held various positions at the Ordnance Office between 1696 and 1708.
A Whig in Parliament, but of an independent disposition, he spoke only occasionally during debates on national affairs, but actively promoted local causes on behalf of his Cumbrian constituents.
Lowther's lifelong interest was in the development of his estates in Cumberland.
Although a younger son, he inherited the property on the death of his father in 1706 after his elder brother Christopher (a notorious spendthrift) was disinherited.
In the years which followed Lowther increased the family estates through land purchase, and invested heavily in developing collieries in west Cumberland.
He sought a monopoly of the coal trade, with its lucrative market in Dublin, and to this end he played a vital role in developing the harbour facilities in Whitehaven.
Partly as a result, Whitehaven came to prominence in the Virginia tobacco trade during the 1740s, although Lowther had only indirect links with the merchant community.
He also sought to promote the local iron industry, and to continue the development of Whitehaven as a planned town along lines laid down by his father in the 1680s.
All this, together with a parsimonious outlook on life, brought him great wealth.
By the 1730s he was considered by many to be the richest commoner in England, and at his death his income from landed property, coalmining, investments in government funds, and mortgage holdings was around £25,000 annually.
Lowther was interested not merely in profits, but also in ways of solving some of the immense technological difficulties confronting coalmining in the eighteenth century.
He was an early investor in Newcomen steam engines, used for mine drainage, and in 1736 he conducted an experiment before the Royal Society, as a result of which he was elected FRS, relating to the problems caused in coalmines by inflammable gases.
Lowther was a man of immense stamina.
Almost every year he undertook the arduous journey from London to Whitehaven, where he spent the summer months discussing business with his stewards.
He continued to travel north, despite frequent attacks of gout from the age of fifty, even after surviving the amputation of his right leg at the age of seventy-seven in 1750.
Such was his energy that in 1753 he steered no fewer than six separate turnpike trust bills through Parliament, all relating to Whitehaven.
Lowther was unmarried.
He died in London 2 January 1755.
[J. V. Beckett,Coal and Tobacco: the Lowthers and the Economic Development of West Cumberland 1660–1760 , 1981; Hugh Owen,The Lowther Family , 1990.]
A C Hunt
,Edward Gordon (1863–1924), bibliographer, was born 16 February 1863 in Liverpool, the youngest of four sons (there were no daughters) of Robert Duff, merchant of Prince's Park, Liverpool, and his wife Jane Gordon.
He was educated at Cheltenham College, entered Wadham College, Oxford, in 1883, and took a pass degree in classics in 1887.
While at Oxford he began to draw up a catalogue of the fifteenth-century books in the Bodleian Library.
Neither the Bodleian nor the British Museum, however, would offer him a place, and in 1889 he began to read for the bar.
He had to wait for more congenial work until 1893, when Mrs Rylands appointed him her librarian.
He had the task of cataloguing her books (including the Spencer library), advising on new purchases, organizing the collection, and supervising its transfer to the new John Rylands Library in Manchester.
The library opened in 1900, but Duff resigned shortly afterwards, having quarrelled with the trustees.
He never took another permanent job, but supported himself with freelance work (he catalogued books for the London booksellers Pearson & Co.), with academic appointments (he was Sandars reader in bibliography at Cambridge in 1899, 1904, and 1911), and with the income from his books.
His first work,Early Printed Books , was published in 1893, followed by Early English Printing in 1896.
His works on early printing included two textbooks,The Printers, Stationers and Bookbinders of Westminster and London from 1476 to 1535 (1906) and The English Provincial Printers, Stationers and Bookbinders to 1557 (1912), a biographical dictionary,A Century of the English Book Trade 1457–1557 (1905), and a bibliography, twenty-eight years in the making, of Fifteenth Century English Books (1917).
A work on armorial book-stamps remained unpublished.
Duff regarded bibliography as a science: his work set new standards of accuracy.
He was scathing in his criticism of colleagues whose work did not match these standards.
A Liverpool friend remembered him as ‘a tall spare man with alert eyes and a very beautiful voice, but with an ironic and often unkind humour about his contemporaries’.
Duff never married.
He lived in Liverpool until 1915, and thereafter in Oxford until his death there 28 September 1924.
[Obituaries in Library , 4th series, vol. v, 1924–5, pp. 264–6, and Library Association Record , vol. ii, 1924, pp. 226–8; A. S. Marsh, ‘Edward Gordon Duff: a Bibliography’(University of London diploma in librarianship, 1953, unpublished); letters and papers in the University Library, Cambridge (especially Add.
6463, 8294–7, 8591–8631); letters to Duff in the Huntington Library, San Marino, California.]
George W Carpenter
,David (1825–1903), engineer and inventor, was born 3 March 1825 in Leeds, one of the five sons of Edward Joy, oil-mill owner of Leeds, and his wife Ruth.
He showed keen interest in machinery from his early days and made ship and engine models, including a charcoal-fired model locomotive which ran at the Leeds exhibition in 1838.
In 1840 he went to Wesley College, Sheffield, where he studied engineering drawing and The Steam Engine by Thomas Tredgold [q.v.].
Joy entered his father's seed-crushing and oil-refining works in 1841.
He then started an apprenticeship with Fenton, Murray & Jackson, locomotive builders.
When this firm closed down in 1843 he transferred to the locomotive drawing office of the Railway Foundry works, Leeds, of Messrs Shepherd & Todd, where he became acting chief draughtsman.
Here in 1847 he designed the famous ‘Jenny Lind’ 2–2–2 type express locomotive for the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway.
Tested on the Midland Railway in the following year, one of these machines averaged 56 m.p.h. for sixty-four miles.
This type had considerable influence on locomotive design for many years.
In 1850 Joy and Edward Wilson patented twin boilers working in parallel within the same casing.
In 1850 Joy became superintendent of the Nottingham and Grantham Railway and in 1853 of the Oxford, Worcester, and Wolverhampton, both of which were operated under contract by E. B. Wilson & Co.
Here all his skill and experience were fully stretched in keeping the service running despite frequent breakdowns of second-hand and unsatisfactory locomotives.
Returning to the Railway Foundry in 1855, he was involved in the building of the ‘farm engine’ of Robert Willis [q.v.], the forerunner of the tractor and road locomotive, and in 1857 built a double expansion marine engine with innovative features.
In 1859 he became manager of De Bergue's, bridge-builders of Manchester, and took out patents for an improved steam hammer whose manufacture was started in his own Cleveland engine works in Middlesbrough.
In 1874 he went to the Barrow Shipbuilding Co. as manager of the water-tube boiler department, becoming secretary in 1876.
In 1879, following several years' work, he patented his radial valve gear, of simple and compact design, to give improved steam distribution in locomotive and marine engines.
This was applied in 1880 to a new LNWR design of 0–6–0 freight locomotive.
Well over 3,000 locomotives of the LNWR, Lancashire and Yorkshire, and other railways were fitted with Joy's valve gear, which was also applied by Maudslay & Co. to marine engines, where a saving of 25 per cent in space and weight was achieved.
In 1882 Joy, with his sons, set up an engineering consultancy practice in Westminster to continue and develop applications of his inventions.
Among his many inventions one of the most important, for which he was awarded a gold medal at the 1885 inventions exhibition, was the conjugating mechanism enabling the three valves of a triple-expansion marine engine to be driven by only two sets of valve gear.
Thirty years later this principle was applied to locomotives, and over 1,000 were so equipped.
He was a member of the Institutions of Civil and Mechanical Engineers, and of the Institution of Naval Architects in England and in the USA.
In 1867 Joy married Kate, daughter of C. F. Humbert of Watford.
They had three sons and two daughters.
Joy died in Hampstead, London, 14 March 1903.
[Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers , vol. lxiv, May 1903, pp. 357–60; C. Hamilton Ellis, ‘Famous Locomotive Engineers XIV, David Joy’,Locomotive, Railway Carriage and Wagon Review , 15 June 1940; H. A. V. Bulleid,The Aspinall Era , 1967.]
Naomi Evetts
,Thomas (c. 1670–1750), engineer and architect, possibly a native of Kent, was born c .1670, of unknown parentage.
Commissioned in the 4th Regiment of Foot, he fought at the battle of the Boyne in 1690 and then served in the Netherlands, where he may have gained experience of hydraulic engineering.
By 1699 Steers was living in Rotherhithe, where the seven children of his marriage to Henrietta Maria Barber were baptized before March 1710.
He was almost certainly involved in the construction of the country's first large wet dock, the Great Howland wet dock at Rotherhithe, in use by 1703.
In May 1710 Steers was ‘brought down on purpose’ to Liverpool to build the town's first dock.
Its construction was a considerable engineering feat, an enclosed wet dock of three and a half acres built within the pool, a tidal creek of the Mersey.
The dock was in use by 1715 and the surrounding area reclaimed.
From 1738 to his death Steers worked on Liverpool's second wet dock, the South (later Salthouse) dock.
Steers was granted the freedom of the borough of Liverpool in 1713 and established a flourishing anchor smithy near the dock.
His public appointments and offices included dock master from 1717, water bailiff from 1724, town councillor from 1719, and mayor in 1739–40.
His reputation as an architect was based notably on St George's church, completed in 1734 on the site of Liverpool's castle, and on the first architectural stone-fronted dwelling house in Liverpool in Hanover Street,c .1740.
As a speculative venture he built the Old Ropery Theatre in the 1740s.
Steers was also a pioneer of English river navigation and canal construction.
He was surveyor (1712) to the Mersey and Irwell navigation and was appointed engineer when work began in 1721 to make these rivers navigable from Warrington to Manchester.
Commissioned as consultant for the Newry canal, he completed his survey in 1736, later spending two years on site.
This was the first summit-level canal in Britain, built to transport coal from Tyrone to Dublin.
In c .1698 or 1699 he married Henrietta Maria, daughter of Abraham Barber, property owner, of Rotherhithe.
They had five sons, two of whom died in infancy, and two daughters, one of whom died in childhood.
In the second half of January 1721 he married Anne, widow of Thomas Tibington, mariner, of Rotherhithe and Wapping.
They had two sons, one of whom died in childhood, and two daughters, the elder of whom died in infancy.
Apparently a modest man, Thomas Steers was buried ‘in a decent and private manner’ in St Peter's churchyard, Liverpool, 2 November 1750.
His son Spencer, the first child of Steers's second marriage, continued his interests in Liverpool.
Steers's dock laid the foundation of Liverpool's prosperity as a seaport.
He was a man of vision, versatility and, in his own engineering field, genius.
He had no known memorial.
[Liverpool Town Books, Holt and Gregson MSS, Liverpool Record Office; H. Peet, ‘Thomas Steers’,Transactions of the Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire , vol. lxxxii, 1930.]
Eric Taylor
,Francis (1840–1900), founder of the National Liberal Federation, was born 24 August 1840 in Birmingham, the younger son and second of three children of a draper of German extraction.
His father died while he was still young and he was brought up by his mother and paternal grandfather, who owned a tailor's shop in Moor Street, Birmingham.
He was educated at King Edward VI School, Birmingham, and at the age of sixteen, following the death of his grandfather, he took charge of the family business.
Schnadhorst was brought up as a Nonconformist and as a young man he acted as secretary to the Revd R. W. Dale [q.v.], the pastor of Carr's Lane Congregational church.
The alliance between Nonconformity and radicalism was particularly close in Birmingham, so Schnadhorst joined the Birmingham Liberal Association soon after its formation in 1865 as a matter of course.
He first became involved in the active work of the association in 1867, when he was elected vice-chairman and joint secretary of the St George's ward committee.
In 1872 he served briefly on Birmingham town council, being elected to fill a casual vacancy in October only to be defeated at the municipal elections a month later, but by this time it was apparent that he was a talented organizer and in 1873 he was appointed full-time secretary of the Birmingham Liberal Association in succession to William Harris.
The Birmingham Liberal Association was already regarded as a model of efficiency, following the success of its ‘vote as you are told’ campaign at the 1868 general election, which had secured the return of Liberal members for all of Birmingham's three seats, but Schnadhorst fine-tuned its organization to an even higher pitch.
He quickly engineered the overthrow of the Conservative and Anglican majorities on the town council and the school board and put in place a political machine which carried all before it for well over a decade.
This was the heyday of the ‘Birmingham caucus’ and to its detractors Schnadhorst, with his Teutonic name and ‘spectacled, sallow, sombre’features, was the perfect embodiment of its sinister power.
In 1877 Schnadhorst was appointed part-time secretary of the newly formed National Liberal Federation, while retaining his post with the Birmingham Liberal Association.
The work involved in the dual appointment eventually proved too onerous even for someone of his energy and dedication and in 1884 he resigned the Birmingham post to become full-time secretary of the National Federation at a salary of £800 per annum.
Two years later the Liberal party organized a national testimonial for him and over £10,000 was raised.
In 1885 Schnadhorst was given a seat on the standing committee of the Liberal Central Association, the party headquarters, and in July 1886 he was appointed secretary of this body.
He remained secretary of the National Federation, so becoming the link between the leadership and the constituency associations and hence the key figure in rebuilding the party following the split over Irish home rule and the defection of the Liberal Unionists.
He reorganized the National Federation to make it more responsive to the needs of local associations, so encouraging affiliations, and revolutionized the Central Association's conduct of elections, the improvements being reflected in a series of favourable by-election results at the end of the 1880s.
The work of co-ordinating the activities of the National Federation and the Central Association proceeded more slowly but some progress was made, most notably in candidate selection.
In 1889 Schnadhorst's own candidature in Newcastle under Lyme was approved but he stood down in the following year because of ill health.
His health continued to decline and within two years of masterminding the Liberal victory at the 1892 general election, so enabling W. E. Gladstone to form his fourth ministry, he resigned all his offices with the party.
He had always been very highly strung and eventually suffered a complete mental and physical breakdown before dying in a private lunatic asylum in Roehampton 2 January 1900.
He was survived by his wife Mary, the daughter of a Birmingham provision merchant, two sons and a daughter.
[B. McGill, ‘Francis Schnadhorst and Liberal Party Organization’,Journal of Modern History , vol. xxxiv, 1962;Birmingham Mail , 4 January 1900;The Times , 5 January 1900.]
Elisabeth Brink
,Marguerite Antonia (1880–1943), novelist and poet under the name Radclyffe Hall, was born 12 August 1880 at Sunny Lawn, West Cliff, Bournemouth, the younger daughter (there were no sons) of Mary Jane Sager (née Diehl), an American widow, and Radclyffe Radclyffe-Hall, who was educated at Eton and Oxford but never pursued a career.
Following her sister's death in early infancy, her parents' divorce when she was three years old, and her mother's remarriage, Marguerite was brought up at the Earls Court residence of her mother and her mother's third husband, Albert Visetti, a professor of singing at the Royal College of Music in London.
Although she came from a financially privileged background, her education was superficial, governesses being followed by day-schools, a brief interlude at King's College, London, where she possibly read Latin, continental history, mathematics, and elementary science for two terms, and a year in Dresden.
Between 1906 and 1936 she published five volumes of poetry, seven novels, and a number of short stories.
Her poems, of which the best known was ‘The Blind Ploughman’, were very popular at the time, and many of them were set to music and performed at public concerts all over Britain.
They are collected in the volumes 'Twixt Earth and Stars (1906),A Sheaf of Verses (1908),Poems of the Past and Present (1910),Songs of Three Counties (1913), and The Forgotten Island (1915).
Her main literary talents, however, lay with prose, which is borne out by her novels The Forge (1924),The Unlit Lamp (1924),A Saturday Life (1925),Adam's Breed (1926),The Well of Loneliness (1928),The Master of the House (1932),The Sixth Beatitude (1936), and her volume of short stories,Miss Ogilvy Finds Herself (1934).
Adam's Breed and The Well of Loneliness won her international fame, albeit in very different ways.
In addition to winning its author the gold medal of the Eichelbergher humane award,Adam's Breed was awarded the Femina Vie Heureuse prize and the James Tait Black memorial prize.
The Well of Loneliness , a courageous and serious novel about lesbianism, was prosecuted under the Obscene Publications Act of 1857, condemned as an obscene libel, and was not republished in Britain until 1949.
Radclyffe Hall described herself as a ‘congenital invert’, called herself ‘John’, the name Radclyffe Hall being reserved for her publications, and was strikingly masculine in appearance.
She shared her private life exclusively with women, notably with Mabel Veronica Batten, under whose influence she converted to Catholicism, and later with the sculptor Una Vincenzo, Lady Troubridge.
Radclyffe Hall and Lady Troubridge, who shared a number of homes in London and in Rye, Sussex, travelled extensively and associated with many well-known artists and writers of their time, among them Colette, Romaine Brooks, and Natalie Clifford Barney.
Radclyffe Hall was a member of the Society for Psychical Research, the PEN Club, the Writers' Club, and the Women Writers' Club, and a fellow of the Zoological Society.
After the banning of The Well of Loneliness Radclyffe Hall was denied the recognition she deserved for her mastery of the narrative technique of interior monologue and as a writer who dealt with a great variety of themes, such as World War I, materialism, Catholicism, and the suppression of women by patriarchal society.
She died 7 October 1943 at 502 Hood House, Dolphin Square, London.
She was unmarried.
[Una Troubridge,The Life of Radclyffe Hall , 1961; Michael Baker,Our Three Selve s, a Life of Radclyffe Hall , 1985; Lovat Dickson,Radclyffe Hall at the Well of Loneliness , 1975; Richard Ormrod,Una Troubridge , 1984; Sylvia Bruce, ‘Biographical Notes on Radclyffe Hall’(unpublished MSS); archives of King's College, London.]
Richard Morphet
,(George Vernon) Meredith (1894–1984), painter, was born in St John's Wood, London, 17 March 1894, the only child of (Sir) George Frampton, RA [q.v.], one of the leading sculptors of his day, and his wife, Christabel Annie Cockerell, painter.
He was educated at Westminster School and attended St John's Wood Art School and then (1912–15) the Royal Academy Schools.
During World War I he worked on the western front in a field survey company and in interpretation of aerial photographs.
Frampton was one of the most accomplished of the many interwar European painters who represented the observed world with pronounced clarity.
From 1920 to 1945 he showed in the Royal Academy summer exhibition in all but four years, being elected ARA in 1934 and RA in 1942.
The majority of Frampton's paintings were portraits (many of them commissions, both private and institutional).
His sitters, who included the Duke of York, later King George VI (1929), were active in imaginative and intellectual pursuits — art, architecture, music, theatre, literature, science, and public service.
He specially admired the sculptor J.-A.
Houdon (1741–1828) for the directness with which he conveyed a sitter's presence and personality without obtruding himself between subject and viewer.
Unusually for his generation, Frampton was an heir to this tradition.
Early portraits employed austere backgrounds, but Frampton increasingly revealed unusual skill in realizing the appearance of three-dimensional objects with almost trompe l'oeil verisimilitude, as well as a keen sense of the texture and even the feel of any depicted substance.
Carefully chosen attributes both explained a sitter's work and interests and provided a satisfying interplay of forms, within which shapes were made to rhyme in curious and subtle ways.
Like his pure essays in the genre, these images proved Frampton a master of still life, with a relish for the particular which embraced test-tubes, matchboxes, skulls, autograph scores, and even a can of weed-killer.
For all Frampton's love of tradition, both the enigmatic stillness of his paintings of commonplace objects and his interest in purity of form in an abstract sense were peculiarly expressive of the modern era.
In 1953 he was placed at his own request on the Academy's retired list.
Perfectionist in all things, he declined to continue painting once a slight deterioration in eyesight precluded the extreme clarity he sought.
But his retirement was into anything but inactivity.
A member for sixty-nine years of the Art Workers' Guild, Frampton had inherited from his father a strong feeling for materials and a commitment to meticulous workmanship.
He retired to the striking hill-top house (in Monkton Deverill, Wiltshire) he had designed in the 1930s, its style reminiscent of seventeenth-century France.
Here Frampton created (and from his studio-cum-workshop maintained for forty years) an interior remarkable for its beauty and its well-thought-out detail, from the mechanism of clocks to the ingenious adaptation of items of furniture.
After 1945 Frampton's dignified, thoroughly realized art virtually disappeared from public consciousness for thirty years.
He was eighty-eight when in 1982 he held his first one-man exhibition, a retrospective at the Tate Gallery.
To his surprise and delight, members of a younger generation found inspiration in his work and he was able to die knowing that his art would not be forgotten.
Prudent and orderly, uncompromising in his views on life and art, and instinctively reserved in a postwar world which contradicted them extensively, Frampton was a man of humour, courtesy, and charm, who unbent when he sensed that his deep feeling for beauty, order, and sound technique was shared.
In 1951 Frampton married Hilda Norman, daughter of the architect James Bow Dunn, FRIBA, RSA.
They had no children.
Shortly after moving to Mere, Wiltshire, he died there 16 September 1984.
[Meredith Frampton , Tate Gallery, 1982; personal knowledge.]
Ian Adams
,John (1745–1828), cartographer, map engraver, and land surveyor, was born 22 April 1745 in Jedburgh, the younger son and younger child of John Ainslie, druggist in Jedburgh and burgess of the burgh.
The first reference to him appears in 1765 when he was employed by Thomas Jeffery, geographer to the king, to survey Bedfordshire with Thomas Donald.
The pair went on to do similar work in Buckinghamshire in 1766 to 1768 and Yorkshire from 1767 to 1770.
After Jeffery's death in November 1771, Ainslie returned home and shortly thereafter made a map of Jedburgh and its environs.
This plan was dogged by misfortune and the loss of the plates on a trip to London was never rectified.
Lean times were to follow and three years later we find him using the backs of sheets of his Jedburgh map to draw a privately commissioned plan.
Ainslie's mind was still fixed on making large-scale county maps: he proposed to survey Selkirkshire, Fife, and Kinross-shire, Stirlingshire and Clackmannan, Perthshire, the Lothians, Wigtownshire, Angus, Renfrew, Kirkcudbright, and Berwickshire.
This ambitious programme was completed by 1797, but with certain qualifications: the maps of Stirlingshire and of Perthshire were never embarked upon, for Ainslie failed to find sufficient subscribers.
Berwickshire was surveyed by John Blackadder and Ainslie only engraved it in 1797.
A new edition of these maps was brought out in 1801.
Ainslie settled in Parliament Square in the midst of the Old Town of Edinburgh from where he published on 1 March 1778 a map of eastern Scotland from Moffat to Arbroath.
He then published four charts covering the south-west coast from Saltcoats to Whitehaven in Cumberland, before turning to the east coast of Scotland, producing a general chart in 1785 and in May 1786 three separate charts of the same coast.
Henceforth, the sheer variety of his cartographic output was impressive.
In 1785 alone, not only did he survey and engrave the series of charts mentioned above, but he also found time to make a series of estate plans for Patrick Kerr of Abbotrule (which Kerr failed to pay for), to survey a line for a canal from the Forth to the Clyde for Robert Whitworth, and to engrave several plans for the court of session in Edinburgh.
During 1787 and 1788 Ainslie devoted the greatest part of his time to preparing his great map of Scotland.
On 1 January 1788 the first of nine sheets were complete.
There is no doubt that this map was a landmark in the improvement of the outline of Scotland, which was to last for twenty years.
For the first time the Great Glen is shown as a straight line, and Skye, Mull, and Islay are shown with some degree of accuracy.
In 1789–90 he made a book of plans of the Earl of Eglinton's estates in Ayrshire, one of the treasures of the Scottish Record Office.
He then worked again with Whitworth, surveying lines for the Edinburgh to Glasgow canal.
With Charles Rennie, the civil engineer, he surveyed the new harbour for Saltcoats and the line for the Glasgow to Ardrossan canal.
With the turn of the century Ainslie turned to publishing, writing The Gentleman and Farmer's Pocket Book, Companion and Assistant in 1805 and a Comprehensive Treatise on Land Surveying in 1812.
At the time of his death he had accumulated £8,976 7s 6d, a considerable sum for the day.
He died at his house in Nicolson Street in Edinburgh 29 February 1828.
[Ainslie's maps are to be found in the Scottish Record Office, National Library of Scotland, and the British Museum.]
J H Denton
,Walter (c. 1220–1280), bishop of Exeter, often known as Walter de Exonia, was born in Exeter probably c .1220.
His family name derives from the village of Branscombe on the coast about sixteen miles east of Exeter, but of his parentage we know nothing.
He was university-trained, no doubt at Oxford, appears to have obtained his first benefice in commendam (Coningsby, Lincolnshire) in 1243 and, probably having been attached to the familia of William de Raleigh [q.v.], bishop of Winchester, was archdeacon of Surrey by 1245.
Between 1245 and 1257 he obtained dispensations to hold several benefices in plurality, which included the rectory of Farnham, annexed to the archdeaconry of Surrey, the rectory of East Clandon in Surrey, the chapel of Bloxworth in Dorset, and a prebend in the king's free chapel of St Nicholas at Wallingford Castle.
During the same period he clearly became involved in royal service, for in 1250 he acted for Henry III at the papal curia in securing the confirmation of the highly controversial election to the bishopric of Winchester of Aymer de Valence [q.v.], the king's half-brother, and then, in the next year, he was appointed the king's proctor at the papal curia .
Favour with the king was combined with papal favour, for he was styled papal chaplain by 1250.
By 1254 he was a canon of Exeter Cathedral, and we soon learn that he had become chancellor of the cathedral.
His election as bishop of Exeter on 23 February 1258 was apparently undisputed.
Royal assent was given on 3 March, and, along with the new bishops of Norwich and Coventry and Lichfield, he was ordained priest on 9 March and consecrated as bishop on 10 March by the archbishop of Canterbury, Boniface of Savoy [q.v.].
He was enthroned in Exeter Cathedral on 14 April.
In common with most bishops in the thirteenth century, especially those with university training, he did not combine his ecclesiastical duties with a high office of state.
Even so, he continued in royal service, acting from time to time as royal negotiator and adviser, notably at times of crisis.
He gives the strong impression of having been practical and conciliatory, a man who inspired confidence in those with whom he had dealings.
He was already in Paris on the king's business during July 1258, and early in 1263 he was one of Henry III's proctors in the French royal court.
In these years he was one of a few markedly royalist bishops among a generally Montfortian episcopate.
Between 1263 and 1265 he was much involved in treating for peace at home between the king and his barons.
When peace came he was one of the committee of six who, having co-opted a further six, devised the settlement: the Dictum of Kenilworth of 31 October 1266.
On 11 December 1272 he transferred to the new archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Kilwardby [q.v.], the spiritualities of the see and on the following day was the only bishop recorded as present in London at an important declaration concerning royal rights in respect of this papal provision of Kilwardby.
With the bishop of Winchester he presented Kilwardby with his pallium in May 1273 and immediately set out for Burgundy to meet Edward I on his return from crusade.
He rejoined Edward in Gascony in the autumn and attended the general council at Lyons from May to July of 1274, returning to England for Edward's coronation on 19 August.
Scarcely any evidence survives to shed light on his particular role during these various activities, but he was clearly a staunch and respected supporter of both Henry III and his son Edward.
His diocesan work can be studied in much more detail, for his register is the first extant episcopal register for the diocese of Exeter, and probably in fact the first to be compiled.
It reveals a vigorous and conscientious bishop, active in visiting, and often rededicating, the churches of his large diocese.
He restored and augmented the collegiate church of Crediton and founded another college at Glasney, near Penryn; and in 1268 and again in 1275 he undertook the revision and amendment of the statutes of his cathedral church.
He is remembered also for his work on the manor house at Clyst, where he endowed a chantry chapel.
During his last years he was involved in a bitter and ramified dispute with Edmund, Earl of Cornwall, in the defence of ecclesiastical rights following the encroachments of the earl and his agents.
It was during these years too that an eastern extension was begun to Exeter Cathedral, with the addition of a square-ended Lady chapel with flanking chapels.
From this important beginning a major new project of rebuilding developed.
The chapel on the south side of the Lady chapel was St Gabriel's chapel, and here on 20 July 1280 he ordained a chantry, where he chose to be buried.
He died in Bishopsteignton 22 July 1280, and on his tomb, under the northern arch of his chantry chapel, was placed an impressive monumental effigy, notable in style for its flowing drapery.
An elaborate canopy was added in the fifteenth century.
[F. C. Hingeston-Randolph (ed.),
The Register of Walter Bronescombe , 1889;Dictionnaire d'Histoire et de Géographie ecclésiastiques ; A. B. Emden,A Biographical Register of the University of Oxford to 1500 , vol. i, 1957; H. R. Luard (ed.),
Annales Monastici , 1864–9;Calendar of Patent Rolls and Calendar of Close Rolls ; A. M. Erskine (ed.),
The Accounts of the Fabric of Exeter Cathedral 1279–1353 , 1981–3.]
John Turner
,William Waldorf , first Viscount Astor (1848–1919), urban landlord and newspaper proprietor, was born 31 March 1848 in New York, the only child of John Jacob Astor, manager of the family estate, and his wife Charlotte Gibbes.
He was educated privately and at Columbia Law School, and worked as a lawyer and in the family estates before entering the New York State Assembly as a Republican in 1877.
He built the Waldorf section of what later became the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.
In 1879 he was elected to the State Senate, and in 1880 ran unsuccessfully for Congress.
In 1882 he was appointed as minister to Italy.
There he wrote Valentino: an Historical Romance of the Sixteenth Century , published in 1885, the year when he ceased to hold his diplomatic office.
Astor married Mary Dahlgren, daughter of James William Paul of Philadelphia, in 1878.
They had two sons, Waldorf (later second Viscount Astor, q.v.) and John Jacob (later Baron Astor of Hever, q.v.), and a daughter.
In 1890 Astor's father died, leaving him a legacy estimated at 100 million dollars.
In September 1890 he took his family to London.
In 1893 he bought Cliveden House, to which he added the entire balustrade of the Villa Borghese.
He was naturalized as a British subject in 1899.
In 1906 he made over Cliveden to his newly married elder son, and bought Hever Castle in Kent, which he reconstructed and where he housed his collection of pictures and artefacts.
In 1892 he bought the Pall Mall Gazette , a Liberal evening daily newspaper which he turned into a Conservative organ.
In 1893 he launched the Pall Mall Magazine , a monthly journal.
In 1911 he bought the Observer , in order to get the services of its editor, J. L. Garvin [q.v.], as editor of the Pall Mall Gazette .
The Gazette was sold in August 1915, the Pall Mall Magazine having already been sold in 1912.
Astor retained the Observer , which was subsequently passed down to his son Waldorf.
Astor was a substantial contributor to charities and to the Conservative Party.
He was created Baron Astor in 1916, and promoted viscount in 1917.
Astor was a shy, austere and, by all accounts, unlovable man.
He despised his native country and said so in print.
In return, he was lampooned by the New York press.
He added two further novels of historical romance to his published output before 1900.
He was important not so much for any positive achievement as for the unintended consequences of his purchases.
Through buying the Observer , he preserved the independence of Garvin.
By taking a peerage he ruined the political career of his elder son, who had become Unionist MP for Plymouth in 1910 and was elevated to the Lords in succession to his father in 1919, but also created the opportunity for his daughter-in-law, Nancy (later Viscountess Astor, q.v.) to win her husband's seat at a by-election, and thus become the first woman to sit in the House of Commons.
Astor died 18 October 1919 in Brighton.
[Stephen Koss,The Rise and Fall of the Political Press in Britain , vol. ii, 1984; Waldorf Astor papers (Reading University library); J. L. Garvin papers (University of Texas at Austin, Harry Ranson Humanities Research Center); Michael Astor,Tribal Feeling , 1963; W. J. Ghent in Dictionary of American Biography , vol. i, 1928.]
A G E Jones
,John (c. 1770– c. 1843), merchant service master and Antarctic discoverer, was born c .1770 but nothing is known about his early life and education.
He may have been a Londoner, brought up in the Newcastle coal trade.
From 1798 he occasionally appeared in the coasting, home, and foreign trades as master of various vessels.
In 1838 Messrs C., H., and G. Enderby, of London, managing owners for a joint venture, sent the schooner Eliza Scott and the cutter Sabrina on a commercial voyage of discovery.
Balleny was master of the Eliza Scott , which was not a good sea boat.
Some scientific instruments were lent by the hydrographer John Washington [q.v.].
Balleny sailed from the Thames on 14 July 1838, sighted Amsterdam Island, and made Chalky Bay, New Zealand, on 3 December.
At Campbell Island he met John Biscoe [q.v.], who was on a similar search for land in the Antarctic.
At 11.30 a.m. on 9 February 1839, north of the Ross Sea, he sighted land in latitude 66–7° S, longitude 162–3° E. This was a group of five islands which he called the Balleny Islands.
The striking point was his accuracy in navigation, for after days of dead reckoning, his latitude and longitude were in error by no more than five miles, despite difficulties of navigation in those waters.
That suggests he was an experienced sailor.
Sailing westwards, on 2 March 1839, in latitude 64°58' S, longitude 121°08'–122°44' E, Balleny charted ‘Sabrina Land’, which does not exist.
He may have seen the continental ice cap, raised by mirage.
The Sabrina was lost on 24–5 March 1839.
Balleny returned to Britain on 18 September 1839, just as Captain James Clark Ross [q.v.]was leaving for Antarctic discovery.
The hydrographer gave Ross a copy of Balleny's chart and extracts from his logbook.
When Ross reached that area, he charted the islands as a separate group, the Russell Islands.
Balleny's voyage was a commercial failure, the sealskins he unloaded paying for only a fraction of the expedition.
In 1840–1 Balleny was master of the new barque,Taglioni , on its voyage to Calcutta, and in 1842 Australia.
He seems to have died about this date, for there is no further record of him.
His short report appeared in the Journal of the Royal Geographical Society , vol. ix, 1839, pp. 517–28.
The logbooks of Balleny and John Moore, chief mate, are held by the Royal Geographical Society, and there is some information in the hydrographic department of the Admiralty; otherwise, references are few.
[A. G. E. Jones, ‘Captain John Balleny and the Balleny Islands’,Fram (Bangor, Maine), summer 1984, vol. i, part 2, pp. 497–505, and ‘New Light on John Balleny’,Geographical Journal , vol. cxxxv, part 1, 1969, pp. 55–61.]
Roland Thorne
,Henry Grey (1777–1836), reformer, was born 2 December 1777, the second of three sons and fourth of eight children of Charles Bennet, fourth Earl of Tankerville, of Chillingham Castle, Northumberland, and his wife Emma, daughter and co-heiress of the London banker Sir James Colebrooke, first baronet, of Gatton, Surrey.
Educated at Eton, he served five years in the 1st Foot Guards, entered Lincoln's Inn in 1798, and Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1799 (MA, 1801).
Between interludes as assistant to (Sir) William Drummond [q.v.], envoy at Naples, and captain of volunteers, he was called to the bar (1803).
He practised on the western circuit, where Thomas Creevey [q.v.]found him ‘most amiable, occasionally most boring , but at all times most upright and honourable’.
Bennet, whose father, formerly joint postmaster-general, had abandoned politics, shared his brother Ossulston's political ambition: both belonged to Brooks's Club.
His election as MP for Shrewsbury in 1806 was invalidated, not before he had signalled hostility to George III's dismissal of the ‘Talents’ administration.
His advocacy of Catholic emancipation courted defeat in 1807.
Before regaining his seat in 1811 he viewed the Peninsular war theatre.
He faced no contest after 1812.
In the Commons he joined the opposition ‘mountain' led by Samuel Whitbread [q.v.], whom he revered, although his closest associates were fellow-lawyers, Thomas Creevey and Henry Brougham [q.v.].
His maiden speech, ostensibly a conventional attack on placemen, was directed at the prince regent who, provoked by Bennet's championship of his estranged wife, labelled him ‘factious’.
Bennet shunned the ‘constitutional’ opposition leaders as deviants from Foxite principles, but his bête noire was Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh [q.v.], leader of the House, with the home secretary Henry Addington, first Viscount Sidmouth, a close second.
His quest for ‘a cheap and reformed government’ meant frequent tirades against army estimates, civil list extravagance, and taxes.
He assailed other reactionary regimes sanctified by Napoleon's final defeat, prior to which he toured the Continent.
He condemned postwar curtailment of civil liberties, and support for parliamentary reform involved him in metropolitan politics, but he disappointed Whigs and Radicals alike.
After the Peterloo massacre of August 1819 he sought an inquiry into the manufacturing districts' plight.
His outspoken defence of Queen Caroline in 1820–1 led to his portrayal among her champions in an engraving by Francis Holl after Abraham Wivell [qq.v.].
The radical Black Book (1823) commended him: ‘Always at his post.
Supports Mr [Joseph]Hume nobly.
Tells the Collective Wisdom home truths.
Calls for useful papers and documents.
Shames the rogues…
Great…as the labours of Mr Hume have been, it may be doubted whether all his exertions can be put in competition with the single act of Mr Bennet in obtaining an accurate return of the salaries, offices and emoluments of the honourable Members.’
Bennet's efforts ‘to diminish the sum of human misery’ adorn the history of English criminal law.
No retributory institution, prison, hulk, penal colony, or penitentiary adequately combined punishment with reformation: he and his select committees exposed them, to little avail.
The inquiry into metropolitan policing which he initiated, prompted by Sir Samuel Romilly [q.v.], caused such a furore in 1816 that ten years elapsed before constructive legislation emerged, although Bennet, having previously piloted the abolition of gaol fees, overthrew statutory rewards for informers on felony in 1818.
Other abuses that he confronted included flogging, callous capital punishments, confusion of political prisoners with felons, the despotism of colonial governors, the plight of lunatics and child chimney-sweeps, and corrupt licensing.
He was sometimes taken in by unscrupulous petitioners.
The abrupt termination of Bennet's public career in 1824, ascribed to the death of his only son, was followed by his exile to Italy.
The threat of criminal prosecution for a sexual offence would explain his flight and his pathetic submission to criticism of his endeavours.
The author of several pamphlets, and an FRS, Bennet kept a political diary from 1806, now lost, though extracts were published in the nineteenth century and one volume (for 1821) has come to light.
In 1816 he married Gertrude Frances (died 1841), daughter of Lord William Russell.
They had one son and two daughters.
Bennet died in Florence 29 May 1836.
[R. G. Thorne (ed.),
The House of Commons 1790–1820 , 1986, vol. iii, pp. 178–81; L. Radzinowicz,A History of Criminal Law and its Administration from 1750 , 5 vols., 1948–86; British Library, Holland House MSS, Add.
MS 51749, 52017; Bennet's 1821 diary in the possession of Michael Collinge, London.]
P J Marshall
,William (1749–1830?),
Calcutta attorney and writer of memoirs, was born in London 30 June 1749, the eighth child of Joseph Hickey, an Irishman, a successful London attorney, and his wife Sarah Boulton, whose family were landed property owners in Yorkshire.
Joseph was evidently an indulgent parent, whose efforts to advance William's career were largely wasted on what was, by his own account, an exceptionally wayward adolescent.
William went to Westminster School from 1757 until he left in 1763, as he himself put it, ‘most deservedly in high disgrace’.
By then his disinclination for systematic work or study, his capacity to spend money, and what he called his ‘propensity to women’ were all well developed.
A succession of scandals finally persuaded his father that William must seek his fortune overseas.
In 1769 he obtained a cadetship in the East India Company's army at Madras, made the journey to India, but seeing no prospect of advancement there, returned to London via China.
An attempt in 1775 to set him up in Jamaica was no more enduring.
In 1777, however, he was packed off to India again, this time to Calcutta, where, with the exception of an interval of two years in London managing a parliamentary petition, he was to remain until he retired in 1808.
For some thirty years Hickey practised as an attorney at the Supreme Court established in 1774 in the capital of the new British empire in India to administer English law to the inhabitants of Calcutta and to British subjects in Bengal generally.
In addition Hickey served for some years as deputy to the sheriff of Calcutta and became clerk to Sir Henry Russell [q.v.], ultimately chief justice of the Supreme Court.
Although in his style of living Hickey remained for many years something of a rake, his career in Calcutta appears to have been a success.
He built up a large practice, relying especially on ‘native’ clients, and earned enough money to enable him to live in a very opulent way, even if he did not save any considerable fortune.
He prided himself on being a very well esteemed member of the British community.
He was known as ‘the gentleman attorney’ and kept ‘the best company of the place’.
Fearing for his health, Hickey reluctantly left India in 1808.
Little is known of his retirement in Britain, where he settled in Beaconsfield.
Any assessment of Hickey's career and of his personality is almost entirely dependent on a single source provided by the subject himself, the 742 pages of memoirs which Hickey wrote shortly after his return to Britain.
Little is otherwise known about him.
No collection of his own papers survives, nor is there much about him in the letters of others.
At least one portrait of him can, however, be definitely identified; it was painted in India by Thomas Hickey (no relation to William).
The memoirs are extremely detailed, yet Hickey states that he wrote them almost entirely from memory, having only a few documents available to him and those mostly from his later years.
By strict standards, therefore, the memoirs must contain much that can only be regarded as fiction.
For instance, Hickey includes many conversational passages that purport to be verbatim records, but must be reconstructions of what Hickey thought was appropriate to have been said on the occasion.
Nevertheless, the memoirs undeniably deal with real persons, places, and events.
Subject to many small mistakes, the memoirs stand up well to cross-checking with other records.
They therefore constitute a significant historical source, above all in bringing to life the British community in Calcutta.
For Hickey, however, the memoirs were evidently much more than a mere record of past events.
In them he tried to recreate the characters of people who had meant much to him.
In some cases he was brilliantly successful, as with the ‘irresistibly, attracting and engaging’(but also outrageously insensitive) Robert Pott, his friend for thirty years.
The main character of the memoirs is of course ultimately their author, and, although he ostensibly denied this, the memoirs constitute his apologia.
In them he presents himself as a ‘pickle’, that is as a self-confessed reprobate, who made good.
Even at his worst, he implies that he never transcended the ultimate standards of gentlemanly conduct and human decency, or at least never did so without sincere repentance.
Hickey never married.
Being, as he freely admitted, of an ‘amorous disposition’, among innumerable liaisons he formed a number of enduring relationships with women.
One of these, Charlotte Barry, took the name of ‘Mrs Hickey’.
After Charlotte's death in 1783, the great love of Hickey's life was Jemdanee, one of his Indian mistresses, who bore him a short-lived son.
He is presumed to have been the William Hickey whose death was recorded in London 31 May 1830.
[Manuscript of the memoirs on deposit at the British Library (India Office Library and Records), MS Eur G.118; Alfred Spencer (ed.),
Memoirs of William Hickey , 4 vols., 1913–25; Peter Quennell (ed.),
Memoirs of William Hickey , 1960, 2nd edn., 1975.]