

6 Debate about Animals
The first task of the natural historian had been to name.
Even though insects did not answer to their names, they had to have them; otherwise nobody knew what anybody else was talking about.
In part there was the problem of Babel — in different countries or different regions, plants and animals had quite different names; and in part it was a problem of taxonomy.
The distinctions between different kinds of creatures needed in practical life — perhaps between flowers and weeds, or the edible and inedible — may not be very useful across cultures, and may not be any good in science.
Snails may be food or pests.
When in the eighteenth century Mme Merian was preparing her sumptuous insect books, she found that there were no names in European languages for common but unshowy kinds of butterflies.
Nobody had been interested in distinguishing them.
On the other hand, we should not underestimate our ancestors, or ‘primitive’ tribesmen of today: a study of the naming of birds in a part of New Guinea made recently demonstrates that their divisions and ours show an astonishing degree of similarity.
Out of 157 Kalam names, 96 applied to species, and 13 more to groups of species forming valid taxa in our system.
There does seem to be something objective about the way mankind orders the world.
In the seventeenth century, people stopped writing in Latin even when writing for the learned, and various attempts were made at making up universal languages.
An example was John Wilkins' ‘real character’ of 1668, in which symbols stood not for words but for things.
Europeans had heard travellers' tales of how natives of different parts of China could not understand each other 's speech, but could communicate by  writing.
Nearer home, our ‘Arabic’ numerals are examples of symbols of the kind Wilkins wanted: ‘2’may be read as ‘two’or ‘zwei’, but to the English or German speaker it means the same.
Yet artificial languages never have caught on.
Wilkins and others in the early Royal Society were afraid of the metaphors associated with ‘words’ rather than things, and feared a science which was really word-play; but the invention and exploitation of models is akin to the exploration of metaphor, and science like everything else is a field for homo ludens.
Only in mathematics do we see a successful artificial and international language, though when we come to talk about visual language we may see something a little like it; and music might count as a language, though one in which it is hard to say anything very definite.
In our natural history (as elsewhere later in science) it turned out best to adapt an existing language; but the man who did it, Ligneous, in the middle of the eighteenth century, came from Sweden.
His language was one spoken by very few foreigners, and indeed Latin had remained the learned tongue there as in Germany.
Linnaeus devised a kind of Latin suitable for concise descriptions: animals and plants were not to be written up in flowery language, but in sentences containing many adjectives and few verbs.
His greatest idea came after he had written his first works and was doing an index for a book: this was to give a name composed of two words, a generic name and a specific or trivial one, to each species.
This has survived for well over two hundred years and is still going strong as an efficient method of information-retrieval.
The difficulty is to know which are species.
We, like the Kalam of New Guinea, distinguish jays and crows, or red deer and roes; but whether the two kinds of native oak in Britain are one species or two is a problem, and certainly we all know that there are more differences between different breeds of dogs than there are between some distinct species of animals.
In the eighteenth century, as indeed for Aristotle, the best guide was fertility: a male and female belonged to the same species if they would mate and produce viable and fertile offspring.
This simple test showed that all mankind was one; but it was difficult to do with exotic or shy creatures.
Birds in which the male and female looked very  different were often classified as different species in nineteenth century bird books; and the same happened with certain species of orchids which have flowers of different kinds, sometimes bafflingly on the same plant.
With the rise of palaeontology about 1800 this test became anyway less relevant: we cannot supervise the mating of dinosaurs.
Naturalists had to fall back on their judgement in family grouping; and some then and since have followed Adanson, a great French contemporary of Linnaeus, in trying to weigh up all characteristics of an organism instead of taking one or a few as crucial.
Naming good species is worth doing, but it is like grammar: a necessary step in the elegant and efficient ordering of ideas, but not in itself real science or literature.
Just as astronomers sought for the pattern and the simple laws that must govern the movements of the stars and planets — making the world a real universe or cosmos, an ordered whole — so naturalists sought an arrangement which would make sense of all the different kinds of creatures that they found.
For much of the eighteenth century, the old belief endured that everything was organized into a great chain of being, linking minerals, plants, animals and men (and perhaps angels).
The explorer might hope to find ‘missing links’ in the chain living in remote places.
This chain theory collapsed partly through its own incoherence under pressure — how do we know when we have got all the links?— and partly because of the discovery of past faunas.
These might have been held to be missing links in a chain of which the links were very small in some places, and large (so far) in others; but this idea conflicted with the notion that God would have created the best of all possible worlds, which should therefore not change over time since all change must be for the worse.
Linnaeus' system of plants had a basis in arithmetic: he counted the male and female parts of the flower, and these figures placed it in its class.
Usually this method put in nearby groups plants that intuition, or an enumeration as done by Adanson, indicated were alike; but not always, and if not it was just too bad.
Linnaeus admitted that there was something artificial about this procedure, and hoped that in the course of ages a really natural system would be worked out.
Such a method was proposed by Jussieu in 1789, and first in France and then  elsewhere it was steadily adopted, and was improved as more characteristics were taken into account.
But the difficulty about the natural method was that the classification had no shape.
Cuvier seemed to contemporaries to have had little trouble in demolishing the evolutionary scheme of his contemporary Lamarck.
Lamarck was eminent for his classification of invertebrates, and had in effect put the chain of being into motion, so that everything was moving slowly upwards, and creatures had not become extinct but had just changed, responding to their environment.
In his Règne animal (1816) Cuvier put forward a scheme in which the animals were divided into four great branches: instead of a chain we have a tree.
In classifying them he followed Aristotle in considering as many characters as possible; but he made great use of the ‘principle of correlation’, the way in which all the parts of an animal work together.
Because of his interests in vertebrate palaeontology, bones were his especial interest.
He believed that it would be possible to reconstruct an animal from a single bone — certainly, faced in the Paris basin with a valley of dry bones, he fired the imagination of contemporaries and of later generations by calling them back to life.
Within his four branches, Cuvier subdivided using multiple criteria and separating, for example, the marsupials from the other mammals, although from the outside the koala looks a bit like a bear, and the thylacine (or Tasmanian wolf) very like a dog or wolf.
His system became the standard one for half a century.
Animals could thus be placed on the different branches of the tree, but there was no symmetry about it all.
One could not predict creatures not yet discovered, for the natural systems had no neat arithmetical basis like Linnaeus'; and anyone contemplating the system set out in Cuvier might feel (with King Alfonso of Castile on Ptolemaic astronomy) that if God had consulted him, he would have recommended something simpler.
What did appear were various kinds of relationships, often called ‘affinities’.
This really means relationship by marriage, but naturalists used it to mean family relationship, recognizing that horses and donkeys were closely related even though they denied any actual evolutionary connections.
Pre-Darwinian biology had a language which already possessed evolutionary overtones.
Another word often used was ‘type’.
This had a range of meanings, but was based on the idea that an individual could stand for a race, or prefigure other individuals not yet born.
In this latter sense, preachers and theologians sought in the Old Testament (with its sometimes unedifying stories) types of the characters in the New Testament.
In the interpretation of prophecy and of apocalypse this kind of reasoning was essential.
In zoology, where again there seemed to be a former world of ‘Dragons of the prime, That tare each other in their slime’ in meaningless violence, the extinct animals could be seen as types of those now existing.
Similarly, the good and great could be seen as noble types appearing before their time.
Such thoughts went with an idea of progress, at least in the past; but such progress need not have been smooth, for the various faunas could easily have been destroyed and replaced in a series of catastrophes.
The other sense of type did not involve time.
The first specimen to be formally described according to the rules laid down by Linnaeus (and later codified by Strickland and others from 1842 on) is the type, and these are carefully kept in great museums, which exchange duplicates after due comparison.
If in doubt, one compares another specimen with the type in order to see if it belongs to the same species.
In an extension of this, the first species described can be seen as the type, or the typical member, of its genus.
Because Linnaeus worked in western Europe, it tends to be the European form which is seen as typical in this sense; and of course it is accidental which species in a group happens to be first described and hence seen as typical.
Types in this sense were used in teaching.
The world is so full of a number of things that it would be hopeless to try to study every kind of animal or plant.
The best plan was therefore to study a few typical ones: T. H. Huxley's course on the crayfish at South Kensington in the 1870s was based on this principle, close study of a crayfish preparing one for any invertebrate.
Naturally the comparisons were closest with other crustaceans, and Huxley brought in shrimps, lobsters and crabs in the context of his course; the crayfish was a typical crustacean rather as the man on the Clapham omnibus was supposed to be a typical Englishman.
But beyond this, Cuvier had demonstrated unity of plan and correlation of the parts in organisms.
Once the crab had been  shown by J. V. Thompson in his Zoological Researches (1828–34) to begin life as a little shrimp-like creature, and the barnacle perhaps more surprisingly to do the same before settling down in middle age, then the unity of plan in the group became more evident.
Barnacles were a fit subject for Darwin to work on, as he did for many years, because of their curious metamorphosis; and also because of the way in which males have regressed to become merely vestigial in some species.
Given the whole family of crustaceans, it was possible to imagine an ideal or typical crustacean of which all the existing forms were more or less close realizations.
This was done by Thomas Bell, a dentist and naturalist who achieved the feat of recognizing a shrimp previously undescribed in British waters in a dish of prawns served up to him in Bognor.
No actual creature had all the limbs and segments of the ideal one; and their divergence from it was a measure of their height in the scale — crabs come above lobsters.
Such a typical creature was a kind of Platonic ideal, imperfectly realized here below; and Richard Owen, Huxley's patron and then foe, made sense of zoology through a series of such ‘archetypes’, as he called them.
He saw homologies, unity of plan, everywhere and this gave him a pattern of a kind.
The idea of types could help organize the science; and the exemplars of the type were often called ‘representatives’.
Thus Alcedo atthis is the only representative of the kingfisher family found in Britain.
But the term could be extended, so that kangaroos might be said to represent deer in Australia because they live in something like the same way.
To most serious naturalists (and the term ‘biologist’, coined at the beginning of the century by Lamarck and Trew, took long to come into use), relationships which were not affinities were not really of much interest.
But an exception was William Swainson, an outstandingly talented zoological illustrator, who took what we might call ideas typical or representative of his time further than most contemporaries were willing to do.
In Huxley and others the idea of types was a teaching aid, and Cuvier's branching tree gave some organization to his great tomes on the animal kingdom.
Swainson had begun work on an encyclopedia of zoology, but this project was then transformed into a series of volumes for the Cabinet Cyclopedia organized by Dionysius 
Lardner.
Lardner was called ‘the Tyrant’ by his contributors; he was an Irishman, who created a sensation when he ran off with the wife of an army officer.
He was one of those who saw the possibilities opened up by the cheaper paper, and the coming of machine-made cases instead of hand bookbindings, of about 1830.
There was also a growing market for books as literacy increased, though there was not yet universal schooling: the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, the Mechanics Institutes and the so-called March of Mind were features of the time leading up to the Reform Bill of 1832, and indicating a market for non-fiction.
Lardner's volumes were not quite an encyclopedia, since each one could stand on its own: volumes came out at intervals, and buyers do not seem to have been made to subscribe to the whole set.
Swainson's original contract called for him to produce volumes at three-month intervals; he had already done preliminary work for his abortive encyclopedia, but even so the rate of production envisaged is astonishing, and it is not surprising that Swainson failed to keep up with his timetable.
Faced with a whole series of books to write, Swainson had the choice of simply following Cuvier's system, which was coming out in an English version at the same time, or of doing something new; and he chose the latter.
Swainson was a man of parts, not altogether unlike Darwin in some respects.
His career as a naturalist had begun when he was in the army at the end of the Napoleonic Wars; serving in Malta and Sicily, he met Rafinesque (later a founder of botany in the USA), who infected him with enthusiasm for natural history.
After the war, Swainson went on an expedition to South America, to Brazil; but unlike Humboldt or Darwin, he brought little home, having been confined to the coast by a war.
Back in London, deserting his native Liverpool which he compared unfavourably to Manchester, he was advised by William Leach at the British Museum to take up lithography.
He duly produced the first work on natural history to use this new technique, Zoological Illustrations (6 volumes, 1820–33) and at the same time, Exotic Conchology (1821–2).
The plates in these volumes were hand-coloured, and the original ones, coloured by Swainson and annotated by him so that colourists could get them right, have recently come to light and are at the Linnean Society, where his correspondence is also.
He refers to the lithographed drawings as ‘engravings’, and he used many short lines like an engraver scratching on copper; pioneers are often conservative, and it was left to Edward Lear in his superb volume on parrots (1832) to exploit lithography, using bold flowing lines with his crayon on the stone.
Swainson felt that an illustrator ranked below a real man of science, and he therefore also sought a reputation as a theorist.
He adopted from an eminent entomologist, William MacLeay, the notion that the various classes of animals formed circular clusters (in which the extremes met) rather than diverging branches.
These circles then touched others, forming groups of three, or (since the bottom circle could be made up of three little ones) five.
There was only room in each circle for a set number of species.
The group of circles formed a genus, and the genera could similarly be arranged in circles, and so on up the scale to higher groupings.
Analogies played almost as important a part in the system as affinities did; animals with long snouts should occupy a place similar to birds with long bills, for example.
The basis in threes was to be expected if God was a Trinity; and indeed in Swainson's high-church theology, we should expect to find in nature a network of analogies and symbols.
The great advantage of his system, with its reliance upon external characters and analogies, was that it enabled him to make sense of the whole animal kingdom without the lifetime of research which Lardner's schedule made impossible.
He could not afford like Darwin to spend several years on just getting the barnacles straight.
Knowing ahead of time what the classification of fish must look like is a great help if one is an expert only on birds and mollusca: and Swainson produced analogies which nobody had previously thought of.
Another advantage in the 1830s was that there was no room among the apes for man.
The circles were full up, and therefore man was not a part of the animal kingdom at all.
Emphasis on analogies and external characters led to the splitting up of the marsupials, so that the thylacine was placed among the dogs despite its extraordinary reproductive system.
Those who bought the Cabinet Cyclopedia therefore got a rather odd view of zoology, conservative in its   types and symbols but up to date in its appreciation of J. V. Thompson's work, and rarely dull.
Figure 5 Orang-utan from the Penny Encyclopedia, vol. 1, 1833.
The circular or quinary system of Swainson interested some of the more speculative minds of the next generation, including Huxley, A. R. Wallace (who annotated his copy of Swainson on the geographical distribution of animals), and Darwin (who had copies made of MacLeay's writings in order to criticize them).
Swainson had got to know some of the leading zoologists in London on his return from his voyage, and when writing the  scientific descriptions of the birds collected on Franklin's polar journeys he had gone to Paris and worked in the Museum there.
But he had an immense capacity for rows, and fell out with everybody sooner or later.
He tried to get a post at the British Museum, and was most indignant when it went to George Children, a friend of Davy and thus possessing superior patronage.
Lacking a base in an institution, and having resigned from the Zoological Society after falling out with its Secretary, he was, as it were, writing his books in a void.
A corrective to eccentric views, or a stimulus to close argument in presenting them, is provided by discussion or by teaching, formal or (particularly) informal; and this Swainson did not have.
Even if one has good scientific ideas, it is never enough just to publish them: the world will never beat a pathway to the door of the scientific recluse; and all that the Avogadro or the Mendel can hope for is posthumous fame.
Swainson himself, in the first of his Cabinet Cyclopedia volumes, a Preliminary Discourse (1834) on natural history designed to complement John Herschel's on physical science, drew attention to the excessively formal meetings of most London scientific societies, where no questions or discussion followed a lecture or paper.
The exception was the Geological Society, whose meeting room was even set out like the House of Commons for debate rather than in rows for a lecture.
Swainson also complained of the decline of science in Britain, and the lack of opportunities to study it.
Other ‘declinists’ helped found the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1831, meeting in different cities each year for lectures and discussions in various ‘sections’; but Swainson played no part in it, thus avoiding the power struggles in which gentlemen of science usually with Cambridge connections came in effect to direct the organization.
Victorian science, perhaps Victorian intellectual life, had a certain robustness which could easily degenerate into quarrels, and it is a feature of the time that leading workers in the same field were often not on speaking terms: but at least in the BAAS good-tempered discussion was possible.
In the generation after Swainson's, one who was fully involved with scientific institutions was Edward Forbes.
He was also a  man who got on well with almost all his associates, and his early death in 1854 was seen as a great blow to natural history.
His career and his ideas form an interesting contrast with those of Swainson.
He was a student at Edinburgh, where among other figures more in the mainstream of science and medicine he met Samuel Brown, a chemist famous (or notorious) for his transmutation experiments.
He then made the pilgrimage to Paris in 1836/7, having renounced medicine as a career.
In Paris he found that the lecturers did not as in Edinburgh confine themselves to one hour, but generally took an hour and a half or two hours; but he found his time there very valuable.
The problem about renouncing medicine in early-Victorian Britain was that there was no other very obvious way to live if one were a naturalist.
He tried giving freelance lectures in Edinburgh, and wrote a book on British starfishes (1841), but these brought in very little.
A stream of scientific papers began to bring fame but not fortune.
He hoped in the end to be chosen for the Chair of Natural History in Edinburgh, having a strong feeling (by then old-fashioned) that natural history was really one field.
The problem was that there was no compulsory retiring age in the nineteenth century, and Robert Jameson worked on as Professor at Edinburgh for half a century, dying in office in his eightieth year in 1854.
Forbes thus had to wait for fifteen years or so before the coveted post came up; during this time Jameson sometimes teetered but always recovered, and his courses and museum fell behind the times.
Forbes managed to get a place on a voyage in the eastern Mediterranean, where HMS Beacon was engaged in a survey.
On his return, he got a post at King's College, London, teaching botany; but the fees were small.
He became a keen supporter of the BAAS, founding a club which gathered each year at the meetings, for conviviality and science.
They called themselves the Red Lions, after the name of the pub where they first met in Birmingham in 1839.
Forbes' verses and caricatures became famous, and came to be typical of a kind of hearty humour forming a part of scientific meetings of the nineteenth century.
In the end, a post was found for him in 1844 as palaeontologist with the Geological Survey, with a salary of 300 per year; and on the strength of this in 1848 he married.
The Geological Survey  was one of the very few organizations employing men of science in Britain — Greenwich Observatory was one of the others — but their status was about that of clerks in the Civil Service, and this rankled.
At last in 1854 Forbes was duly appointed to the Edinburgh chair, but he died a few months later at the age of only thirty-nine; there was a general feeling that he had worn himself out with drudgery, and that success had come too late.
Forbes was thus a contemporary of Darwin and Huxley; but because he died at the height of his powers just five years before the Origin of Species was published, and because despite his time in Paris he remained an outdoor natural historian having little temptation towards laboratory-based physiology, his work was incomplete and soon seemed obsolete.
In particular, his idea that the depths of the sea were lifeless was shown to be false with the deep-sea dredges begun in connection with the laying of telegraph cables beneath the oceans.
It is to be expected that nature will surprise us; what was significant about Forbes' work was that he was a pioneer in studying the distribution of marine organisms, finding analogies between going deeper into the sea and going higher on land.
Forbes sought for general patterns in the distribution of living and extinct organisms, seeing a kind of polarity which governed the production of new types during past epochs.
He loved to dwell also on the analogies between plants and animals, remarking in 1843 that ‘both kingdoms seem pervaded by a double representation of each other’.
He saw geology as disclosing the preparations ‘for the reception of organized beings, a history which has all the character of a great epic, having for its hero, MAN’.
This did not mean that he was at all sympathetic to evolutionary ideas, which seemed crude and mechanical; but he was not patient either with ‘Bridgewater writing’, because it meant seeing the hand of God more in some things than others.
For him, every organism was an outward type of an inner Divine thought; so nothing was isolated, and everything was linked to everything else.
He believed that the greatest scientists should also be poets, for both recognized affinity, analogy and beauty; and although to his biographer his mind seemed essentially Platonic, his greatest heroes were Aristotle, Linnaeus, Robert Brown and Goethe.
Swainson's and Forbes' energies were diffused in their own struggle for existence (though both hoped to live like gentlemen rather than just exist) and the need to write fast and to lecture for money and reputation.
Had Forbes lived longer, he might have founded at Edinburgh a school of naturalists as he hoped, and which was impossible at that date in London; and he might have written a major work.
It was Darwin's fortune that spared him from the drudgery which wore out his contemporaries, and allowed him to do his research without worrying about whether he would have bread and cheese.
Without private means, as a less-promising drop-out from Edinburgh medicine, he would even after his voyage have found it very difficult to find employment giving leisure for research.
One such job was at a museum.
The British Museum was still one unit, containing both natural history and works of art, and there were posts there for a few naturalists.
Robert Brown, the great botanist who had studied the distribution of Australian plants on and after a voyage with Matthew Flinders, was the leading light there, with George Children as Keeper of Zoology; but the Museum never fulfilled the role of the Parisian natural history museum, with its lectures and research school.
When in the last quarter of the century, the natural history collections were moved to the new building in South Kensington, and had no longer to play second fiddle to the historical parts and the library, then the number of jobs increased and the scope for research improved.
The first Supervisor (1856) of the whole natural history collections was Richard Owen, and he presided over the move to South Kensington (1881).
Owen was an older contemporary of Forbes and Darwin, but lived far longer than either of them (1804–92); it is often a good idea to outlive one's opponents, but Owen's bête noire was Huxley (who outlived him), and by 1892 the world had become Darwinian and Owen seemed like a living fossil.
He had moreover made himself disagreeable to many contemporary naturalists, and his posthumous reputation has been well below what it was in his earlier life, when he was seen as the British Cuvier.
Owen was a museum man from the beginning of his career.
After taking an Edinburgh medical degree, he was assistant curator of the Hunterian Collection of comparative anatomy at  the Royal College of Surgeons from 1826.
This collection had been formed in the second half of the eighteenth century by John Hunter who was largely responsible for raising surgery from a craft to a profession in England, and was the greatest anatomist and physiologist of his day.
Its object was to show the comparative structure and functions of organs throughout the animal kingdom.
With the coming of palaeontology, the museum was a great resource for anybody interested in reconstructing fossil creatures.
It was also one of the attractions of London for the intellectually-minded tourist.
Cuvier had claimed to be able to reconstruct an animal from a single bone, but it was Owen who did it, working out that a bone from New Zealand, broken at the ends, must have come from an enormous flightless bird, and being vindicated when the complete skeleton of a moa was found later.
This was indeed a triumph; like most of those who make predictions, Owen got some animals wrong later (identifying as mammals what turned out to be reptilian remains), but connoisseurship is a matter of probabilities rather than certainties.
What really interested him, and what he tried to get across in lectures and in learned tomes, were the unities of plan, the homologies, to be found in the animal kingdom.
This made him the intellectual heir of John Hunter, whose Essays and Observations he published with due filial piety in 1861.
These were papers, filling two volumes, left unpublished at Hunter's death, which Owen dedicated to the Royal College of Surgeons, where from 1837 he had been Hunterian Professor.
Like Swainson and like Forbes, Owen saw the animal kingdom as exemplifying the ideas of its Creator, through a pattern of types and archetypes.
He believed in a kind of progressive development of forms, but like Forbes stopped short of an actual evolutionary theory.
He was one of the very few men of science who gave a welcome, albeit qualified, to Vestiges (1844) presumably because he could see the wood for the trees; but when the Origin of Species came out in 1859 he disliked it heartily, and became one of the most formidable opponents of Darwin and Huxley.
Contemporaries saw some kind of jealousy here; Owen was not one who could brook a rival for the position of British Cuvier.
He had (like Davy in the previous generation) risen by his professional competence to a position where he mingled with the eminent, like W. E. Gladstone, the Prince Consort and Samuel Wilberforce.
Such success did not, however, always lead to social security.
Huxley, the exponent of laboratory physiology, won a great victory over Owen when he contrived to get a statue of Darwin placed on the main staircase of the Natural History Museum; but justice has been done with the passage of time, and Owen's statue is now in pride of place in his building.
Rivalries are certainly a feature of intellectual life.
In the case of Owen and Huxley there was a complex relationship, for Owen had been almost his father-in-science; but Owen had other serious reasons for seeing little in Darwinism.
His Platonism meant that relationships were ideal patterns, not to be taken literally as lines of descent.
His work on fossils and on comparative anatomy had convinced him of the reality of species and the lack of missing links between them.
Moreover, he was a Christian, and saw Darwin's theory, with its apparent reliance on chance, as opposed to religion; materialism and chance were the bases after all of the Epicurean philosophy.
Owen was no fundamentalist, and many of his contemporaries (especially those working in museums, and classifying vertebrates) saw little for them in Darwinism: the family trees were hypothetical, and there was no independent evidence of real rather than ideal relationships.
Those who were against evolutionary speculations were not ‘creationists’ proposing a different explanation of the origin of species, based upon one of the accounts of the creation in Genesis.
High-church men such as Gladstone and Wilberforce did indeed stick closer to the literal text of the Bible than their twentieth-century successors would; they saw all its books as an inspired unit, ‘Holy Scripture’.
The ‘higher criticism’, examining the Bible as one would any other ancient text, only impinged on the Church of England in 1860 with the publication of Essays and Reviews by various authors including Frederick Temple and Benjamin Jowett.
So before that most believers, like the young Darwin, took it for granted that everything in the Bible was true in a simple way.
Sophisticates might see it differently: thus J. H. Newman, writing in the Tracts for the Times (no. 85, 1840) when still a  member of the Church of England, drew attention to discrepancies and differences of emphasis between various books of the Bible.
His intention was to show that the interpretation of Scripture was too complex to be left to whoever happened to be reading it.
Only in the light of the traditions of the Church, which had preserved these writings and formed a Canon of orthodox books in deciding which writings should be included in the Bible, could the meaning of the text be properly assigned.
Newman, with his concern about reserve in communicating doctrine to those who were not ready for it, and his analysis of assent into notional and real, seemed slippery to many contemporaries.
To most Victorians, truth seemed a simple matter, only confused by people like Pontius Pilate, of conformity to facts.
The Bible, then, must be true or false like a newspaper report; few people had room for the truths of poetry or of fiction in their religion.
Apart from this belief in the straightforward truth of books which would now be seen as in differing degrees myth, with Adam as Everyman rather than a historical figure, for example, there was diffidence about the boundaries of science.
The Baconian suspicions of the speculative and deductive intellect were strong; the public then as now liked science that was hypothetical and interesting, and loved rows between experts, but scientific opinion was cautious.
And in particular, science which was supposed to rely upon careful generalizing, with repeated experiments and observations, could not handle unique events.
John Herschel in his Preliminary Discourse (1830) for the Cabinet Cyclopedia urged that while astronomers can deal with the orbits of the planets in the solar system, their inductions cannot take them back to its creation.
Thus one should avoid a theory of the origin of species, which would inevitably be unscientific, and concentrate on describing and classifying the existing species.
Darwin did not have to overthrow a coherent and worked-out theory; he had to persuade contemporaries that hypothesizing about origins was worthwhile.
The famous example of a prominent scientist and Christian who was something like a fundamentalist is Philip Gosse.
His Omphalos (1858) was written in the year before the Origin of Species, so it is not a reply to it; but it can be seen as a reply in  anticipation.
Gosse was perplexed at the vast tracts of time required by geologists to account for the deposition of all the strata.
Since each stratum was accompanied by its fossils, it appeared that there had been animals upon the Earth for millions of years.
To Gosse, this was just an appearance; and his book was ‘an attempt to untie the geological knot’, though it might seem rather to cut it.
The omphalos was Adam's navel.
Since he was not born in the ordinary way, Adam would not have needed one, but the general assumption was that as a man he had a navel.
A bystander at his creation, or rather arriving a few moments after it, would feel justified in assuming that Adam had had a mother, been born and brought up in the usual way, and was in every way like us; but he would be wrong.
For Gosse the Earth might be like Adam, supplied with what looks like evidence of its past history, but is not.
The fossils are the equivalent of Adam's navel.
Gosse was a Plymouth Brother, and a marine biologist who had made aquaria popular and who ran seaside field-trip/holidays for those interested in natural history.
His book did his reputation no good.
It offended the religious, because it seemed to make God out to be untruthful or deceitful; in the scientific age, science was after all a route to truth, and only the Devil was the father of lies.
Those who were seriously engaged in geology or biology could not allow such reasoning either, although in a sense it only represented the idea that science cannot deal with origins, carried to an extreme.
Taken that way, the book can be said to have shown the problems of hypothesizing about origins; and also the problems associated with supposing that animals, men or plants were suddenly created, fully-grown so that they could manage on their own.
Once looked at hard, Victorian ‘creationism’ could be seen to have its problems.
There were further difficulties when one began thinking about the numbers of animals required at the Creation.
To sustain carnivores, there must have been many more herbivores; but the idea that two of each kind were created somewhere and slowly spread and multiplied would not go with real population dynamics.
This was made explicit by Louis Agassiz, a Swiss who had in 1840 recognized marks of glaciation all over northern Europe and thus given us the idea of ice ages.
He had also made  himself the leading authority on fossil fish, taking over Cuvier's work.
In 1846 he went to the USA to study and lecture, and in the following year was appointed to a chair at Harvard.
He was one of the first eminent European scientists to make a career in the USA, and rapidly became a lion: his lectures and books were popular, and he built up a school and museum at Harvard.
American zoologists and botanists were, like those elsewhere, divided into ‘lumpers’ and ‘splitters’: lumpers are those who apply a coarse taxonomy, putting into one group individuals which may differ quite widely; whereas splitters use a fine taxonomy, making species where lumpers saw only races or varieties.
Compared to Europeans, Americans tended to be splitters.
This was because they found that many of their animals and plants were very similar to European forms, but that they did differ in what seemed to be significant respects, such as size or colour.
To Agassiz, who became the most eminent anti Darwinian in the USA, these indicated that they were separate creations: animal populations had been created in about their present numbers and in their present locations.
This curious conclusion set at nought the work on distribution done by Brown, Humboldt, Darwin and Wallace, and by the botanists Joseph Hooker of Kew and Asa Gray of Harvard; they had found all sorts of curious patterns, of which it seemed possible to make sense in terms of migrations, barriers and ice ages.
Agassiz's kind of ‘creationism’ simply seemed to bar the door to further investigation of a question which could be scientifically handled.
It was also some way from orthodox Christianity, as ‘creationism’(and indeed Bridgewater natural theology) can often or generally be.
By 1857 when Agassiz's Essay on Classification appeared, as an introduction to a never-completed work on the natural history of the USA, it was already difficult to believe that Noah's flood had really been a world-wide catastrophe with animals surviving two by two; indeed Agassiz's work on ice ages had involved reinterpretation of data that seemed evidence of the Flood.
His Essay was clearly incompatible with this story; and for man, the animal we are all most interested in, his account was very different from that in Genesis.
By the nineteenth century, the idea that as children of Adam and 
Eve we were all brothers and sisters under the skin had provided an argument against slavery.
If black people had been separately created in Africa, and Red Indians in the Americas, and so on, then it might be as legitimate to enslave them as to enslave cattle.
This was an important matter in the USA in the 1850s.
To suggest that the races of mankind were separate creations was to depart widely from Biblical teaching.
One could be a ‘creationist’ without being much support for Biblical religion.
As a young man in Germany and in France Agassiz had met both an idealistic evolutionary system and the branching natural method of Cuvier and his disciples.
His own system of classification involved a belief in the objective reality of both species and higher groupings — in fact, a kind of Platonism not so different from that of Forbes and Owen.
Species should not, he believed, be defined in some operational way, based for instance on fertility.
There were essential differences between them, so that arguments between splitters and lumpers were not about convenience, but about truth.
Agassiz drew diagrams of the relative flourishing of different families of fish through past time, which showed gradual appearance and extinction — but he must have believed that species came into being and died out at definite times.
In the absence of coelacanths, it was still possible to toy with the idea that species and genera had their life-spans as individuals do, even though some ‘living fossils’ among plants should have made this more difficult than it was.
By the 1850s attempts to understand the arrangement of animals had thus reached the limits possible if one assumes that species are fixed in time.
Two-dimensional patterns like those of Linnaeus, Cuvier or Swainson made sense only against a background of idealism; by the 1850s they seemed to close doors to further enquiry rather than open them.
Those working with invertebrates, such as Lamarck and Darwin, or with plants, such as Gray and Hooker, where the number of species was vastly greater than among vertebrates, were perhaps driven towards some more dynamic conception of a species, as something changing over time.
The efforts of those like Gosse and Agassiz to make a definite theory out of the doctrine of Creation helped to show the value of an alternative approach; evolution might be made scientific.
In this way, Darwin could offer a ‘working hypothesis’, as Huxley put it, or a light shining in the darkness.
In some of Darwin's own researches we can see how useful it was.
He studied orchids, because of their extraordinary shapes; and argued (building on work of Brown) that they had evolved in conjunction with the insects which fertilized them.
Instead of just describing and classifying the orchids, he could give some explanation of their appearance.
This involved ecology, rather than just arranging dried specimens in interesting patterns.
Quite new kinds of research were opened up, so that whereas the static kind of classifying was a rather sterile tradition, Darwinism presented an attractive research programme.
Its trouble was that it could lead to just-so stories rather than to information; it was more provisional than some kinds of science.
But even the safest-seeming science is going to be obsolete sooner or later; obsolete taxonomy, like that of Swainson or Agassiz, is as dead as the dodo, and those who took the risks of Darwinism usually found it interesting and fruitful.
Darwinism never received a welcome in France, where in place of Darwin's historical and probabilistic method the way forward seemed to be in laboratory physiology.
Here the models were from chemistry rather than from history; the idea was to give an account of how the parts of the organism were formed in embryology, and how they functioned in life.
In a sense, this was a line which had been followed by John Hunter; but his heirs in Britain had not pursued it, partly because of a national aversion to the vivisection which seemed a necessary part of it and partly because it seemed materialistic.
In Britain, Huxley introduced this kind of physiology from France and Germany from the 1850s; and in the last quarter of the century his pupils (trained in South Kensington, in what became Imperial College) filled chairs in British universities, where the field was now becoming separated from medicine.
In Huxley's own book The Crayfish (1879), written twenty years after the Origin had appeared, the development of crayfishes is a very unimportant part of the work, forming a confessedly hypothetical section at the end.
Huxley as a popularizer of Darwin and as a teacher of biology emphasized rather different aspects of science.
Huxley himself loathed vivisection, but encouraged it in his pupils and saw Britain's  backwardness in the new physiology as something in need of urgent attention.
Darwin, with his inherited money, doing little experiments in his garden and studying what we would call ecology, seemed rather like a survival from the eighteenth century: the new way to end arguments about animals seemed to be through chemistry.
But that  millennial day was still seen to be far off.
Naturalists still needed illustrations, and it is to these that we shall turn next.
7 Discourse in Pictures
Natural history in the nineteenth century meant not only arguments about the system and man's place in it; it also meant great quantities of illustrated books and papers.
And in technology too, the nineteenth century saw the coming to Britain from France of technical drawing, and the depiction of industrial landscapes and industrial processes.
Scientific illustration meant not only pictures of animals, plants and rocks, but also of bridges, gas-works and railways.
It is tempting to suppose that making pictures is almost devoid of theory; but no artist was ever really a kind of camera, and both theory and fashion entered into scientific illustration.
Just as scientific theory, from optics, geology, meteorology and phrenology, entered landscape and genre painting, so scientific illustrations show current outlooks.
Artists' intentions are easier to recover in scientific illustration than in many other kinds of pictures.
Since science is public knowledge, it is really printed pictures that will most interest us; and the nineteenth century saw the appearance of a series of new techniques which changed the appearance of scientific books radically.
Books in the eighteenth century, and in the first quarter of the nineteenth, were little illustrated and were expensive.
A handsomely produced but unillustrated book like Davy's Six Discourses (1827) would have cost more than a week's wages for an artisan like Faraday had been.
Woodcuts were used for cheap publications, like the chapbooks sold by chapmen or pedlars; but these had crude illustrations.
Woodcuts made on the side grain had become obsolete for scientific illustration by the middle of the seventeenth century.
The splendid and spirited pictures in  the early printed herbals had been done this way, but as increasingly detailed and accurate illustrations were demanded, plates etched or engraved on copper became the norm.
Woodcuts can be mounted with type, because what is to print black stands up from the surface; so it was easy to put pictures on the same page as descriptions, and herbals and bestiaries were liberally illustrated.
Copper engraving or etching is not a relief process, but an intaglio one; what is to print black is cut down below the surface, and the copper is wiped before printing.
A different press is needed, and a different paper is desirable, so to print pictures and text on the same page is awkward.
Generally illustrations were separately bound in, with complex instructions to the binder as to where they should go — which he sometimes got wrong.
Wicked persons are also tempted to remove the plates from their own or someone else's copy and frame them; the plates and text are much more separable in every way than they were in the old herbals.
Sometimes the plates were even in a different format from the text, coming in a great atlas volume and making the work a nuisance to shelf.
Copper engraving was also a difficult technique.
It was rare for the painter to be able to do his own engraving, and conversely few engravers were artists in their own right.
Engraving is like translating; it has its own idiom, and skilled engravers became expert at transforming finished drawings or amateur sketches into plates, though engraving is a less rich language than drawing.
The task was expensive: in the early nineteenth century, plates engraved for the Royal Society's Philosophical Transactions cost up to twenty guineas.
These were plain plates, often very detailed anatomical studies in a large quarto format; if coloured, as some plates were in the Linnean Society's journal at the same time, the cost would be still higher.
For the Royal and Linnean Societies, both fashionable and scientific, money was no object and plates appropriate to the article were engraved.
Authors were generally allowed to use the coppers if they later published their work in a book.
At less exalted levels of society, economies had to be made; often many subjects were crammed on to a single plate.
Authors had to economize in the number of illustrations they used, and readers had to get into the habit of turning a number of pages to find a   relevant picture.
Only at the upper end of the market could such beautiful coloured works as Plants of the Coast of Coromandel (1795–1820), published under the auspices of the East India Company, or Audubon's Birds of America (1827–38), find a sale.
Audubon was an effective salesman for his book among the wealthy, to whom he himself seemed an exotic.
Colouring was done by hand, following pattern plates coloured by the artist, so that different copies of the same work, perhaps done several years apart in a slow-selling book, may differ considerably among themselves.
Figure 6 A pattern-plate of William Swainson from Zoological Illustrations, 1821.
Just at the beginning of the century there came two new techniques, which reduced the price of illustration very considerably and brought visual language into the more ordinary works of science and natural history.
The first of these was wood engraving, done on the end-grain of boxwood with a burin rather than a knife.
Thomas Bewick of Newcastle was the pioneer and perhaps the greatest exponent of this art; his History of British Birds of 1797–1804 was a splendid example of what could be done, although his text was of no scientific significance.
Wood engravings can accompany type, and so once again pictures could go back on the page; they were also very durable, so that runs of hundreds of thousands were possible.
The publishing explosion of the mid-century meant that scientific books were sprinkled with detailed illustrations done in this way.
Copper in contrast was not durable enough for big editions, and where its effects were desired it was increasingly replaced by steel; but this was much less used than wood for works of science.
Wood engravings were generally small, because the box tree is small and its end-grain cannot accommodate a big picture.
For magazines such as the Illustrated London News the solution was to bolt a number of small blocks together; but for full-page scientific pictures the technique of lithography became the standard one.
Wood engraving was a technique which most artists could not manage, so a craftsman was needed to translate the drawing; on the other hand, an artist might be expected to do his picture on the stone, from which it would be directly printed.
One attraction of the method was that an easy flowing line could be printed, in contrast to the short strokes made by the burin in copper; and Edward Lear's parrots, toucans and owls are stunning examples of lithography.
To get the detail which a copper engraving can show was more difficult, but by the middle of the century this had been achieved and lithography was the normal medium.
Like copperplate, it needs a different press, and lithographs had to be bound in separately; but because the cost was about one-third that of copper engravings, there could be more of them.
Only in about the last quarter of the century did colour printing, in the form of chromolithographs, become at all usual; and for expensive books, hand-colouring remained the norm well into the twentieth century.
Audubon was not the first to try to portray animals in motion, but his dramatic and vast illustrations of the birds of America were important as attempts to show living creatures.
In fact they were painted from dead specimens, and to get within range of a naturalist was a misfortune for a nineteenth-century bird or animal; but Audubon painted them against realistic backgrounds, and in more or less plausible action.
Some of his poses aroused derision from contemporaries, but his art suited the Romantic sensibilities of his day, and the principle of depicting living creatures became gradually accepted.
In fact, this can hardly be done in many cases because the animals concerned are nocturnal or are very well camouflaged; but the stiffly mounted corpse on its studio stump, so characteristic of the eighteenth century, soon came to look dated.
Those engaged in classifying creatures in museums worked anyway with dead ones; it was only at the very end of the nineteenth century that the collecting of dead animals and dead birds gave way to the careful observation of living ones, using binoculars.
The naturalist in the field might not even have seen his specimens alive, but have acquired corpses from local people.
So there was often an element of delusion about zoological illustration.
This is increased if the picture is systematic, that is, if it is to show members of close species.
Such illustrations are valuable if one is discriminating specimens, in a museum or perhaps in the field; but close species are not usually seen together, because they will fill slightly different ecological niches.
A systematic plate can also easily date, as classifications change: what seemed species are reclassed as races, and what seemed close species are put into different genera.
In such a plate, visual language is being used to put across a theoretical message; and like ordinary language it can become obsolete.
To the historian, this makes it more interesting because it presents hostages to fortune, and there is more to interpret.
Another kind of plate with more than one animal or bird on it is the ecological one.
Audubon had often shown a predator with its prey, and the relatively static bird plates of John Gould's artists for his splendid volumes also show this.
Edward Lear, drawing parrots and toucans in the zoo, got them very lifelike but left his backgrounds very sketchy, letting the bird stand out  brilliantly but giving very little clue about its habitat.
Pictures done in the zoo can be much better than those done in a museum from a dry skin, perhaps not very convincingly stuffed; but only if there are field sketches too for the artist to work from can he hope to get the background right.
Only rarely did the artist actually go to where he might see exotic species in the wild — and even if he had gone there always, he would probably have found them very hard to see.
But at least he could, if armed with field sketches, show an animal on a food plant, perhaps; or depict various species which might be found in the same rockpool or stretch of veldt.
We can see this process happening with different plates of the Australian Diamond Firetail finch.
This was shown in a handsome but stiff pose, painted by Barraband, in Vieillot's book Tropical Songbirds (1805–9): though drawn from life, it looks stuffed but is very decorative, and is accurate enough to fit its primarily taxonomic purpose as well.
A few years later, in Lewin's Birds of New South Wales (1813), we find a pair displayed, giving us more information, by one who had seen them wild; but the background is rather vague local colour.
This book was the first natural history book known to have been published in Australia, where the engravings were also done probably by a transported forger.
Then a generation later, in Gould's Birds of Australia (1848) a plate shows a pair on grasses which form part of their diet.
Since this was lithographed, by H. C. Richter, it is also much bigger, in a large folio size instead of quarto; but with small birds which can be shown life-size on a page of ordinary dimensions, this merely adds splendour
There is little theory-loading in any of these plates, and none of them attempt to catch the bird in motion as the ‘field guides’ of the twentieth century do.
The lie of every feather is indicated, and while the plates give great aesthetic pleasure, their object was to help identify birds hit by a collector.
If the specimen first collected has perished, the picture may indeed be the type.
Sometimes, as when a plate of a fossil shows its matrix in detail, or that of a fish shows the river where it was caught, we are given more information than we needed — though such details may help to balance the tone of the plate and thus have an aesthetic function.
Later illustrations brought in more: they included the  whole life-cycle of an insect, as the plates of butterflies and moths of Humphrys and Westwood (1841, 1843–5) do; in their handsome but crowded pictures we find a number of close species, on characteristic food plants, thus getting both system and ecology.
It is curious that in modern works on insects, the different stages are often shown in different illustrations, in order to be clearer, to give less systematic hostages to fortune, and to use colour only where it is necessary.
By the time Darwin was working on the Origin of Species, the man who was to become his great opponent in the USA, Louis Agassiz, was using diagrams to show how the various families of fish had flourished and declined through the geological epochs; and in his handsome volumes of 1857, Contributions to the Natural History of the United States, I and II, he included a plate of turtles to show the range of variation within a species.
All the three turtles shown belong to one species, but differ considerably; it was upon the existence of such differences that Darwin was to base his theory of natural selection leading to divergence and eventually to the emergence of new species.
Similar diagrams to show the periods of flourishing of various natural groups were used by Richard Owen, Darwin's chief adversary in England; illustrations which look Darwinian may not be so in fact, but merely indicate that contemporaries were all wrestling with similar problems, and were sharing a good many assumptions.
Owen took over from cartographers the convention that where outlines are unknown one should just dot them in; so his pictures of fossil bones show conjectural restoration of broken or lost pieces.
It was perhaps unfortunate that in verbal controversy with T. H. Huxley he was less careful.
By the 1870s Darwinians were using diagrams showing hypothetical family trees to account for relationships among species.
Specifically Darwinian illustrations are to be found in R. D. Fitzgerald's Australian Orchids (1882–94), one of the most splendid books published in Australia in the nineteenth century.
He showed in two cases the flower with the insect which pollinated it, following Darwin's lead in his Fertilisation of Orchids (1862).
There Darwin had argued that the extraordinary shapes of orchids were the result of evolution in conjunction with generally a single kind of insect fertilizer.
Fitzgerald's plates were  thus tactfully laden with theory, and contrast with other flower pictures which show decorative insects, or insect plates which show food plants.
What is striking about natural history illustrations is sometimes their longevity.
Thus bird books today sometimes use pictures from John Gould, well over a century old, or from C. G. Finch Davies (Birds of Southern Africa, ed.
A. Kemp, 1982) or G. E. Lodge (Unpublished Bird Paintings, ed.
C. A. Fleming, 1983), dating from the early years of our century.
Despite all the changes in theory which have happened in the interim, these plates still apparently have value, and pass time's test.
Sometimes the name originally given is no longer apt, because of revision of genera or species; and sometimes close species put on one plate, as with Lodge's pictures (which are of New Zealand birds), are now separated; but these things do not seem to matter too much to the publishers and editors.
In the past, such longevity has sometimes been a sign of static science.
Thus a picture of a chimpanzee from Edward Tyson's Orang-Outang of 1699 was used in the standard English version of Cuvier's Animal Kingdom (1827–35), and sections through different woods from Nehemiah Grew's Anatomy of Plants (1682) were reproduced in Davy's Agricultural Chemistry (1813).
In both these cases the old plates made the necessary points, and there was no need to go to the trouble and expense of getting new ones.
If there has been little theoretical change, or if they are works of art in their own right — and especially if they are decorative — then illustrations can have a useful life much longer than the text which accompanied them.
In most fields the nineteenth century was the age of the textbook, such as Thomas Thomson's in chemistry and Lyell's in geology, where successive editions made the earlier ones obsolete; the plates that survive usefully are perhaps to be compared to the very few classic books like the Origin of Species which go on selling.
In the days of the Bestiary and the Emblem Book, animal pictures had shown the world of Aesop's fables; butterflies giving us a symbol of resurrection, and also of feckless enjoyment, in pictures waiting to be decoded.
By the nineteenth century this language of animals and flowers had been almost lost, though E. H. Aitkin in India in 1883, drawing a chameleon hunting a  butterfly, could whimsically call it ‘the pursuit of pleasure’.
At the beginning of the century George Montagu on the title-page of his Testacea Britannica (1803) made a verbal and pictorial point about the Chain of Being; but the text, a verse from Stillingfleet, was essential.
Strictly visual language to make scientific points had been used as early as 1555 by Pierre Belon in his Oiseaux, where he put the skeleton of a man and a bird side by side to demonstrate their unity of plan, or homology.
Works on comparative anatomy continued this tradition, though by the nineteenth century there was more caution about using mankind.
As we saw, Montagu's contemporary James Parkinson, the radical surgeon, made a visual point in the frontispiece to his Organic Remains of a Former World (1804–11) which shows Noah's Ark grounded on a rock in the middle distance with the rainbow beyond it, while on the beach in the foreground are various shells of extinct creatures which had missed the boat.
Parkinson knew nothing of dinosaurs, revealed in the work of William Buckland, of Oxford, and of Gideon Mantell, a surgeon of Lewes, in the 1820s.
Cuvier had reconstructed extinct mammals, but here the analogies with living elephants, bears and rhinoceroses were close enough for nobody to doubt what they must have looked like.
To encounter a hairy elephant would be alarming; but the dinosaurs caught and have held the imagination of us all because they seemed dragons.
Apocalyptic visions of monsters seemed to be realized in these terrible eyes and terrible jaws.
The palaeontologist was an Ezekiel calling to life the dry bones; but in this case the old sign ‘here be dragons’ was apt, and the prophet was bringing diabolical creatures to life — perhaps a Frankenstein rather than an Ezekiel.
Since they were safely extinct, nobody needed to have real nightmares about dinosaurs; but their reconstructions did bring problems, and involved theory-loading.
Ichthyosaurs, with their fishy shape, were no great problem; but Mantell's dinosaur was called Iguanodon because of some resemblances to the Iguana.
It was imagined that like lizards it went on all fours; bones were mounted this way in museums, and at the Great Exhibition of 1851 hollow model dinosaurs were made to entertain the public.
Inside the Iguanodon men of science were entertained to dinner; this was possible because the beast had  been made horizontal.
Dining at ease inside a dragon makes a good symbol of the harnessing of mighty powers of nature for man's comfort, or perhaps of pride coming before a fall.
But soon Owen's erstwhile disciple T. H. Huxley began to question the dinosaurs' relationships to lizards; he saw the closeness of birds to some reptiles, and inferred that at least some dinosaurs had gone on two legs rather than four, the Iguanodon among them.
How one reconstructed a dinosaur might depend upon one's views of relationships between reptiles and birds; and indeed with the coming of cladistics, taxonomy based on descent, this is still a live issue, though there is now general agreement that Iguanodon stood on its hind legs.
Dinosaurs as dragons rather than as ancestral birds or lizards struck the painter John Martin as he prepared a frontispiece for Mantell's Wonders of Geology (1838).
Martin was a specialist in vast canvases showing the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Belshazzar's Feast with the Writing on the Wall, and such apocalyptic scenes; and his frontispiece is suitably dramatic, though small.
In the foreground three dinosaurs, clearly wingless dragons rather than definite species, are fighting in mud or slime, watched by a pterodactyl with its wings spread like a cormorant.
Further away two more monsters threaten each other, while in front some tortoises and ammonites show the inhuman scale of the dinosaurs.
Curious palm trees dot the scene, and the background is immense and desolate, as in Martin's paintings.
The ‘country of the Iguanodon restored’ is very different from Victorian Sussex; the strange light which picks out the struggling animals also reveals how many tons of animal life the artist believed that the primeval world could support on quite a small area-as later dinosaur pictures always tend to do.
The chief effect is to highlight the horror of the desolate and pre-human world of purposeless suffering.
If man was a late creation, his Fall could not have brought pain and death into the world; ferocious dinosaurs, and animal suffering generally, brought grave problems to those seeking a theodicy, justifying the ways of God.
Grey Egerton, describing in 1852 a fossil fish which he had lithographed for the Geological Survey, could take a more cheerful view, calling it a ‘pretty little specimen’.
This, like the    advertising language which Darwin's family teased him with using about beetles and barnacles, was characteristic of Victorian naturalists.
Darwin delighted in the exquisite adaptations which he saw in living creatures, as Paley and other natural theologians had done before him: contemplating fossils (or nature generally) could bring pleasure or pain depending on one's temperament and state.
The glum and the cheery would at least have agreed that getting the best artist for one's pictures was crucial, and some rows, as for instance between Albert Gunther and Francis Day, were over attempts to commandeer an artist.
In the case of Gunther and Day, who were eminent ichthyologists, the artist was G. H. Ford.
Fish are very demanding for the draughtsman because one cannot put them into an attractive or anthropomorphic pose; what can sometimes be done is to show the scenery where the fish was caught.
A view of the Tweed behind a salmon gives local colour; and more seriously it can serve, like the blue wash behind a bird, to get the tonal balance of the picture right.
Figure 7 ‘The Country of the Iguanadon’, frontispiece to Mantell's Wonders of Geology, eighth edition, 1864.
To get the specimen from overseas to the artist was the normal practice, but sometimes it was possible to take the artist, or to send him, to the animals.
Thus on Captain Cook's first voyage, Joseph Banks the naturalist took a number of artists, including Sydney Parkinson who was to specialize in natural history subjects.
He produced many excellent pictures before his death on the voyage; and later expeditions benefited from professional and amateur draughtsmen.
Graphic records from nineteenth century voyages of discovery are very splendid.
But sometimes a naturalist or collector overseas would find and perhaps train local artists to depict what he collected.
This happened in China, and some of the attractive paintings collected by John Reeves in the early nineteenth century have recently been published at the British Museum (Natural History).
Many of these were stock pictures rather than specially commissioned ones; Chinese artists were skilled at rendering plants, birds and animals, and could work in conventions attractive to European merchants.
It was not so easy in Latin America, where J. C. Mutis led a Royal Botanical Expedition in the late eighteenth century; this lasted into the early nineteenth century, for he died in Colombia in 1808.
Mutis found Indians to paint flowers for him, setting the  plants stiffly down the middle of the page in a way that looks exotic to the European eye.
Some of the plants they drew were diseased; it is always a matter of difficulty to know which features of a plant or animal are individual peculiarities and which are specific characters.
The artist, especially if he has only one specimen to work from and cannot therefore generalize, must paint what he sees; the greatest of artists in this line will, however, agree with Josef Wolf that ‘we see distinctly only what we know thoroughly’, a maxim he adapted from Goethe.
Mutis' volumes began to come out only in 1954, which must be some kind of record; in this case the explanation was the various political vicissitudes of the century and a half following his death.
William Daniell in his Animated Nature of 1807–12 had tried to convey not only background but also atmosphere.
But it was Wolf who succeeded best in the nineteenth century in bringing drama into natural history illustration.
In his plates for John Gould's bird books the character of the bird comes through, so that the birds of prey are not just accurate but menacing.
In his Life and Habits of Wild Animals, Wolf drew a crocodile seizing a tiger before the eyes of its mate, a gazelle dislodging a leopard from its back by dashing under a low branch, and such exciting episodes — the animal equivalents of the genre paintings in which Victorians delighted.
Wolf's animals look right even in these scenes where the temptation to make them anthropomorphic is great, because the picture might be taken to have a moral for human beings.
These animated plates may take theoretical risks: crocodiles may turn out to dislike the taste of tiger; territorial displays may be misinterpreted as mating ritual; a fight may really be a kind of dance.
In W. L. Buller's Birds of New Zealand (1888) the eminent artist J. G. Keulemans showed a Kea attacking sheep.
This was a time of panic, in which one farmer alleged that a thousand of his sheep had been killed by these parrots; but it is now known that they rarely kill sheep.
An alarming picture encapsulated a false belief.
On the other hand, careful observation of living creatures had led to the solution of some problems, such as how the toucan tucks its head under its wing to sleep — depicted in E. T. Bennett's book on the London Zoo (1831–2).
Wolf's exciting plates were engraved by J. W. and Edward  Whymper, the famous mountaineer; but by Wolf's day the new technique of photography was beginning to come into use in scientific illustration.
One may feel that while an artist may fudge a picture, the camera cannot lie.
On the other hand, a photograph cannot be generalized or simplified to bring out the important diagnostic features of a species; it must be always of an individual at a particular time and place.
There is still scope therefore for the artist, but no longer for the run-of-the-mill artist, in scientific illustration.
The first photographs required long exposures, and animals cannot be expected to sit still as long as Victorian adults did; but by the last quarter of the nineteenth century fast exposures were possible.
Darwin's Expression of Emotions (1872) had photographs of humans, including a splendidly sulky child; but the animals were drawn, because the ‘disappointed and sulky’ chimpanzee, or the dog ‘in a humble and affectionate frame of mind’, would have been harder to photograph with the equipment available.
In the same decade, Edweard Muybridge developed high-speed photography of men and animals in motion, and was at last able to clear up the question of how horses gallop.
Even such curious things as the trajectory of a crow's wing were photographed before the end of the century, while photography through telescopes and then microscopes proved invaluable in astronomy and in biology.
Where photographs can show things invisible to the unaided eye, they are extremely valuable; and in the second half of the nineteenth century the camera, a gift of science to society, could be a useful scientific instrument.
As well as recording movements, it preserves for us portraits of scientists, and pictures of industrial processes.
Natural history illustrations often included dissections, but it is striking to find in J. S. Miller's Crinoidea (1821) an exploded drawing of one of these ‘stone lilies’ or stalked starfish.
With an engineer's interest in how all these tiny ‘bones’ had fitted together, Miller had gone far beyond his contemporaries dealing with less complex fossils, who drew in with dotted lines parts missing in their specimen.
At this date such illustrations were uncommon even in engineering, where drawing was becoming both a serious matter and something like an art form.
It is   curious that although in the nineteenth century the historical picture was the most prestigious, and the anecdotal picture the most popular, it is the scientific illustration-birds, flowers, ships, steam-engines, and great buildings such as railway stations — which catch and hold our attention and admiration.
Figure 8 Exploded drawing of a stone lily from J. S. Miller, Crinoidea, 1821.
The engineering drawing was an essential feature of the industrial revolution as it moved into the stage of large-scale works; it is thus a characteristic element of the scientific age of the nineteenth century.
Its origins go back to the rediscovery of perspective in the Renaissance, and then to the architect's drawings of the eighteenth century.
The earliest steam-pumps of Thomas Newcomen and others in the eighteenth century were not erected from the kind of detailed and accurate drawings customary by the nineteenth.
There was much use of natural materials, and craftsmen expected like medieval masons to be given general rather than highly specific directions.
In the same way, shipwrights were expected to show initiative when building in the traditional way in wood; but with the coming of iron and then steel as materials, leading to bigger ships as steam replaced sail, calculations led to exact drawings, which became the vehicle of centralized control and stronger industrial discipline.
In the last decades of the eighteenth century, James Watt prepared careful working drawings for the steam-engines which Boulton and Watt were making.
These engines required much better fit of components than had Newcomen's; parts bought in had to fit exactly, and then those putting up the engine and its house on site required to know just what to do.
A language of technical drawing began.
Watt's were usually coloured, the colours at this period sometimes indicating materials, sometimes function, and sometimes being just decorative.
Contemporary with Watt was Gaspard Monge, who in 1795 published his Géométrie descriptive; although this book was not directly influential in Britain for some time (British engineers having little sympathy for abstract mathematics), it formed the basis for modern engineering drawing.
Monge provided a system for clearly displaying three-dimensional structures in two dimensions.
Careful shading, as was done by Swainson drawing shells and by James Sowerby and his family drawing minerals, could indicate exact shapes; and projections from different angles showed how things fitted together.
By the middle of the century, an engineering firm would have a large drawing office (which by the end of the century might include women draughtsmen) in which detailed plans indicating exactly where rivets must go, and more highly finished drawings for the client, were prepared.
The  draughtsmen were by this time becoming separated from the engineers, in that specialization which was such a feature of all aspects of life in the age of science.
The engineering drawing itself accelerated this process, because projects carefully worked out in advance on paper could be carried out by many workers each doing a small repetitive part of the whole operation, perhaps in distant factories and workshops.
The skilled man could be replaced by the factory hand.
It was a feature of the history of technology in the nineteenth century that an invention by a craftsman, or a traditional practice, was opened up to scientific analysis; once properly understood, it could be improved upon.
Some theoretical science, such as thermodynamics, depended upon this process.
Sadi Carnot came to the second law of thermodynamics from pondering on the efficiency of an abstract and idealized engine; and Helmholtz came to the first from considering simple mechanical devices such as trip-hammers driven by water-wheels.
Renaissance drawings of machines, and even some of those from the eighteenth century, sometimes display an ignorance of how the device must really have worked; and at other times they are fudged, so that important features cannot be seen because the artist did not understand them.
A proper engineering drawing cannot be thus fudged; like Wolf, the draughtsman must fully comprehend what he is drawing.
As a concise and precise international language like that longed for by the natural philosophers of the seventeenth century, where symbols would stand for things and not words, engineering drawing was valuable in opening machinery to scientific study.
This had indeed been one of the aims of the scientific societies of the seventeenth century, such as the Royal Society; and it was best realized in the superb plates in the Encyclopèdie of Diderot and d'Alembert which show French manufactures in the middle of the eighteenth century, before the industrial revolution changed techniques.
At all times, but increasingly in the later eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries, new techniques have been brought in by observing their use elsewhere what would now be unkindly called industrial espionage — and sometimes by tempting away workmen.
Apprentices trained by the great engineers such as Robert Stephenson introduced the best practice  in their subsequent careers; they were therefore sought after, and a high premium was charged when a boy was taken on.
Apprentices were trained to make drawings rapidly, so that when they saw some machinery with which they were unacquainted they could sketch its salient features; this would correspond to the field sketch of the naturalist.
Engineers and manufacturers of the nineteenth century had to keep an eye open for the rather too-well-informed casual visitor, making notes and sketches of what was going on.
The early industrial development of the USA largely depended on this kind of borrowing.
A sketch by an expert can convey much more information than several pages of prose, as we all know from the instructions that accompany household apparatus.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there was almost no standardization in science or in technology.
Drawings were not done to a standard scale; the metric system was just being introduced in France and its conquered territories, where it replaced a range of different miles, fathoms, feet and inches; and there were no standard interchangeable parts, even nuts and bolts and screws being individual.
It was not until the 1870s that in British science grams and centimetres replaced ounces, troy or avoirdupois, and cubic inches; while in engineering the old units lasted well into the twentieth century.
Variations of units having the same name meant that sometimes there was easy money to be made, buying big chauldrons and selling small ones; but usually this was only a minor nuisance, entailing conversion tables and making international communication a little more difficult.
In Britain at the beginning of the century the naval dockyards were among the largest industrial concerns; and there Marc Brunel first introduced high technology in the form of machinery for making pulley-blocks for the rigging of warships.
His son, Isambard Kingdom Brunel, is famous for his railway work and for his ships.
The principle of interchangeable parts did not catch on in British industry as fast as it did in the American gun industry; Colt's revolvers were the great examples of what became known as the American system of manufacture.
In the later nineteenth century Europeans found themselves borrowing techniques from the USA.
This was particularly true in the military field, as the old smooth-bore muskets were replaced by  rifles at the time of the Crimean War of 1854–6.
Because of the interest Colt's guns aroused at the Great Exhibition of 1851 in London, commissioners were sent to the New York Industrial Exhibition of 1854.
One of them was Joseph Whitworth, who prepared an interesting report on some of the manufactures and on the patent system of the USA.
He is particularly important in our story because of his work on standardizing the pitches of screws and of nuts and bolts.
Faraday had written in the 1820s that it was a good idea to have the same pitch on various bits of apparatus, so that they could be connected together in different ways; but this idea had not become general.
It was an important step towards the ideal of interchangeable parts, and it went well with the nineteenth century transforming of craft activity into modern industry, remotely controlled by paper in the form of plans and drawings, prepared by people in a distant office and perhaps in a distant town.
Great Exhibitions were an important visual argument for science and industry, and an opportunity for patriotism; and it is to the diffusion and dissemination of science that we shall now turn.
Science was not merely loved or used, as understanding or as power; it was also believed in, and therefore it was also preached.
To audiences ranging from the Royal Family to working men, the message of science was put across by earnest evangelists and ardent publicists.
Since scientists had to eat, much of this rhetoric was also concerned with the need for the age of science to support its science with money and honour.
8 Scientific Culture
Outside London, the major agency for the diffusion of scientific knowledge and the spread of the gospel of science was the British Association.
At its first meeting, this had been essentially a group of provincial enthusiasts; but they were soon brought within the fold of the established Church Scientific, the ‘gentlemen of science’ mostly from Cambridge, who took upon themselves the direction of the efforts of the provincial amateurs.
The first meeting had been at York in 1831; thereafter the Association visited the university cities of Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh and Dublin, before in 1836 venturing to Bristol and subsequently to other large towns.
The visit of the Association was not unlike the coming of a circus: local intellectuals had an opportunity to mingle with the eminent who came in droves, cities competed in the lavishness of their entertainment, and in days before radio and television one could see and hear well known speakers addressing scientific audiences, or sometimes great crowds of working men.
In the scientific sessions one might if one were lucky witness some great row.
Meetings were often held in museums or educational institutions specially built or refurbished to be ready for the great occasion.
We can see what went on by looking at the volumes of the annual Report of the Association; for instance that of 1855, containing the proceedings of the meeting at Liverpool in September 1854.
It is a stout book, giving the rules of the Association, the officers at all the meetings so far, and all the life and annual subscribers, with addresses — making it a kind of ‘Who's Who’.
Holding office in the Association was an important indicator of status in the scientific community by this time.
There  were by 1854 seven sections, each with its own President, Vice-Presidents and Secretaries: Mathematics & Physics; Chemistry; Geology; Zoology & Botany; Geography & Ethnology; Statistics; and Mechanical Science, which meant in effect Engineering.
Each evening there were General Meetings, in the Philharmonic Hall or St George's Hall: at one the President, Lord Harrowby, gave an address; at another, Owen talked about the anthropoid apes; and one evening Edward Sabine talked about terrestrial magnetism.
On two evenings there were demonstration experiments, in electricity, optics, magnetism and gyroscopes, with an exhibition of photographs of the Moon; and on the last evening was a meeting where the proceedings of the General Committee and the allocation of grants were explained to members.
During the days, the various sections met to conduct their own meetings, hearing papers from both eminent and unknown men of science.
The meetings of the Association helped both to raise the consciousness of scientists and also to enforce some specialization: members expected to attend only one of the sections.
The President began the meeting as usual, with a review of the scientific advances of the previous year, naming experts who had helped him in making his list.
Perhaps the development of most interest to us in 1854 was that on an American initiative there had been an international conference at Brussels on shortening ship's passages by producing better charts of winds and currents.
This led in Britain to the setting up the Meteorological Office under Captain FitzRoy, formerly of HMS Beagle, who went on to make the first weather forecasts in Britain.
Sarcasm and theoretical criticism of these in due course preyed on FitzRoy's mind, and in 1865 he killed himself; after an intermission, and despite ‘scientific’ criticism of the empiricism of it all, the weather forecasts were resumed, perhaps with slowly increasing accuracy down to our own day.
Harrowby was an eminent politician, who had been for many years MP for Liverpool; his scientific interests were in geography and statistics.
He hoped, in his address, that Finance and Political Economy might be removed from the sphere of party contention; that the spirit of science might be imported into politics.
He was horrified at the ‘monstrous forms of misery and vice’ disclosed by  the statistics, believing that facts must disturb prejudices and theories, and that the Census reports were ‘the Doomsday-book of the people of England, as the great volume of the Conqueror was of its surface’.
He called the attention of his audience to the question of a decimal coinage — realized nearly 120 years later- and to the excitements of living in an age of gas and steam, of railroads, telegraphs and photographs, in which ‘the importance of science is no longer questioned.
It is a truism — a commonplace.’
Nevertheless, he found it worth enquiring, as Presidents of the BAAS were wont to do, whether ‘sufficient facilities for education in science exist or are in progress in our country; and whether Government or other important bodies provide sufficient encouragement and reward for its prosecution’.
Until recently he believed that ‘the magnificent State of Britain' had done little for the Science upon which her wealth, power and very existence depended; except to provide security and freedom in a country its citizens could be proud of, and this had indeed been enough.
But spontaneous vigour of citizens and of political and religious institutions was not, happily, any longer felt to be sufficient.
Governments were now ‘heartily and honestly engaged in repairing the deficiencies of centuries’, while institutions were reforming themselves, so that soon without the excessive Continental systematization, there would be excellent practical arrangements for scientific education.
The Government was even prepared to put money into it.
What about rewards for scientists?
Harrowby believed (wrongly!) that titles were not what scientific men would want: their names anyway ‘were a passport into any society, the proudest of the land’.
Public life and science are both jealous mistresses, not tolerating known devotion to another pursuit; but at least those who administer the affairs of the country ought to, and do not, ‘know enough of science to appreciate its value, and to be acquainted with its wants and with its bearings on the interests of society’.
This should soon be the case with all educated men; and might be brought about sooner with formal contacts between the BAAS and Parliament.
He had no fears that the pursuit of science need crush the imagination, or lead to a tedious style; or that it would ever become the favourite study of  the many, overgrowing and smothering ethical and elevating influences, though perhaps too passive, from Literature and Art.
After this exercise in Victorian Values by a maverick Tory, we pass to various commissioned reports on the state of different sciences.
There is one on the facts of earthquakes, arranged in tabular form and number three of a series-a contribution to ‘Humboldtian’ science, occupying 326 pages.
This is followed by a report on the construction of lifeboats, then by one on the state of knowledge on radiant heat, again the third of a series, essentially reviewing recent work all over Europe; then an account of the results of magnetic observations at observatories in the British colonies, another Humboldtian exercise; a report on how Solar Radiations affect the Vital Powers of plants, grown under bell-glasses of various colours; a catalogue of meteors; a report on the surface of the Moon; another on water-pressure machinery; and reports on the equivalence of starch and sugar in food, on deviations of the compass in iron and wooden ships, and on the vitality of seeds.
All these were themes of some contemporary importance, and, as we see from the Treasurer's reports, money was voted for the expenses of the various eminent people drawing them up.
The Report indeed includes a statement of all the grants made since 1834: over 1,500 in 1839, 1840 and 1843, but later falling to 159 in 1849; at this meeting 751 was voted.
For the scientific sections, there are merely notes and abstracts of papers, which nevertheless occupy 176 pages; they are separately paginated and indexed from the formal reports, which makes these publications confusing to cite.
Some ‘abstracts’ are long; one, in small type, on the climate of Nova Scotia occupies over 11 pages; others are so brief as to be merely the title, such as‘On the lost tribes of Israel’, under Ethnology, and ‘On the decomposition of Magnesian Limestone at Brodsworth’, under Chemistry.
The subjects covered include the costs of a recent strike at Preston; the phenomena of diamagnetism; the heating effect of secondary electric currents (much electricity was still in Chemistry at the BAAS); the extent of palaeozoic glaciers; and the action of literary and philosophical pursuits in promoting longevity.
There was in this vast menu something to please everyone.
With its rituals, its entertainments, its clashes and its uplift, its patronage and its exposure of the eminent to provincial crowds, the BAAS came to occupy an important place in the intellectual calendar of Victorian Britain.
Railways and steamships brought delegates from all over the country to the chosen centre each year, and also brought foreign visitors, giving an international flavour to the occasion.
Distinguished foreigners were appointed Corresponding Members; there were fifty-five in 1854.
The newspapers described what went on, particularly the annual Presidential Addresses, which generally called for more scientific education, and were fully and widely reported.
It is curious nevertheless how poor the primary sources sometimes are for debates at BAAS meetings: the famous clash between Wilberforce and Huxley in 1860 at Oxford, in the new museum there, has scarcely more contemporary accounts than that between St George and the dragon, so that it is impossible to know exactly what happened.
The BAAS was based upon a German model, and in its turn formed a model for associations in other countries, such as France and the USA.
But because of the industrial importance of nineteenth-century Britain, and because of its provincial vigour, the BAAS was particularly prominent.
The themes raised in Harrowby's address were indeed important ones for his audience.
There were few in Britain who combined scientific and public life: Leonard Horner, John Lubbock and Lyon Playfair might be examples.
Here there is a contrast especially with France.
The first Napoleon had been a patron of men of science, perhaps hoping that finance and political economy might be thus ‘removed from the sphere of party’; and men like Berthollet, Laplace, Cuvier, Gay-Lussac, Arago, Dumas and Berthelot played prominent parts in, or received titles from, governments of different colours during the century.
In the USA, the Coast Survey, the Topographical Engineers and the Smithsonian Museum received government support, playing a part in the promotion of trade and the winning of the West.
In Germany, universities were controlled by governments, and also supported by them: the British ideal of self-help was not widely shared.
More serious was the lack of careers in science even by the 1850s.
Edward Forbes, T. H. Huxley and John Tyndall all had  long and unhappy waits for suitable posts; and even insiders from the ancient universities could not depend upon posts if they had scruples about being ordained.
In 1847 Richard Sheepshanks wrote of John Couch Adams, a Cambridge mathematician who had just predicted the new planet Neptune: ‘I think there is a hope that Mr Adams will continue his astronomical career.
In any other country there could be no doubt of it, but in England there is no certain carrière for men of science.
The Law or the Church seizes on all talent which is not independently rich or careless about wealth.’
Sheepshanks, a leading figure in the Royal Astronomical Society, himself fitted into all three of his categories: he was both a lawyer and a clergyman, and did not practise either profession because he had inherited wealth from his cloth-manufacturing father.
Adams was in a more difficult position.
He was offered a knighthood in 1847 when Queen Victoria visited Cambridge, but he declined it and the honour which came to him was accompanied by little emolument.
Because he did not wish to be ordained, his Fellowship at St John's College, Cambridge, lapsed in 1852; but he was fortunate in getting another at Pembroke College, and then in 1858 was elected to the Lowndean Professorship of Astronomy and Geometry at Cambridge, which did not require that the holder should be a clergyman.
For contemporaries the moral that they order these things better in France was particularly easy to draw, for Neptune had been independently and at the same time predicted by U. J. J. Le Verrier.
He not only entered politics, but had a chair of astronomy created for him, and was in 1854 appointed Director of the Paris Observatory.
In this case a nasty priority-dispute between the ‘seconds’ of the two men ended in mutual respect, with Adams as President of the Royal Astronomical Society later presenting Le Verrier with its gold medal.
The BAAS was on the surface a democratic and provincial body, run in fact by a small group of professionals, a Cambridge network of gentlemen of science.
In astronomy, this system worked well because there were series of observations which amateurs could make which really advanced the science; of comets, meteors and red stars, for example.
In natural history the same was true, and the careful observer and recorder was a very  important person in the advance of the science.
Here both foot-soldiers and officers were required, and indeed they still are: what churches call stewardship of talents has a place.
But in chemistry, physics and physiology, the laboratory sciences becoming prominent in the nineteenth century, there was little scope for the amateur.
There were a few people who had private laboratories, and who were like Lavoisier amateurs of fully professional competence; and there were those who lived by consultancy.
But the advance of the laboratory sciences depended essentially on stewardship of money: that is, on financial support.
At the beginning of the century, chemistry and physics had still been fairly cheap: the expensive sciences were astronomy and exploration with its associated natural history, the Humboldtian programme; but by the latter half of the century physics and chemistry, though still to our eyes heavily dependent on sealing wax and string, were becoming the big science of the day.
At the beginning of the century, the Royal Institution had been founded with two aims which turned out to be incompatible: to bring science both to mechanics and to the landed gentry.
The mechanics lost out, and the place became a research institute funded by subscribers who attended lectures.
Davy and then Faraday turned out to be brilliant lecturers, holding large audiences for courses on scientific topics, each lecture being illustrated by experiments, often of a spectacular kind: Davy made a model volcano filled with potassium, and poured water into it; and Faraday flung the fire irons and then the coal-scuttle to a large electromagnet overhead.
With Tyndall the tradition continued, and indeed it still does.
These lectures making science comprehensible and palatable for the fashionable, the earnest and the intellectual circles of London were not the whole programme of the Institution.
Some courses appropriate to medical students were given; but there were also lectures which had no connection with science in our narrow modern sense.
Thus the famous wit Sidney Smith lectured on ethics, and S. T. Coleridge on Shakespeare.
Recent reprints of Royal Institution discourses, organized under disciplines, do not really give the flavour of the programme as a whole.
By the middle of the century the most important lectures were called Discourses, and were delivered on Friday evenings.
Often they    were by a member of the staff of the RI, but the majority were outside speakers.
The event was fixed up long ahead, and in the correspondence of the eminent delivering such a Discourse appears comparable in importance to giving a major address at a BAAS meeting.
From 1851 they were published as Proceedings of the Royal Institution, sometimes in abstract but generally in full.
They were printed fairly rapidly: Francis Galton gave a lecture on the nature and nurture of men of science on 27 February 1874, and sent out offprints on 9 April, at a postage charge of 1/2d;.
Figure 9 Scientific lecture theatre from C. F. Partington, Natural and Experimental Philosophy, 1828, vol. 11, frontispiece.
By the latter part of the nineteenth century there were two aspects of the popularization of science.
The first was to put it across to laymen, interested in science but inexpert in it.
Royal Institution audiences included the eminent in various walks of life, and the lecturer had an  opportunity for evangelism among the mighty.
From the beginning the audiences also included women, though no women held forth there in the Age of Science of the nineteenth century — when the Curies came to England in 1903 to talk about le radium, it was Pierre and not Marie who gave the Discourse.
Women could not play a conspicuous part in scientific life.
The second aspect of popularization was informing active scientists in other disciplines about what was going on.
This kind of higher popularization was an aspect of the specialization which was such a feature of the nineteenth century, and since.
At the BAAS the different sections reinforced these disciplinary frontiers, sometimes drawn a little differently from today's but on the whole amazingly stable: the intellectual map of nineteenth-century Europe is more like today's than the political one is.
Of the scientific Discourses at the Royal Institution some were describing original research, occasionally very new as when J. J. Thomson reported in 1897 the discovery of the electron (if we may allow that phrase); others were in the nature of a review of recent work.
At the beginning of the century, all journals except that of the Linnean Society were general journals, publishing material in all (or most) of the sciences-even the Linnean Society included animals, vegetables and minerals within its purview.
While not every article would interest every reader, or be comprehensible to him or her, they were usually written in an expansive style so as to be accessible.
The Royal Society at the  time when the BAAS was founded was a club having a majority of non-scientific members, headed by a Royal Duke.
Just as the word ‘scientist’ was being coined in the 1830s to express a new feeling of community, specialized societies and journals were coming into being for astronomers, entomologists, chemists and other groups.
Aiming at a very specific readership, they carried shorter articles written in the jargon of the various separate sciences.
The books of Mary Somerville (e.g., On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences, 1834) proved valuable to men of science wanting to keep up with what was going on in other fields, and unable to understand it all even if they had had time to read it.
Hers was high-level popularization; at other levels were such elementary works as Jane Marcet's Conversations on Chemistry,(1806) and Samuel Parkes' Chemical Catechism,(1806) though both these reckoned to be up to date with new discoveries such as those of Davy.
The style of the letter, the conversation, the catechism, or the lecture appealed to those popularizing science and afraid that the neophyte might be put off for life by too dry a style.
As articles in scientific journals became more formal, the need for popular writings and lectures increased.
When we look at the lectures delivered at the Royal Institution, we find a striking variation in the level at which topics are treated, and an amazing range of topics; what is uniform is the skill with which the lecturers on the whole wrote persuasive prose.
At the Royal Institution, one could get popular science of a high standard; and what was offered gives us an idea of what was seen as important.
By the 1870s things had changed much since Harrowby's BAAS address of 1854.
There was universal elementary education in Britain — a century behind Prussia, and three behind Saxony.
Science was being taught in public schools and in grammar schools, and there were courses in universities, which in Britain began at about this time to catch on — this was the era when the great municipal universities started to flourish, though it was to be some time before they received government grants.
What the lectures at the Royal Institution seem to indicate is that despite these changes the age of ‘two cultures’ was still some way off; at the elite level, those interested in the advance of science also wanted to hear about other cultural activity.
Science and scientific argument were still widely defined.
Another way of putting this would be to say that scientific culture was remarkably wide.
The Royal Institution was a centre of science, and the idea was that Discourses there would be scientific; when literature or religion or painting was under discussion, it would be from some scientific point of view.
Just as Harrowby had hoped to bring politics within the orbit of science, so the lectures at this focal point in the metropolis indicate how science permeated all Victorian culture.
Those who see the appearance of humanities in the programmes of scientific institutes in London or the provinces as an intrusion might sometimes in fact be seeing a take-over bid.
Men of science in the nineteenth century were increasingly becoming specialists; but the eminent were often interested in other things as well, and hoped that these were not irrelevant to their science, or that its methods were foreign to them.
Some saw literature and art as a relaxation from science, but others saw it as an extension.
General lectures were important for a scientific community becoming increasingly fragmented.
The Royal Society had by the 1870s become an academy; its elections were an accolade, bestowed after agonizing by a committee.
It had government grants to dispense, and scientific leadership to undertake.
Its Presidents now served for short terms, and were always very distinguished men of science.
It no longer functioned as a club; members could not understand what all the others were up to, and were aware that the interests of physicists and of biologists might be opposed.
The implications of scientific advances, and the value of new pieces of science outside the narrow group of professionals, could be spelt out at the Royal Institution; it was a centre for evangelism, and for a meeting of minds trained in various traditions.
The sixth and seventh volumes of the Proceedings of the RI cover the years 1870–75.
Some of the Discourses printed in them are no more than a title, but most are published in full.
Some are curiosities: on 8 March 1872 R. Lieberich, of St Thomas's Hospital, lectured on Turner's paintings with reference to certain faults of vision.
He remarked: ‘It is a generally received opinion that Turner adopted a peculiar manner, that he exaggerated it more and more, and that his last works are the result of a deranged intellect.’
The lecturer was convinced of the incorrectness  or injustice of this opinion; in his view the explanation of Turner's beginning in middle age to paint what we think of as ‘Turners’ was that the crystalline lens of his eyes became rather dim when he was about fifty-five, ‘and dispersed the light more strongly, and in consequence threw a bluish mist over illuminated objects’.
He compared Turner's last paintings with Beethoven's last works, written while he was deaf: in both cases, some people preferred them.
In all the arts, we may prefer the abnormal and regard that which is entirely sound and healthy as commonplace; but late Turners have gone too far, in Lieberich's opinion, to be admirable.
He found that Turner by 1833 was painting trees unknown to any botanist; probably he painted them because he saw them that way; and indeed with the help of a lens the lecturer could turn a picture of a common tree into a Turner tree for the audience to see for themselves.
Lieberich went on to describe the functioning of the eye, and to diagnose astigmatism in a Parisian portrait painter; seen through a suitable lens, his productions looked much better.
Colours also may get distorted as the eye lens gets yellower with age; in some pictures of Mulready he believed he could demonstrate this defect.
There are philosophical problems about this kind of approach to paintings: if the artist paints so that what is on the canvas looks to him just like what is in front of him, then the astigmatism or other defects ought to cancel out and his picture look all right to us.
More to the point is that the Discourse indicates the scientism of the period: it is taken for granted by the lecturer that Turner ought to paint a tree of a recognizable species, for example, and assumed that portrait painters are after an exact likeness.
Faraday was a friend of Turner and an admirer of his work, and might well have been more sympathetic to his attempts to catch the effects of light in paint.
In 1873 Walter Pater's book, The Renaissance, first appeared; its Epicurean message that art is to help us maintain ecstasy is far from the view of Lieberich, in the light of whose lecture we can see why the aesthetic movement of the late nineteenth century came about — in reaction to representational theories, in the age of photography.
Lieberich is a representative figure in an important group in the  intellectual, scientific and industrial life of Victorian Britain.
This was a group of Germans who, like Prince Albert, had come to seek their fortune, after getting an excellent education in their homeland.
There was indeed a steady brain drain; and some, like Lieberich, had intended to come for a visit rather than to stay permanently.
Others in this group were Max Müller, the pioneer of linguistics, who lectured in June 1870 and again in March 1871 on anthropological topics; and William Siemens, the engineer, who gave Discourses in March 1872 and May 1874.
We may note that Lieberich also spoke again at the RI, this time on the real and the ideal in portraiture, in March 1875; by then he had both an MD and MRCS after his name.
The Siemens family maintained both British and German connections, for William's brother Werner remained in Berlin and built up a great electrical engineering business there, making among other things the first trams.
The Prussians had been allies of Britain at Waterloo, and preindustrial, Biedermeier, Germany was very attractive to many Britons.
The universities there seemed models for British ones, and gradually the feeling gained ground that Germany was the intellectual centre of Europe — in science, in philosophy, in classical studies, in theology and in history Germans were making the running.
Prussia was the weakest of the victorious powers in 1815, and posed no threat to Britain, as France seemed to do when in the 1860s Napoleon III appeared to be following the ambitions of Napoleon I, and contemplating invasion.
When in 1870 Prussia went to war with France the general feeling was that the French were the aggressors and that Bismarck might perhaps teach them a lesson.
The rapid victories of the Germans astonished their friends; in part they acted (like Sputnik later) as an immense stimulus to scientific education, because the German victories were attributed to their science and their efficient schools.
They also led to some strategic thinking: it was clear that Prussia was now the dominant land power in Europe, and that the defences of Britain were by no means impressive — much of the army was always away in the colonies, and the navy on distant stations.
This is reflected in the RI Discourses.
In 1870, on 18 March, the civil engineer and FRS J. F. Bateman lectured ‘on the subway  to France’.
He urged the building of a channel tunnel, at a cost of eight million pounds, with a pneumatic railway running through it.
This would be the first stage of an overland communication with India; and it would also be of immense advantage for Britain's trade with Europe, valuable to all parties.
In July 1870 the war began, and suddenly the Channel became a first line of defence rather than an obstacle to trade.
In 1871 there were three Discourses having some connection with military topics, whereas in 1870 there had been one; in 1872 there was one, and in 1873 none again.
The lectures in 1871 were from E. J. Reed (chief constructor of the navy) on 10 February, on the stability of ironclads following the loss of HMS Captain; then on 3 March Captain Noble, FRS, late of the Royal Artillery, reported on experiments on the power of gunpowder, some of them carried out with William Armstrong, the armaments manufacturer; and on 12 May Colonel Drummond Jervois of the Royal Engineers spoke on the defence policy of Great Britain.
Having spoken of the vital importance of the navy for a trading power, Jervois turned to the urgent need to protect London from an invader, because London was not like Moscow, which the Russians had abandoned before Napoleon and survived, but like Paris.
‘The fall of London would render further resistance impossible’, because the seat of government, the heart of empire, the centre of commerce, the focus of communications, and the only government manufacturing arsenal, would all be in enemy hands.
One answer was to construct three or four fortified entrenched camps about twenty or thirty miles from London as indirect protection, manned with regular troops; another, to build about fifty works, about twelve miles from London, which being purely defensive could draw upon the vast resources of the city in men and materials.
To invest such works a besieging army would have to be at least 700,000 strong, and London would be able to hold out a very long time, as the example of Paris showed; the Prussian siege there lasted five months, and had things gone a little differently Paris might have been relieved.
The navy in the nineteenth century may have been an Insurance policy for free trade, but Pax Britannica was not something which could be taken for granted, even by Victorian Britons.
Ever since the days when Lavoisier and then Davy had worked  on gunpowder there had been close connections between science and defence; but the quantity of hard science in these papers is small, as it is also in F. A. Abel's on substitutes for gunpowder (17 May 1872) where he spoke of nitro-glycerine and dynamite and gun-cotton, and even in John Tyndall's of 4 June 1875 on Whitworth's rifled guns.
What these Discourses show is that ‘science’ still meant something wider than it does in the twentieth century; what the lecturers were encouraging was realistic assessment and sound judgement.
Some lectures were some way even from this loose definition of science: John Ruskin lectured on Verona and Italian art in 1870, and Richard Westmacott, who was both a Royal Academician and FRS, on art five weeks later — but he talked particularly on the question of assembling and conserving the Greek sculpture in the British Museum.
In 1873, Edward Dannreuther talked on the music of the future (meaning Wagner's) and Sidney Colvin on taste and artistic judgement; and in succeeding years there were always some Discourses essentially on the arts-a word which by this time had come to mean literature, music, painting and sculpture rather than crafts and techniques.
The Royal Institution had just moved its laboratories up from the basement where they were no longer valuable in ‘our struggle for existence’, as William Spottiswoode put it in January 1873.
The laboratory of Davy and Faraday had been like a large kitchen of the early nineteenth century.
Such laboratories were not meant to be public places, and the requirements of furnaces and sand-baths and enormous wet-batteries all pointed to the basement as the best place, although without good artificial light the hours of usefulness of basement laboratories was limited.
By the 1870s heating was done by Bunsen burners rather than furnaces; and a laboratory which at the beginning of the century had been as good as any was now ‘a mere makeshift’ or a ‘noble relic’.
There were by then ‘splendid edifices’ in London, Oxford, Cambridge, Manchester and Glasgow, and to retain researchers at the RI would have been impossible without new accommodation for their research.
Competition in facilities at home and abroad would prevail, Spottiswoode believed, for a generation to come — we know that it has gone on ever since.
The era of sealing wax and string was beginning to come to its end, although the  end was far off; in the Cavendish Laboratory under Rutherford in the 1930s the story was that research workers asking for string were made to say how many inches of it they needed.
Most of the Dialogues are about the kind of research carried on in the new laboratories which were becoming a feature of life by the 1870s.
Tyndall, Professor of Natural Philosophy, talked in 1870 on one of his special interests: dust and disease.
He, like other Darwinian evolutionists, was strongly opposed to the idea of the spontaneous generation of life from inorganic matter, though no doubt it must have happened once at least in the past.
He repeated and extended Pasteur's work on micro-organisms, ‘our invisible friends and foes’, and played an important part in getting the germ theory of disease accepted in Britain; and this led to an interest in the particles suspended in the atmosphere especially that of Victorian London, but also in more salubrious places.
In 1871 he again talked on dust and smoke, describing a respirator he had invented using charcoal to absorb noxious fumes; this device to assist firemen was in the Royal Institution tradition going back to Davy's miner's lamp.
Tyndall also lectured in these years on radiant heat, and on acoustics.
His other great interest was in climbing, especially in the Alps; a subsidiary peak on the Matterhorn is named after him, and the Zermatt museum possesses his ice-axe and his signature (and those of other Victorian intellectuals) in old visitors' books.
In his books The Glaciers of the Alps (1860), and Hours of Exercise in the Alps (1871), we find him describing daredevil climbs, astonishingly ill-prepared by modern standards; but also making a serious study of how glaciers move, which in 1872 came out more formally as The Forms of Water.
Tyndall did not in these years hold forth on glaciers at the RI, but on 13 May 1870 Canon Henry Moseley (father of an eminent zoologist, and grandfather of an eminent physicist) gave a Discourse on the descent of glaciers.
Unlike Moseley, Tyndall was far from orthodox in religion; he was an agnostic, but his alpine books show a kind of religious attitude to a universe he believed impersonal; he was a keen Darwinian.
By the 1870s Darwin's evolutionary ideas had come to prevail generally, and also to act as a paradigm in fields remote from his own.
Thus on 14 May 1875, John Evans, FRS, spoke on the  ‘coinage of the Ancient Britons and Natural Selection’, showing how copies made from Roman models gradually degenerated towards simple and symmetrical patterns, saving trouble for the makers.
Two weeks later Colonel Lane-Fox (later Pitt-Rivers), a pioneer of scientific archaeology, spoke of ‘the evolution of culture’: some kind of Darwinism entered into all kinds of explanations, as tends to happen with highly effective theories which get extended far beyond their sphere and come to function almost as metaphor.
More directly Darwinian themes are to be found in other Discourses, such as that of Burdon Sanderson (5 June 1874) on insectivorous plants.
Darwin had himself studied some of these plants, verifying that they do actually consume the flies which land in their pitchers or on their leaves and get caught there, and finding that it was apparently to nitrogenous compounds that the plants responded.
G.J. Allman lectured in March 1873 on another Darwinian theme, the formation of coral islands.
Before he had ever seen one, in the early days on HMS Beagle, Darwin worked out that fringing reefs, around islands in an ocean whose bed was slowly sinking, might maintain themselves at sea-level.
When the island had sunk beneath the waves the former fringe would be left as an atoll.
The crucial point in this deductive piece of science was that corals grow only in shallow water; the theory became generally accepted, and helped to make Darwin's name as a geologist.
In April 1873 W. H. Flower, subsequently to be in charge of the British Museum, Natural History, in South Kensington, lectured on palaeontology and the support it gives to evolutionary theory.
In 1859, when the Origin of Species had come out, the evidence from fossils was suggestive but very incomplete: geologists had sought to characterize strata by their fossils rather than to follow family trees through from early times to the present.
Here as elsewhere, Darwin's theory showed its value as a working hypothesis; and by the 1870s Flower could argue that all the hoofed animals' general line of descent and relationships could be worked out using fossil discoveries.
The history of the horse, worked out from American fossils, was merely the most spectacular.
Looking for lines of descent with modification had not merely led to finding interesting fossils, but had also  produced better understanding of how existing species fit together.
The voyage of HMS Beagle has come to eclipse those of the series of scientific voyages to which it belonged, because of the eminence of its naturalist-passenger.
Only Cook's voyages, the first in the series, are anything like as famous: even the polar voyages of Parry, Franklin and Ross are relatively little known, and in Britain the French, Russian, Spanish and American scientific expeditions in the same tradition are forgotten.
With such voyages, it is hard to decide exactly how ‘scientific’ each one was; but certainly mapping, terrestrial magnetism, gravitational measurements, botany and zoology, meteorology, anthropology and the study of ocean currents were a part of all of them.
By the 1870s general questions of marine biology had become prominent, partly in an evolutionary context in which life had first begun in the sea.
Edward Forbes had suggested that the bottoms of the oceans must be lifeless, an azoic region, because light never penetrated there.
This hypothesis gave later biologists something to test, and in the event to prove false, thus indicating the truth of Bacon's dictum that error is better then confusion, and of Popper's idea that science works through conjectures and refutations.
It was to be expected that Britain as the leading maritime power should take a lead in scientific voyages, which could be directly linked to shorter passage times and greater safety, and the general advancement of trade.
The great promoter of such voyages in the 1860s and 1870s was William Carpenter of the University of London; and in March 1871 he gave a Discourse at the Royal Institution on recent scientific researches in the Mediterranean, in HMS Porcupine.
But the acme of scientific voyages was that of HMS Challenger.
She sailed around the world between 1872 and 1876, under the scientific direction of Charles Wyville Thomson, and was equipped with a chemical laboratory and many other up-to-date scientific facilities.
This was one of the voyages in which the men of science were in charge, in that the point of the expedition was scientific; often there had been frustration among scientists on voyages because the captain's instructions, or his interpretation of them, did not let him stay at interesting places as long as they would have liked, or put enough boats and crews at their disposal.
The results of this voyage were published in fifty large volumes between 1880 and 1895, and represented international collaboration in oceanography and marine biology; the most eminent authorities in the world were chosen to write up the various results and describe the collections.
This formal writing-up took nearly twenty years: it is one thing to collect data, and another to evaluate it and make it into public knowledge.
But even before the Challenger was home, her voyage was being described and discussed in Discourses at the Royal Institution.
In March 1874 Carpenter talked about the temperature measurements made in the Atlantic at depths down to about 2,500 fathoms and their implications.
In January 1875 Huxley spoke of the recent work on the ship and its relevance to geology, he was particularly interested in the way in which debris accumulates at the bottom of the sea because this would help in the interpretation of fossils.
The more directly comprehensible parts of the Challenger's programme were thus made available to the public at a provisional stage.
Debris at the bottom of the sea was coming to include not merely the remains of organisms perhaps on their way to becoming fossils, but also rubbish from man's activities.
The scientific age, with its new chemical and metallurgical industries, produced more pollution and spread it about more than any previous epoch.
Rivers in great cities became foul partly as a result of the beneficent introduction of the water-closet; for diluted sewage was thus discharged straight into rivers, whereas before it had been collected as ‘night-soil’ in concentrated form from privies and used on the land.
The Thames in London became so opaque and smelly as to be a national scandal, especially when in 1849 and then in 1854 John Snow showed the statistical connection between drinking dirty water and catching cholera.
Water from Lambeth was much safer than water from Southwark further downstream.
Better sewage systems, and in London the building of the Victoria Embankment to narrow the river and cover the pipes, could at least get the nastiness out of cities; and by the end of the century filtered and chlorinated water was being supplied by the water companies.
Industrial pollution was a more difficult  problem.
In February 1875 Edward Frankland, an eminent chemist, gave a Discourse on river pollution.
He mentioned the Clyde as polluted by sewage; Dighty Burn, near Dundee, by fibre manufacture; Red River in Cornwall, by tin mines; and the Sankey Brook in Lancashire by chemical works.
He remarked that the River Aire, even before it reached Leeds, had received the house drainage of a quarter of a million people, and the refuse from 1,341 cloth and woollen factories, 1 silk mill, 1 flax mill, 10 cotton factories, 7 paper mills, 26 tanneries, 13 chemical works, 8 grease works, 4 glue works and 35 dye works.
It need not surprise anybody that Victorian cities were unhealthy places.
Royal Commissions had been appointed, and had recently reported, on the state of rivers; they had investigated the ‘comfortable doctrine’ that in twelve miles or so a river however foul would purify itself, and found it untrue.
Dissolved organic matter, even in well-aerated rivers, was hardly reduced.
Even in rivers less polluted, when some living organisms could survive, the water failed to purify itself.
So far chemical methods had failed to produce purification, and it had also turned out that matter precipitated from dirty water would not make fertilizer of great value.
Sewage works were not going to pay their way, or make a profit.
Frankland's answer was to use surface attraction rather than chemical affinity as the agent of purification; in particular, to purify by means of the soil, in irrigation.
Near Aldershot, where this was being tried, one could see the drainage of London being transformed thus into strawberries and cream.
Air and water brought alternately into contact with earth did the trick.
The commissions had recommended ‘mild’ legislation about industrial pollution; and Frankland believed that if firmly enforced it
would have the effect of restoring many of the rivers to nearly their original purity.
To make them pure for drinking purposes is, perhaps, impossible; but it may reasonably be hoped that they may become sufficiently so to delight the eye and to repress the pestiferous and sickening exhalations which at present affect the multitudes of our population compelled to pass their lives on the bank of such rivers.
These were not new problems, though they had been made  worse by the rapid growth of population, industry and cities.
In the early years of the century those, including Davy, who went salmon-fishing were concerned about the state of rivers.
By the 1870s there was also genuine concern for the poor people who lived by or drank from them.
The spirit of laissez-faire which some see as the root of Victorian values was giving way to legislative control in fields such as pollution.
The hope expressed by Harrowby twenty years earlier, that the spirit of science might be imported into politics, is to some extent realized in Frankland's Discourse.
What this spirit brought was a confidence that problems can be solved, and do not just have to be lived with.
It was not yet clear that in solving practical problems as in solving those in pure science, one thing leads to another.
There are no final solutions.
This makes science a never-ending quest, and technology a matter of solving the problems posed by earlier solutions.
Harrowby had expressed faith in scientific education and in the scientific spirit generally, and these things were prominent in the Discourses at the Royal Institution in the 1870s.
Indeed it was at this time that scientism really began to become important, not only in Britain but throughout western Europe, the USA, Russia and Japan.
Belief in evolution, as a cosmic guarantee of progress, was a part of this scientism; but the physical sciences were just as important, because of the support they seemed to give to a reductionist philosophy.
Deterministic laws of atomic arrangements in the triumphant years of classical physics seemed to lie behind the phenomena of life.
In the next chapters we shall look at how scientific education, tending to dogmatism in its elementary stages at least, and the rise of physics as the leading science, affected the way people saw the world in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
9 Battle of Symbols and Jargon
The language of science overlaps with that of ordinary life, but words like ‘field’, ‘elementary’ and ‘family’came to be used in the later nineteenth century in rather different senses in physics, chemistry and biology.
Learning science is in part learning a language.
As scientific courses proliferated, so this aspect became more prominent; the people working in particular sciences came to expect of each other that they would speak the same language, and gaps between physicists, chemists, biologists, geologists and so on increased.
Writers in our day sometimes refer to ‘the scientific community’, but this is very much a theoretical entity: there may be some issues on which all active scientists feel the same, and are opposed to those in the humanities, but there must be very few.
The real communities are discipline-orientated; and as science has grown in the exponential way we are now familiar with, so the scientific communities have become more specialized.
Nobody could keep up with all the chemists nowadays, for example; though someone might from time to time attend enormous congresses of chemists, he or she would go to papers devoted to his or her special branch of the subject.
Scientific language is theory-laden: in using it, one is taught to see the world in a particular way.
This happens to some extent with ordinary languages: in Malagasy one has to make it clear whether a ‘we’ is inclusive or exclusive, while in Navajo using the verb ‘to go’requires one to give some clues about returning.
Even apparently descriptive language involves selection –f what are the significant features to describe, which will be affected by theory.
A follower of Linnaeus' system would describe a plant a little differently from a devotee of the more natural methods of Ray or  Tournefort, for example.
In the physical sciences the degree of abstraction and theory-loading is much greater.
In a developed science, pure description if not impossible is very rare.
Victorian scientists were devoted to facts, and even more were the Gradgrinds for whom knowledge meant a multitude of facts, and who thought they knew what a fact is.
In our world of competing newspapers and television, of leaks, press conferences and official communiques, fact-finding commissions are necessary; and we know for example that there will never be full agreement on what are the facts behind the sinking of the Belgrano or the Rainbow Warrior.
Facts are events which are both authentic and significant; in most cases we trust judges and juries, or less formal bodies, to determine them, but in complex cases it requires judgement and is by no means obvious.
Anybody trying to bring about a major transformation in a science must direct attention to the facts as he sees them: to a herbalist in the tradition of  Culpeper it was an important fact that a particular herb was collected under a waxing or a waning moon; for one of Liebig's pupils analysing it this was not a relevant fact at all.
The derivation of the word ‘fact’ can indeed remind us that it means something constructed rather than just observed.
The physical science most intimately concerned with language was chemistry.
Lavoisier had coined a new set of terms for it, replacing those which enshrined earlier theoretical views, from alchemy or from the phlogiston theory of burning.
He hoped that readers of his book would find themselves willy-nilly thinking his way.
He allowed himself to break his rule of a language based on observation by naming ‘eminently respirable air’ oxygen, which means the generator of acids; and this turned out to be a mistake.
The hope for a language which would express the essence of things rather than being conventional noises perpetuating old-wives' tales is an old one, going back beyond Lavoisier to the seventeenth century.
Then the decline of Latin meant that men of science in different countries could no longer understand each other.
Latin anyway seemed ill suited for the new philosophy, although Linnaeus developed a new dialect of it, rich in adjectives, to provide concise descriptions and names of species of plants.
To Lavoisier and his associates a new international language could be constructed for chemistry.
Mathematics had long had, in the ‘Arabic’ numerals coming originally from India, and in the symbols which had been invented from the seventeenth century on, an international language of symbols.
The noises made when an Englishman a Frenchman and a German read aloud ‘2 + 2 = 4’ are different, but to all of them it means the same.
Chemistry had also had symbols, but the problem was that it had them in profusion.
Alchemists had expressed chemical reactions and recipes in symbolic form, employing for example a sign used by astrologers for the gloomy planet Saturn to express its associated metal, lead.
The difficulty was that there was no agreement about the signs, and down to the seventeenth century no strong feeling that there should be such agreement.
Like other trades and ‘mysteries’, chemical or pharmaceutical knowledge was to be passed from father to son, or master to apprentice, or wise woman to her daughter, and not broadcast to the world.
In particular in the sophisticated world of alchemy, the resonances of chemical and other truths were of the utmost importance.
An alchemical text was not simply or mainly a means of conveying chemical knowledge, and certainly not of doing it succinctly.
The process of making base metal into gold was akin to the maturing of a human being, and the texts were deliberately written to be read at various levels.
A dictionary of alchemical symbols is rather formidable, and indicates how many synonyms (full or approximate) there were, and how far this language was from being clear and distinct.
The French reforms at the end of the eighteenth century were intended to end all this.
Chemical knowledge was to be communicated in a straightforward manner, leaving associations and word play to poets and writers of fiction like Goethe, whose Elective Affinities was one of the few novels to exploit chemical imagery with serious rather than comic intent.
The difficulty is that the world is so full of a number of things that there are many difficult names to be learnt; chemistry seems necessarily to involve a rebarbative vocabulary.
Learning it is easier if it has some reason behind it; but such reasons are theoretically based, and will therefore date.
Lavoisier made the fundamental units of chemistry to be the elements, bodies which could not be further analysed; every  reaction with an element yields a product which weighs more.
By means of the balance — long used by assayers and druggists, but less by theoreticians — he made chemistry into something a little more quantitative than it had been.
It became a science of more exact recipes, like a cookery book in which phrases like ‘add a pinch of salt’ or ‘blend in enough milk to give the right consistency’had been replaced by terms indicating definite quantities.
This was still some way from a mathematical science, and chemists continued to look for the Kepler or the Newton of Chemistry who would make it deductive and mathematical.
Lavoisier's chemistry had a new language, but it had no system of symbols like the Arabic numerals.
Dalton in the opening years of the nineteenth century introduced the atomic theory, which gave a theoretical background to the ideas of definite proportions: if definite numbers of atoms of each element combine, then the total weights combining must also be definite.
If combination is atomic, then it should be possible to symbolize chemical compounds, and to set out chemical reactions in a kind of algebra.
But Dalton wrote no chemical equations, though he did use symbols to indicate composition and perhaps even structure.
His symbols were circles with different patterns inside them; presumably circles because it had always been taken for granted that atoms were spheres.
They never caught on.
They would be hard to remember; they would have been a nuisance to printers, who would have had to make a whole series of new pieces of type; but perhaps most important, they were ambiguous.
Many of Dalton's circles had been used in the past in alchemy or pharmacy with one or more meanings, very different from that of one atom of a chemical element which Dalton meant them to represent.
There were all sorts of other problems with Dalton's atomic theory.
Earlier atomism had always involved atoms ultimately of the same stuff; and in the nineteenth century ‘physical atoms’, the real ultimate building-blocks of the world (probably of very few different sorts) were distinguished from Dalton's ‘chemical atoms’, the smallest units taking part in chemical changes.
Dalton contributed to the muddle by writing of ‘atoms’ of compound gases like carbon dioxide.
Compared to the discussion of the nature of matter in Paris or London, his theory was unsophisticated.
Its advantage was that it worked, in that it gave some hope of understanding why chemical compounds behave as they do; and it did open the way to symbolizing chemical reactions.
It was J. J. Berzelius in Sweden who in the second decade of the century put atomism on a much more secure footing.
He used it to explain how different chemical compounds may contain the same elements in the same proportions —‘isomerism’— because their atoms are differently arranged, and how different substances may have the same crystalline form —‘isomorphism’— because they have the same number of atoms in the same arrangement.
He also invented the symbolism we still use for expressing the atoms: H for hydrogen, O for oxygen, Fe for iron, and so on, based upon the initial letter or letters of their Latin name.
The difficulty was to agree on the proportions of atoms in particular compounds.
We know that water is written H 2 O, but this is not a fact which follows from an experiment or two.
Dalton believed that the simplest compound of two elements must have one atom of each; which made water for him HO.
Analyses showed that water contained eight parts of oxygen to one of hydrogen; on Dalton's assumption, then, the atom of oxygen weighs eight times as much as that of hydrogen, while on the H 2 O formula favoured by Davy and by us it weighs sixteen times as much.
There were various suggestive pieces of evidence, for example from the volume relations of gases — two volumes of hydrogen combine with one of oxygen, which suggests H 2 O — but all of them posed difficulties of a theoretical kind.
If Davy and Berzelius were right that chemical combination was electrical, the union of positive and negative atoms, then a combination of two hydrogen or oxygen atoms into H 2 or O 2 was impossible, for instance; and yet such union seemed to be required for the H 2 O hypothesis.
In the middle of the century there was no agreement on the formulae of even the simpler chemical compounds, and many chemists felt that an atomic theory was merely a distraction: that chemists ought to stick at the ‘equivalent weights’ which gave accurate recipes, and not bother with attempts at explanation.
One way out of this dilemma was to adopt conventions which led to definite formulae without worrying too much about how close they were to nature; and this was proposed by the French    chemist Charles Gerhardt in the middle of the century.
He organized chemical compounds into a series of ‘types’; but for him formulae were simply condensed recipes, and a compound which could be made in two ways might well have two different formulae.
His associate Auguste Laurent- and both of them were kept on the fringe of the French scientific establishment — was more hopeful: he believed that it was possible to determine formulae and structures, but not inductively as chemists had so far tried to do.
Instead of hoping that experiments would eventually pile up evidence for some particular formula, he recognized that it was necessary to proceed hypothetico-deductively: to propose a structure for a given substance, then to work out consequences of this and test them.
This turned out to be the way to go.
Laurent died at the height of his powers in 1853, but his ideas slowly gained ground over the next ten years.
His book Chemical Method was translated in 1855 by William Odling, a prominent figure at the Royal Institution who went on to become Professor of Chemistry at Oxford in the 1870s, as courses in science there became important.
Figure 10 Crystal forms built up from spheroidal atoms from A. Ure, Dictionary of Chemistry, third edition, London, 1828, after W. H. Wollaston whose models are in the Science Museum, London.
Chemistry in the first half of the century was something which had to be learned by medical students, often without much pleasure; they had to have formal if elementary courses of lectures, and textbooks.
Otherwise it was something to be put across in demonstration-lectures to those wanting to keep up with what was going on, but not to bother with too much detail.
For them, something superficial would do; and the demonstration lecture can also be dogmatic.
After all, the demonstration was not merely something to watch, it was also meant to be demonstrative evidence, ‘demonstrating’ as the geometer demonstrates his theorem and puts QED when he has done it.
The change with the founding of the Royal Institution (and then elsewhere) to lecturers who were active in research meant that audiences were sometimes exposed to questions rather than answers.
They could see that there were problems presented in the work of Davy or Faraday; and if they were lucky they might in a later course see the problem solved, only as ever to raise more.
Lecturers like these could afford the luxury of sharing their doubts and uncertainties with their hearers; and these make the most exciting and entertaining lectures.
Much science, however, is well-established, and some philosophers like Hegel have been most interested in this established part rather than in the frontier where conjecture, refutation and research generally is going on.
Many educationalists in the nineteenth century believed that for the young it was right to teach only what was certain, such as geometry and classical languages; once these had been mastered it would be all right to get on to more hypothetical subjects.
When sciences like chemistry began to enter university and then school curricula, it was this sure foundation which their teachers expected to lay.
Schoolteachers were not expected to engage in research, and by the 1870s this was anyway much more difficult than it had been in 1800: there was more to master first, and more equipment was needed.
Science in this context was altogether more dogmatic than in Royal Institution Discourses; there was a syllabus to be got through, and right and wrong answers to questions at the end of it.
Theories were valuable not as a guide to research, but as a prop to the young sprig: they were good insofar as they made a mass of information easier to handle and to remember.
Teachers came to think of their job as akin to filling bottles, rather than to lighting fires.
The atomic theory thus came by the 1860s to have two functions: it might be a fundamental theory of matter, about which it was appropriate to argue in a very general way; or it might be a teaching aid, helpful to students who learned it as a dogma because it made sense of a great number of facts.
At the Chemical Society of London there were great debates about the status of atoms in 1867 and 1869, with Professors at Oxford and at London Universities on opposite sides; and at the same time in France some of the most distinguished chemists were sceptical of atoms, among them P. E. M. Berthelot, who went on to become Minister of Public Instruction in 1886, having done distinguished work on synthesis and on calorimetry.
He helped to keep atomism from being prominent in French syllabuses; but in Britain, atomic theory and the models with balls and wires which expressed it (then called ‘glyptic formulae’) became an important part of elementary science, whatever the doubts of the eminent.
Atomism made sense of the language of chemistry in that, if each symbol is understood as representing one atom, one can ask  questions about how they are arranged; if the symbols merely represent numbers, equivalent weights, then everything is much more abstract.
In 1860 the great international conference at Karlsruhe, the first chemical affair of its kind, voted that equivalents were more empirical than atomic weights; but ordinary mortals found it much easier to think in terms of particles, and to call them ‘atoms’, even though they might well be complex.
There was an analogy here with Darwinian biology, where the species at a given time were real interbreeding units though they were all supposed to be descendants of one primitive form; similarly the chemical elements were supposed by many to be all ‘descendants’ or polymers of hydrogen or helium, and therefore not truly simple bodies, although in ordinary chemical processes they could not be transformed one into another.
Laurent's classic book of 1855 contained chemical equations like ours; writing for instance the reaction of potassium carbonate and sulphuric acid as:
The carbonic acid immediately turns into H 2 O and CO 2 .
Apart from having the numbers above rather than below (prompting jokes from mathematicians), this looks very modern.
Not all Laurent's formulae are quite the same, however, as ours; those involving iron, for example, look different.
With these we may compare the more primitive diagrams of reactions set out in an earlier and elementary work, J. B. Scoffern's Chemistry no Mystery, of which the second edition was published in 1848.
He used no symbols, but tried to set out something like reaction mechanisms to make his subject more readily intelligible (p. 221):
Such diagrams do not indicate quantities as our equations and Laurent's do, and they assume what Laurent denied, that  chemical substances are composed by the union of opposites that there is soda and carbonic acid in sodium carbonate (Na 2 O + CO 2 in our terms, rather than a unit, Na 2 CO 3 ).
But the diagrams have the advantage of indicating what might be going on.
A diagram which is in fact theory-laden may be a valuable aid for remembering elementary information.
The great success of a teaching programme in chemical theory was the Periodic Table of Dmitry Mendeleev, first published in 1869.
He had been trying to put inorganic chemistry into an intelligible form for his students at the University of St Petersburg, when (in common with various contemporaries in various countries) he realized that if the elements are set out in order of increasing atomic weight, they display periodicity: similar elements recur at regular intervals.
His success depended upon the general agreement on atomic weights and formulae which had followed the Karlsruhe Conference of 1860; after the conference delegates had read the paper of S. Cannizzaro, and came to agree with its recommendations.
By taking volumes and weights into account, definite formulae could be fixed on, beginning with water as H 2 O.
Given agreed formulae and atomic weights, the Periodic Table was waiting to be discovered; Mendeleev's contribution was to stake his reputation on it, and to see its power.
When the elements are set out in the Periodic Table, relationships between those vertically above and below each other, those to the right and left of each other , and those on diagonals become apparent.
Mendeleev used these relationships to predict the existence and properties of undiscovered elements; and with the discovery of Gallium, Scandium and Germanium his predictions were found to have been astonishingly accurate, convincing chemists that there was something real behind the arrangement.
Like the natural system in botany, Mendeleev's Table seemed to show how the elements really were related; and as a teaching aid in a part of chemistry which had previously seemed to depend simply on memory, it was a boon.
Mendeleev resisted evolutionary speculations, and also refused to speculate on whether the chemical atoms composing the elements were the same as the physical atoms imagined by natural philosophers, the ultimate building-blocks.
Ever since  Lavoisier, chemists had kept their science distinct from what was coming to be called ‘physics’; Thomas Thomson even declared about 1840 that it would not matter if chemists and natural philosophers had different theories of heat — each could use what worked better for them.
This would have led to science becoming a babel; but it shows the widespread fear among chemists that their science would be ‘reduced’ to something else by armchair theorists who did not know how to hold test-tubes or blow glass T-pieces.
Chemists were even suspicious of physical methods of analysis; but the convenience of the spectroscope meant that by the 1870s it had come into regular use, as we shall see later.
Chemical symbols and the atomic theory took those who used them behind, or perhaps away from, the phenomena; particular observations are only interesting in developed science against a background of abstraction and theory.
For Lavoisier the crucial principle behind chemistry had been the conservation of matter.
All chemical reactions were in a sense an expression of this principle; and if it seemed in some case that the weights of the reactants and the products were unequal, then the chemist must have missed something.
In mechanics there were interactions in which momentum (mv) was conserved, and others in which vis viva (mv 2 ) was unchanged; but down to the middle of the nineteenth century there was no principle of the same generality as that which Lavoisier had made into the foundation of chemistry.
With the proclamation of the principle of conservation of energy by Helmholtz in Berlin from 1847 and then in a public lecture delivered at Königsberg on 7 February 1854, the whole range of physical sciences began to take a new shape.
The great period of ‘classical physics’, the second half of the nineteenth century, depended on the confident extension of this principle to as many phenomena as possible.
What had been separate sciences were thus unified.
On the intellectual front, this unification went on at the same time that in the social history of science specialization was the order of the day.
Just as Newton was not the first to notice that what goes up must come down, so there were many groups of phenomena where conservation had been recognized long before Helmholtz.
Indeed about a dozen claimants, from several countries, could be put forward as the discoverers of the principle.
At the  beginning of the century, heat, light and electricity were separate sciences, and so was magnetism, which had connections chiefly with navigation.
Heat had intimate links with chemistry, and optics with astronomy.
While Galvani showed the connections of electricity with nervous impulses, Volta, Davy and Berzelius, as we saw, demonstrated its links with chemistry.
The close relationship of light and radiant heat was discovered at the turn of the century in infra-red radiation, and that between light and chemical affinity in the ultra-violet rays which will set off reactions.
Some philosophers saw ‘force’ as more fundamental than matter, and Schelling argued that polar forces underlay all phenomena, and that apparent rest was really equilibrium.
All this though was some way from any quantitative expression of conservation of ‘energy’— a term first used in something like the modern scientific sense by Thomas Young at the beginning of the century.
But whereas these ideas of the ‘correlation of forces’ led to insights like those of Oersted and Faraday in electromagnetism, they did not lead to the restructuring of the various sciences.
The same was true of James Joule's experiment in which water was warmed quantitatively by stirring it in special apparatus: a definite quantity of mechanical force in the clockwork produced a definite quantity of heat-but the context of this was argument about the nature of heat, and Joule seemed to have proved that it was motion of particles rather than a substance.
Helmholtz generalized what others had suggested, or had established in one context.
By arguing that the dimensions (mass, length and time) in which the various forms of energy can be expressed must be the same, he opened up a whole new research programme.
Electrical and magnetic units, for example, could be put into centimetres, grams and seconds; and doing this kind of work kept physicists busy for many years.
The science of physics really came to birth during the nineteenth century, though the process of convergence of separate physical sciences had perhaps begun when Galileo united celestial and terrestrial dynamics.
In France at the end of the eighteenth century, there had been a science of ‘experimental physics’; Thomas Young also spoke of ‘physics’ in a famous course of lectures at the Royal Institution published in 1807, but his physics included animal and vegetable life, and excluded  optics and mechanics.
That is, physics in the early years of the nineteenth century meant those parts of science which had not become mathematical; it occupied a place somewhere between natural philosophy and natural history, alongside chemistry.
The word comes straight from the Greek meaning ‘nature’; and it did not acquire its narrower modern sense until about Helmholtz's time.
In France, one landmark was the election of the mathematician S. D. Poisson to the Académe des Sciences in 1812, in a ‘physics’ position.
In France, theoretical physics dominated by those with mathematical training came sooner than elsewhere.
Conservation of energy gave a good reason for putting all those sciences which dealt with energy in one form or another, and even those perhaps which dealt with its interconversions, under one umbrella.
Chemistry and physiology have, however, generally been keen to keep out, even though it be in the rain.
Electricity, magnetism, optics, heat and mechanics now all hung together; and whereas Dalton had simply concentrated upon weights in chemical reactions, the new science of physical chemistry came into being to study the energy and the rate of chemical changes.
Conservation of energy was comparable to evolution as an organizing principle of the sciences; it opened new doors, and indicated new relationships.
The scientist who proposes new interpretations or principles is rather like the fictional detective (they may exist in reality too) who is faced with the same evidence as the reader and the police, but sees that it forms a different pattern when seen from the right angle.
Conservation principles depend upon the idea that to explain change it is necessary to fix upon something constant.
Atomic theory explained chemical change as the rearrangement of unchanging atoms, and therefore in a sense as superficial.
Conservation of energy meant that the production of electricity from mechanical work, and ultimately from a chemical reaction (as in a power station burning coal or oil) is for example simply a transformation.
The creation or destruction of atoms or of energy was held to be impossible, at any rate for mankind — the beginning and end of the universe was generally accepted not to be the concern of scientists, down to very late in the century.
Science was essentially the study of the world as a going concern, not of its origin or end.
It would be very hard to prove a conservation principle.
It is the sort of thing known by its fruit; and by the second half of the nineteenth century conservation of matter and of energy were such effective assumptions that they were generally taken for established truths.
Evidence was reinterpreted that might seem to count against them: for example, the Earth's long geological history, which seemed impossible if it were just a cooling sphere; or the Sun's apparently endless emission of energy, which was hard to explain in terms of its being made of coal, or fuelled by meteors, or contracting and giving out gravitational energy as heat and light.
In the event, these anomalies turned out to be due to radioactivity; but the point is that conservation principles are not readily falsifiable.
They are the kind of assumptions which make whole sciences possible and rational, and they cannot therefore be tested within these sciences.
The principle of conservation of energy is sometimes called the First Law of Thermodynamics.
This is slightly curious, because a ‘law’ in science had come to mean some relationship which had been derived from experiment.
It generalized and perhaps idealized a mass of experimental data, as Boyle's Law of the volumes and pressures of gases, and Ohm's Law relating potential difference and current through a resistance both do.
Thermodynamics by contrast is a highly mathematical branch of physics, concerned with relations of heat and work, and conservation of energy really functions in it not as a law but as an axiom: as one of the bases for the deductive, mathematical system.
The meaning of the term ‘law’ in science has changed greatly over time; and during the Age of Science it was a term of great importance.
Men like Gay-Lussac sought laws rather than risking theories; and Davy declared (Works, VII, 93ff.) that Dalton's Royal Medal from the Royal Society was for his laws of chemical combination, rather than for his atomic hypothesis.
In the Renaissance the word had implied that God had chosen certain laws for his world out of the possible range, like the founder of a Greek city-state deciding upon certain laws rather than others.
God's laws of nature were like those of the Medes and the Persians, which changed not; but they were not necessary laws which could not have been otherwise.
Indeed part of the drive  towards modern science in the West was the search for the laws which God had in fact chosen to apply to the world; experiment as well as deductive reasoning were necessary to find them out.
By the nineteenth century the reign of law was an attractive idea to those inside the sciences and out; but the laws of nature had come to seem not merely unchanging but also inevitable.
The ‘possible worlds’ which had interested earlier thinkers now seemed realized in other societies, as history and anthropology became developed; but in contrast to human societies, nature seemed fixed and uncompromising.
A law of nature was the last word; and just as God could not break a law of logic (by making something both red and green all over, for example), so it was felt that He could not break a law of nature.
The age of miracles was past; and indeed whereas in past times claims to miracles would help a religion, by the mid-nineteenth century they were a hindrance to it, connecting it with superstition.
What is interesting is that a different interpretation was also forthcoming, both from a lawyer and from thermodynamics.
Henry Maine published his classic Ancient Law in 1861.
He sought to show that legal conceptions are the product of historical development; but in particular he indicated how law functions as a framework within which we move.
Thus the Romans were not allowed to sell their ancestral real property, and yet houses and land regularly changed hands through a system of legal fictions and collusive actions.
Law was not absolute.
In the same way, the laws of thermodynamics laid down a framework within which engines and refrigerators operate.
The reign of law allows a fair range of liberty.
It was the Second Law of Thermodynamics which gave Victorian intellectuals a certain frisson because it seemed to imply that the world was running down.
This proposition had been derived by Sadi Carnot in France in the 1820s in an investigation into the efficiency of steam-engines.
Steam-engines had been enormously improved since their invention about a hundred years earlier, and Carnot was interested in whether there was a limit to the improvement.
He envisaged an idealized model of perfect gases and frictionless cylinders, in contrast to the engineers who had actually been making the improvements to real engines; but his method allowed him to demonstrate that  heat will not flow spontaneously from a cool body to a warm one, and that the efficiency of a heat engine depends on the difference of temperature between the ‘source’ and the ‘sink’of heat.
Using steam under pressure (and therefore hotter), and cooling the condenser, would make a steam-engine work more efficiently.
Engineers already knew this, just as we know that the refrigerator will not work if it is not plugged in; but Carnot's achievement, when recognized after a quarter of a century, allowed theoretical understanding and in the end further advance in practice.
What is curious about Carnot's work was that it was done using the obsolescent theory that heat was a weightless fluid, driving a steam-engine like water driving a water-wheel.
With this assumption his principle followed fairly simply, and later physicists — William Thomson and Rudolf Clausius — had problems in incorporating Carnot's law into the new theory, where heat was motion of particles and was actually being converted into mechanical work and not just flowing through the engine.
They saw disorder steadily growing, like a baby, and called this entropy.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics thus constrains the designer of engines; he wants high efficiency but he also has to think about speed and price, and a whole range of possible designs might suit a particular case: the law does not require a unique solution.
In 1859 at the British Association meeting in Aberdeen, James Clerk Maxwell suggested that the law was not absolute but statistical: it described probabilities.
If a mass of hot and a mass of cold gas were brought together, then it was very highly improbable that they would not mix and give a uniformly warm mixture; but there was a small probability, and Maxwell imagined a demon who might assist the process, that the warm gas might separate out into a hot and a cold portion, in defiance of the Second Law.
Darwin's theory had been criticized as the ‘law of higgledy-piggledy’ by Sir John Herschel, the eminent physicist; but in the same autumn, Maxwell had begun the process of turning physics too into a statistical science.
This was not obvious to most people in the later nineteenth century, and the general effect of the Second Law was to encourage the gloomy belief that in time the universe would die the heat death of general tepidity: that the universe would see Victorians and  their foreseeable descendants out, its death being many million years away, was little consolation to believers in progress, who saw it all stopping in the distant future.
Carnot's work was ‘pure’ science, whereas that of contemporary engineers such as George and Robert Stephenson was ‘applied’science, to use terms characteristic of our day.
But in the age of science this distinction was not generally made.
‘Arts’, or crafts, relied on practice; and these traditional activities were passed on from father to son, or at least master to apprentice, as Faraday learned bookbinding, and as Davy had begun to learn medicine.
In contrast to practice, which was acquired by doing it, science was formally taught.
Science was public knowledge and not a craft mystery — religious ‘mystery’ too is something which makes sense in practice.
‘Pure’ sciences in the first half of the century were those without an empirical component, such as mathematics and logic; everything else, whether immediately useful or not, was ‘mixed’science.
The expectation was that when the laws in the mixed sciences had been found, something useful would follow from them; Benjamin Franklin's remark about a new discovery, ‘What is the use of a baby?’ was widely quoted.
Thus Davy was happy at the Royal Institution to give series of lectures on agricultural chemistry, and to work on tanning as well as on potassium and chlorine.
His work had a practical impact in industry, and also affected attitudes to materialism.
With his most famous work, the miner's safety-lamp, it seemed that science was saving lives as well as boosting the economy.
At just the same time George Stephenson also invented a safety-lamp very like Davy's; but he did not know the principle on which Davy had designed his, and his lamp was the fruit of practice, of trial and error, guided by the general idea of restricting the supply of gas-laden air.
Such a device could not be trusted, and it was the hope of scientists that in place of rules of thumb properly scientific methods could be widely taught.
That way the industrial decline of Britain, deplored through most of the century by Presidents of the British Association and eminent men of science generally, would be halted.
The Royal Institution had begun with an abortive attempt to train artisans in elementary science; mechanics' institutes provided lectures for what seems to have been chiefly a membership from the lower middle class.
Like  the socially superior literary and philosophical societies, they laid on a programme with much general culture rather than formal science courses.
The same impulse which led to the Great Exhibition of 1851 also led to the founding of the School of Mines, following the French, and of the Royal College of Chemistry, which was intended to bring Liebig's methods to Britain.
These institutions, on a site bought with the profits of the Great Exhibition, eventually formed part of Imperial College, London.
Prince Albert was an enthusiast for chemical teaching in London, and A. W. Hofmann (famous for research on the amines) was brought from Germany to be the first professor at the Royal College.
In 1849 Hofmann, with Warren de la Rue, began translating Liebig and Kopp's Annual Report on the Progress of Chemistry; this was essentially the production of a number of Giessen professors, who under Liebig's leadership had made this small university one of the best-known abroad.
The Report was intended as a review, giving a complete survey (according to its prospectus) of Chemistry and its Allied Sciences; it was to come out in the first half of the year following that reviewed; and it would give a faithful and ‘whenever necessary, a complete digest of each investigation’ in chemistry, and its applications in pharmacy, arts and manufactures.
Physics, still seen as experimental rather than mathematical, geology and mineralogy were also to be included; and questions requiring confirmation, or more attention, were to be noted.
The attempt would be made to ‘expose in a lucid manner the relation existing between recent enquiries, and our actual store of knowledge’, and not ‘merely isolated and unconnected abstracts of the several individual investigations’.
This modern-sounding and research-oriented publication ran to only three volumes in its English form: Hofmann's aims and moderate success in London reflected those of the Report.
The intention was that the College should benefit the economy, but this could only happen as science replaced practice, and as those with a real knowledge and love of chemistry began to apply it.
It was always one of Liebig's convictions that the British expected practical results from science too soon.
The greatest discovery at the College in the early days was that of mauve, the first aniline dye, by W. H. Perkin in 1856 during an attempt to synthesize  quinine.
It is an irony that despite Perkin's setting up a dye works and doing well out of it, the dye industry had become almost completely German by 1914.
A crash programme was needed to make dyes even for Army uniforms.
The reason for this seems to have been that Victorian British industrialists looked for a quick return, while the Germans were more prepared to take a long view.
Hofmann returned to Berlin, to the most prestigious chair of chemistry in Germany and thus in the world, in 1865, somewhat disappointed at the slow development of chemistry in Britain.
Despite some disappointments, the general progress of science was by this time undoubted, and a source of pride even to those not connected with it.
In all directions it seemed that scientific investigation was triumphing over ignorance, and scientific analysis replacing rule of thumb.
It is to these triumphs, some of which could be made intelligible to laymen while others remained obscure, that we shall now turn, looking first at the discoveries rather than at their reception outside the scientific community.
10 The Triumphal Chariot
Those who held forth in the Royal Institution in the second half of the nineteenth century, or who addressed large audiences at the British Association or its equivalents in other countries, were confident; and they had reason for their confidence.
The enterprise which had begun to take off in Napoleonic Paris had undoubtedly made enormous progress; far more was known about the world than had been a generation or two earlier.
There had been upsets, rows, false starts; but if the progress had been sometimes dialectical, zig-zagging through arguments, rather than straightforward, it had undoubtedly happened.
 Moreover , the results of science in the form of gas-lighting, electric telegraphs, synthetic dyes and railways were there for all to see.
Science was no longer a programme; it was a great body of knowledge, parts of which had already shown themselves to be power.
It is not surprising that there were many attracted to the idea that scientific knowledge was the only true kind, or at least that reasoning like that used in the sciences could solve all human problems.
Belief in progress was not confined to supporters of scientism, but the two went very easily together; and we should now review this progress.
In the eighteenth century, the centre of science might have been the cabinet of curiosities, assembled by the dilettante.
This might include objects from the three kingdoms of nature, apparatus like a globe and a microscope, ethnographical material, and books and illustrations to complement these various things.
For research purposes, the laboratory was just beginning to be separated from the kitchen; but for the nineteenth century the centres were the laboratory and the museum.
Davy at the end of his life remarked that the service of the laboratory was a service   of danger; that few chemists could expect to retain a quick eye and a steady hand for very long, and would have to rely on the hands and eyes of assistants.
There were certainly explosions in laboratories in Davy's time, and Faraday's chance came when his master was disabled after working with nitrogen trihalides; here they did wear goggles, but in general precautions were few.
Those working with lead, like Fraunhofer making optical glass, or with mercury, like Faraday doing electrical work, probably suffered from heavy-metal poisoning.
Fume cupboards for those working with gases and solvents only slowly came into laboratories.
Figure 11 A chemical laboratory from S. Parkes, The Chemical Catechism, 1822, frontispiece (reproduced by kind permission of The Royal Society).
By the later nineteenth century, these dangers were much less; and perhaps more striking is Davy's other remark, about how in his lifetime chemistry had ceased to be a science of furnaces and large quantities, and had become an activity to be carried on with spirit-lamps and test-tubes in the drawing room.
It was not quite the world of the children's chemistry set; but Davy was indeed able to take a portable chemical laboratory with him, even on his  honeymoon, in the form of a box of apparatus.
In the 1850s, the invention of the Bunsen burner meant that very high temperatures could be achieved on the laboratory bench; and if the furnace was no longer necessary, then the laboratory could move upstairs.
The drawing room was not very convenient, because the chemist needed services such as water and gas; and the laboratory with its wooden benches to work at, with their sinks and gas taps, high stools to sit on, and racks of bottles at hand, came into existence.
Chemistry was par excellence the laboratory science of the earlier nineteenth century, but experimental physics and physiology needed similar facilities.
From the seventeenth century, there had been specialized instrument makers; and in the eighteenth century James Watt was one, who turned his mind to bigger things.
But it is striking in Faraday's Chemical Manipulation (1827) how much the scientist had to do for himself.
Faraday's advice was never to throw anything away; and most of the apparatus he described could be home-made from glass-tubing and sheets of india-rubber.
Filter papers were cut out of sheets of ‘bibulous paper’; and complex distillations, such as that in which Faraday isolated benzene, could be done in zig-zag glass tubes.
The chemist had to be a craftsman and a cook as well as a thinker; only the chemical balance was beyond the capacity of the resourceful scientist to make.
But Faraday's puritanism, and his skills acquired in his father's smithy and his own bookbinding apprenticeship, were not typical; and entrepreneurs like Frederick Accum were already selling ready-made apparatus to those who preferred to buy it.
Throughout the century, the quantity of apparatus commercially available greatly increased.
While the researcher might well need to make some of his own, standard equipment would be bought — partly for convenience, and partly because like the balance it would be more accurate for quantitative work then anything home-made.
There may be some who find it relaxing to make some test-tubes or cut out some filter-papers; and apparatus to investigate previously unsuspected effects must be made from scratch, or assembled opportunistically from things designed for old purposes; but ready availability of apparatus is an enormous bonus to the scientist, and the growth of science led to a flourishing trade.
Parkes' Chemical Catechism of 1806 had a frontispiece of apparatus, engraved on glass with fluoric acid; in the fourth edition (1810) this was replaced by a plate of the laboratory of the Surrey Institution, a less-successful version of the Royal Institution; in later editions Parkes substituted a laboratory which a gentleman might copy for himself.
In the early years of the century, laboratories were for one or two people, with assistants and perhaps a friend or two to watch, to perform research; or else to carry out routine analyses for a fee; or a mixture of these things.
Those at lecturing institutions would also be used for preparing demonstration-experiments.
It was not until the 1830s that the idea of a teaching laboratory became at all general; at Durham University then, for example, laboratory instruction was still an optional extra, to be paid for if taken.
By the second half of the century, the teaching laboratory had become a feature of any university, especially in Germany, which tried to attract an eminent person like Du Bois-Reymond or Carl Ludwig by promising him an ‘institute’ with research and teaching facilities.
The great man might expect to play a major part in the design of the building, as Maxwell did when the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge was built following his appointment in 1871, as the first professor of experimental physics.
Faraday had begun as a chemist, and indeed was regarded as one by most contemporaries throughout his life.
But even in the 1820s some of his work had been on electricity and magnetism, which would now be thought of as physics; and in the 1830s he moved decidedly in this direction.
The greatest authority in electrical science was A. M. Ampère, who had devised equations to account for the discoveries of Oersted and others, and was thus bringing electromagnetism within the realm of applied mathematics.
But the problem remained that the physical basis of Ampère's equations was implausible; they provided a model which could be adapted to fit new discoveries, but which did not lead to new predictions or give a convincing explanation to those whose first language was not mathematics-like Faraday.
Faraday seemed to contemporaries an experimental genius, thinking with his fingers; he was thus a splendid example of Baconian philosophy in action.
They duly applauded when he quantified electrochemistry in his famous laws of electrolysis, and  when he proved experimentally that electricity from a condenser, a battery or an eel was the same.
As Faraday went deeper into electromagnetism, he began to leave his contemporaries behind; his work was on the boundary between inductive experimental science and deductive physics, and failed to fit easily into either category.
As he wrestled with the nature of matter and the question of action at a distance, he seemed to be going into metaphysical speculation; he was not a clubbable man, and his scientific work in its higher reaches was a lonely business, interrupted by a major breakdown in health.
In the laboratory he did undoubtedly think with his hands thoughts which he could not clearly express in words, or in the more accurate language of mathematics (which he distrusted); but he did try in his lectures to put across some of his underlying convictions.
This was especially true when he gave an impromptu lecture on the nature of matter in 1844 — the story is that Charles Wheatstone panicked and fled, leaving it to Faraday as chairman to satisfy the audience — and another on ray-vibrations in 1846.
Both these are very different from the ‘experimental researches’ which made up Faraday's main research-publications, where every paragraph is numbered consecutively up to 3,299, and where theorizing is kept in its place in the Baconian manner.
Where most saw atoms with void space between them in the manner of Newton and Dalton, Faraday by the 1840s believed that matter was made up of mere point centres of force.
It was forces and not mass which he perceived as crucial; and thus the field between the points was where the interest lay.
He saw it as filled with lines of force, whose arrangements permitted or prohibited the passage of an electric current; this was itself force rather than any material ‘juice’.
He believed that the ray-vibrations invoked to explain light and radiant heat might happen in the lines of force (which he seemed to have almost demonstrated experimentally) rather than in the hypothetical ether.
He declared: ‘I do not perceive in any part of space, whether (to use the common phrase) vacant or filled with matter, anything but forces and the lines in which they are exerted.’
This led him towards ideas of conservation of energy, and of a unified field; he believed that light and magnetism must act upon one another, and to the astonishment of contemporaries he  indeed demonstrated that a magnetic field will rotate the plane of polarization of polarized light.
Wheatstone's work in telegraphy seemed to show that electricity travelled about as fast as light, and Faraday believed that it must go just as fast; he also believed that gravity must be analogous to other attractive forces, and take time for its propagation, though there was no evidence for this.
Some of Faraday's experimental results were independently achieved, sometimes before him, by Joseph Henry in the USA, and by William Sturgeon in Manchester, for example; and his theory of point atoms owes something to Newton, and more to Roger Boscovich (an eighteenth-century Jesuit) and to Joseph Priestley.
The fertile combination of theory and practice was his own, however, and he stood at the head of a great group of people working on the new phenomena of electricity.
William Whewell in Cambridge was consulted by him over nomenclature, and took a great interest in his work, especially in his unease about the atomic theory with its inert and massy billiard-balls.
Similarly, important physicists on the Continent corresponded with him, and were amazed and delighted by his discoveries; but the lines of force seemed somehow unscientific, a scaffolding that could be ignored when the building was completed.
He himself felt his lack of mathematics; but in science it may be an advantage not to be too well-drilled — one who knows the rules may find it hard to go beyond them, and where great originality is needed the prizes sometimes go to outsiders.
Two Scots with Cambridge connections took up Faraday's work at last, trying to put it into mathematical form rather than to fit the discoveries into an existing theory; and through their work came the great flowering of classical physics.
William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin, was elected to the chair of Natural Philosophy at Glasgow in 1846 at the age of twenty-two, and organized there a physics laboratory for students.
He had already begun publishing on electromagnetism, and in a paper of 1847 he suggested an analogy between an incompressible solid and a magnetic field.
In 1851 he used what were in effect vectors in deriving magnetic equations without using Poisson's theory of magnetic fluid.
He went on to work in thermodynamics, and like Wheatstone to put his electrical knowledge to practical use in  devices connected with telegraphy.
He became the doyen of British physicists, and incidentally one of the first whose voice we can still hear, preserved in a primitive recorder at Glasgow University.
James Clerk Maxwell, who built upon Thomson's work in electromagnetism, was a younger contemporary, born 1831 and dying in 1879.
While at Cambridge he worked on the problem of the stability of Saturn's rings.
In 1856 he was appointed to a chair at Aberdeen; in a series of reforms and cuts, he lost this job; but in 1860 he went to King's College, London.
From 1865 to 1871 he lived on the estates he had inherited in Scotland, and then spent his last years at Cambridge.
He was one of the greatest physicists there has ever been; we have already met his work on gases, with its statistical basis, but his most important research was that in which he took up Faraday's discoveries, giving the lines of force a mathematical expression.
Beginning in 1855, and then especially in the early 1860s, he developed his theory of electromagnetism, which began with a model of tubes of force with complex mechanical analogies, and led to the idea that light was indeed an electromagnetic disturbance.
In 1864 he published a book, The Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field, in which the equations were largely separated from these mechanical models; in 1873 he published his Treatise, which put the whole of electricity and magnetism on a new footing.
His work was swiftly taken up in Germany, where it had close relations with that of Weber and Kohlrausch; and it was there that H. R. Hertz, for whom Maxwell's theory was no more than Maxwell's equations, demonstrated the existence of electrical or radio waves in accordance with the equations.
By then, not merely was much more known about light, heat, electricity and magnetism, but the knowledge was unified with a powerful theoretical structure, so that while chemistry had seemed the fundamental science to many at the beginning of the century, by the end of it there was little doubt that this position belonged to physics.
In Maxwell, the streams of particle and wave physics had begun to converge, with results that were to be disquieting; but optics and the structure of matter were at the same time fruitfully interacting.
It had long been known that some metals gave colours to flames; but this was an unreliable  test, because colours are hard to describe exactly, and because they are usually masked by a brilliant orange-yellow.
Joseph Fraunhofer, an optical-glass maker of Munich, had mapped over five hundred dark lines in the solar spectrum by the early 1820s, and had shown that they did not arise in the prisms used to produce the spectra.
One of the greatest of Cambridge physicists, George Stokes, had obscurely suggested that elements might emit when hot and absorb when cold light of the same characteristic frequencies; but it was not until 1860, with the collaboration in Heidelberg of Bunsen and Kirchhoff, that spectroscopy became a central part of chemistry.
They realized that each element had its own spectrum, a pattern of bright lines (from which the ubiquitous sodium lines could be distinguished); and they used the spectroscope to detect two new metals, caesium and rubidium, which they were then able to isolate.
Kirchhoff reasoned that cooler elements in the outer layers of the Sun would absorb energy according to the same pattern; and accordingly he identified in the Sun a number of elements found upon the Earth.
As apparatus increased in power, elements were also identified in stars and nebulae.
The French philosopher Auguste Comte had said that among impossible things was stellar chemistry; and yet twenty years later he was proved wrong.
Nineteenth-century philosophers were anxious to produce systems of classification of the sciences, and at the end of the century Robert Flint of Edinburgh wrote a History of Classifications of the Sciences (Edinburgh, 1904) which summarized them all.
Nobody seems to have put astronomy near chemistry; and the trouble with all series is that progress often seems to happen on the frontiers of sciences that on the philosopher's map seem as far apart as Finland and Portugal.
The coming of chemistry revolutionized astronomy as the coming of terrestrial mechanics had done in Galileo's day; it accelerated the move from positional astronomy towards physical astronomy, where the stars are not simply fixed points but entities which have evolutionary histories and form part of great systems.
Stellar distances were first determined in 1838, when F. W. Bessel measured the parallax of 61 Cygni; this is the apparent motion in the star produced by the Earth's movement in  its orbit, as predicted in the Copernican system.
William Herschel at the beginning of the century had already detected the proper motion of the Sun within our galaxy.
Bigger and bigger telescopes were used to investigate whether nebulae were star-clusters or stars in the making; this was something the spectroscope ultimately answered, because some nebulae gave bright-line spectra characteristic of hot gas rather than of the Sun or a star.
Now the colour of stars, and especially whether they were red or white, became something of interest; and like natural history, the observation and recording of red stars was something which amateurs could do, and astronomical societies flourished throughout the century, bringing mathematicians and owners of telescopes together.
At big observatories, there were elaborate programmes of observation, assisted in the second half of the century by photography.
Especially in the USA, women began to play a role in observation in the big observatories by the end of the century.
One of the great names in the new physical astronomy was Norman Lockyer, who rapidly mastered the techniques of spectrum analysis.
Having studied the sunspots and the solar prominences, in a race with the Frenchman P. J. C. Janssen, Lockyer then moved on to claim the existence of a new element in the sun, helium.
He had seen its lines in the spectrum, and realized that they did not correspond to any known substance.
This was in a sense the first of the family of rare or inert gases to be discovered; but in chemistry the discovery of an element requires also its isolation, and this did not happen until 1895, when William Ramsay was in the process of finding the whole group of these gases.
Lockyer classified the stars, recognizing two kinds of history for them.
He became eminent in the world of science, editing Nature and playing an important part in establishing the Science Museum in London.
This grew out of a Loan Exhibition (accompanied by lectures) of scientific apparatus for the 1862 Exhibition at South Kensington, which turned out to be a pale shadow of the Great Exhibition of 1851- the death of Prince Albert adding to the gloom.
By then apparatus was available for chemistry, physics, astronomy and biology; these ideas made in brass were not only useful but also often handsome.
New apparatus made new    experiments possible; for example, the new diffraction gratings prepared by H. A. Rowland at Johns Hopkins University from 1882 led to a great improvement and quantification of spectroscopy, while the microscope led to the cell theory.
Museums like the Science Museum now built up collections of enormous value to the historian of science, for the provenance of the pieces is known, and we can only judge past science when we know what could be done with the tools available.
Apparatus known to have been used by a particular scientist, and collections of apparatus by the same maker, are particularly instructive.
Chemical apparatus tends to be broken, or reused in new arrangements; but the historian may hope that even here laboratories may have had capacious cupboards into which unused pieces have been stuffed and thus preserved.
figure 12 Lord Rosse's telescope from Philosophical Transactions, 1861 (reproduced by kind permission of The Royal Society).
The museum with old apparatus and machinery is one kind, but in the nineteenth century it was the museum as a centre of research in current science which was more important.
In the late eighteenth century, John and William Hunter had built up collections of anatomical specimens for teaching purposes; the Hunterian Collection in London became one of the sights not to be missed by the intellectual tourist in the early Victorian period, when Richard Owen was in charge of it.
As well as medical preparations, it contained a great deal of comparative anatomy, including fossils.
This collection was in the care of the Royal College of Surgeons; and other medical societies and medical schools built up museums where the student could study at leisure, augmenting what he had learned from lectures and dissections and at the bedside.
Owen, the ‘British Cuvier’, had made the collection a centre of scientific research with his work, especially on fossils but also on the relationships between the various groups of animals.
The model on which he and others based their plans for museums was that in Paris where Cuvier, Jussieu and Lamarck had worked in Napoleonic Paris.
Here vast collections of plants and animals — stuffed, or as bones and fossils — were assembled so that comparative study could be carried on, and unknown creatures described and named.
The arrangement of the exhibits was crucial: when W. C. Williamson went to Manchester to take charge of the museum there in 1836, he found that the stuffed  animals were merely arranged in ornamental groups; he soon reorganized them systematically.
Everywhere the Parisian example was being followed, with differences in scale; the public's desire to be instructed in such museums, and also at exhibitions of apparatus, is a striking feature of the time.
The geologists soon joined in, and the Museum of Practical Geology in Jermyn Street in London, connected with the Geological Survey and arranging programmes of lectures, presented that science in a systematic manner too.
The cabinet of curiosities might be rudely described as a well-organised attic; and national museums are the national attic, where things too good to throw away are kept safe.
The British Museum at the beginning of the century was an enormous cabinet where classical sculptures, ethnographic material and natural history specimens were all to be found.
There was a mixture of the formal and the informal about it; the Keeper of Zoology in the 1810s was wont from time to time to leap over the stuffed animals.
Following delicate negotiations with Robert Brown, the great collections made by Sir Joseph Banks were transferred to the Museum; but the incompatible demands of the various departments, and the great library which also formed a part of the museum, led to a good deal of friction.
Eventually Owen was appointed Superintendent of the natural history collections, and in 1881 presided over their move to the new building in South Kensington.
Museums are part of an educational system, and part of the entertainment industry; and the problem was particularly acute in scientific museums, where botanical and zoological research was going on.
Just as serious students with a syllabus to get through needed lectures different from those whose hobby was science, so those studying biology or medicine needed a different sort of museum from the general public, excited by dinosaur bones and stuffed grizzly bears.
Collections of dried plants are of interest only to the dedicated or desiccated botanist; and much the same applies to systematic collections of beetles or of fleas.
Museums themselves came to need attics or basements where working collections would be available for research purposes.
Nevertheless, museums were among the first scientific institutions to receive direct government support for science, and particularly for scientific research.
Most of this work was descriptive.
Plants, animals and rocks collected at home or abroad — perhaps from professional collectors, like A. R. Wallace — came to museums in capital cities, university towns or other centres, where they were named and classified.
We remember the great names like Lyell or Darwin, and forget the supporting cast without which they could not have been stars: those in museums classifying their findings.
Darwin's finches, for example, could be seen to be extremely interesting only when their affinities were pointed out to him by a taxonomist.
Speculation about the origin of species began only when there was some agreement, and much argument, about what species were, and what their names were.
This naming seems close to the boring and routine ‘normal science’ that Thomas Kuhn described in his Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1970); there is a good deal of routine in science, as in other things, but it is not always the most eminent who have done the interesting bits.
Lyell made people aware by the 1830s of the great age of the Earth, and he also divided up the Tertiary period, using a statistical method based upon the proportions of existing species found among the fossils.
The great business of the geologists of the middle of the century was to settle the strata, making geological maps and connecting their relative dating schemes across the world.
In 1859 Darwin could still write in the Origin of the imperfection of the geological record; only relatively small parts of the world's surface had been mapped by geologists.
A good deal had not yet been mapped by anybody; not merely the interior of Africa, but parts of the western USA.
In the middle years of the century, the American government sent expeditions to explore the western territories and plot possible routes for the Pacific Railroad; a division of the Army, called the Topographical Engineers, played an important part in these surveys, which were then sumptuously published by the Congress.
Work like this also produced much information about the distribution of plants and animals, and turned up interesting fossils: the pursuit of manifest destiny could also benefit pure science.
Such surveys, whether by sea or land, again required not merely naturalists to accompany them, but museum staff to write up the collections and make the knowledge public.
Geologists had chiefly looked horizontally where fossils were concerned, using them to date strata rather than following resemblances vertically through time.
Darwin's work gave new directions: first to fill in the gaps in the record so that the history of life would be more complete; and second, to investigate the origin of mankind, previously a tabooed subject.
The first of these objectives was particularly pursued in the USA, where humans were relatively recent but where the fossil history of the horse seemed to be well displayed, and where there were curious links between reptiles and birds.
The chief investigators here were E. D. Cope and O. C. Marsh, rivals in the manner of robber barons, chartering trains and suborning each other 's assistants in an effort to get the spoils back to their base first.
The American Gilded Age after the Civil War was a period of ruthless competition even in palaeontology, where the survival of the fittest in the struggle for existence was indeed worked out, in the present as in the past.
Darwin's theory was presented in the Origin in a curious way.
The book was an abstract of a work which had not appeared, and which never did in the form envisaged; this meant that it had no references or bibliography, and that in it Darwin wore his immense learning lightly.
Its structure is like that of Paley's works: the argument is cumulative, but it is not a chain in which each link supports the next, as in geometry; rather, the various arguments are independent, and support each other like the fibres in a rope.
The reader may not be persuaded by some of the cases, but the whole mass of them carries conviction.
The book did not mention man other than obliquely, and it was not until 1871 that Darwin published The Descent of Man; but it was clear from 1859 that the ancestry of man rather than that of horses was the crucial question.
Indeed, it had been the major objection to Lamarck's theory and to Vestiges that man was treated as an animal; and that if such a view gained currency, people would start to behave like animals.
From 1859 caves became exciting to geologists, as they had been forty years earlier when Buckland looked for evidence of the Deluge.
Very painstaking stratigraphical work put it beyond doubt that men had been contemporary with animals now extinct, and that human history must therefore go back long  before the 4004 BC computed from Genesis.
The evidence came from Britain and from France, and was brought before the public when in 1863 Lyell published his book The Antiquity of Man.
These careful excavations were followed up by archaeologists, who were ceasing to be treasure-hunters, just as geologists had ceased to be fossil-hunters; both were now concerned with dating and provenance, and the reconstruction of past epochs.
But just as man's dates were being pushed back, there came an unhappy interaction between geology and physics, again two sciences which had not seemed to have a common frontier.
Post-Darwinian geologists had assigned vast tracts of time for the operations of forces still believed by us to have shaped the Earth; but they were challenged on the grounds that thermodynamics could demonstrate that the Sun and the Earth could not be much more than fifty million years old.
A confrontation between William Thomson and T. H. Huxley was good to watch, and showed that scientists did not always agree, even about what was evidence or the right way to argue: while evolution in the last thirty years of the century was generally accepted, there was no agreement about times and processes.
Natural history had been based in the museum, and in the field; but the newer science of biology, named by a Frenchman and a German and prominently pursued by these two nations, became increasingly a laboratory science with experiment rather than description as the key.
The microscope, improving radically in the early nineteenth century so that its images no longer had coloured fringes all around them, was perhaps as important as the telescope had been two centuries earlier.
Cells had been noticed by Hooke in the 1660s with a primitive microscope; but the cell theory of Schleiden and Schwann gave a quite new understanding of how plants and animals work.
Typical of microscopic work might be W. C. Williamson's work on the formation of bones and teeth in the 1850s, which got him into the Royal Society.
He was a poor boy from Scarborough, who went to Manchester.
He worked his way through medical school in London, returned to establish a good-practice, and pursued scientific research in his leisure time, also giving public lectures — over 300 between 1874 and 1890 — and teaching at Owen's College, which became the University of Manchester.
Exploiting  a new device and a new theory, Williamson made a career in science for himself; and with later work on coal and the plants from which it had come, he made geology also a laboratory subject, involving apparatus for making thin sections, and a microscope.
The microscope was vital for physiology and for embryology, and later also for advances in medicine — notably the germ theory of disease.
But during the second half of the century there came a new approach to physiology, involving chemistry.
Chemistry had always been a part of a medical training, with its role in pharmacy; but the organic chemistry which Liebig had pioneered promised deeper-level explanations in biology.
Chemists had abandoned the belief that in organisms the balance of affinities was different from that in the inorganic sphere; they denied any vital force.
Their incursion was therefore seen as materialistic; biochemists saw animals and plants as natural laboratories, and not as goal-seeking creatures interacting with their environment.
The latter part of the century saw great progress in organic chemistry, as the atomic theory led to structural understanding and natural products such as indigo were synthesized.
Particularly in Germany, there were close links between the dye industry and academic chemists; but in a new form, chemistry retained and expanded its medical connections.
Physicists might be reducing chemistry to physics, but chemists seemed to be reducing biology to chemistry.
The process which had begun with Lavoisier's study of respiration and continued with Prout's work on digestion led on to studies of proteins and fats.
Physical chemists like Vernon Harcourt in Oxford were just beginning to study reaction-mechanisms in a few simple cases in the 1860s, and at the same period in France P. M. Berthelot was performing total syntheses, and in Norway C. M. Guldberg and P. Waage discovered the Law of Mass Action governing chemical equilibria.
By the last decade of the century Emil Fischer was performing elaborate syntheses of carbohydrates and of peptides; and it was possible to suggest reactions and equilibria which characterized living things.
To the laboratory and the museum as a focus of science we should add the observatory.
Observatories go back many centuries, perhaps even to Stonehenge; but modern observatories  in the West began in the sixteenth century.
By the nineteenth, they were very important and expensive institutions which had moved far from their original concerns with navigation and positional astronomy.
Time-signals, geophysical measurements, weather reporting and the testing of chronometers were among the functions which they discharged.
Experiments like those done in France on the velocity of light, by Fizeau and Foucault, and in Britain by Airy on the variation in gravity in a coal mine, were under the auspices of the national observatories.
The making of great telescopes, and of the mountings which would direct them and keep them focused on a star, required great industrial resources and skill.
It was at observatories that fundamental work on errors in observation were done by Gauss, leading to statistical theory applicable in all kinds of other fields.
Some science was independent of all these institutions, or could have been: notably mathematics.
W. R. Hamilton was appointed Astronomer Royal for Ireland and a Professor while still an undergraduate in 1827.
He was no great observer, but a most original mathematician, making great advances in algebra (notably with the idea that xy need not equal yx), which had connections with optical theory, and then with vector analysis.
His friend Augustus de Morgan was working in London on the foundations of logic, as was another Irishman, George Boole, who developed an algebra of classes.
In the USA, Willard Gibbs, given a new position but no salary at Yale, worked on thermodynamics and the Phase Rule; and in Germany Georg Cantor developed the theory of sets.
The explosion of mathematics was one of the most striking aspects of the nineteenth century; and frequently new mathematics has turned out, as Galileo had hoped, to be the language of nature, providing a key or a model for the understanding of phenomena.
What these mathematicians had in common with most of those who worked in laboratories was that the majority were attached to universities.
The structure of universities in Germany, France, Britain and the USA was very different, but everywhere they were by the end of the century centres of scientific research, while at the beginning of it they had mostly been very marginal to it.
German universities were under the control of the state bureaucracy, which appointed the professors, but they had  responded quickly to the specialization of the period with the creation of new chairs.
The German professor was a powerful figure, hiring and firing his assistants and doing his best to place his favourite students, though by the end of the century this was becoming more difficult.
In France the system was much more centralized, and it might be that the stiffness of the Napoleonic system was one reason why France had lost to Germany the prominent place she had had at the beginning of the century when that system was set up.
In Scotland, the universities had always had strong scientific and philosophical traditions; but in England at the beginning of the century neither of the two universities was a centre of scientific research.
Both were essentially seminaries — a majority of undergraduates went into the church in the first half of the century- and finishing schools, where teaching rather than research was the norm.
The change by the end of the century was dramatic.
The ancient universities had adopted German ideas, so that scientific research was now an important part of what went on, especially at Cambridge, with physics and physiology.
Furthermore they had been joined by universities in commercial and industrial cities, beginning with London, and including Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool, Newcastle and Bristol.
These were places where at the beginning of the century there was no more than a Mechanics' Institute or a Lit. and Phil.; and these new institutions were more oriented to science than the ancient ones, and committed on the German model to research.
In the USA, at the beginning of the century, the universities were also closer to seminaries, but by the 1870s they had begun to adopt the German model too, following the lead given by the new Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, the first to emphasize research in alliance with teaching.
By the end of the century, the national differences and traditions prominent earlier were less significant, especially in the physical sciences; and everywhere scientific education was becoming a serious and systematic business.
There was so much new knowledge in science, and degrees in science came to be seen as an alternative to degrees in classics or mathematics rather than as something to be done afterwards as an optional extra, or taken as a merely voluntary course of lectures.
What is curious for the observer from the  twentieth century is the debate about the possibility of secular education, something after all we now take for granted, although we do hear of debates over the teaching of ‘creationism’ in backwoods.
At Oxford and at Cambridge, the new science degrees (like those in modern languages and history) led to a BA, and knowledge of Latin and Greek was essential for would-be students of chemistry or physics.
This was because a degree was part of the training of a gentleman, and not a technical qualification; the scientist was as well-educated, though in a different line, as the classicist.
The utility of science was indeed everywhere urged, just as the utility of classics was urged for those who were to be legislators, justices of the peace or district officers in the colonies.
Apologists for science also argued that doing science was valuable for building the character: accurate observing and truthful reporting were required of the scientist; and so was open-mindedness and humility in abandoning preconceptions.
The feeling of sharing in a great enterprise for the relief of man's estate was also good; and the hope was that the method of science would prove applicable in politics, in the arts and in religion.
Problems would be carefully defined, and the solution dispassionately searched for and no doubt soon found.
Scientism is a not-unattractive doctrine, and was especially so to a rising professional middle-class who associated with it theories of eugenics and of mankind which gave them a pleasing sense of class and racial superiority; but in the later nineteenth century there was no reason to anticipate these darker sides of progress.
One great difficulty in the event was that the picture of the man of science as an open-minded searcher after truth does not fit all of them; indeed it is hard to see how anybody could work in the kind of vacuum envisaged by some of those who invoke a Baconian inductive method.
The great achievements of nineteenth century science — atomism, energetics, evolution, the wave theory of light — were highly theoretical, depending upon conjecture and then search for evidence.
And if research does not fit the pattern, teaching generally fitted it even less well.
There were some, like Henry Armstrong at the end of the century, who urged a ‘heuristic’ method of teaching in which the pupil would be helped to make for himself the discoveries of Newton, Lavoisier and  Faraday.
But the problem is that this requires a teacher of genius; and that a pupil has anyway only a brief time to get through work which has taken the lifetimes of many eminent predecessors: there must always be something artificial about heurism.
Most science was therefore taught dogmatically, as facts organized by proven theories, and as a series of hard words and mysterious formulae — the equivalent of learning an ancient language.
While the experts knew that the status of the atomic theory and of facts and laws was uncertain, those learning elementary science absorbed a world-picture in which unchanging atoms of matter moved according to deterministic laws, in which useful knowledge was paramount, and in which problems could be solved by the almost-mechanical application of scientific method, which was really organized common sense.
This was a view unsympathetic to religion and to the imaginative arts; but it was not characteristic of the leading scientists, who were often interested in all kinds of things beyond their science and continued to resist the appearance of two cultures.
Thus Sir Archibald Geikie (of the Geological Survey) in an address at Birmingham in 1898 deplored the idea of splitting schools into two sides or sections; but the trend towards specialization proved hard to control, and to some the sciences did seem to be all that needed to be known.
Indeed it seemed to some that scientific investigation might even bring to light all that was worthwhile in religion.
11 Wrestling with the Unknown
Eternal life seemed to most Christians — and therefore to most people — in the later nineteenth century to be central to their religion.
In April 1875 there appeared an anonymous book, The Unseen Universe, which turned out to be written by two eminent physicists, Peter Guthrie Tait of Edinburgh and Balfour Stewart of Manchester.
It was one of the successes of the day: there were fourteen editions in thirteen years.
Tait, with William Thomson, had published a Treatise on Natural Philosophy in 1867 which became a standard advanced textbook because it treated physics from the point of view of conservation of energy — fathering the doctrine, as became two Cambridge men, upon Newton: the ‘return to Newton’ was for them the key to modernity.
Stewart's most important work was on radiant heat; at the Kew Observatory he had collaborated with Warren de la Rue on sunspot investigations.
Both Tait and Stewart were staunch churchmen; their book set out to show that modern science gave no reason for abandoning the belief in personal immortality.
Like any good piece of natural theology, it also contained a lot of popular science; and many people must have learned about the laws of thermodynamics from reading this introduction to them.
Recent historians, like Owen Chadwick in The Victorian Church, are doubtful about the role of science in undermining faith in the latter part of the century.
The wealth of Bishops, the problems of the Biblical texts and of other religions, and the morality of both the Old and the New Testaments (arbitrary, and socially unprogressive) were more important factors in the painful losses of faith which Victorians underwent.
Despite the increase of unbelief, beginning well before the Origin of Species  and showing itself in a whole new genre of novels of religious doubt starting with J. A. Froude's Nemesis of Faith (1849), the late Victorian period saw the enormous expansion of the missionary enterprise and of church building.
For everyone who lost his faith, there must have been at least another who went to outcast London or to darkest Africa to convert the faint and hungry heathen; there was a great deal of Christian confidence, and not simply a Church in retreat before agnostic scientists.
We can see from Royal Institution Discourses again how religion was a part of the scientific culture, along with education and more central topics like energy.
In January 1872 Cardinal Manning, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster, talked about the Daemon of Socrates, concluding that Socrates bequeathed us the ‘lesson — that Conscience is the voice of God’.
Two years later the Anglican Dean of Westminster, Arthur Stanley, gave a Discourse on what the Catacombs of Rome indicated about early Christian beliefs.
Just after Manning had come the agnostic Tyndall, talking about the identity of radiant heat and light; and just before Stanley, the militant anti-christian W. K. Clifford had held forth on the education of the people, and especially on the importance of technical drawing.
Audiences might have enjoyed reinterpretations, as when Odling at the same period suggested that phlogiston was an anticipation of the idea of chemical energy, rather than a non-substance.
In another reinterpretation, in 1874, the Rev. Sedley Taylor of Cambridge talked of the trial of Galileo, drawing attention to the possibility of a forged Inquisition minute, and the probability therefore that Galileo ought to have been acquitted whatever one thought of the general merits of his theories; his condemnation was the fault of a dirty tricks brigade rather than of the Church.
Nevertheless, however strong the churches remained, there were many sympathetic who believed that they were crumbling, and felt sad, nostalgic or alarmed about it.
The late Victorian period was the first in which there were considerable numbers of agnostics, atheists and opponents of organized religion who led lives of exemplary respectability; it could not be urged of Huxley, Clifford or Tyndall that they were irreligious because they were libertines, like the earlier ungodly.
Indeed ‘atheist’ in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries usually meant somebody  who behaved as though there were no moral laws in the world.
The great Bishop Joseph Butler of Durham, had begun his Analogy of Religion of 1736 with the famous remark:
It is come, I know not how, to be taken for granted, by many persons, that Christianity is not so much as a subject of inquiry; but that it is, now at length, discovered to be fictitious.
And accordingly they treat it, as if , in the present age, this were an agreed point, among all people of discernment; and nothing remained, but to set it up as a principal subject of mirth and ridicule, as it were by way of reprisals, for its having so long interrupted the pleasures of the world.
By the 1870s Christianity had survived and flourished, and it was not now mirth and ridicule from hedonists — the scientific age was a serious one-but assault from intellectuals and moralists which would shake the churches.
In 1874 John Tyndall at the meeting of the British Association in Belfast delivered what came to be known as the Belfast Address.
This broke the tradition whereby Presidential Addresses were not expected to be highly personal; the convention was that the President reviewed the scientific developments in the past twelve months, usually appealed for more public support for research and education, and might indicate what avenues seemed most hopeful.
Like the Royal Society from its foundation in the 1660s, the BAAS was kept off questions touching party politics or religion, partly in the belief (or hope) that real science could and should be value-free, and partly for pragmatic reasons — an unwillingness to alienate any group.
Tyndall chose, and it was brave to do it in Belfast, to mount an attack on organized religion in the name of science.
Tyndall was a member of the X-club, a group of prominent agnostic scientists who were also keen on the professionalizing of science; they were an important pressure-group, but by no means representative.
To have the spokesman for science take on the churches seemed to many neither congenial nor wise.
Tyndall was a Professor at the Royal Institution, and an accomplished lecturer in that tradition, where arousing interest in a general audience was all-important, in contrast to academics  training students, who thought of him as windy and superficial.
Darwinism, progress, conservation of energy, the psychology of Herbert Spencer, and physiology wrestling with the nature of life, all led to a world-view very different from that of the churches.
Tyndall was not a materialist, but more of a pantheist transferring religious language from God to the world.
He saw evolution as ‘the manifestation of a Power absolutely inscrutable to the intellect of man.
As little in our day as in the days of Job can man by searching find this Power out.’
But science was a better way to approach this Mystery than any dogmatic religion could be in the nineteenth century: ‘We claim, and we shall wrest from theology, the entire domain of cosmological theory.’
For Tyndall, science claimed the unrestricted right to search even on dangerous ground; like Goethe he believed that science ought to be lively, and that commotion was to be preferred to stagnation, the torrent to the swamp.
Science must not be an idol; rather it is a pilgrimage, an exercise for the creative minds of every new generation.
Tyndall's was scientism with a human face.
The new ideas to which Tyndall referred were also effective within the churches.
Though after 1870 all forms of modernism were condemned within the Roman Catholic Church, and St G. Mivart (who had shown sympathies with Darwinism) was excommunicated, other churches and parties came to various degrees of accommodation with contemporary thought.
Henry Mansel the philosopher-theologian after all published in 1858 The Limits of Religious Thought arguing that we can know almost nothing positive about God; this God is not so far from Tyndall's inscrutable Power.
In 1860 the collection Essays and Reviews had been published by a group of liberal clergy including Benjamin Jowett, Master of Balliol College, and Frederick Temple, a future Archbishop of Canterbury.
Some urged the impossibility of miracles, and the inadequacy of the Old Testament chronology, and all pressed for the treatment of the Bible like any other ancient writing.
The so-called Higher Criticism had come late to Britain, and its consequences are still with us in the interpretation of stories of Virgin Birth and Resurrection.
Bishop William Colenso, the author of a well-known textbook of arithmetic, proposed a ‘kenotic Christology’(in which Jesus had abandoned his divine attributes while on  Earth) in his St Paul's Epistle to the Romans in 1861.
In the following year Colenso began to publish his Pentateuch and Book of Joshua, showing that there were errors of fact there.
Unorthodox clergy could be disciplined, though by the 1860s the process was unedifying to most people and was also liable to overturn by the secular courts.
Whereas some sensitive clergy might feel that they could not but take account of recent scientific thinking, men of science who were churchmen would find it even harder to avoid: Faraday's way of keeping a serene faith and active science apart was not so easy in 1870.
There had been laymen — Charles Bell, William Prout, John Kidd and Peter Mark Roget — among the Bridgewater authors of the 1830s, and lay theologizing was thus not unknown in Britain.
Many scientists were well-read in theological writings, and thus when in 1875 Stewart and Tait produced The Unseen Universe they were not doing anything very much out of the ordinary.
They sought to show that nothing in modern science required the abandonment of traditional Christianity, and especially the belief in eternal life.
Although the book was anonymous in the early editions, the secret was soon out.
Stewart and Tait began with the idea that the great majority of mankind had always believed in some fashion in life after death.
By the 1870s there were many who disbelieved and who yet ‘retained the nobler attributes of humanity’; but if the bulk of humanity lost its faith then it would be hardly possible to imagine ‘civilised and well-ordered communities’ surviving.
Indeed the authors were appalled at the violence of their society; and hoped (p. 143) that electricity, ‘under the direction of skilled physicists and physiologists’ might be used for sending ‘absolutely indescribable torture (unaccompanied by wound or even bruise) thrilling through every fibre of the frame of such miscreants.’
Their hope has been realized, by rather than for miscreants; their rhetoric reminds us that Victorian values did not produce an orderly society.
Indeed the hope of eternal life was thought socially important as a sanction, as the authors imply but do not quite state: the prospect of endless rewards and punishments might bring the wicked to their senses.
Revivalists in Britain and America dwelt upon the pains of Hell.
While the church dominated governing body of King's College, London, did not  object to Lyell's geology, it sacked the theologian F. D. Maurice for suggesting that the indescribable torture of the damned might not go on for ever.
Davy at the beginning of the century had derived comfort (and in personal if not social terms, the idea of eternal life is comforting) from the conservation of matter.
He wrote:
If matter cannot be destroyed, The human mind can never die.
If e'en creative when alloyed How sure its immortality.
Stewart and Tait were more aware of the degradation of energy, moral as well as physical, and thus of the impermanence of the world.
They stressed the principle of continuity lying behind the order in the universe which has developed through second causes; and they were sympathetic to Darwin.
From John Herschel and from Maxwell they took the idea that the atoms of matter, being indistinguishable, are manufactured articles, created by God as alike as shillings from the Mint.
Life too never came from inorganic matter, and must have reached the Earth from elsewhere.
The principle of continuity was a precondition for science; we must have faith that we shall never be brought to confusion by inexplicable irregularities.
The principle was, they believed, shown in the continuity from the solid state through gases to the ether in which light travelled; it connected this seen universe with an unseen one, permanent and underlying this declining world.
Tait and Stewart sought to show not the truth of Christianity, but its compatibility with modern science, and the narrowness of those who contented themselves with what they called ‘how’ questions and never with ‘why’.
Agnosticism or scientific materialism was a poor thing which did not take the universe and its order seriously enough.
Their book was assailed by Clifford, who asked what the ‘sickly dreams of hysterical women and half-starved men’ had to do with the ‘gentle patience of the investigator that shines through every page of this book’.
Clifford saw ‘the slender remnant of a system which has made its red mark in history, and still lives to threaten mankind.
The grotesque forms of its intellectual belief have survived the  discredit of its moral teaching’.
Clifford was, in the imagery of the authors of The Unseen Universe, one of those on the voyage who remains in the engine-room seeing how it works, rather than going on deck to see where the ship is going.
Maxwell was a more sympathetic critic, seeing the work (perhaps with tongue in cheek) as science baited with ‘the allurement of some more human interest’.
Stewart and Tait could at best demonstrate the possibility of eternal life; no traveller returned from that bourne with authentic tidings, except Jesus long ago.
The scientific age saw the new phenomenon of the instantaneous transmission of thought across vast distances.
The electric telegraph seemed to those of the mid-nineteenth century to be one of the most amazing feats of science-reasonably enough, if one remembers the long and uncertain times letters took in days of sail.
In the 1860s the first cables were laid across the oceans; thanks to Wheatstone and William Thomson, one could communicate with absent friends whom one could no longer see.
At the same period spiritualism came from America to promise a similar kind of contact with the dead.
In Britain it flourished especially among those for whom orthodox religion had become untenable, providing a promise of immortality apparently much firmer than argument such as that of Stewart and Tait, or of the Bible.
Psychic phenomena seemed to cry out for, and lend themselves to, scientific investigation.
Francis Galton had investigated the efficacy of prayer by seeing whether members of the Royal Family, often prayed for in church, lived longer than other aristocrats; he found they did not.
But this did not really hit orthodox Christianity, for prayers are always subject to the thing asked for being God's will; and He moves in a mysterious way, so that the workings of Providence may not be apparent until long afterwards.
Belief in a personal God has little connection with ‘evidence’.
On the other hand, spiritualism was testable, or seemed so: without any background of dogma, it aimed to provide evidence for the survival of loved ones.
The phenomena were very varied, and usually rather exciting.
Generally darkness, or weak lighting, was necessary; then tables rocked, objects moved, lights were seen and things  sometimes felt, and messages were rapped out.
The messages were often banal, but sometimes gave surprising information about a participant which the medium would not have been expected to know.
There were affinities with prayer meetings, with professional ‘magicians’ or ‘conjurors’, and with scientific entertainment using the mysterious forces of magnetism or electricity.
In the seventeenth century some of the first Fellows of the Royal Society had been interested in spirits and ghosts.
Joseph Glanvil, for example, believed that if people gave up belief in ghosts and witches they would soon also give up God, and he investigated some supposedly haunted houses.
The results are described in his Saducismus Triumphatus (1689), aimed at those modern Saducees who deny the survival of the soul.
Unfortunately for Glanvil, many ghost stories are faked; and investigators of the psychic phenomena of two centuries later came up against the same problem.
The very name ‘conjuror’ for an entertainer shows how the mighty sorcerer of the Renaissance is fallen.
The history of science is full of priority-disputes, mistakes and dogmatism, as one might expect from a human and provisional activity.
As Charles Babbage noted in his Decline of Science in England (1830), trimming and cooking happen, but hoaxing and forging, those more serious forms of fraud, are rare.
Because science is public knowledge, experiments and observations should be repeatable; but an enterprise that depends on trust will sometimes have advantage taken of it by a rogue.
An area where some phenomena are known to have been faked, where the will to believe among participants may be very strong, and where observation happens under poor conditions, is hardly a promising one for scientists.
Some, like Faraday, were highly sceptical but prepared to try an experiment or two.
Faraday showed to his satisfaction that the muscles of those pressing upon a table in a seance moved before the table did rather than in response to its motions; he considered further investigation a waste of time.
Others, several of them very distinguished, recognized that great care was necessary but believed that they were seeing something so important that it ought to be properly investigated.
During the 1870s a group at Cambridge under the leadership of Henry Sidgwick, an eminent  philosopher whose Methods of Ethics (1874) is a standard work of utilitarianism, began systematic experiments.
Some mediums were found to be fraudulent but there seemed to be genuine phenomena underlying the whole business; and it seemed to be the job of earnest doubters to come to grips with it despite its general slipperiness.
In 1882 the Society for Psychical Research was founded; at first it contained both convinced spiritualists and sober enquirers like Sidgwick, but soon the spiritualists left.
Sidgwick was the dominant figure in the Society down to his death in 1900.
It became cautious, fair-minded and increasingly respectable, though firm conclusions did not emerge from its investigations.
In 1886 it published two stout volumes by Edmund Gurney, Frederic Myers and Frank Podmore on Phantasms of the Living.
The question being investigated was the appearance of a loved one who is far away and at a moment of unexpected crisis, or dying.
There were many records of such manifestations, from reliable and intelligent observers, who had often described the curious incident before they could possibly have heard bad news from India or Australia, where at that moment a friend's life was endangered.
This research led the authors into experiments on telepathy, which they tried to handle statistically, holding up cards in different rooms, and so on.
Just as Darwin tried to build up series of small changes as in dog or pigeon-breeding to enormous evolutionary changes, so they sought continuity between unsurprising telepathy and the seeing of phantasms.
To see such hard-headed investigators wrestling with such uncertain data is fascinating.
We also get from the book a sense of the terrible waste of young life, even among the professional middle class from which most informants came.
If the results are striking as social and intellectual history perhaps hardly as science, as a physicist might see it — the book is also striking for the information it gives about the Society for Psychical Research.
It was not a group of cranks.
In 1886 the President was Balfour Stewart, Tait's collaborator; the Vice-Presidents included the Bishops of Carlisle and of Ripon, A. J. Balfour, the future Prime Minister, Lord Rayleigh, the physicist — who had succeeded Maxwell as the Cavendish professor at Cambridge — as well as Sidgwick and other notables.
The Honorary Members were John Couch Adams, the astronomer; William Crookes, the chemist, of whom we shall hear more; W. E. Gladstone, Prime Minister again early in that year in the midst of the Irish Home Rule struggles; John Ruskin; Lord Tennyson; A. R. Wallace, the co-discoverer of natural selection; and G. F. Watts, the painter.
Members of Council were W. F. Barrett, a physics professor from Dublin; Oliver Lodge, then at Liverpool (another physicist); A. Macalister, the Professor of Anatomy at Cambridge; and J. J. Thomson, also of Cambridge and at the beginning of an exceedingly distinguished career in physics.
The ‘establishment’ was fully represented in the Society, which was engaged with problems seen as crucial in late Victorian Britain, and had over 600 members.
Spiritualism had come from America, and had aroused great excitement there.
In America the problems of faith in God were becoming acute in a universe of Darwinism and decreasing availability of energy, with materialism perceived as leading to the collapse of civilization.
So among the twenty Corresponding Members of the Society we find William James of Harvard, with Edward Pickering, director of the Harvard Observatory, and five other Americans.
What is perhaps more surprising is to find five Frenchmen and five Russians among the group, for in these countries one might expect to find that the religious and intellectual perspectives would be rather different.
With its careful experiments and its use of statistics the Society was, however, doing work not altogether remote from experimental psychology.
The Corresponding Members also included a German, an Italian and, more interestingly, an Indian Mahadeva Vishnu Kane, BA, of Bombay, whose religious background must have been very different from that of the earnest doubters of Cambridge.
While psychical research thus attracted many eminent members of the scientific community, there were others who like Faraday and W. B. Carpenter were repelled by it.
To be seriously concerned with this field was to expose oneself to the possibility of ridicule when it turned out that one had been deceived by a clever confidence trickster; at best it led to controversy, to results which were suggestive rather than conclusive, and away from those straightforward and answerable questions which since  Galileo's time had been the essence of scientific research.
Respectable journals which reckoned to cover the whole of science refused to publish psychical research; reports and discussions of it were unwelcome at meetings of scientific societies; and involvement in it had at best an ambiguous effect on a scientist's career.
Very few specialized in this new field; Gurney, Myers and Podmore were among them.
To make a profession out of psychical research was hardly possible, even though by the 1880s there were career structures in more-established sciences.
Such research had therefore to function as a hobby.
We can see the problems if we look at the work of William Crookes.
He was unlike Tait or Rayleigh or J. J. Thomson in that he did not have the useful start in scientific life of a Cambridge degree, or indeed any degree.
In that, he was like Wallace and like Norman Lockyer, the first editor of Nature; but he was unlike them in that he went on to become President of the Royal Society, at the time of the First World War.
He belonged to perhaps the last generation in which it was possible to be very successful in science by making one's own way, rather than following a standard pattern.
J. J. Thomson wrote of him:
Crookes was in many ways unlike other English men of science.
His well-waxed moustache gave him a somewhat foreign appearance…
He was a director of public companies, the proprietor and editor of a journal, gas inspector and expert witness, and at one time he owned a gold mine; he did his work in a laboratory of his own…
He was very quick to observe anything abnormal and set to work to get some explanation…
In his investigations he was like an explorer in an unknown country, examining everything that seemed of interest.
He was just the person to be drawn into psychical research, and also into work on the boundary of matter and energy, a frontier like that between body and mind.
Crookes was born in 1832 and, having left school at fifteen, he went to the Royal College of Chemistry.
There he worked on the unfashionable inorganic chemistry; his science was always to be on the boundary of physics and chemistry.
In 1856, after a  period in Oxford and at Chester, he returned to London because he was convinced that only there could a career be made in consultancy and journalism.
The problem with consultancy was that companies liked to use the eminent, to whom they were prepared to pay high fees; getting started was very difficult.
Journalism was more promising to the entrepreneur-scientist, with steam-presses, cheap paper, the abolition of taxes on knowledge, and new readership with expanding education and the growth of specialization.
Here again, scientific eminence would be a help; but versatility was a start, and in 1861 Crookes wrote to James Samuelson, a barrister and naturalist involved in publishing:
I append the headings of a few subjects to which I have given some attention, and which I could write a readable article upon.
I have some others, but have mislaid my memoranda.
I ought to say, however, that I am in the habit of writing on any scientific topic which may arise, and have such excellent opportunities of getting the best scientific information, that I have no doubt I could please you on any subject connected with my department of science which you may suggest.
The subjects were ‘Aluminium, Preservation of stone, Divisibility of matter, Electric & lime-light, & c , The infinitely small, in space & time, Spectrum analysis, & c & c .’
Aluminium had recently been prepared in bulk by the eminent Parisian Professor Henri Ste-Claire Deville, who became famous as both a teacher and researcher.
In 1861 Crookes made the discovery which brought him the necessary eminence; he identified the new element thallium.
This success came through his rapid taking up of the new technique of spectrum analysis of Kirchhoff and Bunsen; he noticed a green line in the spectrum of some impure selenium.
After beating off a challenge to his priority by a Frenchman, C. A. Lamy — a discovery like this was a very important bit of property indeed — Crookes was elected into the Royal Society in 1863, his sponsors including Faraday, Tyndall, Odling, Abel, Stewart and Herschel.
He spent the next ten years in a classic investigation of thallium and its properties.
Unfortunately he found like others  that even eminence in science did not automatically bring emolument, and in 1863 he contemplated moving to Manchester; but Samuelson then came up with the proposal of producing a new Quarterly Journal of Science, which duly appeared in January 1864 under the editorship of Crookes and Samuelson.
Already in 1860 Crookes had embarked on what turned out to be an important journalistic enterprise, launching the weekly Chemical News, which he edited until 1906.
This was a complete departure from the pattern of the learned journal in which papers are refereed and polished, and then appear after some months; it brought rapid publication of results, and Crookes also encouraged speculative papers which the staid, and Baconian, Chemical Society would not put into its Journal.
He reprinted articles from other publications, often in weekly parts; translated papers such as those of Mendeleev; and gave news of industrial developments and of exhibitions; he had also a lively correspondence section.
This was particularly valuable at a time when the chemical profession was coming to be seen as having different needs and interests from the learned chemical community.
The Chemical Society represented academic chemists, but had not performed any of the professional ‘trade union’ functions of fixing fees, ensuring that only the duly qualified were allowed to do public analyses, and so on.
Crookes operated on both sides of this line; and Chemical News is a very valuable guide to what a chemist was in the later nineteenth century.
The Quarterly Journal of Science had a different aim.
It was to be a serious vehicle of general science.
As such, it contained a section of ‘original articles’, some of them in effect disguised editorials, which were signed, with an indication of status.
Then came reviews, really essay-reviews, which were anonymous and discursive, and sometimes formidable, discussing one or more recent books.
The resemblance here is to the great nineteenth century Reviews, the Edinburgh, the Quarterly, the Westminster, and others, which did include some scientific works among their criticism but were chiefly concerned with literature, history and politics.
By 1873 there were some signed reviews, an adoption of the French practice, which seemed very odd to most Englishmen and never became general, here or elsewhere, in the nineteenth century.
We find interesting matter, like the cost of  offprints and of binding-cases.
The index varies considerably in size from year to year, and must have been trimmed to fit the space available; the number of illustrations fell over time; and the publisher changed.
The journal apparently never made money for Crookes after all, but it kept his name before the public; and being an editor does give some power, patronage and influence.
After a row in 1869, Crookes' name disappeared as an editor; but Crookes wrote to Samuelson a ‘rather pungent’ letter including the passage:
I am not a child to be frightened by a resolution of a board of directors, or to be soothed by the present of shares (each carrying 10 liability) in a company which has been losing money every year from its commencement, and which nothing short of a miracle could make pay a dividend as hitherto managed; neither is my position in Scientific Circles here such as to render my retaining the editorship of any advantage to me — indeed, I am vain enough to think that I confer more than I receive.
As a result, the journal came under Crookes' complete control, and in 1870 he published in it the first of a series of four papers on spiritualism.
Papers on the spirits thus appeared among those on a recent eclipse, on the early days of the Royal College of Chemistry by Hofmann, on patent laws, and on chemical energy.
Indeed the general range was very similar to what we have met among Royal Institution Discourses at the same date.
But spiritualism remained beyond the pale, like phrenology and unlike orthodox religion, despite the claims of some that it was really the same as primitive Christianity.
Journals which published it, and editors who included it, ceased to be fully respectable; this message got through to Crookes, and he stopped his active propaganda, though apparently never ceasing to believe that some of the phenomena he had witnessed, often in distinguished and reliable company, were genuine.
In 1879 Crookes sold the Quarterly Journal; it lived on until 1885, becoming in its last years a monthly-but it had never been a leading journal, and general scientific reviewing never caught on.
The great success among new journals of the period  was Nature, beginning in 1869 and, like Chemical News, coming out in newspaper format each week.
Unable to investigate further the boundary between body and spirit, Crookes moved on to work on that mysterious borderland, as he called it, of matter and energy.
He invented the radiometer, a perplexing scientific toy in which a small propeller contained in an evacuated bulb has its vanes blackened on one side; when light falls on it, the propeller turns.
Crookes could not explain satisfactorily what was happening, but Stokes and others involved with the dynamical theory of gases were ultimately able to account for it in terms of collisions and energy.
Crookes took up Faraday's work on the passage of electricity through gases, and was excited by a passage in an early lecture of Faraday's where he had speculated that there might be a ‘fourth state of matter’ simpler than the gaseous, just as gases are simpler than liquids; they all expand alike when heated, for example.
As pumps improved, Crookes got lower pressures than Faraday had been able to do; and eventually he discovered cathode rays, which he interpreted as this fourth state.
He also continued with spectrum analysis, mapping spectra and struggling to work out which lines belonged to which elements among the confusing Rare Earth Metals like Lanthanum.
He found that glass containing these metals was useful for sun-glasses.
The analytical techniques of which he was a master were inadequate to separate these metals completely, and he concluded that they merged into one another, being varieties rather than true species produced by inorganic evolution.
Crookes' lectures were illustrated by brilliant and striking experiments, especially with the cathode rays, which he believed to be a stream of particles; but his physics and mathematics were not sufficient for him to produce quantitative work in this field.
He also had, as J. J. Thomson remarked, the temperament of the explorer rather than the cool, logical mind of one determined to test a definite theory.
Crookes was thus very important in preparing the way for the ‘discovery’ of the electron by J. J. Thomson in 1897, in an experiment in which cathode rays were deflected by a magnetic field, and then brought back to the zero point by an electric field.
This set-up allowed Thomson to compute the ratio of charge to mass for the particles which the experiment seemed to show must  compose the rays.
He found that the corpuscles, or electrons as they were later called, must be much smaller than those which Crookes had envisaged; and Crookes later came round to his view.
To discover the electron is rather different from discovering the kangaroo, because it is a theoretical entity inferred from certain abstruse experiments; and Thomson's apparently crucial experiment turned out in the twentieth century not to be so.
In Germany, where Hertz had discovered the radio waves in accordance with Maxwell's theory of the electromagnetic field, and where in 1895–7 W. K. Röntgen (using a Crookes tube to generate cathode rays) had discovered X-rays, the general belief was that the cathode rays would also turn out to be a form of wave in the ether.
In the twentieth century, experiments devised to test this idea did indeed find that a beam of electrons could be diffracted like light; the electron microscope depends on this analogy.
But in 1900 these uncertainties were still in the future; there were clouds, as William Thomson described them, hanging over some classical theories, but as yet no thunder and lightning.
The success of Crookes and his successors with evacuated tubes meant that the passage of electricity through gases was more studied and better understood than that through solids.
The solid state seemed more complicated; and because of the problems of purity, which had plagued Crookes in his work on lanthanum and its congeners, it was very difficult to get consistent results with interesting elements like selenium.
Crookes' biographer Fournier d'Albe worked and wrote on this, which had baffled various investigators because its resistance changed under exposure to light-but inconsistently if there is impurity.
It was for these reasons that the first ‘valves’ for radios and televisions and computers were evacuated glass vessels, descendants of Crookes' radiometer and cathode ray tube, rather than semiconductors.
Uncertainty and the reinterpretation of crucial pieces of work were not yet necessary in physics in the 1870s and 1880s, as they seemed to many to be in the human sciences and in the sphere of religion under the pressure of evolutionary theory and the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
Evolutionary explanations of society became the norm, especially through the writings of E. B. Tyler such as Primitive Culture (1871); while the excessive breeding of the unsuitable worried eugenicists such as Francis Galton, Darwin's cousin and the inventor of fingerprinting.
Among discussions of religion, The Unseen Universe was unusual for its emphases on the conservation of energy and the running down of the universe; usually it was the idea of development which was more prominent.
This need not involve rejection of traditional Christianity; Newman had written his famous essay on the development of doctrine in 1845, long before the Origin of Species; and the idea was reworked in the Darwinian light of 1889 in Lux Mundi, a collection of articles edited by the prominent high-churchman Charles Gore.
Nevertheless, it seems probable that the scientific spirit, at least as seen by non-scientists, encouraged more critical and liberal attitudes to religion; this can be seen in the Hibbert Lectures, which began in 1878.
Robert Hibbert had died in 1849 leaving money for religious purposes, which was at first applied to theological education.
The bequest was for ‘the spread of Christianity in its most simple and intelligible form, and to the unfettered exercise of private judgement in matters of religion.’
A group of eminent liberal divines petitioned the trustees to endow a series of lectures on unsettled problems in theology.
They referred to the ‘traditional restraint, from which all other branches of inquiry have long been emancipated’: ecclesiastical interests and party predilections, which meant that theology ‘fails to receive the intellectual respect and confidence which are readily accorded to learning and research in any other field’.
There was, they believed, no reason ‘why competent knowledge and critical skill, if encouraged to exercise themselves in the disinterested pursuit of truth, should be less fruitful in religious than in social and physical ideas’.
The first lecture series was given by Max Müller, a signatory, in the spring of 1878; the venue, the Chapterhouse at Westminster Abbey, was arranged by another signatory, Dean Stanley; the course proved so popular that Müller gave each lecture twice.
He spoke of Indian religion; and indeed comparative religion was a subject becoming popular, a region in which scientific study seemed possible.
Its alarming feature to the orthodox was that it might make Christianity seem simply one faith among others, rather than simply truth.
Müller's lectures  were followed in 1879 by those of Peter Renouf, originally from Guernsey, an associate of Newman, an Inspector of Schools and an Egyptologist; and then in 1880 by Ernest Renan's, coming nearer to home with an investigation of the influence of Rome on Christianity and the development of the Catholic Church.
By the end of the nineteenth century, then, there was a strong feeling that religion, like everything else, should be studied in the light of science.
In all fields, there was still much that was unknown: in Herbert Spencer's philosophy, and in Tyndall's Belfast address, there was room for the unknowable; but it seemed reasonable to hope that under pressure from inquiring minds this would shrink, if not ultimately wither away altogether.
Just as Crookes' experiments on cathode rays not merely revealed but solved some mysteries, so science would gain ground steadily upon the dark, reducing the area of the unknown.
The end of the nineteenth century was the climax of the Age of Science; what remains for us is to glimpse briefly the aftermath of that confident period in which it seemed that all the interesting questions must have answers, and that it was the business of natural philosophy to find them out.