

IBISES AND SPOONBILL: Threskiornithidae.
Fairly large, long-necked, long-legged wading birds, habitually flying with neck outstretched: a useful distinction from herons.
Bill long and curved in ibises, straight and spoon-shaped at the tip in spoonbills.
SPOONBILL Platalea leucorodia.
The only large white heron-like bird with a long broad black bill, spoon-shaped at the tip.
Adult has yellowish breast-band and in breeding season a long yellowish crest.
Immature has wing-tips blackish and no crest.
Normally silent, but may grunt in breeding season.
Shallow fresh and coastal waters, nesting colonially in trees, bushes and reed-beds in marshy areas.
34 in. (86 cm.).
M Map 20 
GLOSSY IBIS Plegadis falcinellus.
Like a large dark round-winged Curlew (p. 139): the only blackish long-legged bird of the region with a curved bill.
Plumage purplish-brown, wings and tail glossed green: legs greenish-brown.
Call a harsh grating croak.
Often flies in lines.
Habitat as Spoonbill, with which and various egrets and herons it often breeds.
22 in. (56 cm.).
V
BALD IBIS or WALDRAPP Geronticus eremita.
Larger than Glossy Ibis, from which it differs especially in its bald red head, red bill and legs, and neck ruff of long pointed feathers, which wave in the wind and give the bird a somewhat shaggy appearance at rest.
Call a rather high-pitched ‘kay-kay’.
Not a waterside bird, frequenting dry country and nesting on rocky cliffs and stream banks, sometimes on ruined buildings.
A local and decreasing species.
30 in. (75 cm.).
SACRED IBIS Threskiornis aethiopicus.
Unmistakable with its black and white plumage, black on the bare head and neck and plumed wings.
Immature has head and neck feathered black and white and no plumes.
Rather silent, but sometimes croaks.
Margins of fresh and coastal water, marshes and cultivated land.
No longer breeds Egypt, and now confined in our region to S Iraq.
The emblem of the British Ornithologists' Union.
25 in. (64 cm.).
STORKS AND WOOD IBISES: Ciconiidae.
Large to very large long-legged long-necked birds, with long stout bills and black and/or white plumage, flying with neck and legs both outstretched (unlike herons), legs trailing slightly downwards: stately gait.
WHITE STORK Ciconia ciconia.
One of the largest land birds of the region, differing from all its other large white birds by combination of long red bill and legs, long neck, short tail and black wings with white patch.
Normally silent, but will hiss when annoyed and clatters mandibles together during courtship, at same time holding neck backwards in a U-bend.
Farmland and open marshes, nesting in trees or in W Europe on buildings, usually on specially erected platforms.
Decreasing in W Europe.
(The huge Marabou Stork Leptoptilos crumeniferus, 5 ft long, with large air-filled pouch hanging from neck, has occurred in Palestine.)
The national bird of Germany.
40 in. (102 cm.).
V
BLACK STORK Ciconia nigra.
Differs from White Stork most notably in being all black except for white underparts.
Immature browner, especially on head and neck.
Less gregarious but more vocal, chief call being ‘he lee, he lee’.
A retiring forest bird, feeding at freshwater margins and in open marshy areas in well wooded country: on migration in more open country.
Nests in trees.
38 in. (97 cm.).
V
WOOD IBIS Mycteria ibis.
Most confusingly named as it is a stork not an ibis.
Differs from White Stork in its yellow bill, black tail and bare red face pink on back and wings.
Juvenile has no red, and is brownish on head, neck and upperparts; immature is grey where juvenile brown, but has reddish under wing coverts.
Generally silent, but may croak or grunt rather weakly.
A rare vagrant to N W Africa from further S, on both fresh and coastal waters.
39 in. (100cm.).
GREATER FLAMINGO Phoenicopterus ruber (Phoenicopteridae).
The only flamingo of the region, easily recognised by its pink plumage and striking red and black contrast of wings in flight; also by  Roman nose effect of uniquely curved flamingo-type bill, specially adapted to sieving animal and vegetable food from shallow water.
Other species not infrequently escape from bird collections and zoos in Europe, including Chilean race of Greater Flamingo, which has red ‘knees’ and feet, and smaller and much brighter pink Lesser Flamingo Phoeniconaias minor of East Africa, which has dark red bill.
A noisy and highly gregarious bird, uttering loud goose-like honking cries in flight.
Extensive shallow lakes or lagoons of salt or soda water, where it builds conical heaps of mud on which to lay its eggs.
In our region breeds only in S Morocco, S Tunisia, S Spain, Rhone delta, Turkey, Egypt, S E Russia and N W Iran.
50 in. (127 cm.).
SWANS, GEESE AND DUCKS: Anatidae. pp. 45–69.
Aquatic birds characterised by long neck, comparatively narrow and usually pointed wings, webbed feet, and (except in the sawbills) bill flattened and blunt.
Young, thickly covered in down, leave nest soon after hatching.
Two main groupings: swans and geese, subfamily Anserinae (pp. 459) and ducks, subfamily Anatinae (pp. 51–69).
Many species not native to region are liable to escape from waterfowl collections.
SWANS: Cygnus.
The largest waterfowl, northern swans are all white, the young (cygnets) being ash-brown, becoming whiter as they grow older; sexes alike.
Ungainly and waddling on land, swans swim gracefully, taking off from the water with ponderous flapping to sail majestically through the air.
No black on wings and no long trailing legs distinguish them from all other large white birds in flight.
Still and slow-moving fresh water, estuaries, sheltered coastal water, sometimes breeding in swamps.
MUTE SWAN Cygnus olor.
Adult readily distinguished by orange bill with black basal knob, also by holding neck curved at rest, by habit of slightly erecting tail when swimming, and by loud throbbing of wings in flight.
In a rare variety, the Polish Swan, immatures also white.
Usually silent, but has twangy trumpeting note and will hiss or snort when annoyed.
Mostly semi-domesticated; common in town parks.
60 in. (152 cm.).
R Map 21
WHOOPER SWAN Cygnus cygnus.
Differs from Mute Swan in yellow base instead of orange tip to knobless bill, also in upright carriage of neck at rest, in whistling rather than throbbing of wings in flight, and in more vocal habits.
Has more yellow on bill than smaller Bewick's Swan, reaching below nostril at an acute angle.
A loud clanging, somewhat goose-like ‘ahng-ha’.
60 in. (152 cm.)
W(b) Map 22
BEWICK'S SWAN Cygnus bewickii.
Smaller and shorter-necked than Whooper Swan, yellow on bill ending bluntly above nostrils.
Calls ‘hoo, hoo’ and a higher-pitched and more musical honk than Whooper.
Breeds in marshy and swampy tundra.
48, in. (122 cm.).
W Map 23
BAR-HEADED GOOSE Anser indicus.
A native of India, till recently bred ferally in Sweden; paler grey than other grey geese (p. 46) and easily told by two black bars on white crown.
Juvenile has unbarred dark brown crown and nape.
Bill yellow, legs orange.
Call a musical ‘aang, aang’ 30 in. (75 cm.).
SNOW GOOSE and BLUE GOOSE Anser caerulescens.
A ‘grey goose’(p. 46), a rare visitor from Arctic North America, in two colour forms: Snow Goose, all white with black wing-tips; and Blue Goose, with bluish grey-brown back and wings, white head, neck and tail coverts, and underparts of either colour or a mixture.
Bill red or pink, legs dull purplish-pink.
Black wing-tips always distinguish Snow Goose both from swans and from albino geese of other species; white head distinguishes Blue Goose from other grey geese.
Voice mellower and more bell-like than other grey geese, with which it usually consorts in Europe.
25–30 in. (63 76 cm.).
V  
GEESE: Anserinae. pp. 45–9.
Large thickset birds, with necks relatively longer than most ducks, and legs comparatively short.
Highly gregarious, and collectively noisy, they fly fast and direct, but often with rather laboured wing-beats and in V-formation.
Odd individuals often in flocks of other goose species.
Sexes alike.
GREY GEESE: Anser. pp. 45–7.
Plumage grey-brown, darker on underparts, with white under tail coverts.
A difficult group: concentrate on bill and leg colour, bill shape and calls.
In winter on estuaries, coastal marshes and farmland.
GREYLAG GOOSE Anser anser.
One of the larger grey geese, with heavy flight and gait, best distinguished by its pale grey forewing, orange bill and pink legs.
Flight-note, a clangorous ‘aahng-ung-ung’, and hissing note when annoyed both similar to farmyard goose, its domestic derivative.
Breeds in lowland moors and marshes.
Eastern race rubrirostris breeding in E Europe and Iraq, has pink bill.
3035 in. (76 89 cm.). rW Map 24
BEAN GOOSE Anser fabalis.
The other large grey goose, much darker, especially on head, neck and forewing than Greylag; bill rather longer, either all orange-yellow, or orange-yellow at the tip and blackish at the base: legs orange.
Less noisy than Pinkfoot, having a tenor version of its notes.
Breeds in marshy places and by fresh water on tundra and in taiga.
28–35 in. (71–89 cm.).
W Map 25
PINK-FOOTED GOOSE Anser brachyrhynchus.
Markedly smaller than Bean Goose, having similar dark head and neck, but forewing pale, and readily told by pink legs and short black-based pink bill.
Very vocal, with a rather shrill medley of ‘wink, wink’ and ‘ung, ung’notes.
Breeds on tundra, sometimes on cliff ledges.
24–30 in. (61–76 cm.).
W Map 26
LESSER WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE Anser erythropus.
The smallest grey goose, adult confusable only with White-fronted Goose, but white on forehead extends much further towards crown, bill much smaller, and has narrow yellow eye-ring, and shriller call.
Immature lacks white forehead and eye-ring.
Bill pink, legs orange.
Can be detected among White-fronts by quicker rate of feeding.
Breeds in drier parts of tundra, towards taiga.
21–26 in. (53–66 cm.).
A
WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE Anser albifrons.
Adult is easiest to identify of northern grey geese, with conspicuous broad white forehead (others occasionally have narrow white band above base of bill) and heavily barred underparts.
Bill pink (yellow or orange in Greenland race flavirostris) legs orange.
Juvenile uniform grey-brown, differing from same-sized Pink-foot in its paler head and neck, darker forewing, lack of black on bill, and orange legs.
Calls a babble of ‘kow-yow’ and ‘kow-lyow’sounds, like distant cries of beagle pack; higher-pitched than Greylag but less so than Pink-foot.
Breeds on marshy tundra.
26 30 in. (66 76 cm.).
W Map 27  
Black Geese or Brants: Branta.
A group of mostly rather small (except Canada) geese with crown and whole neck black (except Red-breasted): sexes alike.
The three native species are all winter visitors in the central and southern parts of the region.
BRENT GOOSE Branta bernicia.
The only goose with an all-black head, and smallest and darkest of the three wholly black-necked geese, no bigger than a drake Mallard (p. 53).
Also has neck and upper breast black, with a white patch on each side of the neck; back, rump and wings dark grey-brown, tail coverts white.
Underparts slate grey in dark-breasted race bernicia, breeding in Arctic Europe, but pale grey-brown to white in pale-breasted race hrota, breeding in Greenland and Spitzbergen.
Immatures distinguished by white speckles on forewing and lack of white neck patch.
Call a croaking ‘ruk, gruk, grunk’.
Breeds on Arctic sea shores and islands and on marshy tundra, wintering in estuaries and coastal mudflats, where highly gregarious. 22 — 24 in. (56 61 cm.).
W Map 28
BARNACLE GOOSE Branta leucopsis.
Distinguished from all other true geese by having its whole face white, with crown, nape and neck black; rest of plumage mainly grey more or less barred black and white.
C.f however, Canada Goose, much more likely to be seen inland.
Call, ‘ark’, resembles gruff yapping of a small terrier.
Arctic coasts and rocky terrain, often nesting on cliff ledges; in winter on coastal flats, marshes, and grassland.
Liable to escape from collections of ornamental waterfowl. 23 — 27 in. (58 — 69 cm.).
W Map 29
CANADA GOOSE Branta canadensis.
A well established introduced species from North America, and an occasional genuine transatlantic vagrant.
Much larger than the other black-necked geese, and distinguished from Barnacle especially by longer neck, generally brownish plumage and much smaller extent of white on face.
Any large black-necked goose inland on lakes almost certainly this species.
Call a loud double trumpeting note, ‘ker-honk’, noisy during mating period.
Ponds, lakes and adjacent marshes and grassland inland; in winter also on coastal flats and marshes.
36 40 in. (92 — 102 cm.).
R Map 30
RED-BREASTED GOOSE Branta ruficollis.
The smallest and most strikingly coloured of the true geese, with a very small bill, chestnut throat, breast and face patch, and rest of plumage black with white lines, including broad one on flanks conspicuous at a distance.
Immatures duller.
Calls high-pitched and rather musical, ‘kee-kwa’, ‘kik-wit’, ‘ti-che’ and similar disyllables.
Winters in steppes and prairies around Caspian Sea, and on W side of Black Sea; more rarely along rivers in Iraq and with flocks of other geese on the Hungarian plains.
A popular ornamental waterfowl, which may escape.
21 — 22 in. (53–56 cm.).
V 
DUCKS: Anatinae. pp. 51–69.
A subfamily with seven groups in our region: shelducks (below), perching ducks (below), dabbling ducks (pp. 53–7), and four groups of diving ducks which feed by diving, pochards (pp. 57–9), eiders (p. 61), sawbills and allies (pp. 63 7), and stifftails (p. 67).
Ducks are generally smaller and have shorter necks and legs than geese or swans.
Most have very distinct male and female plumages, juveniles resembling females.
In the eclipse (moult) plumage in late summer males (drakes) temporarily become very like females (ducks), often scarcely separable except by bill colour.
Both sexes have a coloured wing-patch (speculum).
SHELDUCK Tadorna tadorna.
A large, somewhat goose-like duck, with very dark green head, some black markings and chestnut breastband.
Legs flesh, bill red, drake usually having a knob in summer; sexes otherwise alike.
In eclipse all colours browner and whiter, and in juvenile even more so, with forehead, cheeks and whole underparts white and bill and legs greyish.
Drake has whistling flight note, ‘sostmieu’, not unlike sound of some ducks' wing-beats; duck has a laughing quack, ‘ak-ak-ak…
‘. In the W coastal dunes and heaths, estuaries, sandy, muddy and less often rocky seashores, rarely far inland; in the E by brackish or more rarely freshwater lakes and inland seas.
A burrow nester.
Huge flocks, including most of British breeding population, moult in late summer on coastal flats at mouth of R Elbe.
24 in. (61 cm.).
Rw Map 31
RUDDY SHELDUCK Tadorna ferruginea.
A large deep buff-brown rather goose-like duck, with head paler, tail and wing-tips black, and white wing-patch conspicuous in flight.
Drake has narrow black collar, duck's head whiter; bill and legs black.
A loud nasal clanging ‘aang, aang’, recalling Greylag.
Shores of inland lakes, lagoons, rivers and streams, in steppes, deserts and mountains.
Decreasing in the region.
25 in (64 cm.).
V
EGYPTIAN GOOSE Alopochen aegyptiacus.
Another goose-like duck, varyingly grey and buff-brown, slightly larger, longer-necked and longer-legged than Ruddy Shelduck, and so looking more upstanding; also has white shoulders instead of winy-patches and dark chocolate patches round eye and on lower breast, as well as pink bill and feet.
Sexes alike; juvenile lacks face patch.
A guttural quack, ‘kek, kek’ and a softer, more whistling call.
Marshes and freshwater margins; often perches in trees.
Introduced in W Europe.
27 in. (70 cm.).
R
MANDARIN DUCK Aix galericulata.
Crested drake has strikingly variegated plumage, with conspicuous orange-chestnut wing-fans and side-whiskers.
Duck mainly grey-brown, with slight crest, blue hindwing and wing-tips, narrow white ring round eye, black bill and dull yellow legs.
Eclipse and immature drakes can be told from duck by bill.
Flight notes of drake a sharp little whistle ‘wrrick’, of duck a plaintive little ‘ack’.
By fresh water in woods and forests.
Native of China, introduced in Europe.
17 in. (43 cm.).
R  
Dabbling Ducks: Anas. pp. 53–7.
Dabbling ducks characteristically feed on the surface of the water or by upending, and rarely dive except when young or unable to fly.
Females brown; speculum an important field mark.
Flight swift, direct.
MALLARD Anas platyrhynchos.
The largest dabbling duck, the commonest and most widespread duck of the region, and the origin of the farmyard duck.
Drake's combination of green head (shot with purple towards the moult), narrow white collar, grey back and underparts and dark purple-brown breast is matched by no other waterfowl.
Brown duck has distinctive large blue speculum.
Eclipse drake distinguished by yellow bill; duck's is greenish, juvenile's reddish.
Familiar loud harsh quack, resembling farmyard duck, uttered by duck only; drake has a softer ‘queek’.
Breeds not far from all kinds of still and slow-moving water and marshes, in winter also estuaries and seashores. 23 in. (58 cm.).
Rw Map 32
GADWALL Anas strepera.
Drake is the least brightly plumaged dabbling duck, mainly grey, with contrasting black tail coverts, especially noticeable at rest.
In flight shows white belly and black, white and chestnut patches on wing.
Duck resembles small duck Mallard, with more peaked forehead, but showing white belly and black and white speculum on wing in flight.
Bill of drake grey, of duck dark horn with orange sides, of juvenile yellow.
Drake has deep nasal croak ‘nhek’; duck's quack is softer than duck Mallard's.
Lowland fresh and inland brackish waters, and marshes.
20 in. (51 cm.).
RsW Map 33
WIGEON Anas penelope.
Drake at rest distinctive with shortish bill, chestnut head, buff crown, grey underparts and white line on wing; in flight can be picked out at some distance by conspicuous white forewing.
Duck smaller and slenderer than duck Mallard, with shorter bill, more peaked forehead, pointed tail, white belly, and green speculum; cf. duck Pintail (p. 57).
Characteristic ‘whee-oo’ call reveals presence of drake even in fog or at a distance; duck has purring note.
Often flies fast in small flocks.
Breeds by fresh water on moors and tundra, rarely in coastal marshes, in winter on lakes, reservoirs, estuaries and shallow coastal waters, flocks often grazing on fields.
18 in. (46 cm.). rmW Map 34
AMERICAN WIGEON Anas americana.
A rare transatlantic visitor; mainly pinkish-brown drake has quite different green, white and buff head pattern from Wigeon, but shares white forewing, black under tail coverts and distinctive whistling call.
Duck almost indistinguishable from duck Wigeon unless greyer head and neck and white axillaries can be seen.
Chiloe Wigeon Anas sibilatrix, sometimes escaping from waterfowl collections, has white face, green back of head and warm brown flanks.
18–22 in. (4656 cm.)
A  
TEAL Anas crecca.
The smallest duck of the region, very gregarious and often flies, fast and wader-like, in compact flock.
Drake has chestnut head with distinctive broad-bordered green stripe, and at rest can be picked out at a distance by horizontal white line above wing and buffish yellow patch behind tail coverts.
Drake of rare transatlantic vagrant subspecies, Green-winged Teal carolinensis, has vertical white line at side of breast and cream border to green stripe much less conspicuous.
Duck of both races like diminutive duck Mallard, with black and green speculum and whitish belly.
Bill and legs grey; juvenile's bill pinkish.
Call-note of drake a whistling ‘crrick, crrick’, of duck a short, high-pitched quack; courting parties in spring utter a chorus of bell-like notes.
Breeds on still and slow-moving fresh water with dense fringe of vegetation, also marshes, fens, bogs.
In winter on lakes, reservoirs, estuaries and coastal water.
14 in. (35 cm.).
RmW Map 35
FALCATED TEAL Anas falcata.
Rare vagrant from E Asia or escape.
Drake easily recognised by long crest and elongated wing feathers.
Bill black to dark grey; speculum black and green.
20 in. (51 cm.).
GARGANEY Anas querquedula.
The second smallest duck of the region, slenderer than Teal and rarely occurring in such large flocks.
Drake can be told from all other waterfowl by conspicuous white stripe over eye and from all except Shoveler and Blue-winged Teal by blue-grey forewing.
Duck paler and more blotched than duck Teal and has white throat, more distinctive eyestripe, no black in speculum, and pale spot at base of longer and wider bill; in flight blue-grey forewing is distinctive.
Bill of drake blackish, of duck greyish.
In spring drake has a curious crackling note, like a single match being rattled in a match box; duck has a low quack.
Habitat as Teal, but not in mountains.
15 in. (38 cm.).
Sm Map 36
BLUE-WINGED TEAL Anas discors.
A rare transatlantic vagrant, with forewing bluer grey than wing, easily told by conspicuous white crescentic mark in front of eye.
Duck very like duck Garganey, but has bluer forewing, blackish bill and yellow legs.
Drake has a whistling ‘peep’ and a soft lisping ‘tseef, tseef, tseef’, duck a soft teal-like quack.
15 in. (38 cm.).
V
BAIKAL TEAL Anas formosa.
A rare visitor from Siberia, or escape; drake with unique green, cream and black head pattern, slightly recalling Harlequin Duck (p. 63), together with elongated fan of wing-feathers and vertical white mark.
Duck resembles large duck Teal, with conspicuous pale spot at base of bill, dark line back through eye, surmounted by a broken pale spot.
Drake often repeats a curious clucking ‘proop’ or ‘wot-wot’, duck has harsh quack.
16 in. (41 cm.).
PINTAIL Anas acuta.
The second commonest northern duck of the region.
Drake easily told by greatly elongated central tail feathers, 4 in. of total length, combined with striking pattern of dark head and throat and white breast and stripe up side of neck.
Duck resembles duck Wigeon (p. 53), but has more pointed tail, slenderer neck, narrower wings, indistinct bronzy speculum and brown belly.
Only other white-breasted duck is short-necked heavy-billed Shoveler drake, and only the white-headed maritime drake Long-tailed Duck also has a long tail.
Drake has a low moorhen-like weak nasal ‘gseee’ and in courtship a rather musical croak, and duck a rather hoarse quack.
A fast flyer.
Freshwater and brackish pools and marshes, on moors and tundra and in taiga; in winter also estuaries and coastal marshes and waters.
Drake 26 in. (66 cm.), duck 22 in. (56 cm.). rmW Map 37
SHOVELER Anas clypeata.
Both sexes recognisable by heavy shovel-shaped bill producing characteristic head-down attitude when at rest or swimming on water.
Drake has striking plumage of dark green (often looking black) head, white breast, chestnut flanks and pale blue forewing and is only dabbling duck with a yellow eye.
Duck is like heavy-billed duck Mallard (p.53), but has green speculum and in flight at once separated by blue forewing.
Drake's call a gruff ‘took, took’, duck's a double quack.
Inland and coastal fresh and brackish waters and marshes in lowlands, especially with plenty of vegetation and shallow muddy water.
In winter on deeper waters, sometimes also on coastal waters.
20 in. (51 cm.). rsmW Map 38
MARBLED TEAL Anas angustirostris.
The only dabbling duck of the region with sexes alike and no obvious speculum; like a rather large longer-necked greyish duck Teal (p. 55), with a dark mark through the eye and contrasting pale lower face; head shaggy rather than crested; tail white Drake has a weak nasal squeak, duck a double whistle.
Breeds on well vegetated fresh or brackish water or marshes; in winter on more open waters, even temporary pools in desert.
16 in. (41 cm.).
RED-CRESTED POCHARD Netta rufina.
Drake is only red-billed or red-legged diving duck (see p. 58) of the region, further distinguished from smaller drake Pochard by crest and long broad white wing-bar showing in flight.
Duck is only uniformly brownish duck with a pale (as distinct from white) cheek, except for maritime Common Scoter (p. 63), which has no white wing-bar Feeds by up-ending as well as diving.
Drake has a hard wheezing note, duck a harsh ‘kurrr’.
Fresh or brackish lakes and lagoons, usually reed-fringed, also marshes.
Often escapes from waterfowl collections.
22 in. (56 cm.).
A  
Pochards Aythya.
Pochards are the diving ducks par excellence, diving frequently and swimming submerged.
Usually shorter-necked and compacter than dabblers, drakes with soberer plumage.
Drakes have a low often wheezy whistle, and ducks a harsh growling ‘kurrr, kurrr’
TUFTED DUCK Aythya fuligula.
Drake is only waterfowl with a drooping black crest, and is readily recognised, even at some distance, by strongly contrasted black upperparts and white flanks.
Short-crested duck mainly brown, with yellow eye, and sometimes white band at base of bill (cf.
Scaup) or whitish under-tail coverts (cf.
Ferruginous Duck).
Both sexes show a white wing-bar in flight; bill blue-grey.
Still and slow-moving fresh water with vegetated margins; in winter also on reservoirs and other bare-banked waters; rarely on salt water.
17 in. (43 cm.).
Rw Map 39
RING-NECKED DUCK Aythya collaris.
A rare vagrant from N America, distinguished from Tufted Duck by more peaked head, due to short crest, and two white rings on bill.
Drake also has conspicuous white mark at side of breast; duck has white eye-ring, and obscure whitish patch on face at base of bill.
17 in. (43 cm.).
A
SCAUP Aythya marila.
In many ways a larger version of Tufted Duck, but drake at once distinguished by grey back, and duck by large white patch at base of bill, much more extensive than occasional white band of duck Tufted.
Black head and neck separate drake from similarly patterned drake Pochard.
Occasional hybrids of Tufted Duck and Pochard can be distinguished from Scaups by black tip to bill, darker eye and less contrasting wing-bar.
Freshwater lakes in tundra and taiga; in winter mainly on estuaries and coastal waters.
19 in. (48 cm.). mW(b) Map 40
POCHARD Aythya ferina.
Drake is the only waterfowl of region with whole head and neck chestnut and upperparts grey, lacking drake Wigeon's buff crown and white forewing;(shows no white wing-bar in flight).
Duck brown in front, grey-brown behind.
Both lack a white wing-bar; bill blue-grey with black at tip and base.
Habitat similar to Tufted Duck, but also breeds on brackish lakes.
18 in. (46 cm.). rmW Map 41
FERRUGINOUS DUCK Aythya nyroca.
Like a warm chestnut brown female Tufted Duck or Pochard but at any distance best distinguished from both by sharp contrast of white under tail coverts.
(Tufted Duck may show this but much less contrasted.)
Drake also has white eye.
Female duller, never with white at base of bill.
In flight conspicuous curved white wing-bar separates both from Pochard.
Bill blackish.
Fresh or brackish still or slow-moving water, well fringed with vegetation, also extensive reedswamps. 16 in. (41 cm.).
A  
Eiders: Somateria.
Large heavily built marine ducks, expert divers, rarely seen inland.
Drakes strikingly patterned, ducks mottled brown and the only waterfowl with barred breast; both lacking a speculum.
Bill continuing in almost straight line from forehead (except drake King Eider).
and feathering of forehead descending to a point well down the upper mandible.
Ducks show faint line on wing in flight and have harsh pochard-like ‘kurrr’.
EIDER Somateria mollissima.
Adult drake unmistakable, being only waterfowl white above and black below; also has crown and tail black, back of head pale green and breast pale pink.
In flight forewing almost all white with black tip and trailing edge.
Immature and eclipse drakes can be very confusing, with widely varying mixtures of black and white, but head usually dark and underparts black.
Duck distinguished from, e.g. duck Mallard (p. 53), by heavy build, distinctive bill outline, and barred breast.
Large black and white waterfowl paired with brown one at sea almost certainly eiders.
Drake has low crooning or cooing courtship note, ‘ah-oo:or ‘coo-roo-uh’, with accent on second syllable.
Rocky and sandy sea coasts, rarely on freshwater lakes a few miles inland.
23 in. (58 cm.).
Rw Map 42
KING EIDER Somateria spectabilis.
Drake very distinctive, being the only waterfowl to appear white in front and black behind when seen at a distance.
Quite different from drake Eider, having differently shaped head, markedly peaked orange forehead, red bill, pale grey head and black back.
In flight shows large white patch at base of dark wing.
Immature and eclipse drakes have confusing mixtures of dark and white plumage, but generally have black head.
Duck rather more rufous than duck eider, but otherwise very hard to distinguish except by larger proportion of bill covered with feathers, especially at sides; bare pan not extending right back past eye, as with Eider.
Drake's coo trisyllabic with accent on last syllable.
Arctic coastlines, and fresh water in tundra.
22 in. (56 cm.)
V
SPECTACLED EIDER Somateria fischeri.
Rare winter visitor to coasts of N Russia and Arctic Norway.
Both sexes distinguished from Eider by large white (drake) or pale (duck) spectacle round eye, and feathers coming much lower down bill; drake also by otherwise green head and black lower breast.
Flight pattern more like Eider than King Eider.
21–22 in. (53–56 cm.).
STELLER'S EIDER Polysticta stelleri.
Drake is only waterfowl with white head, black and white upperparts and rufous underparts: also has green patches on forehead and nape.
Dark brown duck best distinguished by white wing-bar and at close range by purple speculum.
Both have quite differently shaped head from other eiders.
Drake has low croon, duck a harsh wigeon-like quack: both make whistling sound in flight like Goldeneye.
Regular visitor off N coast Norway, frequenting only clear water and often coming close inshore.
18 in. (46 cm.)
V  
HARLEQUIN DUCK Histrionicus histrionicus.
An Iceland speciality, very rare elsewhere in Europe.
Drake has unique pattern of blue, white, chestnut and black, though looks just dark at any distance, when short bill and white on head may be best clues.
Duck plain brown with three pale spots on face, one behind and two in front of eye, readily distinguished from scoters by small size and short bill, and from immature Long-tailed Duck (p. 65) by much less white on belly.
No wing-bar a useful pointer in flight.
Buoyant on water, often with tail cocked up: fond of surf and rough water.
Mainly silent, but drake has low descending whistle, ending in a trill: and duck a harsh croak.
Breeds on fast streams, often near waterfalls, wintering at sea off rocky coasts.
17 in. (43 cm.)
V
Scoters: Melanitta.
Large diving sea ducks, often breeding on fresh water but normally resorting to salt water at other times.
Plumage of drakes predominantly black, of ducks mainly brown; tail short, pointed.
Drakes have black bill, marked orange or yellow, with knob at base.
Drakes silent, except for low cooing or whistling notes in courtship; ducks have a harsh growling cackle.
COMMON SCOTER Melanitta nigra.
Drake is the only all-black waterfowl apart from orange mark on upper mandible.
Pale lower half of face distinguishes duck from all except ducks of Red-crested Pochard (p. 57), which has white wing-bar, and Long-tailed Duck (p. 65), which has shorter bill, sometimes with a narrow orange stripe, and much whiter underparts.
Feet black.
Drake often sits on water with tail cocked up.
Breeds by still or slow-moving fresh water in tundra, moorland and taiga; winters often in large flocks mainly in coastal waters, many non-breeding birds staying well S of breeding range all summer.
19 in. (48 cm.). rMW Map 43
VELVET SCOTER Melanitta fusca.
Both sexes distinguished from smaller Common Scoter by white wing-bar, especially noticeable in flight, and red feet.
Drake also has small white patch behind eye and orange-yellow sides to instead of patch on bill.
Duck and juvenile have a pale patch on either side of eye on otherwise dark face.
Freshwater lakes in the taiga, less often on tundra than Common Scoter; in winter mainly in coastal waters, in small parties or with Common Scoters or Eiders.
22 in. (56 cm.). mW Map 44
SURF SCOTER Melanitta perspicillata.
A vagrant from North America to coastal waters of N W Europe, differing from both other scoters in large eider-like bill, strikingly patterned in drake, greenish in duck.
Drake also has distinctive white patches on forehead and nape, and duck and immature have pale patch on nape as well as before and behind eye, like Velvet Scoter.
Duck sometimes has these patches obscure, when uniform face is best distinction from other two scoters.
No wing-bar; legs dull orange.
22 in (56 cm.).
V  
GOLDENEYE Bucephala clangula.
A diving duck most easily recognised by strikingly peaked, almost triangular shape of head: also has distinctive white neck, broad white wing-bars and yellow eye.
Drake has black head, glossed green, with prominent white spot between bill and eye; duck and immature have less peaked head, chocolate-brown with no spot.
Usually silent, except in spring, when drake has insistent ‘speer, speer’ and harsh ‘quee-reek’, and duck a typical guttural diving-duck ‘kurr’.
Rises more steeply from water than most diving ducks, wings making a loud singing note in flight.
Breeds by fresh water in forests, usually coniferous, nesting in old woodpecker and other tree-holes; in winter on both fresh and coastal waters.
18 in. (46 cm.). mW(b) Map 45
BARROW'S GOLDENEYE Bucephala islandica.
Very rarely seen away from Iceland.
Differs from slightly smaller Goldeneye in its more rounded, almost bulbous head, and crescentic, instead of round, white mark on drake's purple (not green) glossed head.
Drake also has large white spots on closed wing instead of barred appearance of drake Goldeneye, and so appears blacker.
Calls and flight-noise similar to Goldeneye.
Breeds on freshwater lakes, nesting on cavities in cliffs, rocks, walls and ruined buildings; in winter also on inshore waters.
21 in. (53 cm.).
BUFFLEHEAD Bucephala albeola.
Rare transatlantic vagrant, drake most easily told by conspicuous white patch at back of head; darker duck has much smaller white patch behind eye.
Both sexes show white wing patches in flight, looking rather like small Goldeneye.
Short bill distinguishes from equally rare Hooded Merganser (p. 67).
Drake has a rolling guttural note and a weak squeak; duck a hoarse ‘quack’ and a repeated ‘, quk, guk’14 in. (35 cm.).
V
LONG-TAILED DUCK Clangula hyemalis.
A diving sea duck, rather neat and small, apart from drake's striking 5-in. tail, distinctive for its unusually short bill and lack of any pale wing-bar.
Summer drake has front half dark, except for large white face-patch, flanks and rest of underparts white, bill pink at tip; in winter most of head and neck turn white, leaving only a black patch on cheek.
Pintail drake (p. 57) the only other long-tailed waterfowl, has quite different head pattern and habits at all times.
Duck has dark patch on cheek, bill all grey.
Noisy drake has loud musical call, ‘ardelow-ar-ardelow’ or ‘ow, ow, owal-ow: duck has a soft quack.
Has a characteristic swinging flight, not raising down-curved wings much above level of body.
Breeds by either fresh or salt water on tundra and Arctic coasts, also inland in Scandinavia on mountains; in winter on coastal waters, scarce inland.
Drake 21 in. (53 cm.), duck 16 in. (41 cm.).
W(b) Map 46  
Sawbills: Mergus.
Diving ducks, with distinctive narrow saw-edged bills, well adapted to chasing fish under water.
Head crested.
Take-off heavy, like Pochard (p. 59), but flight fast and direct, with whistling sound from wings (except Smew).
In flight have characteristic cigar-shape, due to holding head and neck straight out level with body; white wing patch distinguishes from divers, and level neck from grebes.
Ducks and immatures, known as ‘red-heads: have chestnut head and nape, with white chin.
Generally silent, except in display.
Call of duck a harsh ‘karr’.
GOOSANDER Mergus merganser.
Drakes of two larger sawbills both have dark green head and upper neck and long red bill.
Drake Goosander has obscure crest, and white breast and flanks, sometimes tinged pink; smaller Merganser has conspicuous crest, pale chestnut breast and grey flanks.
Ducks and immatures harder to tell apart, but duck Merganser is smaller, has crest higher up on nape, upper pans browner and white of chin less sharply defined.
Lakes and fast streams or rivers; nesting in tree-holes; rarely on estuaries or rocky coasts; in winter mainly on fresh water inland.
23–26 in. (58–66 cm.). rW Map 47
RED-BREASTED MERGANSER Mergus serrator.
Appreciably smaller than Goosander; see above.
More frequent on coasts in breeding season, nesting on ground; in winter regular on estuaries and sea and uncommon on fresh water.
2123 in. (53–58 cm.).
RW MAP 48
SMEW Mergus albellus.
Drake the whitest waterfowl of the region, relieved at rest by only a few black markings, but in flight looks more pied.
Red-heads dive constantly like grebes, but have conspicuously whiter cheeks, and are also much whiter than other small diving ducks.
Smaller lakes and ponds and slow-moving streams and rivers in coniferous forest; in winter on fresh water and estuaries.
16 in. (41 cm.).
W Map 49
HOODED MERGANSER Mergus cucullatus.
A rare transatlantic vagrant, drake differing especially from drake Bufflehead (p. 65) in its thin bill.
Duck like duck Smew but with whole head rufous. 18 in. (46 cm.).
V
Stiff-tails: Oxyura.
Dumpy little short-necked diving ducks, with grebe-like habits including sometimes sinking below water except for head, often swimming with tail cocked up.
Generally silent, but drakes cluck and squeak during courtship.
WHITE-HEADED DUCK Oxyura leucocephala.
Drake has white face and forehead, and in summer blue bill; duck's pale face is crossed by white line; both have base of bill swollen.
Shallow, often reed-fringed, fresh and brackish pools.
18 in. (46 cm.).
RUDDY DUCK Oxyura jamaicensis.
A North American bird recently established in English West Midlands; smaller than White-headed Duck, with much less white on head of more uniformly chestnut drake.
Duck hardly distinguishable except by unswollen base of bill.
Fresh water reservoirs and small lakes.
16 in. (41 cm.).
R  
EAGLES, HAWKS AND ALLIES: Accipitridae. pp. 71–95.
The diurnal birds of prey are a large, distinctive group of medium to large long-winged birds, adapted to flesh-eating by their hooked bills and powerful talons; their nostrils in a cere at the base of the bill.
Females usually larger than males.
Immature plumages can be very confusing.
Flight powerful, often soaring.
Nest in tree or on ledge or ground.
The following families occur in the region.
Pandionidae (osprey); Accipitridae, comprising the kites, eagles, buzzards, hawks, Old World vultures and harriers; and Falconidae (falcons).
‘Hawk’ is often used as a general term for smaller birds of prey, as well as more strictly for the genus Accipiter.
See p. 90 for distinctions of Accipitridae from falcons.
OSPREY Pandion haliaetus.
Large size, long angled wings, white head and underparts, and habit of fishing by diving from air makes this one of the most distinctive birds of prey; much larger White-tailed Eagle and smaller Marsh Harrier (p. 87), both pale-headed birds seen over water, have dark underparts.
Sexes alike.
Call a shrill cheeping, suggesting a young game bird.
Flight rather slow and flapping, recalling larger gulls, when hunting over water; also soars and hovers.
Fond of perching on dead tree or post in water.
Breeds in wooded or moorland country with lakes or rivers; in winter frequents large expanses of fresh, brackish and salt water.
20–23 in. (51–58 cm.). sM Map 50
WHITE-TAILED EAGLE or SEA EAGLE Haliaeetus albicilla.
Massive build and wide span of very broad wings distinguished from all other large brown birds of N W Europe except Golden Eagle (p. 79), from which best told at all ages by wedge-shaped, not square, tail and at close range by legs being only half-feathered.
Adult White-tailed also differs from immature Golden in lacking black bar at tip of white tail, while immature White-tailed resembles adult Golden in having brown tail, though with base mottled white.
Head of adult often pale, sometimes almost white; bill yellow.
Sexes alike; tail of immature rather longer.
Has various barking calls, the female's deeper.
Ponderous, heron-like or vulturine flapping flight, low over water or reed-beds when hunting; also soars and dives from air.
Rocky coasts, large lakes and rivers in forested and other wild country.
27–36 in. (69–91 cm.).
V(b)
PALLAS'S SEA EAGLE Haliaeetus leucoryphus.
Smaller than White-tailed Eagle, with smaller dark, not yellow, bill, head always pale, and tail with dark tip like immature Golden Eagle.
White on tail very conspicuous in flight.
Immatures hard to distinguish, though Pallas's does not have base of tail mottled white.
Various barking, neighing and gull-like calls, but rather silent in winter quarters.
Inland lakes, swamps and rivers, wintering also on coasts of inland seas, scarcely overlapping White-tailed Eagle.
30–33 in. (76–84 cm.).
Kites: Milvus.
Large buzzard-like birds of prey with long angular wings, tail forked and sexes alike.
Nest in trees.
Partly carrion feeders and in S Europe frequent motor roads to feed on animals killed by traffic.
RED KITE Milvus milvus.
The only large predator of the region with a deeply forked tail, except for the Black Kite.
Plumage more rufous and head usually paler than most buzzards, also has pale patch on underwing, which Buzzard may have too, but Black Kite does not.
Call a shrill buzzard-like mew.
Soars, often with angled wings, but normal flight more buoyant and harrier-like than Black Kite's or Buzzard's.
Woodland, mainly deciduous, and areas with scattered trees.
24 in. (61 cm.).
R Map 51
BLACK KITE Milvus migrans.
Tail slightly forked, but fork not always easy to see in flight.
Otherwise like a dark Buzzard,(p. 77) but soars less and flaps more with wings held slightly crooked.
May also be confused with dark Marsh Harrier (p. 87), but glides with wings level, not canted upwards, and frequently twists tail from side to side.
Noisy, with a high-pitched squealing cry.
Often gregarious and habitually hunts over water.
All types of country except dense woodland, but especially near water; often in towns and villages.
Probably the most numerous bird of prey of its size in the world.
22 in. (56 cm.)
V
BLACK-SHOULDERED KITE Elanus caeruleus.
A smallish grey and white bird of prey, easily recognised by its black shoulders and frequent hovering; tail square, eye red.
Immatures are browner.
Rather silent, but has various weak whistles.
Often perches on poles and wires, and may fly at dusk.
Open country with scattered trees and woods, often near water; open arid steppes.
13 in. (33 cm.).
SHORT-TOED EAGLE Circaetus Dallicus.
A rather small greyish eagle or very large buzzard, distinguished from all same-sized birds of prey except Osprey (p. 71) by almost completely white underparts, dark only on throat, upper breast and wing-tips, with some dark bars on wings and tail.
Head rather rounded, sometimes appearing almost owl-like.
Calls mewing, buzzard-like, ‘hu-opp’ or ‘piee-ou’Soars and often hovers.
Open country with scattered woods and trees, in both hills and plains.
In S Europe feeds predominantly on snakes, whence sometimes called Snake Eagle.
Nest usually on top of low tree.
25 27 in. (63 69 cm.).
Hawks: Accipiter.
The largest genus of birds of prey in the world includes hawks in the strict sense, recognised by their combination of rather short broad rounded wings and long tail.
Female much larger than male.
Nest in trees.
Specialists in catching smaller birds in woodland and scrub.
SPARROWHAWK Accipiter nisus.
Differs from smaller falcons (p. 95) in its shortish broad blunt wings, although grey male's are appreciably more pointed than brown female's and may approach shape of female Kestrel or Merlin, especially when these are soaring with outspread wings.
Barred underparts also distinctive, rufous in male, grey-brown in female.
Chief call a chatter, based on ‘kek’, ‘kew’, ‘kyow’ or ‘kiv’.
Characteristic flight patterns include: quick dash along a hedgerow, up and over to pounce on prey; fast low flight through wood or across open ground; soaring, often in a circular glide with intermittent spasms of three or four wing-flaps; also a gannet-like downward plummet with closed wings.
Wooded country, sometimes penetrating villages and town suburbs.
Presence in a wooded area sometimes revealed by plucking posts, with feathers and bones beneath a stump or other perch or even on ground.
11–15 in. (28 38 cm.).
Rmw Map 52
SHIKRA Accipiter badius.
Smaller than Levant Sparrowhawk, with pale cheeks, pale tail and brown on neck.
Dark throat stripe like immature Levant.
Female more like male; underparts variable.
S Caspian region only.
12 14 in. (31–36 cm.).
LEVANT SPARROWHAWK Accipiter brevipes.
Male larger than male Sparrowhawk, with grey not rufous cheeks and paler grey upperparts contrasting more with black wing-tips.
Female greyer than female Sparrowhawk.
Both have pale underwing, contrasting strongly with black wing-tips, central tail feathers unbarred, and red-brown not yellow eye.
Immatures especially may appear strikingly white beneath.
Call a distinctive high-pitched ‘kewick-kewick’.
Flies low over ground or along forest edges.
Forests, wooded valleys.
13–15 in. (33–38 cm,).
GOSHAWK Accipiter gentilis.
An outsize Sparrowhawk readily told from all other buzzard-sized birds of prey by having shorter wings and longer tail than buzzards and eagles, shorter wings and tail than harriers and kites, and broader and blunter wings and longer tail than Peregrine (p. 93).
White eyestripe and under tail coverts.
In the N, especially N Russia, can be very pale, almost white.
Calls a shrill ‘ca-ca-ca-ca’ or ‘qek-qek-qek-qek’and, from female a screaming ‘hi-aa, hi-aa’.
Has fast low hunting flight, and soars with frequent flaps.
Forests, both coniferous and broad-leaved.
19–24 in. (48–61 cm.).
Rm
DARK CHANTING GOSHAWK Melierax metabates.
Grey, with white-tipped dark tail and barred rump and underparts, and reddish-orange legs and base of bill.
Immature mainly brown.
Wings broad and rounded like a Goshawk, but flight more harrier-like, quartering the ground; more often seen perched on a tree or post, often in a distinctive horizontal position.
Call a series of fluty piping notes, also a shrill whistle.
Open dry bush country, 15–19 in (38–8 cm.).
Buzzards: Buteo.
Large, short-necked, broad-winged, rather short-tailed birds, much smaller than same-shaped but longer-necked Aquila eagles (pp. 79–81) and overlapping with the smaller eagles and the mostly smaller long-winged long tailed harriers (p 87).
Plumage mainly brown, very variable, of limited identification value except for underwing and tail bars.
Flight soaring, on raised, sometimes crooked wings; occasionally hovering.
Call based on a mewing ‘Deeioo’.
BUZZARD Buteo buteo.
Plumage exceptionally variable from pale to dark; tail barred, often faintly, with obscure dark band at tip; underwing often with large pale patch.
Eastern race vulpinus often rufous on head and especially on often unbarred tail.
Call fairly high-pitched, almost gull-like.
Forests and areas with scattered woods; in winter in more open country.
20–22 in. (51–56 cm.).
Rmw Map 53
ROUGH-LEGGED BUZZARD Buteo lagopus.
Differs from Buzzard in its unbarred tail (white with a dark band near tip), conspicuous black patch at angle of very pale underwing, and usually also by paler head and neck and broad brown breast-band.
Feathered legs separate it from all other same-sized birds of prey, except smaller eagles.
Call louder and less shrill than Buzzard.
Hovers more than other buzzards.
Open country, tundra, moors, dunes, marshes.
20–24 in. (51–61 cm.).
W
LONG-LEGGED BUZZARD Buteo rufinus.
Often very like Buzzard, but larger, rump pale, belly dark and tail always unbarred; may have distinctive white patch on underwing.
Rufous phase similar to rufous eastern race of Buzzard vulpinus.
Immature with barred tail indistinguishable from immature Buzzard.
Has a short sharp buzzard-like mew.
Plains, semi-deserts, mountains and other treeless country.
20–26 in. (51–66 cm.).
HONEY BUZZARD Pernis apivorus.
Much the most buzzard-like of the kite group.
Best distinction from Buzzard is double broad dark bar near base of tail, which Buzzard lacks, as well as bar at tip.
which Buzzard shares.
Is also slightly slenderer, with longer, narrower wings and tail and longer neck, accentuating smaller, more ‘pigeon-like’ head.
Normal flight calls, ‘puihu’(male) and ‘piah’(female), shriller than and quite distinct from Buzzard's; various other calls at or near nest.
Often soars on flat wings, sometimes hovers; characteristically droops wings when glides.
Spends more time on ground than Buzzard, and has distinctive habit of robbing bees' and wasps' nests.
Forested country, mainly deciduous.
20–23 in. (51–58 cm.).
Sm Map 54  
BONELLI'S EAGLE Hieraeetus fasciatus.
Intermediate in size between Buzzard (p. 77) and Golden Eagle, and best distinguished from all same-sized birds of prey of the region by contrast between whitish leading edge and dark centre and trailing edge of pointed wing, with conspicuous grey patch at angle.
Underparts faintly spotted, but appear white at any distance; legs feathered.
Wings longer and narrower than Buzzard; tail longer, with similar dark band at tip.
Immature browner with pale chestnut underparts, but cf Booted Eagle.
Call a rather musical ‘klee-klee-klee-klee’.
Wooded, often rocky, mountains, in winter in more open country.
26–29 in. (66–74 cm.).
BOOTED EAGLE Hieraeetus pennatus.
Buzzard-sized, with two plumage phases, the commoner mainly rufous, with white underparts, which contrast strikingly with dark tips and trailing edge of wing from below; tail square, rufous, unbarred, legs feathered.
Dark phase rich dark brown with pale tail.
Immature more rufous than adult especially below, paler than immature Bonelli's Eagle.
Flight more buoyant than Buzzard (p. 77).
Call a shrill ‘ki-keee’.
Forests, mainly in hill country; in more open country in winter.
18–21 in. (46–53 cm.).
Eagles: Aquila. pp. 79–81.
Very large birds of prey, with long broad wings, broad tail, legs feathered, and plumage usually some shade of dark brown, the adults darker than the young.
Habitually soar.
Nest on ledge or in tree, usually inaccessible.
GOLDEN EAGLE Aquila chrysaetos.
Adult tawny brown, sometimes with pale head; immature distinguished by white base of tail and white patch on spread wing.
Differs from White-tailed Eagle (p. 71) in square, not wedge-shaped tail and fully feathered legs; adult has dark tail like immature White-tailed, but immature has much less white on tail than adult White-tailed.
For distinctions from other Aquila eagles, see below and next page.
Rather silent, but has a buzzard-like ‘twee-o’ and a barking call.
Has a majestic soaring and gliding flight, with wing-tips splayed out and upturned, often remaining on the wing for hours at a time.
Mainly mountainous country, often treeless.
Probably the most numerous eagle of its size in the world.
30–35 in. (75 88 cm.).
R Map 55
IMPERIAL EAGLE Aquila heliaca.
Distinguished from other large eagles by white shoulders, especially conspicuous in rare Spanish race adalberti, pale patches on nape and tail, becoming paler with age.
Immature has distinctive streaky underparts.
Rather silent, but has a barking ‘owk-owk-owk’.
Less often seen on wing than Golden Eagle.
Lowland forests, wooded foothills, plains, steppes and marshes with scattered trees.
31–33 in. (78–84cm.).
SPOTTED EAGLE Aquila clanga.
A medium-sized to large eagle, easily confused with slightly smaller Lesser Spotted Eagle and dark phase of same-sized Tawny Eagle.
Adult has less conspicuous whitish patch at base of tail than most Lesser Spotteds (Tawny has none).
Immatures of both have distinct whitish V at base of tail, but Spotted has much larger and more conspicuous pale spots on upperparts than Lesser Spotted, which in turn has a distinctive buff patch on nape.
Both species are slimmer, broader-winged and squarer-tailed than Tawny Eagle; tail base of Spotted broader than Lesser Spotted.
A barking ‘kyak, kyak, kyak’, like yapping of small dog, less shrill and more resounding than similar call of Lesser Spotted.
In flight Spotted Eagle usually holds leading edge of wing straight, but Lesser Spotted flies with wings held slightly forward and so looking more crooked; both species slightly droop wing-tips when gliding.
Lowland forests, more often near lakes, rivers or marshes than Lesser Spotted; both species in open country only on migration.
26–29 in. (66–74 cm.).
V
LESSER SPOTTED EAGLE Aquila pomarina.
A buzzard-sized eagle, marginally smaller than Spotted Eagle, for distinctions from which, see above, and from usually larger Tawny Eagle, see below.
Habitat similar to Spotted Eagle, but more often seen away from water.
24–26 in. (61–66 cm.).
TAWNY EAGLE and STEPPE EAGLE Aquila rapax.
A medium-sized eagle exceptionally variable in colour from very dark brown, almost black, to pale brown, nearly white.
N African race belisarius is never rufous; darker E European race orientalis is known as Steppe Eagle.
Dark adults best distinguished from Spotted and Lesser Spotted Eagles by broader, more rounded wings, no white above rounded tail, and often a rufous-buff patch on nape; also at close range by oval not rounded nostrils Immature usually paler than adult, and, especially in Steppe Eagle, may show striking contrast of pale, almost creamy brown upperparts with dark blackish-brown wing-tips and tail, sometimes with white rump patch; shows two pale wing-bars in flight.
Call a crow-like barking ‘kow-kow-kow’.
More often seen perched or flying low than soaring, when wings are held slightly crooked and rather short tail is noticeable.
Steppes, plains, savannas, often treeless or bushy.
26 31 in. (66–79 cm.).
VERREAUX'S EAGLE or BLACK EAGLE Aquila verreauxi.
Rare vagrant to extreme S of region, perhaps breeding in Sinai peninsula.
Adults easily told by deep black plumage with conspicuous white patch on rump and pale patch on wing, showing as shoulder patch at rest; wings broader and paler at tip in flight.
Immatures paler, larger than Tawny Eagle.
Generally silent, but has various barking or crow-like calls.
Flight more graceful than most large eagles.
Rocky hills.
31–38 in. (79–97 cm.).
Vultures.
pp. 83 and 85.
Large, short-tailed (except Lammergeier), birds of prey, their long broad wings, with a span of 5–9 ft, highly adapted to soaring.
Plumage, except adult Egyptian Vulture, various shades of brown; often with a neck ruff and legs not feathered below ‘knee’(except Lammergeier).
Sexes alike in plumage and size.
Normally rather silent and sluggish birds.
Mostly gregarious.
Carrion feeders of open country.
Vultures soar at great heights, watching not only for carcasses but also for other vultures possibly flying towards carcasses.
Once the presence of a carcass has been directly or indirectly detected, they glide down to it rapidly, and large numbers of vultures are thus enabled to assemble in a short time.
The order of feeding depends on the stoutness of bill.
Only the larger vultures are able to rip open a tough hide and feed, the smaller ones, especially the Egyptian, have to wait their turn
EGYPTIAN VULTURE Neophron percnopterus.
A small black and white vulture, with the typical straight-winged soaring outline, but with black-tipped white wings and wedge-shaped tail, longer than typical vultures.
Bare yellow skin on head and throat, ruff shaggy, bill much slenderer than other vultures.
Immature at first all dark brown, when small size and tail shape and length distinguish from other dark vultures, becoming whiter with each successive moult over five years.
Normally silent.
Less gregarious than larger vultures.
Open country, both mountainous and lowland, a village scavenger in the East and N Africa.
Nests on rock ledges.
23 26 in. (58 66 cm.).
V
LAMMERGEIER or BEARDED VULTURE Gypaetus barbatus.
The largest vulture of the region, with quite different flight outline from the typical vultures, long narrow angled and pointed wings and long diamond-shaped tail, looking almost like a giant Gyrfalcon (p. 91).
Mainly dark above, and underparts fulvous; head white with conspicuous black band through eye, terminating in the ‘beard: legs fully feathered.
Immature all dark with paler mottlings, underparts gradually becoming paler over five years, but not rufous till adult.
Silent except in display, when has high-pitched ‘quee-er’.
More active than typical vultures.
Not gregarious within the region, and does not join other vultures at carcasses.
High and usually remote rocky mountains, nesting on rock ledges.
Has remarkable habit of dropping bones from a height on to a hard surface to split them so that it can eat the marrow.
40–45 in. (102–114 cm.).
LAPPET-FACED VULTURE Torgos tracheliotus.
The rarest and one of the largest of the breeding vultures of the region, an all-brown typical broad-winged vulture, readily distinguished at close range by massive bill and bare red skin on head and throat.
In flight, pale bar at base of forewing and pale thighs are distinctive; wing span up to 9 ft.
Normally silent, but may utter various growling, grunting or yelping sounds.
Not usually gregarious in the region.
Open plains, savannas and semi-deserts, with scattered trees, in which it nests.
39 in. (100 cm.).
BLACK VULTURE Aegypius monachus.
The largest Old World vulture, all dark, with outline similar to Griffon, but tail rather longer and usually more wedge-shaped, so that at a great distance can be confused with a sea eagle (p. 71).
Seen from above in flight, primaries appear paler than rest of wing.
Black down on head and bare blue-grey skin on head and neck, are good distinctions from Lappet-faced Vulture (p. 83).
Ruff black.
Immature paler beneath.
Various croaking, hissing and mewing notes.
Less gregarious than most vultures, but will join Griffons at carcasses.
Mainly open country, both lowland and mountainous, nesting in trees.
Now on the list of endangered European birds.
3942 in. (99–107 cm.).
GRIFFON VULTURE Gyps fulvus.
The only large pale-coloured vulture, with dark wing and tail feathers in marked contrast.
Head and neck covered with white down, with a creamy-white ruff at the base but this not easily visible in the field.
Immature darker and more rufous.
Can make a variety of grunting, hissing and whistling sounds of little significance for identification.
Usually seen soaring at a considerable height.
Flight outline ‘like a  tea-tray in the sky: the wings parallel-sided, then broadly rounded with splayed primaries and a horizontal pale mark on underside; tail very short, squared.
Rocky mountainous country, breeding on cliff ledges, and generally roosting on rocks or crags.
Takes precedence at carcasses over Egyptian Vulture but is dominated by Black Vulture.
38–41 in. (97–104 cm.).
V
RÜPPELL'S VULTURE Gyps rüppellii.
A wanderer from the south to Egypt and Sinai, rather shorter-winged and darker than Griffon, from which readily distinguished by white-speckled upperparts and three striking broken white horizontal bars on underwing.
Immature brown, with white band along leading edge of wing and mottling on underwing more diffuse, confusable with immature African White-backed Vulture G africanus, not yet recorded in the region.
Voice loud and harsh.
Grassy plains and both open and mountainous deserts, gregarious where it is common.
37–42 in. (95 107 cm.).
Harriers: Circus.
Slim medium-sized birds of prey, with long, usually narrow wings and tail, long legs, not very stout bill, and wings pointed (except Marsh Harrier), a ruff of feathers often making the face rounded and owl-like.
Males pale grey (except Marsh Harrier), usually smaller than brown females; immatures brown or deep buff.
Characteristic hunting technique of gliding low over ground with wings slightly canted upwards.
Normally silent out of breeding season.
MARSH HARRIER Circus aeruginosus.
The largest and most buzzard-like harrier of the region, with broader, more rounded wings and less graceful flight.
Male differs from other harriers in its largely brown plumage, grey only on wings and tail; nearer to female in size than other harriers.
Female and immature usually easily told from all same-sized birds of prey except Osprey (p. 71), which has white underparts, by pale head.
Occasional dark-headed individuals can be told from Black Kite (p. 73) by rounded tail, from buzzards (p. 77) by slenderer build and different flight pattern.
Display call disyllabic, female's longer and more drawn-out; alarm call of male ‘chuckara, chuckara’, of female a shriller ‘chinka, chinka’.
Marshes, fens, swamps, extensive reed-beds, rice fields.
19–22 in. (48–56 cm.).
SRm Map 56
HEN-HARRIER circus cyaneus.
Male pale grey, with black wing-tips, differing from smaller male Montagu's Harrier in its prominent white rump (instead of white bar at base of tail) and no dark bars on the secondaries or rufous streaks on flanks and underwing.
Female brown, with conspicuously barred tail, hard to tell from slenderer female Montagu's except by size, more conspicuous white rump and ruff extending across throat as blackish line.
Immature as female, without deep buff underparts of immature Montagu's.
Cf.
Pallid Harrier.
Alarm or display call a chattering ‘ke-ke-ke’ or ‘kek-kek-kek’.
Moors, grassy steppes, coastal marshes, extensive reed-beds and dunes.
17–20 in. (43–51 cm.).
RmW Map 57
PALLID HARRIER circus macrourus.
Very like both Hen and Montagu's Harriers, male differing from both in paler colour, whiter head and breast, less black on wing-tips and no white on rump, from Montagu's also in no dark bars on secondaries or rufous streaks on flanks and underwing.
Females and immatures even harder to distinguish, but adult female differs from Hen-Harrier in slenderer build and narrower white rump patch, and from Montagu's in its blackish throat ruff.
Immature similar to immature Montagu's.
Open grassy plains, savannas and steppes.
17–19 in. (43–48 cm.).
V
MONTAGU'S HARRIER Circus pygargus.
Males especially are appreciably smaller than Hen-Harrier, for differences from which and from Pallid Harrier see above.
Immature has distinctive deep rufous buff underparts.
A dark melanic form occurs.
Call somewhat shriller than Hen-Harrier, ‘yick, yick, yick’.
More often in marshes, fens and young conifer plantations. 16–18 in. (41–46 cm.).
Sm Map 58  
FALCONS: Falconidae.
A very distinct family of diurnal birds of prey (pp. 91–5) characterised by long, pointed scythe-like wings; females often much larger than males.
Normally silent, but when alarmed or displaying typical calls are high-pitched and chattering, based on ‘gyak’, ‘kee’, ‘kee-a’ and similar notes.
The falcons share with the owls (p. 177) a number of marked behaviour differences from hawks, eagles, buzzards and other members of the Accipitridae (p. 70); their droppings fall straight down from the perch instead of being squirted away; they build no nest of their own; they kill their prey by biting and severing the back of the neck; they hold their food in one claw; the young hiss when afraid or threatening; and they may bob their heads to show curiosity.
The larger falcons are among the birds of prey most favoured for the sport of falconry.
GYRFALCON Falco rusticolus.
The largest falcon of the region, resembling a large stout Peregrine (p. 93) in outline, though with slightly blunter wings with broader bases, and longer tail, but extremely variable in plumage, from almost white with a few dark flecks to almost completely dark grey; most frequent form is like rather pale Peregrine, but lacking the dark moustachial streak.
Birds from Greenland and Iceland, known as Greenland Falcon and Iceland Falcon (though separate races are not now recognised by taxonomists) are larger, and white forms, which migrate SE in winter, are most frequent in N Greenland.
Immature mainly brown.
Flight rather slower than Peregrine, and calls louder, harsher and lower-pitched.
Cliffed and rocky sea coasts, mountains, edges of coniferous forest.
20 22 in. (51–56 cm.).
V
SAKER FALCON Falco cherrug.
Resembles a broader-winged longer-tailed Peregrine (p. 93), with upperparts mid-brown like a Buzzard (p. 77), its pale head distinguishing it from both Peregrine and Lanner, though this not always clearly visible; moustachial streak barely perceptible.
Spotting rather than barring on tail is a useful pointer, as is contrast between heavily spotted underwing and pale wing tips.
Fairly variable, and can be almost as pale as a Gyrfalcon.
Immature more streaked.
Open country, high plateaux, steppes, plains, semi-deserts, with scattered trees.
18 in. (46 cm.).
LANNER FALCON Falco biarmicus.
European race feldeggii looks smaller and slenderer than Peregrine and differs also in its browner (but not so brown as the Saker) upperparts, pinkish underparts, rufous or buff crown and nape and much narrower moustachial stripe; also has longer tail and blunter wings.
Birds from N Africa and the Middle East, erlangeri and tanypterus, are paler and much less heavily marked with streaks on crown, bars above and spots below.
Saker always has paler crown and is less slender and rakish, but may otherwise be hard to distinguish.
Open country, including deserts, usually nesting on cliffs or rocky outcrops, sometimes in ruins.
17 in. (43 cm.).
PEREGRINE Falco peregrinus.
Readily identified in flight by distinctive anchor-like outline of long wings and rather short tail, and characteristic fast, winnowing wing-beats, followed by a glide; also frequently soars, indulges in aerobatics, and swoops steeply on prey in a power dive.
Plumage very variable, from dark to light grey above with buff underparts barred dark grey; black moustachial streak is conspicuous against white chin and cheeks.
Northern forms are darkest; pale southern races have some rufous on nape in Mediterranean (brookei).
Female much larger than male.
Juvenile dark brown above, streaked instead of barred below, and with legs, cere and bare skin round eye blue-grey instead of yellow.
Chief call a harsh deep chattering falcon note.
Open country, from tundra to semi-deserts, especially with crags or cliffs for breeding, coastal cliffs, occasionally in forests and on tall buildings in towns; in winter frequent on estuaries and flat coast-lines. 15–19 in. (38–48 cm.).
Rmw Map 59
BARBARY FALCON Falco pelegrinoides.
Like a small pale Peregrine, of which it may be only a race, but much paler and more rufous, with crown and nape very rufous. 15–18 in. (38–45 cm).
SOOTY FALCON Falco concolor.
Has two colour phases, one all-grey with black wing-tips, the other almost black.
Longer-winged than Kestrel (p. 95).
Differs£ from male Red-footed Falcon (p. 95) in absence of any red or rufous cere, and legs yellow.
Smaller than Eleonora's Falcon and grey form much paler.
In hobby-like flight can sometimes be distinguished by two central tail feathers protruding.
Voice similar to Kestrel.
Breeds in open treeless country with rocky outcrops, but winters also in savannas and open woodland.
13–14 in. (32–35 cm.).
ELEONORA'S FALCON Falco eleonorae.
Intermediate between Peregrine and Hobby (p. 95), slenderer than Peregrine and longer-tailed than both, with wings extending to tip of tail.
Plumage varies from pale to dark, but with many intermediates and no two birds exactly the same Pale form like Hobby but with upperparts more grey-brown and more rufous on heavily streaked underparts.
All dark form, blackish-brown like a large Red-footed Falcon (p. 95), but with thighs dark grey instead of rufous and legs, cere and bare skin round eye yellow or blue-grey.
Intermediates may include birds pale above and dark below.
Sexes nearly same size.
Immatures have tail barred, and show barred underwing in flight.
More gregarious than most falcons and social breeding, as many as 50 birds sometimes hunting together.
Flight patterns resemble Peregrine and Hobby.
Chief call note disyllabic.
Sea cliffs and rocky islands, breeding in late summer so that young can be fed on birds migrating through the Mediterranean at that time.
15 in. (38 cm.).
HOBBY Falco subbuteo.
Flies like a miniature Peregrine (p. 93), long scythe-like wings with even shorter tail, making outline even more swift-like.
Differs in streaked underparts, and rufous thighs and under tail.
Females slightly and immatures much browner above, immatures not rufous on thighs.
Follow migrating flocks of hirundines and swifts, on which it preys.
Open country with scattered trees.
Nests in trees.
12–14 in. (30–36 cm.).
Sm Map 60
MERLIN Falco columbarius.
Smallest and least distinctive small European bird of prey, most easily told by its flight, habitat and general habits.
Male differs from male Sparrowhawk (p. 75) in streaked underparts, and from Hobby in pale thighs, bar at tip of tail, and no moustache or white cheeks.
Female differs from both kestrels in brown upperparts.
Outline compacter than Hobby, more like Kestrel.
Flight more dashing than Kestrel, in pursuit of small birds, though may hover.
Hills and moors, often treeless, in winter also often on coastal marshes and dunes.
10–13 in. (27–33 cm.).
Rsmw Map 61
RED-FOOTED FALCON Falco vespertinus.
The most gregarious falcon.
Male all dark grey with chestnut thighs and under tail coverts, with bright red bill, cere, bare skin round eye and legs.
Eastern form with striking white underwing could occur in extreme S E of region.
Female differs from Hobby in rufous crown and nape but not thighs.
and red legs.
Immature like immature Hobby with pale forehead.
Both hovers and glides.
Open country with scattered trees and small woods, nesting in trees.
12 in. (30 cm.).
A
LESSER KESTREL Falco naumanni.
Gregarious habits, more active flight, and noisy behaviour are best distinctions from Kestrel, unless male's unspotted mantle can be seen.
Also slenderer and has narrower and slightly shorter tail with underside paler and breast of both sexes sometimes almost unspotted.
Female and immature very hard to distinguish except by pale claws.
Often in company with Kestrel, hovering (with faster wingbeats) much less often but frequently gliding; wings may appear white beneath.
Open country, nesting colonially on inland cliffs and ruined buildings.
12 in. (30 cm.).
V
KESTREL Falco tinnunculus.
Constant hovering is best pointer.
In flight, long pointed wings (blunter in female) and long tail look rakish.
Sexes same size.
No other small bird of prey has male's combination of blue-grey head and tail, spotted chestnut mantle (sparsely spotted in Canary Is) and black tail bar.
Barred tail with terminal bar distinguishes female and immature from all other same-sized birds of prey (except Lesser Kestrel).
Sparrowhawk (p. 75) has shorter and more rounded wings than female Kestrel, and quite different hunting techniques.
Call a loud shrill nuthatch-like ‘kee-kee-kee’.
Open country, with crags or scattered trees, sea cliffs, towns and villages.
Nest on rock-ledge, building or tree.
13 in. (34 cm.).
Rsmw Map 62  
GROUSE: Tetraonidae. pp. 97 9.
Gamebirds, differing from the pheasants and partridges (Phasianidae p. 100), in their feathered legs and nostrils, and in never having spurs.
They do, however, have similar short wings and heavy whirring flight.
WILLOW GROUSE Lagopus lagopus lagopus.
The varyingly white grouse of northern Europe; birds from coastal Norway are intermediate with the all dark Red Grouse of the British Isles.
Males have prominent red wattle over eye.
In winter all white, except for black tail, distinguished from slightly smaller Ptarmigan by stouter bill, toes much less heavily feathered, and in males by no black patch between bill and eye.
In summer warm brown, although wings and belly still mainly white, especially in flight (Ptarmigan greyer), and in autumn white patches appear (Ptarmigan greyer still).
Habitat often best distinction.
Calls a loud ‘kok-kok-kok’ and ‘gobak, gobak’.
Inhabits, lower levels than Ptarmigan, tundra, arctic prairies with birch and willow scrub, and heather moors and bogs; in winter sometimes descending to farmland.
15–16 in. (38 41 cm.).
RED GROUSE Lagopus lagopus scoticus.
An all dark race of the Willow Grouse, confined to the British Isles, never turning white in winter.
Looks very dark in flight, when lack of wing-bar separates from larger Black Grouse, and dark not rufous tail from partridges (p. 103).
Calls and habits as Willow Grouse.
Heather moors and bogs, in winter sometimes descends to farmland.
15 16 in. (38–41 cm.).
R Map 63
PTARMIGAN Lagopus mutus.
Like closely similar Willow Grouse has three plumages.
In winter all white, with toes as well as legs heavily feathered, except for black tail, and in male black patch from bill to eye and red wattle.
In summer all upperparts greyish-buff mottled darker in male, more rufous in female, with wings still mainly white, especially in flight.
In autumn both sexes, but especially males, turn greyer above.
Calls a hoarse croaking ‘uk, uk’ and a crackling ‘karr, ikrikrrikrrrkrrr’, also a brief crowing display song.
Habitat usually higher than Willow Grouse, mountain tops, tundra, well above tree-line, and in British Isles usually well above 2000 ft. 14 in. (35–36 cm.).
R Map 64
HAZELHEN or HAZEL GROUSE Tetrastes bonasia.
A small woodland grouse, both sexes readily identified in flight by black band at tip of grey tail.
Plumage greyish-brown, becoming more rufous towards S of range; male with distinctive black-bordered white throat.
Call a high-pitched whistle.
Flies more readily than other grouse, wings making a distinctive ‘rrrr’ sound.
Perches in trees.
Mainly in mixed woodland, but sometimes in pure broad-leaved or spruce forest, usually with dense shrub layer, often near rivers.
14 in. (35–36 cm.).
BLACK GROUSE Lyrurus tetrix.
Intermediate in size between Capercaillie and Red Grouse.
Male (Blackcock) is only large black land-bird with white wing-bar and lyre-shaped tail; patch on shoulder and under tail coverts also white.
Female (Greyhen) is like a much smaller female Capercaillie with forked tail and narrow pale wing-bar, and no rufous patch on breast or white on flanks.
Differs from same-sized Red Grouse (p. 97) in its greyer plumage, darker legs, forked tail and narrow wing-bar.
May hybridise with both Capercaillie and Pheasant (p. 107).
Call of male a disyllabic sneezing note, of female a pheasant-like ‘kok, kok’.
Gathers, often in large numbers, at communal display grounds (leks) in spring and autumn.
Male display song a medley of cooing, bubbling and crowing notes.
Flight as Capercaillie but less noisy; flies higher than Red Grouse.
Borders of woodland and moorland, moors, steppes and swampy heaths with scattered trees, especially birches and pines.
Male 21 in (53 cm.), female 16 in. (41 cm.).
R Map 65
CAUCASIAN BLACKCOCK Lyrurus mlokosiewiczi.
Smaller than Black Grouse with rather dull greenish, not glossy plumage, relieved only by red wattle and white shoulder patch (i.e. no white wing-bar or under tail), and distinct tail shape, the tips curving downwards rather than outwards.
Females more uniformly vermiculated than Greyhen, and have rounded tail.
Has similar communal lekking habits.
Alpine meadows and scrub in the higher parts of the Caucasus.
20 in. (50 cm.).
CAPERCAILLIE Tetrao urogallus.
The largest grouse of the region, and only mistakable for an unexpectedly airborne turkey.
Male dark grey, with some white on flanks, and conspicuously long broad tail.
Female and immature differ from much smaller female Black Grouse by chestnut patch on breast, some white on flanks, rounded tail and no wing-bar.
Both sexes may erect hackles on neck when alarmed, to form prominent whiskers.
May hybridise with both Black Grouse and Pheasant (p. 107).
Call of male, a raucous sound like a man clearing his throat, of female a pheasant-like ‘kok, kok’.
Remarkable song at communal display ground, starting with a resonant rattle and ending with a sound like drawing a cork and pouring liquid out of a narrow-necked bottle, followed by a crashing sound made by scraping wing quills on the ground.
Flight has typical game-bird alternation of quick whirring and gliding on down-turned wings; makes a great clatter when leaving trees, where habitually perches and feeds.
Coniferous forest, especially in hills and mountains; in N W Spain in mountain hollywood.
Male 34 in. (86 cm.), female 24 in. (62 cm.).
R Map 66   
PHEASANT FAMILY: Phasianidae. pp. 101–9.
Gamebirds with unfeathered, often spurred legs, short rounded wings, heavy whirring direct flight and short thick bill with upper mandible longer.
The larger and usually long-tailed ones tend to be called pheasants (pp. 107–109), the medium-sized ones partridges or francolins (pp. 103105) and the small ones quails (p. 105).
Partridges, francolins, snowcocks and quails are often encountered in coveys or small parties up to 12–15.
CASPIAN SNOWCOCK Tetraogallus caspius.
Larger, darker and much less rufous than Caucasian Snowcock, and distinguished by broader and more conspicuous white wing-bar, giving the impression in flight of a large pale bird with white and grey wings.
When flushed either runs uphill or flies downhill, calling vociferously.
Most frequent call is a bubbling note very reminiscent of Curlew (p. 139), often uttered with head and neck thrown backwards.
Alarm call a repeated ‘chok, chok, chok’.
High, rocky alpine and sub-alpine meadows in summer generally not below 6000 ft., from the mountains of eastern Turkey (Taurus and Pontus ranges) eastwards; more often in rhododendron scrub than Caucasian Snowcock. 24 in. (61 cm.).
CAUCASIAN SNOWCOCK Tetraogallus caucasicus.
Like a large rufous and grey domestic fowl or a giant partridge, with whitish cheeks, and distinctive blackish striations on upper breast; the snowcock with least white in its plumage.
Sexes alike.
Call a melodious and far-carrying whistle, also utters loud squawks and a soft ‘tju, tju’.
Usually runs uphill, but flies downhill with fast whirring flight.
Cliffs, stony slopes and alpine meadows in the high Caucasus, up to the snow line, using its very stout bill for scraping in the ground to uproot plants.
22 in. (56 cm.).
TUFTED GUINEA FOWL Numida meleagris.
A most distinctive bird, formerly widespread in N Africa, but now confined to a portion of central Morocco between the oueds Bou Regreg and the upper Oum-el-Rbia; also found in S France.
A large gamebird, with a conspicuous erect red crest, the origin of the domesticated Guinea-fowl; plumage grey with white spots, head and neck featherless, neck blue-grey, cheeks whitish, wattles red.
Gregarious, restless and noisy, with the  well-known squeaky cackle of the domestic bird.
Wooded gullies in hill districts, mainly ground living but roosting in trees.
25 in. (63 cm,).
Partridges: Alectoris and Perdix.
Stoutly built medium-sized brown gamebirds, with rufous tail especially conspicuous in flight.
Chukar-type partridges Alectoris are longer, more upright and slightly more pheasant-like than smaller Perdix, and readily distinguished where they overlap it in W and S Europe by black and white eyestripes, white chin and throat, broad black band extending from eye down neck to form breast-band, conspicuous black and white barring on flanks, and red bill and legs.
Sexes alike.
Often perching on rocks and other slight elevations.
The very similar Chukar, Rock and Red-legged Partridges, separable only at fairly close range, are aerodynamically distinct except in the Balkans (Rock, Chukar).
RED-LEGGED PARTRIDGE Alectoris rufa.
Best distinguished by black spotting on upper breast below black breast-band; brownish on head and upperparts.
Call a loud challenging ‘chuka, chuka’ or ‘chik, chik, chikar’, also a sound like whetting a scythe or an old-fashioned steam engine wheezing.
Habitat similar to Partridge.
but prefers drier and stonier locations.
13 ½in.
(34 cm.).
R Map 67
BARBARY PARTRIDGE Alectoris barbara.
A North African species, the most distinctive of the group, with breast-band chestnut speckled white, chin and throat grey, and stripe behind eye buff.
Call like Chukar, also a rapid ‘kakelik’.
Rocky or stony hillsides and deserts, with scrub or open woodland.
13 in. (33 cm.).
CHUKARA lectoris chukar.
Very like Rock Partridge, but with less black between bill and eyes, grey speckling on throat above breast-band, and fewer, larger flank bars.
Call distinct, a loud, high-pitched ‘chuk, chuk, chuk, chukar’, often followed by ‘caccaba, caccaba, caccaba’, reminding others of a barnyard fowl.
Habitat as Rock Partridge, also in deserts.
13 in. (33 cm.).
ROCK PARTRIDGE Alectoris graeca.
Distinguished by black breast-band sharply separating unspotted white throat from unspotted grey breast; rather grey on head and upperparts.
Calls distinctive, an abrupt quadrisyllabic ‘tchertsivittchi’, a curiously nuthatch-like ‘chwit, chwit, chwit’, and a sharp ‘pitchi-i’.
Rocky, stony and thinly grassy hill and mountain slopes; vineyards.
13 in. (33 cm.).
PARTRIDGE Perdix perdix.
Much the most widespread European partridge, and the only one in Central and Northern Europe.
Distinguished from the larger chukar-type partridges by unspotted grey breast, chestnut horseshoe on lower breast, no white about head, less conspicuously barred flanks, greenish bill and grey legs.
Juveniles and some hens lack the horseshoe.
Cf.
Quail (p. 105).
Loud high-pitched creaky grating ‘keev’ or ‘keev-it’degenerates into rapid cackling ‘it-it-it…’when bird flushed.
Never perches above ground.
Open country, including farmland, especially arable, moorland, downs, steppes, heaths, semi-deserts, shingle tracts, sand dunes.
12 in. (30 cm.).
R Map 68  
SAND PARTRIDGE Ammoperdix heyi.
Intermediate between Quail and Partridge (p. 103), having the latter's rufous tail.
Cock pinkish-buff with dark grey head, flanks boldly barred rufous and black, white patch behind eye and orange-yellow bill and legs; in Palestine also has white mark in front of eye.
Hen browner, vermiculated.
Double call resembles two stones grated together; wing quills make a rattling sound in flight.
Broken rocky or stony ground with minimal vegetation, but not on open desert sands; usually in pairs.
9 ½in.
(24 cm.).
SEE-SEE PARTRIDGE Ammoperdix griseogularis.
Differs from Sand Partridge especially in cock's striking head pattern, white stripe through eye being always flanked by a broad black stripe above and a narrower one below.
Double whistling call, ‘see-see’, wing quills also whistle in flight.
Habitat as Sand Partridge.
9 ½in.
(24 cm.).
QUAIL Coturnix coturnix.
Much the smallest European gamebird, and the only migratory one.
Distinguished from young Partridge (p. 103) by buff streaks on head, no chestnut in tail and male's blackish (rarely rufous) throat markings; from Andalusian Hemipode (p. 110) by buff not orange breast and flanks streaked not spotted; and from Corncrake (p. 115) in flight by legs not dangling and no chestnut in wings.
Cf.
Bobwhite (p. 109).
Bill grey, unspurred legs pink.
Female and juvenile have breast spotted.
Typical whirring gamebird in flight, but much more often heard than seen.
Chief call an unmistakable far-carrying plangent ‘quic-ic-ic’ or wet-mi-lips’also a curious growling ‘row-ow-ow’only audible at very close quarters and when flushed may call ‘crwee-crwee’or ‘crucc-crucc’.
Farmland, especially among growing crops, open grassland, steppes, semi-deserts.
Numbers reaching N W Europe vary greatly from year to year.
7 in. (18 cm.).
S Map 69
BLACK FRANCOLIN or BLACK PARTRIDGE Francolinus francolinus.
Spurred cock is one of the most distinctive medium-sized gamebirds, with black face, throat and underparts, chestnut collar, white face patch and flanks strongly spotted white.
Spurless hen resembles many other speckled brown gamebirds, but can be told by chestnut patch on nape.
As often heard as seen; characteristic loud far-reaching, gratingly high-pitched call is variously rendered ‘che-chirree, chik, chiree’ and ‘chik-cheek-cheek-keraykek’.
Areas of fairly dense vegetation, such as tall grasslands and crops, scrub, especially tamarisk, and marshes.
13 in. (34 cm.).
DOUBLE-SPURRED FRANCOLIN Francolinus bicalcaratus.
A partridge-sized gamebird, only in Morocco.
Spurred cock has black, white and chestnut head pattern and underparts strongly streaked with same colours; spurless hen similar but duller.
Chief call a loud deep repeated ‘quair, quair’ or ‘coak, coak’, also ‘cocoi’.
Open woods and scrub, palm groves, cultivation clearings. 12 ½in.
(32 cm.).
PHEASANT Phasianus colchicus.
The most widespread gamebird in the world, native in Eurasia, but introduced in W Europe, N Africa, N America and elsewhere.
General appearance of both sexes too familiar to need detailed description; head and neck of male usually metallic green.
Juvenile pheasants while still growing their long tails need to be distinguished from partridges (p. 103) unless accompanied by adults.
Occasionally hybridises with Capercaillie (p. 99), Black Grouse (p. 99) and other species of introduced pheasant (p. 109).
Cock crows with a loud harsh ‘kor-kok’, often stimulated by distant explosions or thunder, at close quarters a whirring from the wings can be heard before and after this.
Both sexes also cackle and chuckle, e.g. ‘kuttuc, kuttuc’ when flushed.
Juveniles have a curious double bullfinch-like pipe followed by a creaking third note.
Flight whirring; can rocket upwards with remarkable acceleration when startled, though often prefer to run.
Open country, with scattered woods, copses or riverine belts of trees or shrubs, marshes, extensive reed-beds, rarely in large gardens, often feeding on cultivated land.
Native birds of region, from Caucasus and SW Asia, all belong to black-necked colchicus type, with rather dark and purplish plumage, lower back and rump mainly rufous, and no neck ring; these were first introduced in W Europe and in Britain, where they have been present for at least 900 years, used to be known as the ‘Old English’ type.
Later various Far Eastern forms with a more or less conspicuous white neck ring and lower back and rump mainly green, torquatus group,(2) were introduced, and these have interbred not only with colchicus type but with other subspecies introduced from time to time, till the British Isles and much of W Europe are occupied by an indescribable amalgam of pheasant forms from all over Asia.
Forms containing features of the following races may also be seen: principalis (1)(from Transcaspia and Turkestan) with some white on the wing coverts and upper parts yellowish or orange red, mongolicus (4)(from Turkestan, not Mongolia) with white on the wing and partial white collar and upperparts coppery-red glossed with green and the blue-rumped formosanus (3) from Taiwan.
Two very distinct varieties are the so-called ‘melanistic mutant’,(6) dark in both sexes (cock deep blue and green, hen very dark brown), and the flavistic Bohemian pheasant (5) buff or cream-coloured with blackish markings and dark head.
Male 30–35 in. (66–89 cm.), female 21–25 in. (53–63 cm.).
R Map 70
JAPANESE PHEASANT or GREEN PHEASANT Phasianus versicolor.
Introduced in W Europe; closely resembles dark ‘melanistic mutant’ form of Pheasant, but cock can be distinguished by dark green instead of blackish-brown and coppery-red underparts, pale instead of dark rump, and blue wing-coverts.
Hens cannot be separated in the field.
Hybridisation also confuses the issue.
Habits and habitats as Pheasant.
Male c 25 in. (63 cm.), female c 22 in. (56 cm.).
LADY AMHERST'S PHEASANT Chrysolophus amherstiae.
Female differs from female Golden in horn-coloured, not greenish bill, blue-grey legs and bare skin; round eye blue-green, not red.
Call indistinguishable from Golden  England .
R 
GOLDEN PHEASANT Chrysolophus nictus.
Female has longer and more strongly barred tail than female Pheasant (p. 107); Call more rasping and higher-pitched.
Cf.
Lady Amherst's.
Much prefers running to flying.
Britain.
R
SILVER PHEASANT Lophura nycthemera.
Female has blackish brown crest and black and white in tail.
Male has shrill whistle female a repeated deep ‘whoor’.
Germany.
REEVES'S PHEASANT Syrmaticus reevesii.
Male has tail up to 6 ft.
Calls a twittering chuckle and a musical pipe.
Scotland, France, Germany.
R 
INTRODUCED GAME BIRDS: Among numerous species of game birds from Asia and North America which have been introduced into the region from time to time, these have established themselves in at least one area, the pheasants in woodlands.
CALIFORNIA QUAIL Lophortyx californicus.
Like a distinctive short curved black plume on the crown; male also has black and white pattern on face and throat.
Call a trisyllabic ‘qua-quer-go’.
Open country or scrub.
Germany.
BOBWHITE Colinus virginianus.
Smaller than California Quail, rufous, male with dark brown and white eyestripes and white throat; white areas buff in female.
Call a loud double whistle ‘bob-white’.
Open and cultivated country and scrub.
England, Germany.
R
WILD TURKEY Meleagris gallopavo.
Unmistakeably a rather slimmer version of the farmyard turkey, but with no white tip to tail.
Male ‘gobbles’; alarm note ‘pit’ or ‘put-put’.
Mainly woodland.
Germany.
CRANES: Gruidae.
Large, long-legged, long-winged, long-necked but rather short-tailed land and marsh birds, with stout straight bills, fairly long but shorter than herons (p. 35) and storks (p. 43).
Plumage usually a combination of grey, black and white.
In slow, strong but direct flight, both neck and legs are stretched out, a good distinction from herons but not from storks.
Voice loud, clanging or trumpeting.
Many species have remarkable dancing displays.
CRANE Grus grus.
Grey, with black head and wing-tips, conspicuous white stripe from cheek down neck, red crown (not visible at a distance) and a large tuft of plumes obscuring the tail.
Juvenile darker, with brownish head and neck.
Flight attitude, head pattern, plumes and short bill all separate crane from Grey Heron (p. 35), but beware habit in some country districts of Britain of still calling herons ‘cranes’.
Beware Sarus Crane Grus antigone, a not infrequent escape from wildfowl collections, which is much larger (60 in.,[156 cm.]) and differs in having bare red skin on head and upper neck, grey crown, white tips to plumes and reddish legs.
Call a harsh clanging ‘krooh’ or ‘krr’.
Flies in V-formation or lines on migration.
Extensive marshes, bogs and wet heathland or tundra, in winter also in drier open country.
45 in. (114 cm.).
A
SIBERIAN CRANE Grus leucogeranus.
A large white crane with black wing-tips and conspicuous white plumes; legs, bill and bare skin on face red.
Has shorter bill than White Stork (p. 43), and shows no black at all when at rest.
Immature tinged buff, almost rufous on feathered head and neck.
Voice softer and more musical than Crane, ‘krouk, krouk’.
Very local and now much decreased in marshes in the extreme E of the region.
55 in. (140 cm.).
DEMOISELLE CRANE Anthropoides virgo.
Nearly a foot shorter than Crane, from which it also differs in its conspicuous white ear-tufts, black lower neck and breast, terminating in a plume, much less conspicuous wing plumes, lack of red on head, and higher-pitched voice.
Immature grey on head and neck with smaller grey ear tufts.
Marshes and marshy river valleys; in N Africa on high plateaux. 38 in. (96 cm.).
ANDALUSIAN HEMIPODE Turnix sylvatica (Turnicidae).
A small quail-like bird but with rufous breast, and black spots on flanks.
Very shy and hard to flush, often zigzags, frequently only detectable by distinctive low mooing or crooning  note; When does fly skims low and drops down, hardly ever rising again.
Sandy plains and dry grassland with cover typically in dwarf palmetto vegetation.
6 in. (15 cm.).
BUSTARDS: Otididae.
Medium-large to very large, rather long-necked and long-legged land birds; bill stout, somewhat flattened.
Normal gait a sedate walk, with head erect, but usually either crouching with neck extended or running when alarmed.
Flight strong, with broad wings, legs and neck extended, like cranes (p. 111) and storks (p. 43).
Open treeless country.
GREAT BUSTARD Otis tarda.
One of the largest land birds of the region, showing much white on black-tipped wings in flight.
Male, substantially larger than female, has long moustachial bristles and rufous chestnut breast band.
Rather silent, but has a low bark or grunt.
Gregarious, in small flocks.
Treeless plains, steppes and extensive cultivations.
Male 40 in. (102 cm.), female 30 in. (76 cm.).
V(b) 
LITTLE BUSTARD Otis tetrax.
Suggests a large long-legged gamebird and though mainly brown at rest shows a striking contrast in flight, with almost as much white as a flying Shelduck (p. 51).
Breeding male has conspicuously horizontal head and neck pattern of grey, black and white.
Flight note, a short ‘dahg’; display note a far-carrying snorting ‘ptrr’.
Flight intermediate between duck and gamebird, with quivering and whistling wing quills; less given to crouching and running than other bustards.
Grassy and cultivated plains, sometimes with scattered trees and bushes.
17 in. (43 cm.).
V
HOUBARA BUSTARD Chlamydotis undulata.
Easily told in breeding plumage by conspicuous vertical black and white frill or skirt on neck, as well as backward-pointing black and white crest, less conspicuous than Arabian Bustard's.
In winter neck grey in front with dark streaks down side.
When crouching blends perfectly with sandy background.
Much less white in wings than other bustards of region.
A silent bird.
Flight fairly fast though with seemingly slow wing beats, but more often runs.
Dry open plains, semi-desert and desert, usually with little or no scrub.
25 in. (64 cm.).
V
ARABIAN BUSTARD Ardeotis arabs.
A large bustard whose backward-pointing crest gives it an outline more like the African Kori Bustard A. kon than the Great Bustard, like which it shows white on the wings in flight.
Otherwise more uniform in plumage.
Calls a rasping croak and a drawn-out fluty whistle.
Dry grassy plains or open scrub, semi-deserts.
Male 35 in. (90 cm.), female 29 in (74 cm.).
RAILS and CRAKES: Rallidae.
Small to medium, shy, ground-dwelling birds; legs and toes fairly long, wings and tail rather short.
Gait jerky, with tail often flirted, legs dangling in flight.
Marsh dwellers (except Corncrake) inhabiting densely vegetated wetlands, swamps, bogs, fens, marshes, reed-beds and freshwater margins.
Rarely seen in the open, either on ground or in flight.
WATER RAIL Rallus aquaticus.
Like a small Moorhen (p. 117) with a long red bill, which also distinguishes it from all the smaller crakes; most often seen in rear view, as it dashes back into cover, when barred flanks and greyer under tail coverts distinguish from Moorhen.
Juvenile has buff underparts and white throat and eyestripe.
Much more often heard than seen, uttering various clucking, grunting and miaouing notes, a singular loud harsh call beginning as a grunt and ending as a squeal, and several repeated monosyllables.
Most often in the open in hard weather, feeding on unfrozen patches.
11 in. (28 cm.).
O RmW Map 71
SPOTTED CRAKE Porzana porzana.
Even more skulking than Water Rail.
White-spotted upperparts and buff under rounded dark brown wings.
Most likely to be seen at dusk feeding on mud at edge of thick swampy cover.
Has a rhythmical snipe-like ‘tic-toc’ and a loud ‘h'wit, h'wit’, like a whiplash. 9 in. (23 cm.).
SMw Map 72
LITTLE CRAKE Porzana parva.
Like a miniature short-billed Water Rail, with unspotted underparts, barred under tail coverts and green bill.
Male differs from both sexes of Baillon's Crake in its olive-brown upperparts, unstreaked wing coverts, unbarred flanks.
red base of bill and green legs.
Female and juvenile have distinctive buff face and underparts.
Call a reiterated monosyllable ending in an almost yapping trill; also an explosive double note.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
V
BAILLON'S CRAKE Porzana pusilla.
Both sexes differ from male Little Crake in having rufous upperparts, white streaks on wing coverts, flanks barred, bill all green and legs greyish-pink.
Voice perhaps similar to Little Crake, with which it has been thoroughly confused.
7 in. (18 cm.).
V(b)
STRIPED CRAKE Porzana marginalis.
The smallest crake of the region, very rare in N Africa, streaked above, but differing from both Baillon's and Little Crake in its paler flanks and rufous under tail coverts.
Voice not known.
6 ¾in.
(17 cm.).
SORA RAIL Porzana carolina.
A vagrant from America, very like Spotted Crake, but with white under tail coverts and in adults (not immatures) a black face patch.
9 in. (23 cm.).
V
CORNCRAKE Crex crex.
A bird whose loud rasping song, recalling a grated comb, ‘crex, crex’ is much more often heard than its slim brown form is seen.
When flushed, chestnut wings and dangling legs separate it at once from Quail (p. 105) and young Partridges (p. 103).
Rough grassland, hayfields. 10 ½in.
(27 cm.).
SmMap 73  
MOORHEN Gallinula chloropus.
The only waterfowl with both red forehead and habit of constantly flirting white under tail coverts.
This, together with white line along flank and lack of white wingbar in flight, distinguish it from coots.
Legs green with red garter, bill red with yellow tip.
More olive brown juveniles differ from both young coots and adult winter Dabchick (p. 23) in their white under tail coverts, and have much less white on throat than young coots.
Chief call notes are loud but rather liquid disyllabic croaks, ‘curruc’ and ‘kittic’and a ‘kaak’.
Flight weak, laboured and pattering take-off from water and legs trailing down first, later straight out behind.
Habitually swims, with jerky forward movement; sometimes dives.
Fresh water with thick marginal cover, swamps, sometimes plentiful in town parks; often feeds on grassland, usually near water.
13 in. (33 cm.).
RW Map 74
ALLEN'S GALLINULE Porphyrula alleni.
Vagrant from southern Africa.
Back and wings green, legs red, forehead pale blue; juvenile has rufous underparts.
Calls croaking and shrieking.
9 ½in.
(24 cm.).
AMERICAN PURPLE GALLINULE Porphyrula martinica.
Rare transatlantic vagrant.
Purple and bronze-green plumage, pale blue forehead and yellow legs.
Immature like pale brown young Moorhen with more white under tail.
12–14 in. (30 36 cm.)
V
PURPLE GALLINULE or GREEN-BACKED GALLINULE Porphyrio porphyrio.
An outsize dark bluish-purple Moorhen, with no white line on flank, longer red legs and very large stout all-red bill; juvenile greyer.
Form breeding in Egypt (aegyptiacus) has green back, juvenile with whitish underparts.
Calls include many loud hooting, cackling, clucking and hoarse rippling notes, and a softer ‘chuck-chuck’ contact note.
Shy where persecuted; elsewhere comes out into open, often flirting tail, and climbs reed stems; flight as Moorhen.
Swamps, reed-beds, freshwater margins with thick cover.
19 in. (48 cm.).
COOT Fulica atra.
Coots are the only all-black waterfowl with a conspicuous white forehead and bill, dumpier than most ducks; legs green.
In laboured moorhen-like flight shows white wing-bar.
Juvenile has no distinctive features except for all-dark upperparts and all whitish underparts.
Downy young have rufous head and neck (Moorhens are all dark).
Calls distinctive loud high-pitched ‘kowk’, ‘kewk’, and ‘cut’.
Gregarious; large flocks make remarkable roaring sound on surface of water when disturbed by birds of prey.
Much given to quarrelsome chases, habitually dives and has pattering take-off.
Fresh water, usually with vegetated margins, sometimes in town parks.
15 in. (38 cm.).
RW Map 75
CRESTED COOT Fulica cristata.
Only distinguishable from Coot by lack of white wing-bar, hooting call-note, and, at close range blunter angle of black between forehead and upper mandible, two red knobs on forehead and bluish bill and feet.
Reed marshes with patches of open water.
16 in. (41 cm.).
WADERS pp 119- 43.
Nine families of mainly long-legged, long-necked and (except for the plovers, pp. 121–5) long-billed, gregarious marsh or waterside birds, breeding in marshy tundra, taiga, moorland, or grassland, and wintering on estuaries and muddy or sandy seashores, occurring at freshwater margins chiefly on migration.
Wing-bars and call-notes important in identification.
Sexes usually more or less alike.
Song usually delivered in aerial display.
In autumn and winter flocks often perform tight-packed aerial evolutions.
The two principal families are the plovers (pp. 121–5) and the sandpipers and snipes and their allies (pp. 127 41).
We start with three families of large black and white waders.
CRAB PLOVER Dromas ardeola (Dromadidae).
A large black and white wader, mantle and wing-tips grey in immature.
Noisy goose-like honking.
Long neck hunched at rest, outstretched in flight.
Feeds mainly on crabs.
Occasional, sandy shores, coastal lagoons in Egypt.
14 in. (35 cm.).
OYSTERCATCHER Haematopus ostralegus (Haematopodidae).
Differs from all other large pied shore birds by long orange bill and longish pink legs; throat black in summer, white in winter; white wing-bar shows in flight.
Juveniles have dark tip to bill.
Normal call a shrill penetrating ‘kleeep’, also a shorter ‘pic, pic’, and a loud communal piping display.
Seashores; also inland in river valleys in hill districts, by salt lakes and on sand steppes.
17 in. (43 cm.).
RsmW Map 76
AFRICAN BLACK OYSTERCATCHER Haematopus moquini.
An all-black oystercatcher, except for white patch on wing.
formerly in Canary Is., its only locality in region, where now believed extinct.
16 in. (41 cm.).
BLACK-WINGED STILT Himantopus himantopus (Recurvirostridae).
Fantastically long pink legs; long straight black bill also distinctive.
Male has crown and nape black in summer, white in winter; female as male winter but with browner mantle.
Juvenile like female but with greyish head and neck.
Wings black beneath.
Call a rather coot-like ‘kik-kik-kik’.
In flight legs trail out behind, making bird appear unexpectedly long.
Fresh and brackish marshes and pools, also in saltmarshes and on shore.
15 in. (38 cm.).
A(b)
AVOCET Recurvirostra avosetta.
Another unmistakable bird, with its strikingly upcurved bill, used with a side-to-side sweeping motion in feeding, and blue-grey legs.
Juvenile browner.
Swims readily and up-ends.
Main call ‘klooit’, also a soft grunting flight note, and loud yelping cries when nest or young endangered.
Salt and brackish marshes and pools, both coastal and inland, estuaries, less often by fresh water.
17 in. (43 cm.).
Srm Map 77  
PLOVERS: Charadriidae. pp. 121–5.
Short-billed, small to medium-sized waders.
When feeding characteristically run a little way and then stop, often bobbing head nervously; head held up as if listening, not down like Knot (p. 129) or Dunlin (p. 127).
Charadrius plovers are small to medium-sized, usually sandy or greyish-brown above, many with striking patterns of black and white bands on head and neck.
RINGED PLOVER Charadrius hiaticula.
One of the commonest northern shore birds, with distinctive pied head and breast pattern, prominent pale wing-bar, and orange-yellow legs.
Immature has no black on head and often incomplete brownish breast-band.
Calls a liquid musical ‘too-i’ and ‘queep’or ‘queec’, latter forming basis of plangent song, delivered in bat-like display flight.
Sandy and shingly seashores, less often similar fresh and brackish water shores, rarely sandy flats inland; in winter also muddy seashores and estuaries.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
RMW Map 78
LITTLE RINGED PLOVER Charadrius dubius.
Best distinction from Ringed Plover is no wing-bar in flight, also white line above black forehead, bill yellow only at base of lower mandible, pink to yellowish-green legs and yellow orbital ring.
Call also diagnostic, ‘pee-oo’, ‘pip-pip…’ and a reedy note resembling Little Tern (p. 161); song a trilling elaboration of calls.
Not very gregarious.
Sand or shingle by fresh water.
6 in. (15 cm.).
S Map 79
KENTISH PLOVER Charadnus alexandrinus.
Smaller, slimmer and paler than Ringed Plover, with rufous crown, less black on cheeks and only incomplete black breast-band; bill black, legs blackish.
White wing-bar separates from Little Ringed Plover.
Calls distinct from both ringed plovers, ‘wit’, ‘wee-it’ and ‘prr-ip’with a trilling song.
Sand and shingle, mainly coastal.
6 ½in.
(16 cm.).
M(b) Map 80
GREATER SANDPLOVER Charadrius leschenaultii.
A large heavy-billed pale grey-brown plover, black stripe through eye, grey patches at sides of breast, breeding male with a chestnut breast-band.
Has a clear one or two-note whistle.
Salt and fresh water margins.
10 in. (25 cm.).
V
LESSER SANDPLOVER or MONGOLIAN PLOVER Charadrius mongolus.
Much rarer than Greater Sandplover, from which distinguishable in winter only by size, darker plumage, shorter, less stout bill and more gregarious habits; in summer both sexes as male Greater Sandplover but with breast warm buff.
Cf.
Caspian Plover (p. 123).
8 in. (20 cm.).
KILLDEER Charadrius vociferus.
Transatlantic vagrant.
A large ringed plover recognisable by double breast-band and loud ‘kill-dee’ call, frequenting grassland rather than watersides. 10 in. (25 cm.).
V
KITTLITZ'S SANDPLOVER Charadrius pecuarius.
Like a small Kentish Plover, with longer bill, sandy crown, white nape, no dark band on pale rufous breast, and dark line backward from eye.
Call a clear plaintive ‘pipip’.
Freshwater and coastal margins, sand or mud flats.
5 ¼in.
(13 cm.).
CASPIAN PLOVER Charadrius asiaticus.
Vagrant from C Asia, in winter like yellowish-buff Lesser Sandplover (p. 121) but frequenting grassy plains and semi-deserts.
In summer has chestnut breast-band with black mark beneath.
Call a low double or treble whistle.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
V
Golden Plovers: Pluvialis.
Upperparts spangled with grey or yellowish or black; no white on nape; underparts in breeding plumage largely black.
GOLDEN PLOVER Pluvialis apricaria.
A large plover, with yellow-brown upperparts, white axillaries and underwing, and in summer black cheeks, throat and underparts, bordered in northern breeding birds conspicuously with white.
Call a liquid piping ‘tlui’, mournful trilling song.
Gregarious, and easily told from Lapwing (p. 125) in mixed flocks by pointed wings; much given to aerial manoeuvres.
Moors, tundra marshes, arctic heaths; in winter on farmland, estuaries, muddy seashores. 11 in. (28 cm.).
RMW Map 81
LESSER GOLDEN PLOVER Pluvialis dominica.
Vagrant from arctic Asia and America, smaller than Golden Plover with longish legs, greyish-buff underwings and axillaries and more black but less white on face and underparts.
Calls a whistling ‘teeh’ and a high-pitched ‘tu-ee’or ‘tee-tew’, like a Greenshank (p. 131) but richer.
10 in. (25 cm.).
V
GREY PLOVER Pluvialis squatarola.
Plumper than Golden Plover, and distinguished especially by black axillaries, showing in flight, whitish rump and greyish upperparts.
Striking black and white breeding plumage.
Triple call-note, ‘tee-oo-ee’ sounds like boy wolf-whistling, with middle syllable lower than other two.
Individuals usually more widely scattered over shore than Golden Plovers, and less given to manoeuvres in close flocks.
Breeds on tundra; in winter on estuaries and muddy and sandy seashores, and uncommon inland.
11 in. (28 cm.).
MW Map 82
DOTTEREL Eudromias morinellus.
White eyestripes meeting in V on nape, chestnut lower breast and black belly are best field marks, all much fainter in winter.
Chief call a sweet twittering or trilling ‘wit-e-wee, wit-e-wee, wit-e-wee’, also a soft ‘peep, peep’, a sharp ‘ting’ and a brief song uttered on the ground.
Mountain tops, tundra, and recently on arable in Netherlands; migration in open country inland, and in winter mainly in bare, semi-arid places.
8- in. (22 cm.).
SM Map 83
TURNSTONE Arenaria interpres (Scolopacidae).
The only small short-billed wader looking black and white both at rest and in flight; legs orange.
In summer tortoiseshell appearance of upperparts also distinctive.
Calls a twittering, ‘kititit’, a clear ‘keeoo, keeoo’ and a grunting ‘tuk-a-tuk’.
Turns over small stones and weed in search of food.
Breeds on tundra and adjacent coasts, also on small islands in Baltic; in winter mainly on rocky and weedy shores, often with Purple Sandpipers (p. 129).
9 in. (23 cm.).
MW Map 84  
LAPWINGS: Vanellus.
A distinct genus of plovers, whose wing-tips are always black and usually have a broad white bar, and whose tail is always white at the base and usually black at the tip.
Rather noisy, especially in breeding season.
LAPWING Vanellus vanellus.
The most distinctive plover of the region, the commonest inland over the greater part of it, and the only Vanellus breeding over most of Europe.
Easily recognised by generally black and white appearance, upperparts showing green in bright sunlight, by crest, and in flight by conspicuously broad rounded wings; throat black in summer, white in winter.
Calls and song all variations on ‘pee-wit’ theme (Peewit is a vernacular English name), usual ground call being ‘peeet’, flight call ‘pee-wit’and song, delivered in striking aerobatic display, ‘p'weet, pee-wit, pee-wit’.
In display flight wings make loud throbbing or ‘lapping’ sound, origin of standard English name.
Highly gregarious.
Farmland, grassland with short turf, marshy fields, moors, heaths, bogs; in winter also at freshwater margins and on estuaries and coastal mud and sandflats. 12 in. (30 cm.).
RSMW Map 85
RED-WATTLED PLOVER Vanellus indicus.
A large black, white and brownish plover, with long yellow legs and distinctive black and white head pattern with a bright red wattle around and in front of each eye.
Loud shrieking call rendered  did ye do it?’or monotonously iterated single note.
Slow deliberate flight.
Not very gregarious.
Open country near fresh water.
13 in. (33 cm.).
WHITE-TAILED PLOVER Vanellus leucurus.
Brown and white, with long yellow legs; most easily recognised in flight, which reveals pure white rump and tail and strikingly black and white wing pattern.
Loud double call like Lapwing but less high-pitched.
Marshes and freshwater margins; resident in S Iraq, rare vagrant elsewhere in S of region.
11 in. (28 cm.).
SPUR-WINGED PLOVER Vanellus spinosus.
Predominantly black and white, black on crown, throat and underparts white on sides of face, throat and breast, and typical black and white Vanellus wing and tail pattern; slightly crested, small spur at angle of wing.
Voice not unlike Red-wattled Plover but higher-pitched ‘zit-zeet-zeet’.
Flies slowly, stands in hunched position.
Open country near flowing fresh and salt water.
10 ½in.
(27 cm.).
SOCIABLE PLOVER Vanellus greganus.
Another rather large grey-brown plover, with distinctive black crown, encircled by white lines meeting on forehead and nape, and typical black and white Vanellus wing and tail patterns.
Belly dark chestnut in summer, giving impression at any distance of a pale bird with dark crown and belly.
Calls a short high-pitched whistle and a harsh grating note.
Breeds on dry steppes, wintering in dry open country and farmland as well as at freshwater margins.
11 ½in.
(29 cm.).
V  
SANDPIPERS and SNIPE: Scolopacidae. pp. 127 41.
Long-billed, small to large waders.
STINT-TYPE SANDPIPERS: Calidris and Limicola, pp.127–9.
Mostly rather small waders, the smallest called stints (peeps in N America), with only moderately long bill and legs and shortish wings and neck.
Usually rather subdued piping or twittering calls, flocks often keeping up a conversational twitter.
Breeding on tundra and moors, wintering mainly on coasts.
BROAD-BILLED SANDPIPER Limicola falcinellus.
Resembles a rather small dark long-billed short-legged winter Dunlin, with distinctive snipe-like markings on mantle and two white lines down each side; coppery edges of secondaries show at close quarters.
Conspicuous white eyestripe forks behind eye; throat white, bill distinctly decurved at tip.
Flight call a low-pitched trilling ‘chr-r-eek’, also a double note and a trilling song in breeding season.
Rather solitary.
6 ½in.
(16.5 cm.).
V
CURLEW-SANDPIPER Calidris ferruginea.
In flight house-martin-like white rump distinguishes at all times from all small waders, except White-rumped (p. 136), Green and Wood Sandpipers (p. 134), all of which have straight bills.
Markedly curved bill is other good field mark at all times.
In summer rufous plumage distinguishes from all except larger Knot and white-bellied Sanderling (p. 129), both also straight-billed.
Immature has buffish tinge.
In winter like Dunlin, but larger, slimmer, with longer legs and longer, curved bill.
Flight note a soft ‘chirrup’.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
M Map 86
DUNLIN Calidris alpina.
Generally the commonest small wader of the shore, very variable in size, northern breeding birds larger than southern ones.
In summer is only small wader with black lower breast and belly.
In winter, when breast greyish, differs from Sanderling (p. 129) in contrast between grey-brown upperparts and whiter underparts and no black shoulder spot, from much larger and greyer Knot (p. 129) by white sides of rump and tail.
Bill slightly decurved, especially in northern birds.
Juvenile has smudgy mark on sides of lower breast.
Flight-note a rather weak ‘treep’ or ‘teerp’, trilling song.
Breeds also on wet heaths and coastal marshes.
6 ½–7 ½in.
(17–19 cm.). rsMW Map 87
TEMMINCK'S STINT Calidris temminckii.
Differs from Little Stint in appearing more like a miniature Common Sandpiper (p. 133), and in having white outer tail feathers and greenish-yellow legs.
Voice, a shrill spluttering ‘pt-r-r-r-r’ and habit of towering when flushed, also distinct from Little Stint.
On passage mainly at freshwater margins, with vegetation cover.
5 ½in.
(14 cm.).
M(b) Map 88
LITTLE STINT Calidris minuta.
The smallest breeding wader of the region, like a miniature straight-billed Dunlin with white sides to rump but no white in tail.
Upperparts boldly patterned, with white belly in summer and pure white breast in winter; legs black, cf.
Temminck's Stint.
Immature shows two distinctive white V's on back.
Flight note ‘chik’ sometimes prolonged to a short trill. 5 ½in.
(13 cm.).
Mw Map 89  
KNOT Calidris canutus.
A dumpy wader, grey in winter, rufous in summer, intermediate in size between Redshank (p. 131) and Dunlin (p. 127) In winter differs from smaller Dunlin and Sanderling in uniform grey tail, from larger Redshank in no white on wings, and from larger, less gregarious Grey Plover (p. 123) in longer bill and no black under wings.
Summer plumage distinctive, except from white-bellied Sanderling and white-rumped Curlew Sandpiper (p. 127).
Call a low ‘knut’.
Highly gregarious in winter, flocks appearing tightly packed at a distance, feeding with their heads well down.
10 in. (25 cm.).
MW Map 90
SANDERLING Calidris alba.
Slightly larger than Dunlin (p. 127) and in winter easily told from all other same-sized birds on shore by almost white appearance with blackish shoulder spot.
In summer rufous above and on breast.
white belly distinguishing from both Dunlin and larger Knot; more conspicuous white wing-bar separates from Dunlin at all times.
Flight note ‘twick, twick’.
Patters fast and restlessly along edge of tide, preferring to run rather than fly when approached.
Almost confined to sandy shores.
8 in. (20 cm.).
MW Map 91
PURPLE SANDPIPER Calidris maritima.
Slightly larger than Dunlin (p. 127), and the only small dark wader with yellow legs likely to be met with on rocky shores.
White wing-bar, round-shouldered appearance and frequent association with Turnstones (p. 123) are other useful pointers.
Summer adult and juvenile speckled paler; purple gloss on mantle only visible in very good light.
Call a low ‘weet-wit’, also a piping note.
Not very gregarious.
In winter on rocky shores, reefs, weed-covered groynes, breakwaters and patches of stones.
84 in. (21 cm.).
MW Map 92
PHALAROPES: Phalaropodidae.
Small, rather tame and confiding aquatic waders, much the smallest birds likely to be seen swimming, except for a few all-dark petrels.
Winter plumage grey and white, the two common species with a wing-bar; feet lobed.
Males smaller, duller than females.
Flight rather weak, but buoyant swimmers, like tiny gulls, often spinning round in circles and picking insects off surface.
Pelagic in winter.
GREY PHALAROPE Phalaropus fulicarius.
In summer has reddish throat and underparts; always differs from Red-necked Phalarope in shorter stouter bill yellow at tip (male) or base (female) and in winter has rather more uniform grey back.
Call a low ‘twit’.
8 in. (20 5 cm.).
Mw Map 93
RED-NECKED PHALAROPE Phalaropus lobatus.
In summer orange patches on sides of neck and throat are diagnostic; bill blackish, thin, almost needle-like.
Calls ‘twit’, ‘tirric, tirric’ and a curious little pre-flight grunt.
Flight graceful and rather swallow-like, faster than Grey Phalarope. 7 in. (18 cm.). sm Map 94
WILSON'S PHALAROPE Phalaropus tricolor.
A transatlantic vagrant, larger, longer-billed, much more prone to run on land, white rump, no wing-bar. 9 in. (23 cm.).
A  
Shanks and Sandpipers: Tringa. pp. 131–3.
Fairly long-legged and long-billed small to medium waders, less gregarious than Calidris (pp. 127–9), and with conspicuous white marks on wings or rump and loud piping calls.
In winter by shallow fresh and salt water.
TEREK SANDPIPER Tringa cinereus.
Rather like a small Redshank, especially in flight, but with long upcurved bill, less white on open wing and rump, and shorter yellow legs; two black stripes down back.
Has trilling call, based on ‘du’, also disyllabic alarm note and whimbrel-like call.
Song varied and musical.
On the ground bobs head and resembles Common Sandpiper (p. 133) in other ways.
Breeds by fresh water in forest and scrub.
9 in. (23 cm.).
V
REDSHANK Tringa totanus The only wader with a broad white hindwing, which with equally conspicuous white rump makes striking contrast in flight.
At rest grey-brown plumage relieved only by orange-red bill and legs.
Various loud yelping but fairly musical cries, mainly elaborations of ‘tu ‘note; also a loud clamorous cry when startled and a scolding ‘teuk-teuk-teuk’ or ‘chip-chip-chip’when alarmed.
Yodelling song based on more musical call-notes.
Fast direct flight with quick clipped wing-beats; at rest bobs head when suspicious.
Grassy fresh and coastal marshes, damp grassland, wet heaths.
11 in. (28 cm.).
RMW Map 95
SPOTTED REDSHANK Tringa erythropus.
In summer the only all-dark wader with a wedge-shaped white rump.
Long, almost snipe-like red-based bill always distinguishes from other ‘shanks.
In winter from Redshank also by dark wings, white underparts and longer legs, trailing well behind in flight, and from Greenshank by darker upper parts and red legs.
Call note diagnostic, a clear disyllabic ‘too-it’ or ‘tchueet: quite distinct from normal call of both the others; also a scolding ‘chick-chick-chick’.
Breeds in swampy places in forest, heath and tundra; in winter mainly at brackish and salt water margins.
12 in. (30 cm.).
Mw Map 96
GREENSHANK Tringa nebularia.
Larger and paler than Redshank, with no white on wings but a larger wedge of white on black, grey-blue bill, very slightly upcurved, and pale olive-green legs.
In winter upper parts much paler and greyer.
Flight note, nearly always uttered when flushed, a clear far-carrying ‘chu-chu-chu: also an insistent redshank-like ‘chip’ note and more rarely a disyllabic call not unlike Spotted Redshank.
Song a fluty repeated ‘ru-tu’.
Not gregarious.
Marshes, bogs, moors, swampy clearings in forests.
12 in. (30 5 cm.). sMw Map 97
MARSH SANDPIPER Tringa stagnatilis.
A miniature Greenshank, but more graceful, with thinner straight bill, white forehead and face, and longer legs, which project further beyond tail.
In summer upperparts appear spotted darker.
In winter greyer, with distinct dark shoulder.
White on rump more elongated than in Wood and Green Sandpipers (p. 133).
Calls ‘teu’, ‘teeoo’, ‘chik’, etc. not so loud as other shanks, also a liquid twittering trill.
Marshy freshwater margins.
9 in. (23 cm.).
V  
COMMON SANDPIPER Tringa hypoleucos.
A small grey-brown wader with white underparts, sides to rump and tail and wing-bar, best distinguished from other similar waders, e.g. winter Dunlin (p. 127), by characteristic flight and call-note and generally solitary habits.
Typically flies low over water, with shrill ‘twee-wee-wee’ call and flickering wings, appearing distinctly bowed when held momentarily at the downward stroke.
Also has a circular display flight (song an elaboration of the call-note); does not tower when flushed; often perches on low objects, bobbing head and tail.
Breeds by freshwater streams and lakes and sheltered inlets of the sea; in winter mainly by fresh water.
Cf.
Spotted Sandpiper (p. 136).
7– in. (20 cm.).
Smw Map 98
WOOD SANDPIPER Tringa glareola.
Intermediate between Common and Green Sandpipers, differing from both in voice and in legs projecting beyond tail in flight, from Common in its white rump and different flight pattern, and from Green in its much less strongly contrasted dark and light appearance, greyish underwing and barred tall.
Usual flight note a rather flat triple ‘wee-wee-wee’ or ‘wit-wit-wit: also a more musical greenshank-like ‘chew-ew’and a shrill alarm note ‘chip-chip-chip’, song, liquid and musical, recalling Redshank.
Towers when flushed.
Breeds in swampy bogs, scrub and woodlands; winters mainly at freshwater margins.
8 in. (20 cm.) sM Map 99
GREEN SANDPIPER Tringa ochropus.
Larger than Wood Sandpiper, and differing especially in its conspicuous white rump contrasting strongly with dark upperparts and barred tip of tail, but much smaller than Greenshank (p. 131), which is paler above.
Cf.
Marsh Sandpiper.
When flushed dashes up and towers with a shrill ‘weet-a-weet’ note, much louder than Wood Sandpiper, before flying off with a rather snipe-like flight.
Song liquid and musical.
Breeds in swampy woodlands, the nest placed in old nest of another bird, in winter mainly by fresh water.
9 in. (23 cm.).
Mw(b) Map 100
RUFF and REEVE Philomachus pugnax.
Male (Ruff) in summer with ruff and ear tufts quite unmistakable; whole plumage very variable, almost any combination of black, white, rufous brown and buff with bars and streaks, ruff usually differing from ear tufts.
Bill and leg colour also variable, bill red, yellow, brown or blackish, legs green, yellow, orange or flesh.
Winter male can be told from Redshank (p. 131) by thicker neck, dark wings, dark centre of rump, distinctive hen-pheasant-like pattern on back, and sometimes by bill and leg colour.
Female (Reeve) and immature are both markedly smaller, and thinner-necked.
Any puzzling ruff-sized wader is much more likely to be a Ruff than an American vagrant.
Rather silent, but has flight note ‘too-i’ and in spring a deep ‘uk’.
Not very gregarious.
Marshes, swamps, damp meadows; in winter at shallow margins of fresh and salt water.
Male 11 l in. (29 cm.), female 9 in. (23 cm.) sMw Map 101   
WHITE-RUMPED SANDPIPER Calidris fuscicollis.
Curved white patch on rump narrower than Curlew Sandpiper's.
Characteristic ‘jeet’ note.
A
SEMIPALMATED SANDPIPER Calidris pusillus.
Greyer, less rufous and with shorter call-note than Least Sandpiper, with stouter bill.
Legs dark.
V 
LEAST SANDPIPER Calidris minutilla.
Smaller, darker and less rufous than Little Stint (p. 127), but with paler legs.
Cf. also Semipalmated Sandpiper.
V
PECTORAL SANDPIPER Calidris melanotos.
Much the commonest transatlantic vagrant; larger than Dunlin (p. 127).
Sharp division between streaked breast and white belly.
A
SHARP-TAILED SANDPIPER Calidris acuminata.
Differs from Pectoral Sandpiper by rufous crown and in summer lack of clear cut breast-band (Siberia) V
BAIRD'S SANDPIPER Calidris bairdii Buff head and breast, wings longer than tail at rest.
no white sides to tail.
V 
SPOTTED SANDPIPER Tringa macularia.
In winter very like Common Sandpiper (p. 133), in summer distinguished by black spots and breast and dark-tipped yellow bill.
A
BUFF-BREASTED SANDPIPER Tryngites subruficollis.
The only small wader with whole underparts buff, like a small long-necked Reeve (p. 133), with small roundish head, short bill and bright yellow legs.
May occur in dry country.
A
WESTERN SANDPIPER Calidris mauri.
Longish, slightly decurved bill, obscure pale wing-bar, rufous upperparts in summer, legs black.
Call a thin ‘jeet’.
V  
SOLITARY SANDPIPER Tringa solitaria.
Like a small Green Sandpiper (p.133) with black rump but white sides to tail.
V
STILT-SANDPIPER Micropalama himantopus.
Long bill, long legs projecting well beyond tail in flight, white rump, no wing-bar, barred underparts in summer.V 
GREATER YELLOWLEGS Tringa melanoleuca.
Like a large yellow-legged Greenshank (p. 131) with white on rump and tail only.
Call louder than Yellowlegs.V
YELLOWLEGS Tringa flavipes.
Like slender Redshank (p. 131) with yellow legs; in flight white only on rump and tail.
Call ‘yew’ or ‘yew-yew’.
A 
UPLAND SANDPIPER Bartramia longicauda.
A slender sandpiper with plover-like habits; small head, short bill, longish rufous tail and barred undersides showing when wings characteristically held upright on alighting.
May fly like Common Sandpiper (p.133), often perches on posts.
Dry open country.V
LONG-BILLED DOWITCHER Limnodromus scolopaceus.
Like a large Snipe (p.141) with white lower back and rump; flanks barred.
Call ‘keek’ or ‘keek-keek-keek: higher pitched than Short-billed Dowitcher.
A
SHORT-BILLED DOWITCHER Limnodromus griseus.
Bill shorter than Long-billed Dowitcher, wings project beyond tail at rest and flanks spotted.
Call ‘tu-tu-tu’.
V 
Curlews: Numenius.
Large, long-legged, white-rumped waders, appearing uniformly brown at rest.
Long curved bill and legs projecting beyond tail distinguish them at once from otherwise not dissimilar immature gulls in flight.
CURLEW Numenius arquata.
The largest and generally the commonest white-rumped brown wader, very variable in size.
Varied repertoire of calls includes characteristic loud ‘quee, quee, quee’ and ‘cooorwee, cooorwee’notes, and a rarely heard whimbrel-like titter.
Loud musical bubbling song, delivered on wing, starts with Plangent version of ‘quee’ note.
Moors, bogs, wet heaths, sand dunes, moist grassland and other open damp country.
21–23 in. (53–58 cm).
RsmW Map 102
SLENDER-BILLED CURLEW Numenius tenuirostris.
Differs from Whimbrel in lacking stripes on head and from both Curlew and Whimbrel in large dark spots on flanks and purer white rump and belly.
Call note briefer and higher-pitched than Curlew; alarm note ‘kew-ee’ Winter visitor from Asian steppes.
16 in. (41 cm.).
WHIMBREL Numenius phaeopus.
Markedly smaller than smallest Curlews, from which also distinguished by faster wing-beats, distinctive tittering trill and at close range by two dark and one pale stripes on head.
Curved bill separates from godwits, whose rufous plumage is also distinctive in summer.
Song resembles Curlew.
High northern, sub-Arctic and Arctic moors and tundra.
16in. (41 cm.). sMw Map 103
Godwits: Limosa.
Fairly large waders. rather variable in size, distinguished from all three curlews by their straight bills and in summer also by their handsome rufous plumage.
BLACK-TAILED GODWIT Limosa limosa.
Easily told from both curlews and Bar-tailed Godwit by conspicuous white bar on wing, also by black and white tail, giving an almost oystercatcher-like appearance in flight.
Flight call ‘wicka, wicka, wicka’, and on breeding grounds also a lapwing-like ‘pee-oo-ee’ and a greenshank-like ‘wik-ik-ik’.
Song a repetition of ‘crweetuu’.
Less given to aerobatics than Bar-tailed Godwit.
Breeds in damp grassland and on wet heaths.
16 in. (41 cm.). sMW Map 104
BAR-TAILED GODWIT Limosa lapponica.
In winter like a straight-billed Whimbrel, in summer reddish plumage precludes confusion.
Differs from Black-tailed Godwit at all times in having no white on wings, in feet scarcely projecting beyond tail in flight and in summer in having reddish vent Legs somewhat shorter than both curlews and Black-tailed Godwit; bill slightly curved upwards at tip.
Flight notes ‘kirruc, kirruc’ and ‘wik-wik-wik-wik-wik’.
Fast direct flight, flocks sometimes performing aerobatics, like Knot (p. 129) and Dunlin (p. 127).
Breeds on marshy parts of the tundra.15 in. (38 cm.).
MW Map 105  
WOODCOCK Scolopax rusticola.
Most often seen either as a long-winged rufous bird flying fast and twistingly out of sight among the trees, or in unmistakable territorial flight (‘roding’).
Roding male flies a circuit at dusk and dawn, with an owlish flight and interrupted wing-beats, uttering two distinct notes, a rather sibilant ‘twisick’ and a frog-like croak or grunting growl Not gregarious.
Forests, heathland with scattered trees, feeding on marshy and swampy ground; on passage also in more open country.
13 ½in.
(34 cm.).
RmW Map 106
Snipe: Gallinago.
Medium-sized brown waders. with long bill and short legs, breeding in marshes, bogs, damp meadows, wet moors and heaths; in winter at freshwater margins with fairly thick vegetation.
GREAT SNIPE Gallinago media.
Only slightly larger than Snipe, differing chiefly in adult's more conspicuous white at sides and tip of tail, also on wing, especially at trailing edge.
Bill somewhat shorter, underparts more heavily marked, and in flight appears darker and heavier, with slower, more direct flight.
Croaks when flushed; collective bubbling song on display grounds.
Sometimes on drier ground, especially in winter 11 in. (28 cm.).
A
JACK SNIPE Lymnocryptes minimus.
Like a small Snipe with a much shorter bill, two narrow instead of one broad pale streaks on crown, and slower and less erratic flight, dropping down much sooner into cover.
No white in tail.
Often silent when flushed, or utters a low weak call.
Drums like Snipe, but in display hovers and bobs up and down like a marionette, making note likened to distant galloping horse.
Breeds in wet swamps and bogs; in winter more often in dry places.
71 in. (19 cm.).
MW Map 107
SNIPE Gallinago gallinago.
Has proportionately the longest bill of any bird in the region, which together with its zigzag flight and loud harsh ‘creech’ when flushed and remarkable ‘drumming’or ‘bleating’display flight, diving at an angle of 45, are its best field marks.
Will perch on low objects, often when uttering an insistent ‘chip-per’, ‘chip-per’.
Often in small parties (‘wisps’) which perform aerial evolutions. 10–in. (27 cm.).
RmW Map 108
PIN-TAILED SNIPE Gallinago stenura.
Very like Snipe, but slightly darker and heavier in flight, axillaries and under wing coverts more heavily and darkly barred; bill shorter; more often on drier ground.
101 in. (27 cm.).
PAINTED SNIPE Rostratula benghalensis (Rostratulidae).
Strikingly patterned, longer-legged than Snipe, with shorter bill turned down at tip.
Female brighter with rufous neck and upper breast, where male grey-brown.
Male has squeaky trill, female wheezy hiss and repeated ‘ook’ in display, also low croak.
In flight legs dangle, and rounded wing-tips show large round buff spots.
Secretive, hard to flush, remaining motionless for long periods.
Swamps, densely vegetated fresh watermargins.
Egypt only.
10 in. (25 cm.)
STONE CURLEW Burhinus oedicnemus (Burhinidae).
Easily told from Curlew (p. 139) by short straight bill (black tip, yellow at base), large round head, yellow legs.
whitish bar on closed wing, and at close quarters by staring yellow eye.
In rather slow, direct flight, with legs trailing behind, also easily recognised by two white and one black bars on wing.
Call more curlew-like than appearance, a wild shrill wailing ‘coo-leee’, often heard at night.
Sometimes in large flocks in autumn.
Open dry, usually stony country, heaths, semi-deserts, farmland.
16 in. (41 cm.).
S Map 109
SENEGAL THICK-KNEE Burhinus senegalensis.
A smaller version of the Stone Curlew, only in Egypt and distinguishable in flight by having only one white wing bar, not visible at rest.
Call more nasal or metallic.
Sandy river beds, orchards, gardens.
15 in. (38 cm.).
PRATINCOLES and COURSERS: Glareolidae.
Smallish plover-like birds, with fairly long legs and pointed bills.
Sexes similar.
Habit of appearing to stand on tiptoe, stretching the neck.
The Pratincoles Pratincola are plover-like on the ground, but swallow-like or tern-like in flight, with long pointed wings, black and white forked tail, legs short; bill short, black with a red base.
BLACK-WINGED PRATlNCOLE Glareola nordmanni.
An E European bird, only vagrant in N Africa, best distinguishable from Collared Pratincole when lifts wings at rest to reveal black underwing but also lacks white-edged secondaries. 10 in. (25 cm.).
V
COLLARED PRATINCOLE Glareola pratincola.
Brown, with creamy throat bordered black; distinctive chestnut underwing shows best when bird raises wings  at rest, in flight may look black.
White rump and black tail also conspicuous in flight.
Immature has blackish streaks on throat, broader but incomplete black collar.
Gregarious, flocks often hawking for flying insects and spiralling up to perform aerobatics.
Flocks noisy, with tern-like chattering.
Sometimes crepuscular.
Open steppes and savannas, sun-baked mudflats, bare freshwater margins.
10 in. (25 cm.).
V
CREAM-COLOURED COURSER Cursorius cursor.
Like a small slim sandy Golden Plover (p. 123), with grey nape, and black and white eyestripes and curved bill.
In jerky flight looks long-winged, with black wing-tips and axillaries conspicuous, but more often alternately runs and crouches, immature has brown-speckled upperparts.
Rather silent, but has a ‘praak-praak’ call-note on the wing.
Deserts and semi deserts.
9 in. (23 cm.).
V
EGYPTIAN PLOVER Pluvianus aegyptius.
A strikingly plumaged, rather short-legged, very tame wader, with conspicuous white eyestripe and greenish black breast-band.
Immature lacks greenish tinge and has some rufous on shoulder.
Call a weak ‘tsi-tsi-tsi’ or ‘teep-teep-teep’.
Freshwater margins, occasionally in nearby villages, in Egypt only, now rare.
8 in. (20 cm).
SKUAS: Stercorariidae.
Dark gull-like seabirds, called Jaegers in North America, noted for their piratical methods of feeding, by pursuing other seabirds, especially gulls and terns, to make them disgorge their last catch.
The persistence with which they fly down their victims is quite distinct from the desultory mutual robbery of immature gulls.
Further distinguished from immature gulls by white wing patch (but beware occasional immature gull with pale wing patch), and by holding their wings more angled at the carpal joint.
Adults (except Great Skua) have two distinct plumage phases, dark and light, and the middle feathers of the tail elongated; in immatures these feathers project scarcely at all.
Bill slightly hooked.
Breeding on barren moorlands and tundra; passing along coasts on passage, but well out to sea in winter, and rare inland after breeding.
Nest on ground, adults often persistently attacking and even buffeting humans and animals who come too close
GREAT SKUA Stercorarius skua.
Superficially like an immature Herring Gull (p. 151), but with shorter wings and tail; larger, heavier than other skuas, the white wing-flashes more marked.
Calls ‘a-er’ in flight and a deep ‘tuk, tuk’in defence of its nest.
Flight appreciably heavier than a gull but less so than a buzzard, and remarkably agile when chasing other birds; will pursue even Gannets.
Also has a harrier-like display flight, with wings raised.
23 in. (58 cm.).
Sm Map 110
ARCTIC SKUA Stercoranus parasiticus.
Generally the commonest skua, the size of a Common Gull (p. 153).
Many puzzling intermediates between dark and pale phases, ranging from all dark to cheeks, neck and underparts creamy white, the cheeks and neck being barred brown in winter.
Two common intermediates are brown with distinct dark cap and paler cheeks, and brown with yellow neck ring.
Generally appears much darker than any immature gull, from which adults readily distinguished by central pointed tail feathers projecting 3–4 in; in immature these scarcely project.
On breeding grounds has a wailing ‘ka-aaow’ and a deeper ‘tuk-tuk’.
Flight graceful, buoyant and rather hawk-like. 18 in. (46 cm.).
Sm Map 111
POMARINE SKUA Stercorarius pomarinus.
Larger than Arctic Skua, from which adult best told by blunt and twisted central tail feathers, but immature separable only by larger size.
Pale forms much more frequent than dark.
Call a sharp ‘which-yew’ and other, more gull-like notes.
Flight heavier than Arctic Skua. 20 in. (51 cm.).
M
LONG-TAILED SKUA Stercorarius longicaudus.
Adult is the most distinctive skua and the smallest in bulk, easily told by the pointed central tail feathers extending from 5 to 10 in. beyond the rest of the tail.
Legs grey, bill black.
Dark form now extremely rare.
Pale forms usually lack breast band found in other skuas and have dark body.
Immature distinguishable from other immature skuas by small size, smaller bill and much less white in wings.
A high-pitched ‘kreee’ at breeding grounds, otherwise silent.
Flight more graceful than Arctic Skua. 20–22 in. (51–56 cm).
M  
GULLS and TERNS: Laridae. pp. 147–63.
Gregarious long-winged web-footed seabirds, some species also occurring inland, divided into the larger, stouter Gulls and the smaller, slenderer Terns (pp.159–63).
GULLS: Larinae.
Adults have white underparts, grey to black upperparts, head generally white, tail generally square-ended, bill and legs red, pink or yellow; for winter plumages, see pp. 154–5.
Immatures (see pp. 156–7) start brown and gradually develop adult plumage, over 3–4 years in the larger species.
Wings broader and blunter than Terns, and flight heavier, often soaring; legs longer.
Gulls rarely dive.
Many are scavengers; others rarely come to land except to breed.
Colonial nesting, often very noisy on nesting grounds on cliffs or flat ground by the sea, some also inland by fresh water.
AUDOUIN'S GULL Larus audouinii.
The rarest breeding gull of the region, intermediate between Common (p. 153) and Herring Gulls (p. 151) in size, differing from both in narrower wings; red rim round eye; blackish-green legs, and red bill with a black band near the yellow tip, which looks all black at a distance.
Immature pale brown, with grey crown and neck.
Calls a hoarse ‘kiaou’ and a quieter ‘crick-crick’, alarm call a goose-like ‘guggugguggugg’.
Flight buoyant, like a Gannet (p. 31).
Breeds on rocky islands, otherwise mainly at sea.
19 ½in.
(50 cm.).
SLENDER-BILLED GULL Larus genei.
Like a largish winter Black-headed Gull (p. 149), sharing its white forewing blaze, but with longer neck and longer, stouter, much darker red bill (yellow in winter).
In breeding plumage white of body suffused pink.
Immature, see p. 156; legs yellow.
Calls varied, some resembling Gull-billed Tern (p. 159), others more laughing and gull-like, ‘kau-kau’.
Breeds by fresh and brackish lakes and coastal lagoons, wintering mainly in coastal waters.
17 in. (43 cm.).
V
SOOTY GULL Larus hemprichii.
A dark brown gull, with back of neck, tail and belly white; bill greenish-yellow, with black and red tip; legs olive-green; eyes dark.
Immature has tail brown but throat white, with most of bill slate blue.
Call a mewing whistle.
Prefers perching on rocks or buoys to resting on water; piratical in habits, like skuas (pp. 145).
16 ½in.
(42 cm.).
WHITE-EYED GULL Larus leucophthalmus.
Differs from the slightly larger Sooty Gull, with which it hardly overlaps, in its black head and throat, white ring round white eye, paler breast, longer and slenderer black-tipped red bill and yellow legs.
Immature differs from immature Sooty Gull in blackish red bill tipped red.
Call similar.
16 in. (41 cm.).
GREAT BLACK-HEADED GULL Larus ichthyaetus.
In summer the only large gull with dark hood; has white mark around bright red eye-rim.
In winter resembles large Herring Gull (p. 151) with dark smudges on head and whiter axillaries and upper tail coverts.
At all times has distinctive tricoloured bill and greenish legs.
Immatures best told from other large immature gulls by distinctive shape of bill, heavy and appearing to droop at tip.
Breeding call a laughing ‘kyauu-kyauu-kyau,’ otherwise a loud harsh croaking ‘kraapa’.
Flight graceful, often sailing with outstretched wings for long periods; indulges in piracy against smaller gulls.
Breeds by salt or brackish water, wintering in coastal waters; by fresh water only on passage.
26 in. (66 cm.).
V  
BLACK-HEADED GULL Larus ridibundus.
The smallest common breeding gull of the region; like Little and Mediterranean Gulls has red bill and legs.
In summer, has conspicuous chocolate-brown hood, not extending on to nape, turning white with dark smudges in winter.
In winter easily distinguished by conspicuous white forewing, black only at the tip.
Most frequent call a raucous ‘kraah’ and other harsh cries.
Flight strong and buoyant over long distances, more wavering and almost tern-like at other times.
Breeds on bogs, marshes, islands in lakes, dunes and shingle; in winter widespread inland on farmland, short turf, and waste ground, and by fresh water, as well as on coasts and estuaries, a typical urban bird in N W Europe.
14–15 in. (35–38 cm.).
RsmW Ma p 112
LITTLE GULL Larus minutus The smallest and most tern-like gull of the region.
From Black-headed Gull differs in summer by black hood extending over nape on to upper neck, in winter by blackish bill and at all times by smoky grey underwing and no black on wing-tips.
Differs from marsh terns in winter by square white tail, smoky underwing and no sharply defined white shoulder.
Diagonal wing-bar separates cleft-tailed immature (p. 156) from all except larger immature Kittiwake (p. 156).
Calls a rather harsh, sharp ‘kek-kek-kek’ and ‘ka-ka-ka’.
Flight graceful and wavering, recalling marsh terns.
Breeds by fresh water pools, bogs and marshes; on passage at coastal and fresh waters; in winter at sea.
11 in. (28 cm.).
Mw Map 113
MEDITERRANEAN GULL Larus melanocephalus.
More like Common than Black-headed Gull, to which black head of adult in summer is only real likeness.
Stockier build than Common Gull (p. 153) with white wing-tips, heavy red bill appearing to droop at tip, and longer red legs, while winter and immature birds usually have dark smudge through eye.
Second-year birds have black wing-tips, but without white spots.
Calls higher-pitched than Common but deeper than Black-headed: ‘kau-kau-kyau: ‘kee-er’ or ‘kek-ke-ke’.
Flight rather jerky, with shallower wing-beats than Common.
 On grassy coastal marshes and flats; otherwise frequents coastal waters.
15 in. (39 cm.).
MW(b)
BONAPARTE'S GULL Larus philadelphia.
A vagrant from North America, differing from Black-headed Gull in its shorter slenderer black bill, dark slate-grey hood in summer, orange legs of adult.
under surface of primaries white, and more buoyant tern-like flight.
12–14 in. (30 35 cm.)
V
SABINE'S GULL Larus sabini.
A small tern-like gull, the only one in the region with a markedly forked tail; forewings strikingly black, with trailing edge contrastingly white.
Adult in summer is only gull with grey hood, extending over nape.
Immature, with grey nape and black-tipped tail, lacks diagonal dark wing-bar of immature Kittiwake and Little Gull.
Harsh grating cry resembles Arctic Tern (p. 161), but briefer.
Flight buoyant, feeding off surface of water.
Breeds on marshy tundras by fresh or coastal waters, winters at sea.
13 in. (33 cm.).
Mw  
HERRING GULL Larus argentatus.
The commonest and most widespread of the larger gulls, very variable in size; males average larger than females.
Variable also in mantle colour from silver grey to slate grey; the British and Western European argentatus the palest, but other races, notably heuglini (N W Russia) and atlantis (Atlantic Islands) almost as dark as Lesser Black-back.
Since all except pink-legged argentatus and W Scandinavian omissus are yellow-legged, considerable confusion with Lesser Black-back is possible, though Herring Gull generally larger with stouter bill.
Has many wailing, chuckling and yelping notes, commonest being ‘kee-yow’ and in spring a loud echoing ‘gah-gah-gah’.
Flight strong, deliberate, frequently soaring and gliding.
Breeds on sea cliffs, dunes, shingle and marine islands, more rarely inland, even on buildings.
In winter widespread both on coasts and inland, also feeding on rubbish dumps and short turf.
22–26 in. (56 66 cm.).
RW Map 114
LESSER BLACK-BACK Larus fuscus.
Great and Lesser Black-backs are the only two gulls which are all white except for dark grey to black mantle and wings.
Lesser is always markedly smaller than Great, with less stout bill and yellow legs (but sub-adult and winter Lessers may still have pink legs).
British and W European race of Lesser graellsii has much paler mantle than Great, with contrasting black wing-tips, but in Scandinavian race fuscus mantle often as dark as Great.
Cf. also yellow-legged races of Herring Gull.
Calls (rather gruffer), similar to Herring Gull, but migratory in N of range.
21–22 in. (53–56 cm.).
Srm Map 115
GREAT BLACK-BACK Larus marinus.
A larger edition of Lesser Black-back; upperparts almost black and legs pink at all times.
Flight even more ponderous than Herring Gull, and voice similar but deeper and more raucous, with a deep goblin-like chuckle in nesting territory.
Breeds mainly on sea cliffs or marine islands, more rarely on flat shores and inland.
In winter more confined to coast than Herring and Lesser Black-back. 25–31 in. (64 79 cm.).
RW Map 116
GLAUCOUS GULL Larus hyperboreus.
Glaucous and Iceland Gulls are like all-pale Great and Lesser Black-backs, their pale silver-grey mantle and wings unrelieved by any black at the tip.
Glaucous has a larger head and neck and heavier bill, recalling Great Black-back, whereas the Iceland's are notably smaller and slenderer.
Glaucous extremely variable in size, from Herring to Great Black-back.
At very close range the colour of the orbital ring round the adult's eye (yellow in Glaucous brick-red in Iceland) is decisive.
In flight the ponderous wing-beats of the Glaucous contrast with the quick, almost kittiwake-like flight of the Iceland.
Breeds on cliffed and rocky coasts visiting flat coasts and harbours in winter, but rare inland.
Hybrids with Herring Gull frequent in Iceland.
25–32 in. (64 81 cm.).
W Map 117
ICELAND GULL Larus glaucoides.
A small version of Glaucous Gull, with smaller head and less stout bill, recalling Common Gull (p. 153), and much more buoyant flight, but voice, habits and habitat similar.
Cf.
Ivory Gull (p. 153).
22–26 in. (56–66 cm.).
W Map 118  
COMMON GULL Larus canus.
Like a small Herring Gull (p. 151), but adult easily separated by yellow-green legs and bill; bill much less stout and with no red spot near tip.
From winter Black-headed Gull (p. 154) also differs in bill and leg colour, as well as white spots on blunter black wing-tips and no white blaze on forewing.
Cf.
Kittiwake and Mediterranean Gull (p. 149).
Winter adults have heads streaked ash-brown like Herring Gull, not smudged darker, like Black-headed.
Most frequent call resembles a rather feeble but high-pitched Herring, ‘kee-ya’, also has a gobbling ‘kak-kak-kak’, often heard from flocks on migration in spring.
Flight more graceful than Herring but less so than Black-headed.
Breeds on rocky, sandy and shingly coasts and marine islands, also by fresh water inland.
In winter widespread on coasts, estuaries and farmland; in some regions an increasing urban bird.
16 in. (41 cm.).
RmW Map 119
KITTIWAKE Rissa tridactyla.
Adult like a rather daintier Common Gull but with no white spots on black wingtips, black legs and in winter uniform grey head and nape.
Immatures (‘tarrocks’)(p. 156) have strikingly different wing-pattern, with black bar across forewing and another diagonally from ‘elbow’ on to hind wing, but cf.
Little Gull (p. 156), which also has slightly cleft tail, with a dark bar at the tip; cf. also Sabine's gull (p. 149).
At breeding colonies air is filled with deafening cries of ‘kitt-ee-wayke’, also has a low ‘uk-uk-uk’ and a wailing note.
Flight as graceful and buoyant as Black-headed Gull; habitually follows ships.
Breeds on ledges on sea cliffs and in sea caves, exceptionally also on buildings, shingle or dunes by the sea; in winter mainly well out at sea, though flocks occasionally visit coast.
16 in. (41 cm.)
RSmw Map 120
IVORY GULL Pagophila eburnea.
Adult is only pure white medium-sized seabird of region, having no darker streaks or smudges on head in winter: breast faintly suffused pink.
Bill yellow tipped red, legs short, black: vermilion orbital ring round eye.
Immature (p. 156) has unique plumage among seabirds of region, with grey face and throat, dark spots on upperparts, and wing-tips and tail-bar black: bill grey with whitish tip.
Harsh ‘krii-krii’, ‘keer’ and ‘karr’notes resemble Arctic Tern.
Buoyant, tern-like flight not often seen on surface of water.
Nests on cliffs and rocky ground near sea, wintering at sea mainly at the edge of the pack ice.
171 in. (44 cm.).
V
ROSS'S GULL Rhodostethia rosea.
The second smallest gull of the region, breeding adult has distinctive combination of narrow black collar, whole plumage except mantle and wings strongly suffused pink, markedly long wedge-shaped tail, short thin black bill and red legs.
In winter (p. 154) black collar goes, pink fades and creamy white head, tail and body contrast with pale grey upperparts.
Note small bill, dark underwing, and lack of dark wing-tips.
Immature like immature Sabine's but with wedge-shaped tail.
Voice higher-pitched than other gulls, with wide vocabulary, most frequent note ‘e-vu, e-vu’.
Flight agile, tern-like with long, pointed wings, angled like a tern's.
Breeds grassy, wooded tundra; in winter on Arctic coasts and at sea.
12 ½in.
(32 cm.).
V  
TERNS: Sterninae. pp. 159–63.
Most terns resemble graceful small gulls, with longer wings, deeply forked tail, and thinner, more pointed bills, often carried almost vertically downwards in their buoyant flight, as they hover and plunge into the water after their small fish prey.
The common or Sea Terns (Sterna, Gelochelidon, Hydroprogne) of the region are all grey and white with white wing-tips and black head and nape, the forehead turning white in winter.
Size, bill colour and calls are the best field marks.
Juveniles have upperparts speckled brown.
Summer visitors, colonial nesting, very noisy at breeding colonies; nest always on flat ground usually sand, shingle or rocky marine islands.
GULL-BILLED TERN Gelochelidon nilotica.
Very similar to Sandwich Tern, but has much shorter, stouter all-black bill, grey rump and tail and black soles to feet; also broader-winged and heavier-bodied.
At rest in mixed flocks legs show longer.
Head of winter adult whiter than most other terns.
Immatures have paler markings on upperparts, white forehead and reddish legs.
Calls quite distinct, ‘quac-quac-quac’ and ‘cher-wuc’Flight rather heavier and more gull-like. 15 in. (38 cm.).
A(b)
CASPIAN TERN Hydroprogne tschegrava.
The largest tern of the region, like small black-capped Herring Gull (p. 151), but with very stout red bill and forked tail.
Streaked white forehead and dark undersides of primaries separate from Royal Tern in winter, when Caspian's bill may also be orange-yellow.
Immature like winter adult with dark marks on upperparts and black-tipped tail.
Call a rather gruff ‘kaah’‘kaa-uh’.
Flight gull-like rather than tern-like.
Mainly coastal.
21 in. (53 cm.).
A
ROYAL TERN Sterna maxima.
Almost as large and heavily built as Caspian Tern, but in summer has orange-yellow bill and more distinct crest, in winter (but not during the moult) has unstreaked white forehead, and at all times has more deeply forked tail, paler undersides of primaries, and higher-pitched call, a trilling ‘kir’.
Only likely off N W Africa.
20 in. (50 cm.).
V
SWIFT TERN Sterna bergii.
Appreciably larger than Sandwich Tern, adult distinguishable from Lesser Crested only by size, heavier and yellower bill and darker grey plumage, but immature apparently lacks black wing-bar. 19 in. (48 cm)
LESSER CRESTED TERN Sterna bengalensis.
Best told from Sandwich and Gull-billed Terns by smaller size, orange-yellow bill and narrow white band on forehead even in breeding plumage; from Gull-billed also by longer bill and yellow soles of feet.
Immature differs from immature Sandwich in blackish bar along shoulder of wing and black outer tail feathers.
Cf.
Swift Tern.
14 in. (36 cm.).
SANDWICH TERN Sterna sandvicensis.
A larger tern than any on p. 161, though loss stout, further differing from Common Tern in its white upperparts, yellow-tipped black bill, yellow-soled black feet, less deeply forked tail, crested appearance of elongated nape feathers in a wind, heavier flight and distinctive call-note, a rather harsh ‘kirrick’ or kirr-whit' Immature brown on head and nape, and tail tipped blackish.
Almost exclusively coastal.
16 in. (41 cm.).
Sm Map 121  
COMMON TERN Sterna hirundo.
Generally the commonest and most widespread tern of the region, extremely like Arctic Tern.
Two of the safest field marks are bill colour (vermilion Common, blood-red Arctic) and leg length (much shorter in Arctic, which at rest may almost appear legless).
In full breeding plumage Common normally has dark tip to bill, but Arctic normally does not; in winter both have blackish bills.
In flight all Arctic's primaries, seen against light, appear translucent and silvery, but Common has only innermost four primaries making a pale translucent patch.
Most Commons have much whiter breast and underparts than most Arctics, contrasting strongly with their mantles.
Juvenile Common best distinguished from juvenile Arctic by pale flesh-pink (not black) basal half of bill, brownish tinge (which Arctic lacks) on head and mantle, much more conspicuous black shoulder at rest and bar on forewing in flight, and a broad dusky (not narrow black) band on trailing edge of wing seen from beneath.
Main calls, strident and high-pitched, are ‘keeerree’, ‘keeyah’ and ‘kik-kik-kik.’
Breeds by fresh water, and on coast.
In winter on S coasts and at sea.
14 in. (35 cm.).
SM Map 122
ARCTIC TERN Sterna paradisaea.
Very similar to Common Tern, q.v.
for distinctions.
Some Arctics are so grey on the face that a white streak appears to separate the face from the black crown, a feature never seen in the Common; but cf.
White-cheeked Tern.
Often breeds in same colonies, but generally more northerly, and not inland except on the tundra.
14 in. (35 cm.).
SM Map123
ROSEATE TERN Sterna dougallii.
Longer tail streamers, extending far beyond wing-tips at rest (Arctic's extend a little beyond, Common's not at all) account for greater length.
Otherwise best distinguished from Common and Arctic by all black bill (except from midsummer to early autumn, when base becomes red), and distinctive harsh, grating ‘aach, aach’ call note.
Field marks include longer legs and pinkish flush on breast in summer, but Common has breast tinged pale mauve.
At any distance can sometimes be picked out by generally whiter appearance.
Juvenile differs from juvenile Common in its all-black bill, black legs, all dark head, virtual lack of dark shoulder mark at rest and white band on trailing edge of underside of wing.
Mostly on marine islands; rare at fresh water, even on migration.
15 in. (38 cm.).
Sm Map 124
WHITE-CHEEKED TERN Sterna repressa.
Much darker grey than Common Tern, both above and below, so white cheeks stand out very conspicuously; differing also in winter in its blackish-red bill and more uniformly grey tail.
More deeply forked tail and longer thinner bill separate from Whiskered Tern (p 163) in summer.
13 in. (33 cm.).
LITTLE TERN Sterna albifrons.
Much the smallest sea tern, and readily told by its always white forehead, its black-tipped yellow bill, its orange-yellow legs and its quicker, jerkier flight, hovering like a marionette.
Chief calls ‘kik-kik’, ‘pee-e-eer’ and trills.
9 ½in.
(24 cm.).
SM Map 125  
BRIDLED TERN Sterna anaethetus.
A sea tern (p. 158) with all dark upperparts, except for a white collar, confusable only with Sooty Tern.
Forehead white with white eyebrows extending back beyond eye, bill black, white-tipped tail deeply forked.
In winter head mottled with white, eye-stripe indistinct and upperparts sparingly marked white.
Immature similar, but with whole upperparts mottled buff.
Flight graceful, rather slow, with the body appearing to move up and down with each rather exaggerated wing-beat; may soar high.
Call ‘kirk’.
Coastal and maritime.
14 in. (35 cm.).
V
SOOTY TERN Sterna fuscata.
Rare vagrant to Red Sea and E Atlantic seas and coasts from Western Approaches to Canaries, a larger version of Bridled Tern, with darker upperparts, no white collar, white of forehead not extending back beyond eye, and outer tail feathers not wholly white at tip.
Immature all sooty black with white speckles on upperparts.
Flight less buoyant.
Oceanic.
16 in (40 cm).
V
MARSH TERNS: Chlidonias.
Smaller than any sea terns, except Little Tern; in winter with same general pattern of pale grey above and white below, with white forehead, but tail less forked and bill rather slender.
Cf.
Little Gull (p. 149).
Most distinctive feature is graceful dipping flight, often stooping to surface of water to pick up insects, but very rarely diving in.
Breed exclusively by fresh and brackish water and marshes; often in coastal waters on migration.
BLACK TERN Chlidonias niger.
Generally the commonest marsh tern and the only water bird that has whole head and body black or greyish black, relieved only by white of under tail coverts; bill black, legs reddish.
Female has greyer throat and underparts.
Wings show paler underneath.
In winter differs from all sea terns by more sharply defined white shoulder patch, variable but distinctive black spot on side of breast and black bill, as well as by less deeply forked tail.
Immature resembles winter adult but with darker mantle.
Large flocks have a collective reedy cry; also occasionally calls ‘kik, kik’, ‘keek’ or krew'.
Nest floating on vegetation in shallow water.
9 ½in.
(24 cm.). sM (b) Map 126
WHITE-WINGED BLACK TERN Chlidonias leucopterus.
In summer readily distinguished from Black Tern by conspicuous white forewing, rump and tail, shorter stouter reddish-brown bill, but in winter hard to separate except by lack of dark spot on side of breast, paler rump or brighter red legs.
Complete white collar, paler rump and less forked tail are best distinctions from winter Whiskered Tern.
Immature has contrasting dark mantle and grey wings.
Calls hoarser, on passage sometimes a guttural ‘kerr’.
Habitat similar but breeds in somewhat drier marshes.
9 ½in.
(24 cm.).
A
WHISKERED TERN Chlidonias hybrida.
In summer like a sea tern with black cap, grey underparts, white cheeks and red bill, white underwing and under tail coverts conspicuous in flight.
In winter pale on upperparts and very like Common Tern (p. 161).
Immature differs from both black terns in its mottled mantle, and has darker rump than White-winged.
Very noisy at breeding colonies: double flight-note alternates a rasping note like a Corncrake with a shrill cheep like a domestic chick. 9 ¼in.
(24 cm.).
V  
AUKS: Alcidae.
Short-necked, short-tailed black and white diving seabirds; sexes alike.
Wings rather short and narrow, legs set well back, giving upright stance at rest.
Voice a harsh growling ‘arrrr’ or ‘karrrr’.
Flight whirring, fast and direct, low over water, legs and feet often outstretched.
Auks swim and dive readily and constantly, but on land can only shuffle awkwardly.
In winter at sea.
RAZORBILL Alca torda.
Easily told from all other seabirds by unique bill, flattened in vertical plane, and from Guillemot also by white line on bill and in summer also on face.
White wing-bar shows in flight.
Winter adult and immature also have white cheeks and throat, immature's bill much less stout.
Breeds in loose colonies, usually higher up cliff than Guillemots, with the single egg (oval, not pear-shaped) more often sheltered than in the open.
16 in. (41 cm.).
Rsw Map 127
GUILLEMOT Uria aalge.
Generally the commonest auk, with a long straight unmarked bill.
In good light brown plumage of southern albionis form (chocolate in summer, greyish in winter) should also be evident; northern birds aalge have upperparts black though head always browner.
Striking bridled variety, more frequent in north, has narrow white ring round and line back from eye.
Juvenile has a shrill whistle.
Breeds in close-packed colonies on inaccessible open cliff ledges single egg markedly pear-shaped. 16; in. (42 cm.).
Rsw Map 128
BRÜNNICH'S GUILLEMOT Uria lomvia.
Virtually impossible to distinguish from northern Guillemots at any distance, but has darker head, shorter and stouter bill with thin pale line along base of upper mandible, and in winter also by black of crown extending well below eye, with no dark stripe on face.
16 ½in.
(42 cm.).
V
PUFFIN Fratercula arctica.
The smallest breeding auk south of the Arctic, unmistakable in summer, with its grotesque bill and face ornamentation, giving it a solemn clown-like mien, and even in winter when bill smaller and mainly yellow; no white wing-bar.
Cheeks and throat-band grey in winter.
Juvenile has plaintive ‘chip-chip-chip’ call.
Breeds in often huge colonies in burrows, usually in turf on islands.
12 in. (30 cm.). rSw Map 129
BLACK GUILLEMOT Cepphus grylle.
In summer the only seabird all black with a large white wing-patch and in winter the only one with barred black and white upperparts; legs red.
Immature like winter adult but browner.
Call a rather feeble high-pitched whistle or whine.
The least sociable auk, breeding in very loose colonies, in crevices of cliffs and rocks.
Shallower seas, much further up inlets than other auks. 13 ½in.
(34 cm.).
R Map 130
LITTLE AUK Alle alle.
Much the smallest and shortest-billed auk, also the smallest diving seabird.
Beware small-billed juveniles of other auks, though only young Puffin (which has grey cheeks and no wing-bar) is as tiny, and none have white of cheeks extending back almost across nape, nor blackish underwing.
8 in. (20 cm.).
W Map 131  
SANDGROUSE: Pteroclidae. pp. 167–9.
Mainly sandy coloured terrestrial birds, hard to see when at rest in their desert environment, when they resemble small long-tailed partridges in flight more like plump parakeets or long-tailed pigeons or golden plover.
Neck very short: legs short, legs and toes feathered in front (all round in Pallas's Sandgrouse).
Flight fast, flocks performing aerial evolutions recalling golden plover, and undertaking long, often noisy daily journeys — up to 40 miles and back — to and from water to drink either at dawn or dusk.
Gait pigeon-like, rather tripping, with short waddling steps.
Most sandgrouse are liable to flock with other species.
Deserts, semi-deserts, and other dry stony ground, nesting on ground.
Voice is one of the best clues to sandgrouse identification.
SPOTTED SANDGROUSE Pterocles senegallus.
A rather small pale sandgrouse, with elongated noodle-like tail feathers and much less black on the belly than the short-tailed Black-bellied (p. 169).
Male has largely uniform upperparts, yellow throat and blue-grey band through eye; female markedly spotted, with much whiter throat.
Cf.
Chestnut-bellied Sandgrouse (p. 169).
Distinctive liquid musical call, variously rendered ‘cuito, cuito’, ‘wittoo, wittoo’ and ‘waku waku’.
Goes in smaller flocks than most species, and inhabits wide range of dry open country from desert to fairly thick bush, coming to water both quite late in the morning (after 0800) and in hot weather sometimes again in the evening.
13 in. (33 cm.).
CROWNED SANDGROUSE Pterocles coronatus.
A small sandgrouse of the shorter-tailed group, both sexes also lacking the dark line on the breast possessed by all other breeding sandgrouse of the region except the long-tailed Spotted and the short-tailed female Lichtenstein's.
Black chin and black mark between bill and eye distinguish male from males of both Spotted and Lichtenstein's.
Female differs from female Spotted by much yellower throat and less distinctly spotted appearance, from female Lichtenstein's by yellow instead of speckled throat.
Call higher-pitched than other sandgrouse, and rising in pitch, ‘cla-cla-cla’ or ‘cha-chagarra’.
Stony deserts and mountainsides, much more widespread than Lichtenstein's.
Flies very fast to water, mainly in early morning; will drink quite brackish water.
11 in. (28 cm.).
LICHTENSTEIN'S SANDGROUSE Pterocles lichtensteinii.
The smallest sandgrouse of the region, looking rather dark from its close barring, and one of the shorter-tailed group.
Male has distinctive black and white markings on crown and forehead, and yellow breast with three black lines.
Female is only completely uniformly barred sandgrouse, lacking any distinctive markings.
Cf.
Crowned Sandgrouse (above).
Call a wigeon-like double whistle, ‘whittou’, but often flies silently, and so escapes detection when flighting to water as it usually does, after dark and before dawn.
Has singular habit of descending into wells to drink when arrival and departure have been compared to those of wasps at a hole nest.
Less gregarious than other sandgrouse, frequenting rocky and bushy desert areas.
10 in. (25 cm.).
PIN-TAILED SANDGROUSE Pterocles alchata.
The only breeding sandgrouse of the region with a white belly, and the most distinctive of the four species with needle-like elongated tail feathers; the other three are the Spotted (p. 167), the Chestnut-bellied and Pallas's.
Male's rufous breast and female's pure white throat are both unique features, while male is only sandgrouse with both chin and throat black — Crowned (p. 167) has black chin and Black-bellied has black throat, but both are shorter-tailed.
In flight Pin-tailed shows distinctive white wing-bar and white underwing with black tip.
Call, a loud ringing ‘kata, kata’, frequently uttered in flight, can be very puzzling when light too bright to see birds overhead.
Highly gregarious.
Avoids open desert; sometimes nests in loose colonies.
14 ½in.
(37 cm.)
CHESTNUT-BELLIED SANDGROUSE Pterocles exustus.
The most local breeding sandgrouse of the region (Egypt only), the smallest of the three with needle-like elongated tail feathers.
Male is only one of three with whole belly appearing dark (actually very dark chestnut), while female's dark belly barred pale is unique among the six species.
Differs from Spotted in having a black line on the breast; male has distinctive yellow head and wings, while female lacks Spotted's spotted appearance.
Harmonious deep-toned call ‘gouta, gouta’.
Very gregarious, gathering in huge flocks to water between 0700 and 0900 hours, and in hot weather again in evening.
A bird of the open desert.
12 ½in (32 cm.).
BLACK-BELLIED SANDGROUSE Pterocles orientalis.
The largest breeding sandgrouse of the region, and the only one with whole belly black, though dark chestnut belly of long-tailed male Chestnut-bellied often looks almost black.
In fact no other sandgrouse with any black on belly at all has a short tail.
At rest male's yellow wings and in flight white underwing contrasting strongly with black belly are useful pointers.
Male is only sandgrouse with throat but not chin black.
Call rather gruff, variously rendered ‘churr-rur-rur’ or ‘tchourou’.
Avoids open desert.
13 ½in.
(34 cm.)
PALLAS'S SANDGROUSE Syrrhaptes paradoxus.
The only sandgrouse likely to be seen north of the Mediterranean region, and then only when one of its now very infrequent irruptions (none on a large scale since 1908) from Central Asia occurs.
Tail feathers more elongated than any of the N African sandgrouse, with a conspicuous black patch towards the front of the belly, very noticeable in flight, when wings are held rather curved, like a partridge, and quills may hum or whistle.
Finer details of plumage only visible at close range.
Voice variously described as ‘chack, chack’, köcki, köcki' or ‘köckerik, köckerik’.
During irruptions frequents dunes, arable fields and other open habitats.
14–16 in. (35–41 cm.).
V(b)  
PIGEONS and DOVES: Columbidae. pp. 171–3.
Pigeons tend to be larger and doves to be smaller, but no real distinction.
Soberly coloured, in pastel shades of grey or brown, with smallish heads, short bills, longish tails and crooning or cooing voices.
Gait a walk.
Tree or ledge nesters.
ROCK DOVE and FERAL PIGEON Columba livia.
The wild Rock Dove is the ancestor of the Domestic Pigeon, with its varied plumages.
Has general outline of Stock Dove, from which always differs in its grey wing-tips, and except in Middle East in its white rump.
Feral Pigeons in towns have wide range of plumages based on black, white, blue-grey and reddish cinnamon, but blue rock type almost identical with wild Rock Dove.
Blue-chequer variant also occurs in quite wild Rock Dove populations.
Display flight as Stock Dove.
Voice the familiar coo of the Domestic Pigeon, ‘coo-roo-coo’.
Rock Dove on cliffs and rocks, mainly by the sea in the W, but on mountain and hillsides also in the E; nest in a rock crevice or cave ledge.
Feral Pigeon in towns, especially ports, also on inland and sea cliffs; nests on ledges of buildings and cliffs.
13 in. (33 cm).
R Map 132
STOCK DOVE Columba oenas.
Smaller and shorter-tailed than Woodpigeon, with no white patches, but has black wing-tips and two short black bars on wing.
Black wing-tips and lack of pale or white rump are best distinctions from Rock Dove.
Call a grunting double coo, with accent on second syllable.
Display flight circular, sometimes gliding with raised wings.
Woodland and country with scattered trees, also on cliffs and sometimes in towns.
Nests in holes.
13 in. (33 cm.).
Rw Map 133
WOODPIGEON Columba palumbus.
The largest pigeon of the region, easily told by the prominent white patches on neck and wings; dark tail-bar also conspicuous in flight.
Young are darker and have no white on neck.
Voice a soothing ‘coo-coo-coo, coo-coo’ Flight fast and direct; makes a noisy clatter when flushed from cover.
In distinctive display flight flaps upwards at a steep angle and then glides down with wings scarcely upraised.
Wooded country, feeding both in the trees and on adjacent farmland; also among scattered trees, and in W and C Europe regularly in town parks and squares and large gardens.
Nests in trees.
16 in. (41 cm.).
Rw Map 134
LONG-TOED PIGEON Columba trocaz.
Like a Woodpigeon without any white wing patches.
On Madeira has a silvery neck patch, but not in Canaries, where dark bar at end of tail distinguishes from Laurel Pigeon on Palma and Gomera.
Cooing voice and display flight as Woodpigeon.
Woodland.
15–16 in. (38–40 cm.).
LAUREL PIGEON Columba junoniae.
Like a slender Woodpigeon, with brown upperparts, vinous underparts, a green patch on the side of the neck and no white patches at all.
Cf.
Long-toed Pigeon.
Has a distinctive soft flapping flight.
Laurel forests, now very rare.
15 in. (38 cm.).
DOVES: Streptopelia.
Smaller and slimmer than the Columba doves; tail pattern often an important field mark.
Most have much faster, more clipped flight, wings being brought in and out again in quick jerks, and also a wing-clapping and gliding display flight.
Tree nesters.
COLLARED DOVE Streptopelia decaocto.
The largest and palest of the wild Streptopelia doves, stock-dove-size, with generally rather dull ash-brown plumage, readily distinguished from Turtle Dove by blackish wing-tips, black base to white underside of tail, and black half-collars.
Half-collars obscure in juveniles.
Song a persistent triple ‘coo-cooo-cuh’, accent on middle syllable and final one somewhat truncated.
Flight more direct, less clipped, than Turtle Dove.
In the E, areas with scattered trees and bushes, from palm groves and oases to villages and towns; in the W, as a very recent colonist, mainly since 1950, almost a commensal of man, especially in towns and villages, and where grain is fed to other birds.
12 ½in.
(32 cm.)
R Map 135
BARBARY DOVE Streptopelia risoria.
A favourite cage bird, often escaping and occasionally breeding in the wild.
Markedly smaller and creamier than Collared Dove, but with no dark wing-tips, and no blue-grey in tail.
Call distinct, ‘koo-krr-oo’.
10 in. (25 cm.).
TURTLE DOVE Streptopelia turtur.
Generally darker than Collared Dove, with chestnut upperparts, and black and white patch on either side of neck.
In flight much the best distinction is tail, mainly black with conspicuous white edge above and beneath.
Juvenile browner, with no neck patches.
Call a soothing ‘turrr, turrr’.
Wide range of country with open woodland or scattered trees, including palm groves, large gardens, heaths and parks, often feeding in farmland.
11 in. (27 cm.).
Sm Map 136
RUFOUS TURTLE DOVE Streptopelia orientalis.
A rare vagrant from C Asia, larger, darker and more pigeon-like than Turtle Dove, with more heavily spotted, richer chestnut upperparts, darker underparts and blue-grey instead of white neck patch.
Song a soporific ‘cooo-cooo-kakoor’ 13 in. (33 cm.).
V
PALM DOVE or LAUGHING DOVE Streptopelia senegalensis.
Smaller than Turtle Dove with similar tail pattern, but readily distinguished by black spots on the front of lower neck, and in flight by more conspicuous blue-grey forewing.
Very distinctive rising and falling song: ‘oh-cook-cook-oo-oo’.
Common in towns, villages, and oases 104 in. (26 cm.).
NAMAQUA DOVE Oena capensis The smallest and only long-tailed dove of the region.
Israel only, rare.
Rather like a large long-tailed sparrow or lark, the tail and the black of the male's face and throat being unmistakable.
Call a weak ‘koo, koo’.
Flight fast and direct, showing much chestnut.
Open bush country, palm groves.
11 in. (28 cm.).
CUCKOOS: Cuculidae.
Medium to large, rather slender, solitary arboreal birds, with tail long and graduated, and bill slightly decurved.
All species in region (except Senegal Coucal) laying their eggs in other birds' nests.
GREAT SPOTTED CUCKOO Clamator glandarius.
A large, striking and unmistakable white-spotted bird, with conspicuous crest and long white-edged tail.
Juvenile black on head, with smaller crest, buffer underparts and rufous flash in wings.
Frequent harsh and often cacophonous cries include a grating ‘keeow-keeow-keeow-keeow’, a crow-like alarm note, ‘cark, cark’, and a tern-like chatter.
Flight strong and direct.
Open woodlands, olive groves, savannas and other areas with scattered trees.
15 ½in.
(39 cm.).
V
CUCKOO Cuculus canorus.
Grey adult rather like a bird of prey, but can always be told by graduated tail, with white spots and tips, and non-hooked bill, and from male Sparrowhawk (p. 75) in particular by pointed wings.
Rare hepatic form of adult female is rufous brown.
Juvenile can be either grey or red-brown, with conspicuous white patch on nape and at first appears very round-winged.
Well known ‘coo-cooo’ song of male has variants such as‘cooc-cooc-ooo; hen has a ‘water-bubbling’trill.
Both make coughing and choking notes when excited.
In distinctive low-wing flight wings are hardly raised above horizontal plane and depressed far down below body at bottom of downstroke.
Very catholic in choice of habitat, from tundra, moors, heaths and forests to farmland, town parks, dunes and coastal marshes.
13 in. (33 cm.).
Sm Map 137
ORIENTAL CUCKOO Cuculus saturatus.
Slightly smaller but otherwise hardly distinguishable in field from Cuckoo, except by pale rufous underwing and call, a muffled hoopoe-like ‘du-du, du-du’.
repeated six or eight times in succession, preceded by a more rapidly uttered quadrisyllabic version of the same notes.
A shy skulking bird, especially in breeding season, when keeps to tree tops.
In forested regions, especially dense pine and spruce forests.
12 in. (31 cm.).
YELLOW-BILLED CUCKOO Coccyzus americanus.
A North American vagrant slenderer than Cuckoo, with conspicuous rufous flash in open wings and bold white spots on tail.
Might utter a single ‘coo’.
11–12 ½in.
(28–32 cm.
BLACK-BILLED CUCKOO Coccyzus erythrophthalmus.
Another transatlantic vagrant, with less rufous in wing smaller tail spots and all-black bill.
11–12 in. (28–31 cm.
SENEGAL COUCAL Centropus senegalensis.
A very distinctive species, with its conspicuous rufous wings.
Has a characteristic song, with a series of cooing or bubbling notes that run down and then up the scale.
Shy and secretive, with a slow, rather clumsy flight, usually in thick cover in marshes or by rivers or streams; spends much time on ground.
16 in (41 cm.).
OWLS: Tytonidae (Barn owl) and Strigidae (the rest).
pp. 177–83 Nocturnal birds of prey, though some species also hunt by day, with long rounded wings, short tail and feathered legs and feet.
Head large, with large eyes facing forwards and set in a flattened facial disc, whose feathers usually conceal the short hooked bill.
The ear tufts of a few species do not represent true ears.
Plumage usually some shade of brown or white, with darker markings; sexes alike, except Snowy Owl.
Flight of larger owls slow and flapping, of smaller ones quicker and markedly bounding.
Stance upright.
Nest in hole, in old nest of other bird, or on ground.
BARN OWL Tyto alba.
White-breasted race alba is the only owl which is golden-buff above and white below, though most often seen ghost-like in the dusk, or caught in the headlights of a car, when it appears all-white.
Dark-breasted race guttata, deep buff below and strongly marked grey-blue above, can be told from Tawny Owl (p. 183) in flight by its longer wings and at rest by its longer legs.
Call a prolonged, strangled, almost blood-curdling screech; also hisses, snores and barks.
Farmland and other open, often arid country, with scattered trees, feeding mainly on small rodents, frequently nesting in barns, churches and other old buildings.
132 in. (34 cm.).
R Map 138
SNOWY OWL Nyctea scandiaca.
Huge size and predominantly white plumage make this an unmistakable owl; female appreciably larger than male, and with much more numerous blackish or brownish bars on upperparts.
Usually silent away from breeding grounds, where male has a loud harsh bark and a deep hoot, and female a higher-pitched bark.
Flight more buzzard-like than owl-like, often gliding.
Frequently alights on ground.
Tundra and high northern moorland, feeding mainly on lemmings and birds the size of Ptarmigan and Oystercatcher.
Irruptions to S and W linked with fluctuations in lemming stocks.
21 26 in (53–66 cm).
Rw
EAGLE OWL Bubo bubo.
One of the two largest owls of the region, an enormous, almost eagle-sized bird, the prominent ear-tufts and facial disc distinguishing it from all diurnal birds of prey.
Eyes large, orange.
Cf.
Great Grey Owl (p. 183).
Song a deep ‘oo-hu’, other calls include a harsh ‘kveck, kveck’.
Dense forests, coniferous and broad-leaved, also rocky gorges on mountains and in deserts, hunting at dawn and dusk for mammals as large as roe deer and birds as large as Capercaillie. 26–28 in. (66–71 cm.).
V
BROWN FISH OWL Ketupa zeylonensis.
Distinguished from Eagle Owl, by its much shorter ear tufts, unfeathered tarsi and feet, and more uniform plumage.
Song a rather dismal moaning ‘oomp-ooo-oo’, with accent on middle syllable, also a single hoot.
Forests, near water, feeding mainly on fish; spends much time on ground, even trampling out trails along stream banks.
More strictly nocturnal than Eagle Owl.
22 in. (56 cm.).
LONG-EARED OWL Asio otus.
A medium-sized brown owl, the only one with long ear tufts, noticeably longer than Short-eared Owl's.
Slimmer and with more elongated face than both Short-eared and Tawny Owls; further distinguished from Tawny (p. 183) by longer wings and orange-yellow eyes, and from Short-eared by lack of dark patch on upper wing.
Has a more long-drawn-out, moaning hoot than Tawny Owl; young birds have a similar unoiled-hinge hunger cry.
Forests, especially coniferous, areas with scattered trees and clumps, heaths, marshes, dunes, even large gardens; hunts mainly over open country.
Nest usually in old nest of other bird.
14 in. (36 cm.).
Rmw Map 139
SHORT-EARED OWL Asio flammeus.
Much the most likely medium-sized brown owl to be seen by day; ear-tufts rarely visible in field.
Has conspicuously long wings, with which it soars, wheels and glides like a harrier, in addition to normal slow, flapping owl-like flight, and wing-clapping circular display flight.
In flight shows blackish patch on both upper and under surface of wing at ‘elbow’.
Cf.
Long-eared Owl and Tawny Owl (p. 183).
Has a harsh barking flight note; song, a deep triple hoot, usually uttered in display flight.
Open plains, moors, downs, rough hillsides, heaths, marshes, dunes.
15 in. (38 cm.).
RsmW Map 140
AFRICAN MARSH OWL Asio capensis.
Smaller than Short-eared Owl, with longer ear-tufts, more uniformly brown upperparts, darker face, and brown eyes.
Has a hoarse croak.
Hunts, sometimes by day but regularly in dusk, usually in small parties, often flying close to an observer, normally quartering ground like a harrier.
Marshes and swamps, feeding mainly on large insects.
12 in. (30 cm.).
SCOPS OWL Otus scops.
In Europe the only small owl with ear-tufts, though these are not always very conspicuous, and unfeathered toes.
Often adopts slim elongated posture.
Most often detected by rather monotonous ‘piu’ call, not unlike single note of Redshank, repeated at short intervals, usually at night.
Flight less markedly bounding than Little Owl (p. 181).
Areas with scattered broad-leaved trees, open woodland, orchards, farmland, palm groves, parks, ruins, villages, small towns; feeding mainly on large insects.
Largely nocturnal. 7½in. (19 cm.).
V
BRUCE'S SCOPS OWL or STRIATED SCOPS OWL Otus brucei.
A paler eastern version of Scops Owl, with two distinct plumage phases, one basically yellow, the other basically grey-brown, and various intermediates.
Some calls distinctive from Scops, the song ‘ukh-ukh’ and a warbling ‘tsirr-va-vaa’, but others identical.
Habitat similar to Scops, in S USSR especially in cultivated countryside; often in semi-deserts. 8 ¼in.
(21 cm.).
HAWK OWL Sutnia ulula.
The longest-tailed medium-sized owl of the region, the most hawk-like in appearance and habits, and the only one with barred underparts.
Pale facial disc distinctively edged black, forming sideburns.
Short wings, more pointed than other owls, combine with long tail to give hawk-like silhouette.
Call, a chattering ‘ki-ki-ki’ also more hawk-like than owl-like.
Habitually appears by day, perching, often conspicuously in inclined hawk-like attitude, flying low with final upward sweep to perch and sometimes hovering.
Coniferous forests of northern taiga and mountains, also in other woods and thickets, especially on tundra.
14–16 in. (36 40 cm.).
V
PYGMY OWL Glaucidium passerinum.
The smallest owl of the region.
Relatively small head and less well marked facial disc than other owls are its best field marks, together with distinctive habit of flicking tail.
Calls a whistling ‘tyu-tyu-tyu’ and ‘kuvitt’, song more like Bullfinch's pipe than other owls' hoots.
Hunts down small birds both by day and night.
Coniferous forests, often dense, in taiga and on mountains, less often in other woods.
Nests mainly in old woodpecker holes.
6 ½in.
(16 5 cm.).
TENGMALM'S OWL Aegolius funereus.
The largest of the five smaller owls of the region, fully nocturnal, except in the Arctic.
Only confusable with Little Owl, but is brown rather than grey-brown, with more fully feathered feet, adopts more upright stance, and has quite distinct facial expression.
Where Little Owl has low-browed, frowning mien, Tengmalm's brows appear to be raised, as if slightly surprised, accentuated by blacker edge of facial disc and broader white eyebrows.
Juvenile Tengmalm's uniformly rufous, including most of facial disc, except for eyebrows.
Song a hoopoe-like succession of hoots, rising at first and falling at the end, sometimes in the form of a trill.
Usually roosts in dense tree.
Coniferous forests in hill districts and in the taiga, more rarely in mixed or deciduous woods.
10 in. (25 cm.).
V
SPOTTED LITTLE OWL Athene brama.
Very like Little Owl, but underparts barred not spotted and white spots on head smaller.
S Iraq.
8 ½in.
(22 cm.).
LITTLE OWL Athene noctua.
Its partly diurnal habits make this the most familiar of the six smaller owls of the region, short tail and conspicuously bounding flight.
Cf.
Tengmalm's Owl (above).
Call a loud ringing ‘kiew, kiew’, habitually uttered by day; song remarkably like opening sequence of Curlew's (p. 139) song.
Juvenile has a shrill persistent wheeze.
Often perches on posts and other prominent lookouts; bobs, waggles head, and may turn it through 180 when curious or suspicious.
Often flies by night, and hovers for insects in dusk.
Farmland and open country with scattered trees, open woodland, orchards, palm groves, dunes, semi-deserts, also marine islands and other treeless but rocky places.
8 ½in.
(22 cm.).
R Map 141  
TAWNY OWL Strix aluco.
Generally the commonest medium-sized brown owl; predominantly nocturnal and most often detected in daytime hunched up in its tree roost, being mobbed by smaller birds, when can be distinguished from Barn Owl by dark brown face and underparts and from Long-eared and Short-eared Owls (p. 179) by black eyes and lack of ear-tufts.
When seen by day, it appears shorter-winged than these three, and larger and stouter in build than Barn and Long-eared.
Very variable in ground colour, from rich chestnut tawny through various shades of buff, brown and grey-brown to greyish-white; juvenile barred.
Most familiar note is long quavering hoot, but equally often heard, especially from young birds in late summer and autumn, is a sharp ‘ke-wick’(These two notes are origin of traditional ‘tu-whit, tu-whoo’).
Juveniles in or just out of nest may make a sound remarkably like a gate on an unoiled hinge.
Open, mainly deciduous, woodland, parkland, large gardens and other areas with scattered trees, not uncommon in villages, towns and some cities.
Nest usually in tree holes.
Feeds mainly on small birds and rodents.
15 in. (38 cm.).
R Map 142
HUME'S TAWNY OWL Strix butleri.
One of the least known owls in the world, very rarely reliably observed in the field; upperparts buff with greyer wings and distinct golden collar; Tawny Owl can be so pale that unfeathered toes of Hume's are only really good distinction; perhaps black-tipped crown feathers would show a darker crown in the field.
Flight direct but laboured.
Song a clear drawn-out ‘huu’, also a more quavering hoot.
Among rocks and in palm groves near rocks.
In our region only known from four or five localities.
15 in. (38 cm.).
GREAT GREY OWL Strix nebulosa.
One of the giant owls of the region, about the size of an Eagle Owl (p. 177), but with longer tail, rounder head and no ear tufts, smaller yellow eyes set in a facial disc with concentric dark rings, and a black patch on the chin.
Cf.
Ural Owl.
Song and calls both resemble Tawny Owl, but hoot much deeper.
Coniferous forests, often hunting by day for mammals as large as squirrels and lemmings.
Nest usually in old nest of other bird.
27 in. (69 cm.).
URAL OWL Strix uralensis.
Only a little smaller than Great Grey Owl, from which it differs chiefly in dark eyes, unlined facial disc, and no black patch on chin.
From paler forms of much smaller Tawny Owl, differs also in its long tail, which hangs down in flight, and relatively smaller eyes.
Hoot more muffled than Tawny's, also a barking ‘khau, khau’ and a harsher version of Tawny's ‘ke-wick’.
Forests, coniferous, deciduous and mixed, sometimes in villages and large cities, often hunting by day for mammals up to the size of a red squirrel and birds up to the size of a Hazelhen. 24 in. (61 cm.).
NIGHTJARS: Caprimulgidae.
Exclusively nocturnal birds, well adapted by their long wings and tail, large eyes and gape, and small bill and feet, to catch moths, beetles and other flying insect prey by night: seen by day only when flushed from the ground or perched on a branch (normally horizontally along it), being well camouflaged by their mottled brown plumage.
Sexes more or less alike.
Flight silent, and very agile, gliding and wheeling, with sudden darts after prey.
Southern species often sit in dirt roads or sandy tracks and appear in car headlights.
Eggs laid on bare ground.
NIGHTJAR Caprimulgus europaeus.
The only widespread nightjar of the region, most often detected by its song, a far-carrying churr, sustained but with occasional abrupt changes of pitch, not usually heard till 45–60 minutes after sunset.
When flushed, appears a long-winged, long-tailed, hawk-like bird, readily told from all birds of prey by its very short, straight bill, and from juvenile Cuckoo (p. 175) by unbarred underparts and no white patch on nape.
Male has white tips to outer tail feathers and three white spots on outer wing quills.
Call a soft but insistent ‘cu-ic’, also makes a whip-crack sound by clapping wings together.
Open woodlands, forest edges, patches of felled woodland, heaths, low moors, open country with scattered trees, semi-deserts. 10 ½in.
(27 cm.).
Sm Map 143
RED-NECKED NIGHTJAR Caprimulgus ruficollis.
Larger and paler than Nightjar, with a conspicuous rufous collar and white throat patch, and more conspicuous white wing and tail spots, the female also having pale spots.
Song quite distinct, a rapid loud echoing repetition of ‘kutuk’.
Dry open country and semi-deserts, with scattered trees and shrubs.
12 in. (31 cm.).
V
NUBIAN NIGHTJAR Caprimulgus nubicus.
A small pale greyish nightjar with a rufous collar and very conspicuous white tips to outer tail feathers, male also with white spots on wing tips.
Tamarisk, thorn and other scrub, desert edges, roosting by day in shade of rocks or bushes.
8 ½in.
(22 cm.).
EGYPTIAN NIGHTJAR Caprimulgus aegyptius.
Like a pale, sandy Nightjar, with a conspicuous white throat patch, but the white tail and wing spots obscure or non-existent.
Song very variously described, ‘tukl-tukl’, ‘kre-kre-kre’, at times turning to clear ‘u’ or ‘o’with metallic timbre, and nightjar-like churr.
Deserts and semi-deserts, often hunting close to bedouin and other nomad encampments.
In Iraq is sometimes forced to move in daytime when ground gets too hot for it to rest on.
10 in. (25 cm.)
V
AMERICAN NIGHTHAWK Chordeiles minor.
A rare transatlantic vagrant, easily distinguished from all nightjars of the region by conspicuous white wing patches; also has white chin and in male, white bar near end of tail.
Call a nasal ‘peent’ or ‘peeik’.
8 ½–10 in. (22–25 cm.)
V  
SWIFTS: Apodidae.
The most aerial of all birds, superficially resembling swallows and martins, feeding on flying insects.
Plumage brown or blackish, sometimes with white patches.
Sexes alike.
Narrow, scythe-like wings, short usually forked tail adapted to very fast flight.
Short legs for clinging on vertical surfaces; very rarely on ground.
Nesting hole or crevice of natural or artificial cliff, often in towns and villages, the material being glued together with saliva.
SWIFT Apus apus.
Easily told from the swallow tribe by short tail and long curved wings, as well as by all dark plumage, apart from whitish throat, rather more obvious in juvenile which also has pale tips to wing feathers.
Cf.
Pallid Swift and Plain Swift.
Has vigorous dashing flight, wheeling and gliding, and excited squealing parties chase each other round the houses in towns and villages.
Normal cry a harsh scream.
Feeds over fresh water, open country and built-up areas.
6 ½in.
(16.5 cm.).
Sm Map 144
PALLID SWIFT Apus pallidus.
Very hard to separate from Swift, even in good light, but is distinctly paler brown and has more conspicuous white throat patch, rather paler forehead and slight contrast between paler secondaries and rest of wing; also slightly different outline, especially broader head, and slower wing-beats.
Cf.
Plain Swift.
Spends longer at breeding colonies, but otherwise as Swift, with which often flies.
6 ½in.
(16 5 cm.).
ALPINE SWIFT Apus melba.
The largest swift of the region, with a 21-inch wing-span, easily told by its pale brown plumage, with white underparts crossed by brown breast-band.
Parties utter a loud trilling whistle, rising and falling in pitch.
Flight even more vigorous and powerful than Swift.
8 ½in.
(22 cm.).
A
WHITE-RUMPED SWIFT Apus caffer.
Larger and rather more uniformly dark than Little Swift, and with a markedly narrower white rump and distinctly forked tail.
Has a more guttural twittering call, and is less noisy.
Uses old nests of Red-rumped and other swallows.
5 ½in.
(14 cm.).
LITTLE SWIFT or HOUSE SWIFT Apus affinis.
Much the smallest swift of the region, distinguished by short square tail, and from all except White-rumped Swift by conspicuous broad white rump; throat whitish.
Cf.
House Martin.
Call a high-pitched twittering trill. 4 ½in.
(12 cm.).
V
PLAIN SWIFT Apus unicolor.
Rather smaller and darker than Swift and Pallid Swift, differing especially in its dark throat and faster flight.
Screams and has a rapid trill.
Canaries and Madeira only.
6 in. (15 cm.).
NEEDLE-TAILED SWIFT Hirundapus caudacutus.
A rare vagrant from E Asia.
Very short square tail and conspicuous white horseshoe on adult underparts. 7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
V   
BEE-EATERS: Meropidae.
Gregarious brightly coloured long-winged, long-tailed, terrestrial birds, with sexes more or less alike; bill long, slightly curved.
Perching on wires or bush tops on look out for bees, wasps and other flying insects; flight swallow-like, with long glides on triangular wings and tremendous acceleration to capture prey, after which they return to perch with a graceful upward sweep and batter it to death before swallowing it.
Open country with scattered trees and bushes, often near rivers, in whose sandy banks and in the sides of sand and gravel pits they dig their usually colonial nest holes.
BEE-EATER Merops apiaster.
The most widespread bee-eater of the region, and the only bird with harlequin plumage and central tail feathers slightly projecting likely to be seen over the greater part of it.
Mainly blue-green, with chestnut head and mantle, yellow rump and throat, and black breast-band and stripe through eye.
Yellow rump and pale chestnut underwing with black trailing edge especially noticeable in flight.
Flight-note a distinctive, constantly uttered liquid ‘quilp’, also a throaty ‘kroop, kroop’.
11 in. (28 cm.)
A(b)
BLUE-CHEEKED BEE-EATER Merops superciliosus.
Looks much greener than Bee-eater, and has much longer central tail feathers, blue cheeks, chestnut throat, and no black breast-band.
Call hardly distinguishable, but tends to be shriller and less loud.
12 in. (31 cm.).
V
LITTLE GREEN BEE-EATER Merops orientalis.
Predominantly green, and differing from Blue-cheeked Bee-eater, with which it overlaps in Egypt and the Middle East, in its markedly smaller size and absence of chestnut on throat; race in Israel has shorter central tail feathers and much more blue on face and throat than illustration.
Call a chattering ‘tit, tit’ or ‘tree-tree-tree’.
10 in. (25 cm.).
ROLLERS: Coraciidae.
Brightly coloured crow-like terrestrial birds, with sexes more or less alike, named from their somersaulting habits in courtship display.
Bill stout, slightly hooked.
Often perch conspicuously on posts, wires or bush tops, flying down to capture beetles, lizards and other small animals on ground.
Hole nesters.
ROLLER Coracias garrulus.
Over most of the region, the only crow-sized bird, apart from Jay (p. 305), to show a bright blue wing-patch in flight, but a much larger blue patch than Jay, wings appearing blue with black tips and edges.
At rest resembles a smallish blue-green crow with a chestnut back.
Flight direct, woodpigeon-like.
Call a harsh, rather crow-like ‘rack, kack’, kacker’.
All kinds of open country with scattered trees, scrub, parkland, open woods, tree-lined roads.
12 in. (31 cm.).
A
INDIAN ROLLER or BLUE JAY Coracias benghalensis.
Differs from Roller in its chestnut breast as well as mantle.
Voice croaking and heron-like, a loud quacking clatter and a staccato k'yow, k'yow' S Iraq only.
13 in. (33 cm.).
RING-NECKED PARAKEET Psittacula krameri (Psittacidae).
The only parrot of the region, conspicuously long-tailed, green, with hooked red bill, male with black throat and narrow rose-pink collar on hind neck.
Flies with fast clipped wingbeats, always uttering its shrill, monosyllabic screech.
Gregarious, frequenting areas with trees; a hole-nester. 16 in. (41 cm.)(including tail 10 in [25 cm.]).
KINGFISHERS: Alcedinidae.
Medium-sized birds with short legs, long stout bill, brightly coloured plumage and habit of perching upright.
Sexes alike.
Not all feeding on fish.
Hole nesters.
KINGFISHER Alcedo atthis.
One of the most brilliantly coloured birds of the region, the only one with plumage all blue-green above and all rich chestnut below; tail short, bill black, base reddish in female.
Legs red.
Call a loud shrill penetrating ‘cheee’ or ‘chikeee’; song, rarely heard, a whistling trill.
Lowland fresh water of all kinds, in winter also on estuaries and sea coast; dives either from a perch or while hovering to catch fish.
6 ½in.
(16 5 cm.).
R Map 145
SMYRNA KINGFISHER Halcyon smyrnensis.
Striking and unmistakable, with contrast of chestnut, bright blue and white; feet and massive bill red.
In flight white bar shows on underwing.
Very vocal, with a loud laughing cry.
Cultivated land, gardens, open plains, forests, fresh water, sea coast.
10 ½in.
(27 cm.).
LESSER PIED KINGFISHER Ceryle rudis.
Equally striking and unmistakable with its all black and white plumage, but always associated with water.
Male has two black bands on breast, female only one; head crested.
Call a sharp penetrating ‘keek, keek’; also a whistling note; small parties often collectively noisy.
Fresh water, except in forests or high on mountains, and estuaries; characteristically fishes by hovering with beating wings, then plummeting into water.
10 in. (25 cm.).
BELTED KINGFISHER Ceryle alcyon.
Rare vagrant from N America, with dark head and crest, grey back and breast-band, chestnut breast-band and flanks (in female only) and white throat, neck and underparts. 11–14 in. (28–35 cm.).
V
HOOPOE Upupa epops (Upupidae).
Quite unmistakable, with long curved dark bill and prominent black-tipped crest, either folded down or erected fan-wise.
Plumage pinkish-cinnamon; tail and rounded wings strongly barred black and white so that in flight looks like huge round-winged black and white moth.
Chief call a rapid far-carrying clipped ‘hoo-hoo-hoo’, less musical than Cuckoo (p. 175) and less drawn-out and quavering than Tawny Owl (p. 183).
Grassy and wooded plains, farmland, orchards, vineyards, parks and gardens; a hole nester. 11 in. (28 cm.).
M(b) Map 146  
WOODPECKERS: Picidae.
Terrestrial birds highly adapted to climbing about trees, extracting insect prey from their bark and rotten wood, and also excavating nest holes: tail stiff (except in Wryneck), to act as support against vertical surfaces, with zygodactyl feet (two toes pointing forwards, two backwards) but one toe vestigial; legs short, bill stout (except Wryneck), and tongue very long.
Tail square, but may appear forked when pressed against tree trunk.
Male usually with red patch on head.
Flight markedly undulating or dipping; gait a hop.
Most species of region drum in spring, a mechanical sound made by resonance of dead branches under rapid blows from bill, and resembling sound of small metal clappers on wooden sounding board, or creaking of dead branch.
Always associated with trees, though some species regularly feed on ground.
Nest in hole in tree; no nest material.
BLACK WOODPECKER Dryocopus martius.
Much the largest woodpecker of the region, and the most distinctive, male being the only large all-black land bird with red crown and crest; female and juvenile browner, female with red on nape only.
Has a distinctly angular way of holding its neck, which alone should suffice to distinguish from any other woodpecker seen against the light.
Flight very markedly undulating.
Far-carrying voice a loud, clear, vibrant, fluty string of double notes; also a single repeated musical yelp.
Drums, with appreciably longer phrase than Great Spotted Woodpecker (p. 195).
Coniferous forests, also mixed and sometimes beech woodland.
18 in. (46 cm.).
GREY-HEADED WOODPECKER Picus canus.
Superficially like a small Green Woodpecker, but head and underparts predominantly grey, male has red on forehead only, female has no red at all, and black moustachial streaks are much narrower.
Juvenile browner, with barred flanks.
Call like Green Woodpecker, but more musical, slower and falling away at the end.
Habitat similar.
10 in. (25 cm.).
GREEN WOODPECKER Picus vindis.
Readily distinguished from all other birds of region, except Grey-headed Woodpecker, by combination of green plumage, conspicuous yellow-green rump in flight, and red on head.
Both sexes have red crown and black moustachial stripe, male has red moustachial stripe also.
Juvenile paler but speckled darker.
Spanish race sharpei has grey cheeks with narrower black moustaches; North African race levaillanti, treated by some as a species, similar, but male lacks red moustache and female has red only on nape or back of crown (fortunately Grey-headed Woodpecker does not extend S of the Loire).
Spring call a loud, ringing, far-carrying ‘plue-plue-plue’, at other times various loud yelping cries.
Exceptionally drums, with a light rattling sound.
Broad-leaved and mixed forests, and all kinds of well timbered country, including parks, large gardens, and roadside trees.
Also feeds on ground, especially on lawns and at anthills. 12 ½in.
(32 cm.).
R Map 147  
Spotted Woodpeckers: Dendrocopos. pp. 195–97.
Black and white woodpeckers, distinguished from each other and from the Three-toed Woodpecker (p. 197) as follows:
Red
on crown
: Syrian juv., Great Spotted juv., White-backed male and (faint) juv., Middle Spotted adult and juv., Lesser Spotted male and juv.;
on nape
: Great Spotted male, Syrian male;
on breast
: N. African Great Spotted male,
under tail coverts
Great spotted adult and juv., Syrian adult and juv, White-backed adult and juv., Middle Spotted adult and juv.
Yellow on crown
: Three-toed male.
Large white patch on wing
.
Great Spotted adult and juv., Syrian adult and juv., Middle Spotted adult and juv.
Wings mainly barred
White-backed adult and juv., Lesser Spotted adult and juv.;
mainly black
: Three-toed.
SYRIAN WOODPECKER Dendrocopos syriacus.
Very similar to Great Spotted, and chiefly distinguished by white face due to absence of black bar on side of neck; from Middle Spotted and White-backed distinguished by lack of red crown, and from White-backed also by large white wing patch.
Juvenile further distinguished from Middle Spotted by moustachial streak reaching bill, and obscure reddish breast band.
Voice similar to Great Spotted, also has a liquid moorhen-like note.
Habitat as Great Spotted, which within range of Syrian is largely confined to mountain forests; steadily spreading into Europe from the south-east.
9 in. (23 cm.).
GREAT SPOTTED WOODPECKER or PIED WOODPECKER Dendrocopos major.
Over most of the region the commonest black and white woodpecker, with prominent white patch on each wing and red under tail coverts; male with black crown and red nape, and juvenile with both crown and nape red.
Male of N African race numidus has red on breast.
Flight conspicuously bounding, wings being folded against body at bottom of each bound.
Usual call note a sharp ‘tchick’, also various trills and titters and a harsh mistlethrush-like churring note when excited.
Drums frequently in spring, with 8–10 blows lasting for one second only.
Coniferous, broad-leaved and mixed forests, areas with scattered trees, parks, orchards, large gardens.
9 in. (23 cm).
Rmw Map 148
MIDDLE SPOTTED WOODPECKER Dendrocopos medius.
The smallest of the three spotted woodpeckers that have a conspicuous white patch on each wing, a feature at once distinguishing it from the three on p. 197, while its red crown separates it from adult Great Spotted and Syrian, as well as Three-toed and female Lesser Spotted.
From juvenile Great Spotted and Syrian it can be told by the gap between its black cheek stripe and black nape, and no black stripe bordering red crown.
A restless bird, appearing very barred in flight.
Has a repeated ‘kik’ note, and a ‘song’rendered as ‘wait, wait’uttered slowly on a rising or falling scale.
Drums much less often than Great Spotted.
Habitat as Great Spotted, but not in pure conifer forests.
8 ½in (22 cm)
WHITE-BACKED WOODPECKER Dendrocopos leucotos.
The largest black and white woodpecker of the region, differing from all the others, except much smaller Three-toed, in its white or barred rump; from the three on p 195 in its lack of any white patch on wing, which consequently looks mainly barred, and from Great Spotted and Syrian also by male's red crown and face pattern of both sexes, with black bar on side of neck not joining black nape, as in Middle Spotted.
Red of juvenile, both on crown and under tail coverts, is rather pale.
Voice not so loud as Great Spotted.
Drums with single blows merging into a volley, resembling a creaking branch.
Woodland, mainly broad-leaved, less often in areas of scattered trees.
10 in. (25 cm.)
LESSER SPOTTED WOODPECKER or BARRED WOODPECKER Dendrocopos minor.
The smallest woodpecker of the region, the size of a Hedgesparrow (p. 221); barred appearance is distinctive.
Lack of red on under tail coverts distinguishes from all other black and white woodpeckers, except Three-toed.
Female is only black and white woodpecker with no red, except Three-toed.
Commonest note a rather weak, flat ‘pee-pee-pee-pee-pee’, not unlike Wryneck but lacking its ringing quality.
Less often utters a ‘tchik’, weaker and more sibilant than Great Spotted's (p. 195).
Drums fairly often in spring, not so loud as Great Spotted, but lasting longer, two seconds, with 10–30 blows.
Mixed and broad-leaved forests, and areas with scattered timber, such as orchards, parks, large gardens.
54 in. (14 5 cm.).
R Map 149
THREE-TOED WOODPECKER Picoides tridactylus.
The most distinctive black and white woodpecker of the region; the only one with mainly black wings, the only one, except White-backed, with a white rump, and the only one, except female Lesser Spotted, with no red at all; male is also the only one with any yellow, on crown.
Has various notes resembling Great Spotted but softer.
Drums, but rather slowly.
Old coniferous forests, also in willow and birch in far north.
8 ¾in.
(22 cm.).
WRYNECK Jynx torquilla.
The least woodpecker-like woodpecker of the region, with a longish tail that makes it more like a small brown shrike or a large warbler.
From Treecreeper (p 273) can easily be told by larger size, longer tail, straight bill and brown underparts.
Flight less undulating than the true woodpeckers; on ground, where often feeds, hops with tail raised.
Call a loud, clear, rather musical ‘kew-kew-kew-kew-kew’, somewhat like calls of Nuthatch (p 271), Lesser Spotted Woodpecker or Kestrel (p. 95) and other small birds of prey.
Open broad-leaved woodlands, and areas with scattered trees, including parks, orchards and large gardens.
Nest normally in tree hole, will use nestbox. 6 ½in (16.5 cm.). sM Map 150  
LARKS: Alaudidae. pp. 199–205 The first of the passerine or songbird families (see p. 10).
Small to medium ground-living birds, mostly with sober plumage, sexes alike, and moderately thin bills adapted to both an insect and a seed diet.
Song well developed, usually delivered in the air.
Larks walk or run but do not hop.
SHORE LARK Eremophila alpestris.
At a distance appears just like any other lark, though somewhat less streaked than, e.g., Skylark (p. 205), but at close quarters easily told by black and yellow pattern on head, and by male's small black ‘horns’ in breeding plumage.
Has some white in tail which, however, looks mainly black in flight, especially from below.
Cf.
Temminck's Horned Lark.
Song recalls Skylark's, but is briefer, and in its most developed form uttered only from the ground or a stone, also sings frequently, but often only in snatches, in the air.
Commonest call is a quite unlark-like ‘tsip’ or ‘tseep’, similar to Rock Pipit (p 210) or Yellow Wagtail (p 212); also a thin, falling ‘si-di-wi’.
Flight more undulating than Skylark; can run very fast.
Breeds in rocky ground in high Arctic or in alpine zones of mountains, but regularly winters on coast, e.g. in Britain, sometimes in company with Snow or Lapland Buntings (p. 281).
62 in. (16 5 cm.).
W(b) Map 151
TEMMINCK'S HORNED LARK Eremophila bilopha.
Smaller, paler and more sandy coloured than Shore Lark, with white instead of yellow on the head, and found only in stony or sandy desert, often quite devoid of vegetation.
Voice similar, but call more disyllabic, and song less vigorous, though more often in song flight, with no final plumb drop.
5 ½in.
(14 cm.)
BLACK-CROWNED FINCH-LARK Eremopterix nigriceps.
A small bird much more finch-like than lark-like, male very distinctive with black crown and underparts, but female just like many other small sandy desert passerines; told in flight by black underwing.
Twittering song uttered in soaring display flight, followed by butterfly-like descent with wings raised and a final plumb drop.
When disturbed may fly round in a circle; on ground does not hop like finches.
Unlike most other larks of the desert crouches when stops running.
Dry sandy wastes with very sparse vegetation.
4 ½in.
(11 cm.).
HOOPOE LARK or BIFASCIATED LARK Alaemon alaudipes.
One of the largest and most distinctive larks, larger than a Skylark (p. 205), with a long slightly curved bill and striking black and white wing-pattern, both features somewhat recalling Hoopoe (p. 191).
Prolonged musical whistling and piping song may be uttered on ground or during display flight, when male spirals conspicuously upwards and descends again on outstretched wings, with a final plumb drop.
Not very gregarious, and could be mistaken for small courser when running on ground; when it stops it does not squat but stands erect.
A desert bird.
7 ½in (19 cm.).
SHORT-TOED LARK Calandrella cinerea.
Smaller and paler, especially beneath, than Skylark (p. 205), with no crest, shorter bill, unstreaked underparts and a distinctive small dark patch on each side of breast, not always easy to see in the field.
Cf.
Lesser Short-toed Lark Song a simple sustained repetition of a few musical notes, often ending with a wistful phrase recalling Willow Warbler (p. 237), usually uttered in aerial display with bird bobbing up and down like a slowly manipulated yo-yo, and with no final plumb drop.
Calls include the conversational sparrow-like ‘tchi-tchirrp’, a short rattling note when flushed, and a ‘tee-oo’ anxiety note.
Has a lark-like flight and on the ground a pipit-like stance.
Dry, bare, often sandy ground, steppes, cultivations, semi-deserts, dunes.
5 ½in.
(14 cm.).
A
LESSER SHORT-TOED LARK Calandrella rufescens.
Very like Short-toed Lark but greyer and only certainly distinguishable when dark streaks on breast of Lesser Short-toed can be seen.
Lacks dark patches on side of breast and slightly capped appearance.
Song similar, but usually preceded by a ‘prrrit’ note and often includes mimicked phrases; uttered in rising spiral or circular flight.
Habitat similar, but stonier and less grassy, often at drier margins of marshes.
5 ½in.
(14 cm.).
V
DESERT LARK Ammomanes deserti.
Sandy coloured and varying greatly in shade according to the dominant colour of its normal habitat; has some dark but no white feathers in tail.
Cf.
Bar-tailed Desert Lark and Dupont's Lark; both short-toed larks are partly streaked and have white in tail.
Call a plaintive ‘tweet’.
Deserts, semi-deserts, wadis, rocky and stony ground, sometimes with scattered trees, not normally flocking.
5 ½in.
(15 cm.)
BAR-TAILED DESERT LARK Ammomanes cincturus.
Smaller and less variable than Desert Lark, from which readily distinguished by dark bar at tip of shorter tail.
Also has thinner bill, darker legs and less rufous on wings.
Song weak, fluty, higher-pitched, slightly reminiscent of child's trumpet.
Fast and sometimes rather jerky, more finch-like flight running swiftly with frequent sudden stops.
More exclusively a desert bird than Desert Lark, usually avoiding bushes and even rocks; frequently seen in small flocks.
5 ¼in.
(13 cm)
DUPONT'S LARK Chersophilus duponti.
Intermediate between Skylark (p. 205) and Short-toed Lark in size, and differing from both in long curved bill, from Skylark in lack of crest and from both short-toed larks in markedly streaked breast.
General appearance varies between brown and rufous Cf Hoopoe Lark (p. 199).
Has a rather nasal song, an even more nasal, greenfinch-like ‘dweeje’ and a double whistle on a rising scale, ‘hoo-hee’.
A shy bird, much preferring to run than to fly.
Scrub and grassy steppes.
6 ¼in.
(16 cm)
Calandra Larks: Melanocorypha.
Heavily built larks with stout seed-eating bills.
Steppes and  any other open grassy country.
CALANDRA LARK Melanocorypha calandra.
A large plump lark, with broad triangular wings and a large black patch on each side of neck.
In flight trailing edge of wing is conspicuously white and contrasts with dark underside; cf.
Bimaculated Lark.
No crest; white outer tail feathers, cf. female Black Lark.
Skylark-like song, including both frequent notes mimicked from other birds, and its own jangling corn-bunting-like ‘kleetra’ call note, uttered either in high wide circular song flight, or lower down with curious slow wing action, or even on ground.
Grassy steppes with low scrubby vegetation, cultivations, dry stony ground.
7 ½in (19 cm.).
V
BIMACULATED LARK Melanocorypha bimaculata.
Smaller and more rufous than Calandra Lark, with much smaller black neck patches.
Most readily distinguished by white eyestripe, no white wing-bar, and white at tip of tail, not on outer feathers.
Habits similar.
Breeds higher up in mountains, and in winter more often in semi-deserts. 6 ½in.
(16.5 cm.).
V
WHITE-WINGED LARK Melanocorypha leucoptera.
Differs from Calandra Lark most obviously in its much broader white wing-bar, but is also more rufous, especially on male's crown, has narrower wings and lacks the black neck patches.
Song like Skylark (p. 205), delivered either in soaring aerial song flight, or flying nearer ground, or on rock or hummock on ground.
Dry grassy steppes, stony wastes and semi-deserts. 7 in. (18 cm.).
V
BLACK LARK Melanocorypha yeltoniensis.
Male easily distinguished from all other larks by all black summer plumage; in winter black becomes browner.
Female and juvenile have no distinctive features, differing from Calandra and White-winged Larks in lack of white in wing.
Song like Skylark (p. 205), but in shorter bursts, uttered more often on ground than in low circular owl-like song flights.
Flight note also like Skylark, and a piping call note.
Grassy, scrubby and in winter also cultivated steppes.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.)
THICK-BILLED LARK Rhamphocorys clot-bey.
Much the stoutest-billed lark, with breast conspicuously dark-spotted, and black and white patches on each wing and each side of neck.
White wing-patches conspicuous in flight.
Has very erect carriage, holding head high or even slightly backwards; runs very fast and does not squat but stands upright when stops.
Song and song flight distinctive.
Calls varied, a low ‘koo-ee’ and ‘sree’, and a ‘co-ep’flight note.
A desert bird, mainly in stony hammada desert, also in grassy wadis. 6 ¼in.
(17 cm.).
WOODLARK Lullula arborea.
In flight has noticeably shorter tail than adult Skylark, giving it an almost bat-like outline; young skylarks in late summer and autumn are never quite so short-tailed.
Crest not always visible in field.
Buff eyestripes meeting on nape, blackish and white mark on leading edge of wing, tail with white tip but no white outer feathers.
Mellow fluty song, quite different from Skylark's, often on an interrupted descending scale, usually delivered in circular song flight, sometimes at night.
Flight and call note, ‘tit-looeet’.
All kinds of country with scattered trees, woodland verges, heaths, parkland, alpine meadows, farmland, orchards, olive groves.
6 in. (15 cm.).
R Map 152
SKYLARK Alauda arvensis.
A rather large plain brown lark, with an often inconspicuous crest, and white outer feathers in fairly long tail.
Juvenile has no crest and shorter tail.
Best field mark is sustained warbling song, normally delivered in the air, both while ascending and descending almost vertically, and while hovering.
Final plummet silent.
Flight and call note a liquid ‘chirrup’.
Crouches rather than runs when disturbed.
Flocks on migration and in winter.
Open country, farmland, grassland, heaths and moors, alpine meadows, dunes.
7 in. (18 cm.).
RmW Map 153
SMALL SKYLARK Alauda gulgula.
Smaller, but very similar to Skylark, differing chiefly in its thicker bill, and somewhat shorter tail with conspicuous buff edges.
Sings more often from a perch.
Rare visitor, S Iraq.
6 in. (15 cm.).
CRESTED LARK Galerida cristata.
Distinguished from Skylark chiefly by longer crest being always erect and conspicuous, and buff instead of white outer feathers in shorter tail; also in flight by orange-buff patch on underwing.
Bill slightly curved.
Cf.
Thekla Lark.
Song more plaintive and reedier than Skylark's, and in shorter phases, often mimetic, sometimes delivered in air, but never with soaring display of Skylark.
Call a liquid trisyllable ‘whe-whee-ooo’, rising from first to second and than falling again; also a high-pitched double note.
Dry waste, stony and sandy ground, dunes, semi-deserts, wadis, cultivations, oases, also in and around towns and villages, building sites, railway sidings and similar rough places.
6 ¾in.
(17 cm.).
V
THEKLA LARK Galerida theklae.
Very hard to distinguish from Crested Lark in the field, but tends to be smaller and have shorter bill, more conspicuous spots on breast and greyer underwing.
Best distinction is song, more like Skylark and Short-toed Lark (p 201), and still more mimetic, delivered either in a fluttering circular display flight, followed by an earthward plummet or, rather more often than Crested Lark, from a bush top or even a tree; call sometimes disyllabic.
Prefers more broken ground, often with scrub, and avoids towns and villages.
6 ¾in.
(17 cm.).
SWALLOWS and MARTINS: Hirundinidae.
Small slender short-necked aerial birds, with long wings, forked tail and short flattened bill with wide gape; wings relatively shorter than swifts (p. 187).
Flight graceful, often fast.
Gregarious, often feeding over fresh water.
SWALLOW Hirundo rustica.
The commonest hirundine of the region, easily told by chestnut throat and forehead, adult has long tail streamers, but juvenile has shorter fork.
Most frequent call is twittering ‘tswit, tswit, tswit’; alarm note a shrill ‘tsink, tsink’ Pleasant twittering song, ‘feetafeet, feetafeetit’.
Usually breeds in buildings.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
Sm Map 154
CRAG MARTIN Hirundo rupestris.
Differs from Sand Martin mainly in its brownish underparts, with speckled throat but no marked breast band, also has dark mark on underwing and conspicuous white spots under tail.
Juvenile rather more rufous.
Cf. also Pale Crag Martin and Plain Sand Martin.
Song and call notes both rather feeble and twittering.
Breeds on inland and sea cliffs and buildings, sometimes in towns.
5 ¼in.
(14 5 cm.).
RED-RUMPED SWALLOW Hirundo daunca.
Readily distinguished by rufous-buff rump and chestnut nape; no white spots in tail streamers.
Flight note a long-drawn ‘quitsch’ or ‘guitsch’; alarm note ‘keer’.
Song less musical and flight slower than Swallow.
Usually near cliffs, bridges or buildings, often in towns.
7 in. (18 cm.).
V
PALE CRAG MARTIN Hirundo obsoleta.
Smaller, paler and greyer than Crag Martin, and best distinguished by almost white throat and breast; no breast band.
5 in. (12–5 cm.).
PLAIN SAND MARTIN Riparia paludicola.
Differs from Sand Martin mainly in its brown chin, throat and breast, with no distinct breast band, and from the two Crag Martins in lack of white spots in tail.
Habits and habitat as Sand Martin.
4 ¾in.
(12 cm.).
SAND MARTIN Riparia riparia.
The smallest hirundine over most of the region, with brown breast band across otherwise white underparts, and no white spots in tail.
Calls reedier and much less musical than Swallow or House Martin, twittering song being little more than a repetition of call note.
Usually in open country fairly near fresh water, but not far up in hills or in towns; nests colonially in holes excavated in sand and gravel banks.
4 ¾ in. (12 cm.).
Sm Map 155
HOUSE MARTIN Delichon urbica.
Prominent white rump is best field mark, together with pure white underparts; but cf. the two white-rumped swifts (p. 187) and Red-rumped Swallow.
Juvenile's upperparts tinged brown.
Usual call a spluttering ‘chirrp’ or ‘chichirrrrp’; alarm note ‘tseeep’, gentle, twittering song, delivered on wing or from perch.
Breeds in or near human settlements, also on cliffs, quarries and bridges.
5 in. (12 5 cm.).
SmMap 156  
PIPITS and WAGTAILS: Motacillidae. pp. 209–15.
Small, rather slim, long-tailed insectivorous land birds, with sexes alike, divided in our region into pipits Anthus and wagtails Motacilla (p. 212).
Pipits are brown, with paler underparts, usually with darker streaks on breast; tail shorter than wagtails, usually with white outer feathers.
Appearance and habits often lark-like, e.g. undulating flight, aerial song flights, walking and running gait, tendency to avoid perching in trees.
Call note often the decisive clue in identification.
TREE PIPIT Anthus trivialis.
Very like Meadow Pipit.
Requires presence of trees in breeding season, when frequents open woodland, heaths, and other areas with scattered timber, though not usually in or very close to human settlements.
6 in. (15 cm.).
Sm Map 157
MEADOW PIPIT Anthus pratensis.
Can most easily be distinguished from Tree Pipit by voice; legs of adult generally dark flesh-pink, hind claw longer; those of immature and of Tree Pipit flesh-pink.
Juvenile tinged yellow-buff.
Usual call a single or more often triple ‘pheet’, closely resembling Rock Pipit (p. 211) and quite distinct from Tree Pipit's rather loud harsh ‘teez’, which is more like Yellow Wagtail (p 213).
Both have undistinguished trilling song, but Tree Pipit's normally ends with distinctive far carrying ‘see-er, see-er, see-er’.
Song of both uttered in aerial display, normally flying up either from ground (Meadow) or tree or bush (Tree).
Breeds in all kinds of open uncultivated country, moors, bogs, grassy hills, alpine meadows, tundra, heaths, dunes.
In winter resorts to damp grassland, fresh-water margins, marshes and estuaries, often in flocks.
Present in region throughout year.
5 ¼in.
(14.5 cm.).
SrMW Map 158
RED-THROATED PIPIT Anthus cervinus.
Darker than Meadow Pipit, and always distinguishable both by strongly streaked rump and underparts and by distinctive call.
In breeding plumage has reddish throat and sometimes also breast.
Song not unlike Meadow Pipit, but more prolonged and musical and often delivered at greater height.
Calls a loud sharp ‘thup’ and a tree-pipit-like ‘skee-eaz’.
Open or shrub tundra and its coasts.
5 ¾in.
(14.5 cm.).
A
OLIVE-BACKED PIPIT Anthus hodgsoni.
Strikingly olive-green above, with a marked eyestripe (orange-buff in front and white behind eye) and white underparts, breast boldly spotted, with a larger blackish smudge on side of neck.
Call a loud ‘tsee’ or ‘tseet’, like Red-throated Pipit.
Coniferous forest.
5 ¾ in. (14.5 cm.).
V
PECHORA PIPIT Anthus gustavi.
Best distinguished by its call, a loud ‘pwit’, softer and lower-pitched than Meadow Pipit and usually repeated 2–3 times.
Has two pale streaks down back, buffish outer tail feathers, and rump and underparts boldly streaked.
Song has a wood-warbler-like trill, followed by a low throaty warble; delivered in aerial song flight.
Wooded and shrub tundra, and fringes of coniferous forests.
5 ¾in.
(14.5 cm.).
V  
WATER and ROCK PIPITS Anthus spinoletta.
A dark-legged pipit with well marked races occupying two distinct breeding habitats, mountain (Water Pipit) and coastal (Rock Pipit), all appreciably larger and greyer than Meadow or Tree Pipits (p. 209).
Water Pipit greyer, paler than Rock Pipit with white, not greyish outer tail feathers.
Voice of all races similar: a meadow-pipit-like song, delivered in aerial song flight, rising from and returning to either ground or a rock; and a sharp ‘phist’, less high-pitched than Meadow Pipit's and rarely uttered in triplicate.
Rocky coasts, mountain tops, alpine meadows and scrub; other sea-coasts and lowland marshes in winter.
6 ½in.
(16.5 cm.).
Rw Map 159
TAWNY PIPIT Anthus campestris.
The palest and most wagtail-like of the pipits, with its almost uniform sandy-brown plumage (scarcely streaked above, unstreaked below), long tail, and wagtail-like stance.
Buff eyestripe noticeable, lores pale.
Paler, less streaked and shorter-legged than slightly larger Richard's Pipit.
Juvenile has streaked breast like juvenile Richard's.
Song a simple metallic ‘chivee-chivee-chivee’, uttered in high display flight, from which plummets to ground.
Calls varied, a yellow-wagtail-like ‘tseep’, also ‘tsip’, ‘tsup’, ‘tseuc’ and ‘tsi-uc’, and a sparrow-like chirrup, like Richard's Pipit.
Dry, usually rather open, often sandy country, heaths, dunes, hillsides, savannas, cultivations, vineyards.
6 ½in.
(16.5 cm.).
A
LONG-BILLED PIPIT Anthus similis.
Larger and greyer than Tawny Pipit, with longer bill, darker legs, no moustachial stripe, faint streaks on breast wing coverts less strongly marked and buff outer tail feathers.
Fairly musical song, uttered either on ground or in air; calls ‘tchup’ and ‘che-vee’.
Barren or grassy ground, with scattered rocks and sometimes bushes.
7 ½in.
(19 cm.).
BERTHELOT'S PIPIT Anthus berthelotii.
Like Meadow Pipit (p. 209), but greyer; habits like Tawny Pipit.
Song a repeated ‘tsiree’, sometimes delivered in air; call a low ‘tsik’, also ‘chi-ree’, like song.
Inhabits all natural habitats in Canaries, but only upland ones in Madeira.
5 ½in.
(14 cm.).
RICHARD'S PIPIT Anthus novaeseelandiae.
One of the largest and longest-legged pipits of the region, with eyestripe rather conspicuous.
bill rather stout lores dark and boldly patterned underparts; Tawny Pipit adult has equally long tail but is much less streaked.
Most likely to be confused with immature Tawny Pipit which has streaked breast and whitish, not deep buff.
flanks.
Pale legs distinguish from Water Pipit.
Has a most distinctive harsh call, ‘r-r-ruup’, and a rather upright stance; often hovers before landing.
A wanderer from Siberia, occurring annually in western Europe in some numbers, mainly in autumn.
7 in. (18 cm).
A 