

THE HISTORY AND CHRONOLOGY OF CUBISM
Tradition has always maintained that it was Apollinaire who introduced Braque to Picasso towards the end of 1907.
In fact the two men may have met sooner; a sketchbook of Picasso's which he filled with drawings in the early spring of that year contains some short written entries which mention Braque twice.
Possibly it was only after they came together under the aegis of Apollinaire, one of the greatest artistic impresarios of his age, that they felt the attraction towards each other that was to result in the most unusual and intensive collaboration in the history of art.
At the time of their meeting, Picasso and Braque had very different positions in the Paris art world.
Picasso had already acquired a considerable reputation for himself as an original and independent figure.
The works of his so-called ‘pink’ and ‘blue’periods were being bought by important collectors, and the fact that an established dealer like Vollard was interested in his work gave him additional prestige.
With the Demoiselles d'Avignon, finished shortly before he met Braque, he had produced a painting that was to become one of the cornerstones of twentieth-century art.
Braque, on the other hand, although he was only six months younger than Picasso, was slower in his development and had not yet established himself as a particularly original or significant painter; indeed, Braque subsequently came to feel that the paintings he executed in Antwerp  during the summer of 1906 were his first creative works.
Braque enjoyed his first success only in 1907, when the German dealer Wilhelm Uhde bought the Fauve pictures which he exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants.
When he was shown the Demoiselles d'Avignon, Braque appears at first to have been bewildered by it, though he realized that it marked an important new departure.
Fauvism had by now largely spent itself, and Braque's search during the following years for a more solid foundation for his painting drew him increasingly closer to Picasso.
In 1907 Picasso and Braque had been living near each other in Montmartre for some time, and after 1908 began meeting daily to talk, visit the galleries and museums, and to examine each other 's work.
Picasso had never exhibited at the large Salons or taken part in any group manifestations, and after the Indépendants of 1909, Braque joined him in this particular kind of artistic isolation.
While both painters, and Picasso in particular, led active social lives and mixed with a wide circle of literary and artistic figures, their friendship seems to have rendered them self-sufficient.
This is probably what Braque meant when he said later, ‘nous étions surtout trés concentrés’.
In 1911, the year in which their intimacy was at its greatest and their work so close as to be often almost indistinguishable, Picasso and Braque spent the summer months together at Céret, in the Pyrenees.
In the summer of 1912 they were again together at Céret and then at Sorgues, a village near Avignon where Braque rented a house, and together they visited Marseilles in search of tribal art.
During the brief periods in which they were separated they corresponded.
Later, in the autumn of 1912, Picasso moved to Montparnasse, and during the following years the differences in their work began to become apparent, but the same friendly relations were maintained.
At the time of Picasso's removal to the Left Bank he accompanied Braque on a short trip to Le Havre, and in the early summer of the next year Braque called by on Picasso at Céret.
In the summer of 1914 Braque was once more at Sorgues, while Picasso spent his time between Sorgues and Avignon, where he worked in the company of André Derain.
When war was declared and  Braque and Derain returned to join their regiments in Paris, Picasso escorted them to the station in Avignon.
The outbreak of war naturally marked the end of the collaboration of Picasso and Braque, but the unprecedented closeness of their artistic careers over the preceding years makes it impossible to separate completely the contribution made by each to Cubism during the most vital years of its development.
Contemporary critics and writers (except those who acknowledged no relationship between the work of Picasso and Braque and that of the other figures of the movement), however, were almost unanimous in proclaiming Picasso as founder and leader of the movement.
Sometimes the name of Braque is coupled with that of Picasso, but when mentioned, Braque is almost invariably referred to as a follower of Picasso.
This neglect of Braque is strange, since his were the first Cubist paintings, and since, as opposed to Picasso, he actually showed Cubist works in a public Salon.
Louis Vauxcelles already spoke of ‘cubes’ in his review of the exhibition which Braque gave at Kahnweiler's gallery in November 1908, and the same critic referred to the paintings which Braque exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants of the following year as ‘bizarreries cubiques’, from which the style derived its name.
Braque had submitted some paintings to the Salon d'Automne in 1908 (a few of the same paintings which he later showed at Kahnweiler's), and Matisse, who was on the jury, is also said to have described these works as being composed of ‘petits cubes’.
The reasons for Picasso's primacy however, are obvious.
In the years before 1907 Braque was almost unknown, whereas many people already saw Picasso and Matisse as leaders of avant-garde painting.
Moreover, Picasso obviously had a more forceful and dynamic personality than Braque, and this had impressed itself strongly on influential critics such as Apollinaire, Salmon and Vauxcelles, with whom he was more friendly than was Braque.
Then, although neither painter was exhibiting publicly in Paris after 1909, by 1914 Picasso had held one-man exhibitions in England, Germany, Spain and America, while Braque exhibited abroad more rarely, and then only in group shows.
Then, the Hommage  à Picasso with which Gris made his sensational début at the Salon des Indépendants of 1912, must have had the character of a tribute to the chef d'école.
Picasso was also throughout his life astonishingly prolific and during the Cubist years produced between three and four times as many works as Braque.
The importance of Braque's contribution to Cubism and his stature as an artist began to be seen and acknowledged only after the war.
Kahnweiler linked the names of Picasso and Braque together seriously in Der Weg zum Kubismus, written in 1915 though not published until 1920, but general recognition of their collaboration dates from the Kahnweiler and Uhde sales of the early 1920s when their pre-war Cubism could be seen together in large quantities for the first time.
Uhde, a young collector and dealer who had been on friendly terms with both painters since the early pre-Cubist days, in a book entitled Picasso et la Tradition Française which appeared in both French and German in 1928, stressed the cardinal part played by Braque in the formation of Cubism.
Uhde writes: ‘The crystallization (of Cubism) as a style owed much to Braque’, and summing up the differences in their characters, ‘Braque's temperament was limpid, precise and bourgeois; Picasso's, sombre, excessive and revolutionary.
To the spiritual marriage which they then contracted, one brought a great sensitivity, the other a great plastic gift.’
Vauxcelles's attack on Braque's first Cubist paintings serves to emphasize the new and radical use to which he had put his studies of Cézanne, for in 1908 Cézanne had already been an important influence on advanced painting for some time.
Indeed, Vauxcelles, in a review of the Salon des Indépendants of 1907, notes with satisfaction that ‘The influence of Cézanne is on the wane’, and adds, ‘certain earlier Salons, in particular those of 1904 and 1905, could have borne as a banner…‘homage to Cézanne’ '.
The main influences seen by Vauxcelles in the work of the younger painters were those of Gauguin, Derain and Matisse, to which in 1910 he adds the influence of Picasso.
During these years the most important of the established exhibitors at the Indépendants and the Salon d'Automne included Bonnard, Vuillard and Denis, while the strong group of Neo-Impressionist painters under the leadership of Signac were also recognized  and admired; by 1909 Vauxcelles was able to comment on the fact that it was no longer necessary to fight for the painters that he had christened the Fauves.
After the large Cézanne retrospective exhibition at the Salon d' Automne of 1907, his influence once again became paramount, although after 1909, following the lead of Braque, certain painters began to interpret Cézanne from a more formal and intellectual, and less immediately visual point of view.
Vauxcelles refers to some of the painters of the Indépendants of 1910 who were working under the influence of Cézanne as ‘ignorant geometricians, who reduce scenery and the human body to dull cubes’.
But by far the greater number of paintings to be seen at both these Salons in the first ten years of the century were still sub-Impressionist in character, and it was as part of the final and conclusive reaction against Impressionism that the Cubist and proto-Cubist works exhibited in 1910 were greeted.
Apollinaire in a review of the Salon des Indépendants of that year wrote: ‘If we had to describe the general trend of this exhibition, we would say without hesitation — and with great pleasure — that it means the rout of Impressionism’.
And to prove his point he cited beside the names of Matisse and two or three other painters who had been Fauves those of Robert Delaunay, Henri Le Fauconnier, Jean Metzinger, André Lhote and Marie Laurencin, all of whom were at some time or another involved in the Cubist movement.
Reviewing the Salon d'Automne, Allard grouped together the work of Metzinger, Le Fauconnier and Gleizes, and, using one of the paintings shown by Metzinger an example, stated: ‘there is thus being born in opposition to Impressionism an art which instead of copying natural phenomena, offers to the mind of the spectator, in their pictorial entirety, elements that as a result of synthesis are fundamental and timeless’.
Of Gleizes' work he said: ‘Standing in front of his canvases I had the very definite impression of a sobering up after an Impressionist debauch.’
Allard seems to have realized that the work of these painters was a reaction against Fauvism as well: ‘away  with posters, with visions that ‘compel’, with ‘quivering slices of life’, away with jottings and anecdotes.
A good picture is nothing more than a perfect equilibrium, that is to say a balance of weights and a harmony of numbers.
Let the painter's mind be sensitive, but not his brush.’
La Presse, although hostile to the future Cubists, seems to have realized that something new was afoot when it referred to ‘the geometric excesses of Mm.
Le Fauconnier, Gleizes and Metzinger’.
Shortly afterwards Metzinger published an article in the literary review Pan on the work of Picasso, Braque, Le Fauconnier and Delaunay in which he proclaimed a new type of painting which for the first time broke with hellenic traditions.
1910 is the year in which the Cubist painters, other than Picasso and Braque, came together as a conscious group, although many of them had known each other earlier.
Metzinger and Delaunay had exhibited portraits of each other at the Salon d'Automne of 1906, when both were working in a Neo-Impressionist idiom, and by 1907 Delaunay had met Léger and Le Fauconnier as well.
Gleizes and Le Fauconnier became friendly in 1909 after a meeting at the home of a young socialist writer named Alexandre Mercereau, where Gleizes also met Metzinger and Delaunay for the first time in the following year, although these meetings did not lead to immediate friendship, and Gleizes knew little about their work.
Léger appears to have joined the circle at Mercereau's later in the same year, probably introduced by Delaunay with whom he was becoming very friendly at this period.
The painters also met at the Tuesday evenings held by the review Vers et Prose at the Closerie des Lilas.
This café was the stronghold of the older generation of literary Symbolists, writers like Paul Fort, Stuart Merrill and Verhaeren, but many of the younger literary figures such as Apollinaire, Allard, Salmon and Mercereau (the last two on the staff of Vers et Prose) were to be seen  there too.
Allard had arrived in Paris from Lille in the spring of 1910 and his first contacts were with the future Cubists; because of this, his criticism is doubly interesting as representing their ideas unclouded by outside opinion.
Older, more established painters like Signac and Sérusier also frequented these gatherings at the Closerie so that the atmosphere, though stimulating, was not particularly radical.
Gustave Kahn, art-critic of the Mercure de France, entertained privately the same group of painters and authors.
The works of Metzinger, Gleizes and Le Fauconnier had been hung together by chance at the Salon d'Automne of 1910, but the common characteristics which the critics saw in their styles, and the excitement expressed by the poets and authors at Mercereau's and at the Closerie des Lilas over the possibilities of a new school of painting, seem to have made the painters aware of each other; Apollinaire and Salmon in particular , although both were in many ways insensitive to painting, realized that Picasso's latest style contained the elements of a new art, and felt that the work of several other painters was evolving in a similar direction.
Gleizes writes, ‘it was at this moment, October 1910, that we discovered each other seriously, including Robert Delaunay…and that we realized what we had in common.
The necessity of forming a group, of frequenting each other, of exchanging ideas, seemed imperative.’
Besides the meetings at Mercereau's and the Closerie, the painters began meeting regularly at Le Fauconnier's studio in the rue Visconti as well, where during the closing months of the year they watched with interest the development through successive stages of his Abondance, a painting that all appear to have regarded as an important, revolutionary work.
Early in the following year Gleizes instituted weekly soirées at his studio in Courbevoie.
Neither Picasso nor Braque, the true creators of the movement, were present at any of these gatherings.
The first Cubist manifestation took place at the Salon des Indépendants of 1911.
Largely at the instigation of Apollinaire, Salmon and Allard, the painters had decided to show together as a group.
‘Metzinger, Le Fauconnier, Delaunay, Léger and I,’ writes Gleizes, ‘had decided to show at the next Salon des Indépendants…but…we should show as a group, everyone was agreed.’
They feared  that if their paintings were not all shown together most of the impact would be lost; but to ensure that they were hung together, the rules of the Salon had to be modified.
Usually the committee of the Salon appointed a hanging committee which was automatically and unanimously approved by the general assembly at its annual meeting held a few weeks before the opening of the exhibition.
With the aid of their literary friends, the painters drew up a pamphlet to distribute to the general assembly, protesting against the chaotic hanging in previous exhibitions, and urging that the hanging committee proposed by the committee of the Salon be overthrown.
They proposed instead a new list of candidates which included themselves ‘and certain other painters whom we knew to a greater or lesser extent…who seemed to us capable of representing if not a particular tendency at least a certain standard’.
These included Lhote, Segonzac, La Fresnaye and Marchand.
The manoeuvre proved successful and Metzinger in particular received a very large number of votes.
Le Fauconnier, Léger, Delaunay, Metzinger and Gleizes chose for themselves Salle 41 and accepted a few other painters to be shown with them, among them, at the request of Apollinaire, Marie Laurencin.
A neighbouring gallery contained the entries of Lhote, La Fresnaye, Segonzac, Luc Albert Moreau and André Mare.
The dramatic ‘coup’ at the general meeting, coupled with the publicity made by the writers of the circle, sufficed to provoke an exceptional amount of interest in the contents of these rooms even before the Vernissage.
On the opening day it was almost impossible to get into Salle 41 owing to the crowds.
Next day a violent storm of criticism and derision was let loose in the press, while the long review by Apollinaire in L'Intransïgeant served to establish him as the champion of the group.
The painters themselves, despite the highly organized aspect of the demonstration, appear to have been surprised at the sensation caused by their works and at the sudden notoriety which they acquired overnight.
Even without the works of Picasso and Braque the public saw in this manifestation a new departure in art; yet in many ways the succès de scandale of the Indépendants was due as much to the poets as to the painters.
Shortly after the Salon des Indépendants, the Societe des Artistes Indépendants  of Brussels invited the French painters to join them in their yearly show, which was to open in June.
The catalogue lists Archipenko, Delaunay, Segonzac, Gleizes, Le Fauconnier, Léger, Marchand, Moreau and Jean Plumet; Metzinger for some reason abstained.
In his preface to the catalogue, Apollinaire wrote: ‘The new painters who made manifest this year, at the Salon des Artistes Indépendants of Paris, their artistic ideals, accept the name of Cubists which has been given to them.
Nevertheless Cubism is not a system, and the differences which characterize not only the talent but the styles of these artists, are an obvious proof of it.’
The term ‘Cubism’ had become common usage in the press after the opening of the Salon des Indépendants, although Apollinaire himself had referred to Metzinger, who had shown a painting directly influenced by Picasso, as ‘the only adept of Cubism strictly speaking’.
Applied to the artists showing at Brussels, the term could have no very definite meaning, and Apollinaire found it hard to identify many specific characteristics shared by the painters, or even to distinguish Cubism from Fauvism: ‘One feature unites them, for if the principal merit of the painters who have been called the Fauves was the return to fundamental principles as far as colour and composition are concerned, the Cubists, in order to extend yet further the province of an art thus renewed, have sought to return to basic principles of drawing and inspiration.
If I add that the majority of Cubists were formerly considered to be Fauves, I can demonstrate how far these young artists have come in a short time and the logic of their vision.
‘Out of these two movements which follow upon each other and fuse so successfully, is born an art that is simple and noble, expressive and precise, passionate in its search for beauty, and ready to tackle those vast subjects which yesterday's painters feared to undertake, leaving them to antiquated, boring and pretentious daubers of the official Salons.’
Apollinaire concludes: ‘I believe that in these few words I have conveyed the true meaning of Cubism: a new and lofty artistic movement, but not a rigid school inhibiting talent.’
The exhibits in the Brussels exhibition seem to have had in common only a  concentration on clearly defined simple forms and a corresponding limitation of colour, and very few of them had anything at all in common with the work of Picasso and Braque.
Certain critics like Hourcade and Allard, who did not realize the importance of what Picasso and Braque were doing, continued to take a broad view of Cubism as simply a return to a more sober, classical form of art, and thus to include within the movement a large number of artists who were not strictly speaking Cubist but had been slightly influenced by the style.
In October 1912 Hourcade wrote: ‘The term ‘Cubism’…means nothing if it is used to designate a school: there is no school of Cubist painting.
And it is absurd to think that the painters of the Section d'Or and others, scattered through the Salon d'Automne, share any concern other than that of reacting against the sloppiness of Impressionism.
The true definition of Cubism seems to me: the return to a sense of style through a more subjective vision of nature (conveyed at times by a stronger emphasis on masses).
The main interest of Cubism is the total difference of the painters from each other.’
However, Vauxcelles's original references to the ‘cubes’ in Braque's work and to his ‘bizarreries cubiques’had been intended disparagingly, and the term ‘Cubism’continued to be applied by hostile critics to the work of the more advanced painters whom they could not understand or appreciate, and by perceptive critics to these same artists whom they considered to be pioneers in a new movement.
But as the pictorial innovations of Picasso and Braque — the construction of a painting in terms of a linear grid or framework, the fusion of objects with their surroundings, the combination of several views of an object in a single image, and of abstract and representational elements in the same picture — began to influence a widening circle of artists, the style became distinguishable by virtue of these features.
Although until late in 1912 Picasso and Braque lived in Montmartre and had relatively little contact with the other Cubists who lived mostly on the Left Bank or in the suburbs, they did not live in isolation.
Picasso had never shown publicly at the big Salons, but Braque's Cubist works exhibited at the Salon des Indépendants of 1909 were widely discussed and were undoubtedly an influence on some painters, while they must have helped others to interpret Cézanne in a more  intellectual, objective way.
The work of both painters could be seen at Kahnweiler's gallery in the rue Vignon and at the small private gallery run by Uhde.
Delaunay used to meet Picasso at the gatherings at the Douanier Rousseau's, while Metzinger was a frequent visitor to Picasso's studio in the Bateau Lavoir during the early years of Cubism, and was an important agent in transmitting the first discoveries of Picasso and Braque.
It was Metzinger who, in his Note sur la Peinture of 1910, was the first to write of the fact that Picasso and Braque had dismissed traditional perspective and felt free to move around their subjects, studying them from various points of view.
Discussing the painting of Picasso and Braque, he added to some general remarks about the return to a more formal and intellectual art his view that a painting by Picasso was ‘the tangible equivalent of an idea, the image in its totality…
Cézanne shows us living forms revealed by light, Picasso adds a material inventory of their intellectual existence, he establishes a free, variable system of perspective…
To purely optical sensations he adds tactile sensations.’
And of Braque he wrote: ‘Whether he paints a face, a fruit, the entire image pulses incessantly; the painting is no longer an inert grouping of concurrent masses.’
Léger was shown the works of Picasso and Braque in 1910 by Kahnweiler and met them later the same year.
Le Fauconnier and Gleizes did not meet Picasso until late in 1911, and Gleizes does not record having met Braque at all.
The poets and writers who had been instrumental in organizing the younger painters at the Indépendants also played a large part in uniting the different aspects of Cubism.
Apollinaire and Raynal in particular moved freely in all artistic circles.
Apollinaire, however, remained personally most intimate with Picasso, and it is certain that the literary circle which surrounded Picasso, and  which included Max Jacob and Pierre Reverdy, was more advanced than that around Gleizes and Metzinger, whose closest friends, men like Mercereau and Nayral, belonged to the circle of Paul Fort and the older generation of Symbolists.
During 1911 and 1912 the group formed by Gleizes, Metzinger, Léger, Le Fauconnier and Delaunay was expanded to include several new figures.
Archipenko and La Fresnaye, who had been unknown to Gleizes before the Salon des Indépendants of 1911, began to frequent the Mondays at Courbevoie.
Picabia was drawn into the circle, probably by Apollinaire with whom he had recently become friendly.
Apollinaire himself was usually accompanied by Marie Laurencin.
But most important was the contact established with the Duchamp brothers who exhibited under the names of Jacques Villon, Marcel Duchamp and Duchamp-Villon.
Duchamp-Villon, although at that time not personally in touch with the group, was on the committee of the Salon d'Automne of 1911 and together with La Fresnaye, Desvallières and one or two others, was largely responsible for persuading the hostile jury to include the paintings submitted by the Cubists.
Duchamp-Villon and La Fresnaye were also members of the hanging committee, so that the Cubist painters were able to exhibit for the second time that year as a group.
Marcel Duchamp and Jacques Villon had been influenced by the demonstration at the Indépendants, and were included in the Cubist room at the Salon d'Automne.
After this their studio at Puteaux became another meeting place.
Franz Kupka, a Czech painter who had come to Paris in 1894 or 1895, and who lived in an adjacent studio, was also drawn into contact with the Cubists.
Le Fauconnier and Mercereau continued to entertain weekly, so that the painters and writers were meeting constantly.
Metzinger, Gleizes, and Le Fauconnier even planned to publish a review dedicated to the plastic arts, with the collaboration of Jacques Nayral and Mercereau.
The participation of many of these painters in the formation of Les Artistes de Passy in October 1912, an attempt to transform that district of Paris into yet another art-centre, is a further sign of the continual emphasis on communal activity.
Lhote, who had already established a  certain independent reputation, mixed cautiously in Cubist circles, but from 1911 onwards was generally referred to as a Cubist, although his somewhat academic style often gained him exemption from the unfavourable criticism directed at the other painters.
The most significant new figure to join the group, however, was undoubtedly Juan Gris.
A Spaniard like Picasso, Gris had arrived in Paris in 1906 and had moved into a studio adjacent to Picasso's in the Bateau Lavoir.
Although he did not begin painting seriously until 1911, Gris had thus been in a position to watch at first hand the birth and development of Picasso's Cubism.
Within an amazingly short time he developed into a highly accomplished and individual painter.
As he was a very intellectual artist, he was the ideal figure to take over from Metzinger the task of transmitting the principles of Cubism to the other painters; and since he joined the group at a moment when the movement was striving for greater definition, his influence and importance cannot be overestimated.
Marcoussis and Herbin, whose work began to be noticed during 1912 and 1913, had also approached Cubism directly through Picasso and Braque.
The influence of Cubism seems to have been immediate and extensive.
One reviewer of the Salon des Indépendants of 1912 writes: ‘Now that the Cubists have grown into a school their works occupy several rooms and are to be seen in several exhibitions’, and another: ‘the Cubists are to be found in force’.
Reviewing this same exhibition, both Allard and Apollinaire noticed that for the first time in several years the influence of Matisse and Fauvism was slight.
Gustave Kahn wrote: ‘The exhibition favours the Cubists.’
To add to the general impact of their work, many of the Cubists had, at the suggestion of Apollinaire, submitted very large canvases — Delaunay's Ville de Paris was the largest painting in the exhibition.
That same year (1912) the Cubists also exhibited in Rouen at the Salon de Juin, and the movement was rapidly becoming known outside France as well.
As  early as 1910, Mercereau had sent to Russia an exhibition of works by Gleizes, Metzinger and Le Fauconnier, and a few artists whose aims he felt to be similar.
Apollinaire was able to write that the Salon d'Automne of 1912 had been persuaded to show the Cubists because of their influence and prestige abroad; the most important and sensational feature in the Salon was certainly the maison cubiste, for which André Mare and Duchamp-Villon were responsible.
Indeed, a painter-critic named Lecomte had resigned from membership of the Salon because he felt the Cubists were too numerous and their work too well hung.
Finally the storm and controversy raised by the Cubists reached its climax on 3 December 1912 when they became the subject of an interpellation in the Chambre des Députés.
Following the lead of a municipal councillor and amateur photographer named Lampue, who had written an open letter to Monsieur Berard, Under-Secretary in the Ministry of Fine Arts, in the Mercure de France, a Socialist deputy, Monsieur Jean Louis Breton, demanded that measures be taken to prevent the Cubists from exhibiting at the Salon d'Automne: ‘It is absolutely inadmissible that our national palaces should be used for manifestations of such an obviously anti-artistic and anti-national kind.’
The attack was answered by Marcel Sembat, another Socialist, and a leading member of the party, who was himself keenly interested in modern painting.
‘When a painting seems bad to one,’ he declared, ‘one has an incontestable right, that of not looking at it and going to see others.
But one doesn't call in the police.’
So the matter rested there; but it is a sign of the intense feeling aroused by the new school.
The most important single Cubist exhibition was that of the Section d'Or at the Galerie de la Boétie in October 1912.
In the previous year the Cubists and a large number of their friends had exhibited at the Galerie de l'Art Contemporain in the rue Tronchet, under the auspices of the Societe Normande de Peinture Moderne.
This exhibition had received little attention in the press, though l'Autorité and  Paris Journal had referred to it as an ‘exhibition of Fauves and Cubists’ no doubt through a confusion of terms, but also partly because this seemed the only way of describing the manifold tendencies represented, which were as divergent as at Brussels.
The Section d'Or, on the other hand, was generally accepted as being Cubist in character.
Over 200 works were shown, and the fact that all the artists showed painting representative of their development during the previous three years gave the exhibition an added air of being a Cubist demonstration.
Since Picasso and Braque had not exhibited for some time, and since they had not taken part in the manifestations at the Salon des Indépendants and the Salon d'Automne, the public were not in a position to realize that their abstention deprived the Section d'Or of much of its meaning.
The idea of the Section d'Or seems to have originated in the course of conversations between Gleizes, Metzinger and Jacques Villon at Puteaux and Courbevoie.
Jacques Villon, who was older than the others and seems on that account to have enjoyed a certain authority, is generally credited with having suggested the title.
On 2 September 1912 Gil Blas announced that Marcel Duchamp was planning to send to the forthcoming Salon d'Automne a painting which was also to be called La Section d'Or.
All the Duchamp brothers were at this time passionately interested in mathematics; Jacques Villon was engaged in reading Leonardo's Trattato della Pittura, while Marcel Duchamp was a close friend of an amateur mathematician named Maurice Princet, so that it is not surprising that they should have been responsible for introducing a more scientific note into Cubist discussions.
The choice of La Section d'Or as a title for the exhibition of the group of painters who appeared at the Galerie de la Boétie seems to indicate some dissatisfaction with the term Cubism as applied to their work, and was probably intended to imply translation by Peladan in 1910.  that the paintings shown had a more profound and rational basis.
Perhaps it was felt also to have a wider, more general meaning.
The three organizers, however, and many of the painters most directly concerned, were at this period working in a Cubist idiom.
If the Cubists had been surprised by the violent reactions which they had aroused previously, they seem to have been anxious to attract as much attention as possible with this exhibition.
The Vernissage was held from nine until midnight, for which the only precedent was the initial opening of the Salon d'Automne in 1903.
Invitations were issued to vast numbers of people, and many of the guests had to be turned away.
Lectures by Apollinaire, Hourcade and Raynal were advertised, and a review, La Section d'Or, was published to coincide with the opening; it was edited by Pierre Dumont and numbered Apollinaire, Reverdy, Max Jacob, Maurice Raynal, Salmon, Warnod and Hourcade among its contributors.
Salmon had at one point actually hinted that the great philosopher Henri Bergson might write a preface for the exhibition.
As in previous exhibitions, artists like Alcide Le Beau, Segonzac and Luc Albert Moreau, whose paintings were related to Cubism only in a most general way, were invited to show, and the title may have been chosen partly to allow for this.
But as opposed to the exhibition of the Societe Normande de Peinture Moderne of the previous year, the majority of the artists showing at the Section d'Or were Cubists or painters directly influenced by the movement, and the effect made must have been concentrated.
Furthermore, the fact that the exhibition was organized to show the successive stages through which Cubism had passed indicates that the painters were attempting to make their work as comprehensible as possible to the public, and their purpose must have been further served by the demonstration of the affinities between Cubism and the more readily understandable paintings of other artists who shared only a few of their pictorial concerns.
The exhibition was undoubtedly a great success, and it put  Cubism on the map more than any other exhibition that preceded it.
This same desire to render Cubism more intelligible to the general public, and to define and clarify the movement generally led Gleizes and Metzinger in the autumn of 1911 to collaborate in writing the book Du Cubisme, which appeared in August 1912.
Salmon's La Jeune Peinture Contemporaine, which contained an Histoire anécdotique du Cubisme, was published in the following month.
Earlier in 1912 Apollinaire had written a series of articles for Les Soirées de Paris and these were gathered together with some additional material to form the bulk of his Les Peintres Cubistes which was issued in March of the following year.
In February and June 1912 Hourcade published articles entitled respectively ‘La Tendance de la Peinture Contemporaine’ and ‘Le Mouvement Pictural vers une école française de peinture’, in which he attempted to reassess the achievements of the preceding year.
Raynal's first significant essay ‘Qu'est-ce que le Cubisme?’ did not appear until late in 1913.
All these writings had certain points in common.
All emphasized that Cubism was an art of realism, although natural appearances were playing an ever-diminishing part.
Painting was to become intellectual, and the painters would depict the world not as they saw it, but as they knew it to be.
Apollinaire and Hourcade added that this conceptual or intellectual approach led naturally to a selection of simple geometric forms.
The right of the painter to move around an object and combine various views of it into a single image, first stated in writing by Metzinger in 1910 and elaborated a few months later by Allard, was quickly adopted by most critics as a central feature of the style, and became related to the conceptual or intellectual aspect.
Thus Hourcade felt that an artist could convey more clearly the real nature of an object by showing as many aspects of it as possible, and guided by intelligence rather than by his eye, would resort to geometric forms.
Knowing that the opening of a cup is round, it is false to depict it simply as an ellipse; ideally the object is shown as a combination of plan, section and elevation.
Emphasizing the intellectual approach, Hourcade was the first of the many writers to relate Cubist painting to Kantian aesthetics, and in one of his articles includes a quotation from Schopenhauer: ‘Kant's  greatest service was to distinguish  between the appearance of a thing and the thing in itself, and he showed that our intelligence stands between the thing and us.’
Hourcade also saw as a second feature of Cubist painting the organization of the whole surface in terms of interpenetrating or interacting planes: ‘The fascination of the paintings lies not only in the presentation of the main objects represented, but in the dynamism which emerges from the composition, a strange, disturbing dynamism, but one that is perfectly controlled.’
In Du Cubisme, this feature was discussed as deriving from Cézanne: ‘He teaches us to understand a dynamism that is universal.
He shows us the modifications which objects thought to be inanimate impose on each other…
He prophesies that a study of primordial volumes will open up unheard of horizons.
His work, a homogeneous mass, moves in front of our eyes, contracts, expands, seems motionless or flickers, and proves that painting is not — or is no longer— the art of imitating an object by means of lines and colours, but that of giving a pictorial expression to our intuitions.’
On the subject of the abstract tendencies inherent in Cubist painting, however, the writers differed sharply.
Apollinaire appeared to see complete abstraction as the goal.
In the second section of Les Peintres Cubistes he stated: ‘The subject no longer matters, or hardly matters.’
…The secret ambition of the young painters of advanced tendencies is to create a form of pure painting.
This is a completely new kind of plastic expression.
It is still in its infancy and not as abstract as it aspires to be.’
Gleizes and Metzinger, themselves painters, and fascinated by purely formal pictorial problems, also began by seeing abstraction as the logical end, although they rapidly retreated and admitted the need, for the moment at least, of a certain coefficient of realism: ‘…the painting imitates nothing and…must justify its existence in itself…
Yet we must admit that reminiscences of natural forms cannot be absolutely banished, at least not yet.
Art cannot be raised to a pure effusion at a single onset.’
Allard and Hourcade rigorously  opposed any suggestion of abstraction in Cubist painting.
Hourcade condemned it as un-French: ‘our tradition calls for a subject and the originality of Cubism lies precisely in its rejection of the anecdote in order to rediscover the subject’; and he repudiated the idea that all the painters of the Section d'Or had renounced natural appearances: ‘…it is absolutely false to say that all these painters are turning their backs on nature and want only to produce pure painting.’
None of the writers realized that the Cubism of this date relied on a balance between abstraction and representation to achieve its effects, and that it was this balance that gave each work a significance on more levels than one.
It was only natural that the two artist-writers, Gleizes and Metzinger, should have been the ones who were forced into a position of compromise between the two poles of abstraction and representation.
But while the Section d'Or represented the high point of the Cubist movement as it was presented to the public, and while the influence of Cubism daily became more powerful and widespread, many painters who had been Cubist, or had moved in Cubist circles, were already abandoning the style or using certain aspects of it as points of departure for developing completely new art forms.
Delaunay, who earlier in the year had held an important exhibition together with Marie Laurencin at the Galerie Barbazanges, did not show at the Section d'Or, and wrote an open letter to Vauxcelles: ‘I beg to inform you that I do not subscribe to the erroneously held opinions of Monsieur Hourcade which proclaim me as a founder of Cubism together with four of my colleagues and friends.
It is without my knowledge that certain young painters have made use of my latest researches.
They have recently exhibited paintings which they call Cubist paintings.
I am not exhibiting.’
And in the reviews of the Section d'Or and the progressive Salons of 1912, there are indications that the works of Kupka, Picabia and Marcel Duchamp were generally recognized as having gone in some way beyond those of the original Cubists in daring and novelty.
One critic of the Salon d'Automne wrote: ‘The prize for idiocy this year is retained by M. Picabia…while M. Kupka has turned to sphericism,’ while Hourcade felt that Picabia  had ‘pushed a bad theory as far as it can go.’
Allard had referred to the work of Kupka at the Salon des Indépendants as ‘post-Cubist fantasies’, while at the Section d'Or Vauxcelles singled out as representative of the worst and most outrageous tendencies Duchamp's Le Roi et la Reine entourés de nus vites.
Both Delaunay and Le Fauconnier, who did not exhibit at the Galerie de la Boétie either, were at this point on less friendly terms with the other members of the movement, and for this reason their works were not illustrated in Du Cubisme.
The differences between the painters appear to have been purely personal, but Delaunay had also moved away from the other Cubists in his works of 1912, and, using his Cubist researches as a point of departure, was developing a much more purely abstract kind of painting with colour as its principal element.
Delaunay was himself profoundly aware that he had evolved a new kind of painting and he communicated his discoveries to Apollinaire with whom he had become very friendly.
Apollinaire, always ready to welcome and encourage any form of artistic novelty, christened this development ‘Orphism’.
Apollinaire had recently finished writing Le Bestiaire au Cortège d'Orphée and felt the name to be applicable to Delaunay's work, partly because it was more lyrical and sensuous than the rather austere Cubism of the period, and also because he saw it as a form of ‘peinture pure’ which had analogies with music.
In the nineteenth century music had come to be regarded as queen of the arts because of its non-imitative qualities, and throughout the Cubist period musical analogies become increasingly frequent.
With the emergence of abstract painting many felt that painting had become completely ‘musicalized’.
In his article ‘Du Sujet dans la Peinture Moderne’(which became the second section of Les Peintres Cubistes) Apollinaire had written: ‘Thus we are progressing towards an intensely new kind of art, which will be to painting what one had hitherto imagined music was to pure literature.’
Arthur Eddy, an American critic who in 1914 produced the first book in English on Cubism, Cubists and Post-Impressionism, wrote that ‘the  comparison that Picabia is fondest of making is that of absolute music’.
Valensi, who had shown at the Section d'Or in 1912, in a lecture given late in the following year asked: ‘Why should we not invent pure painting?
Since the musician works with notes, why should we not accept that colour by its intrinsic force is capable of expressing a painter's thought?’
In his lecture ‘Le Cubisme écartelé’ given at the Section d'Or on 11 October and later added to Les Peintres Cubistes when the book was already in proof, Apollinaire divided Cubism into four categories, Orphism being the most advanced: ‘It is the art of painting new harmonies out of elements borrowed not from visual reality but created entirely by the artist and endowed by him with a powerful presence.
The works of Orphist artists should offer simultaneously a sensation of pure aesthetic enjoyment, a structure of which the senses are hardly aware and a profound content, in other words a subject.
This is pure art.’
While waiting to move into a new apartment in the Boulevard Saint Germain, Apollinaire lived with the Delaunays for almost two months during the autumn of 1912, and at this time the Delaunays' studio became the meeting-place of a new group.
The poet Blaise Cendrars was drawn into the circle, and he, together with Apollinaire, Chagall, and the American painters Bruce and Frost, joined the Delaunays during the summer of 1913 at the house they had rented at Louveciennes.
Early in 1913 Canudo, another friend of Apollinaire's, founded a review called Montjoie which was recognized to be an Orphist mouthpiece, while Apollinaire expanded and developed his ideas on the new style in L'Intransigeant and particularly in Les Soirees de Paris.
Archipenko, who had been a friend of Delaunay for some time, now also denied being a Cubist; the Art column of Gil Blas reported on 14 December 1912: ‘M. Archipenko has formally announced that he has completely detached himself from the Cubist group whose principles he rejects.’
The group used also to frequent the Bal Bullier, a popular Parisian dance hall.
There they were sometimes joined by Arp and Arthur Cravan.
Delaunay felt that the basis of his art was ‘simultaneous’ contrasts of colour, a  concept which he adopted from Chevreul, whose colour theory had interested him for some time.
He meant by this that the areas of colour in his painting were not to be blended by the eye but were to be seen as acting on each other reciprocally, thus producing pictorial form and space.
Sonia Delaunay later expressed this theory in its simplest form: ‘Pure colours used as planes are juxtaposed in simultaneous contrasts to create for the first time a sense of form, achieved not by clair-obscur, but through the relationship in depth of the colours themselves.’
In March 1913, writing on the Salon des Indépendants in Montjoie, Apollinaire referred to ‘L'Orphisme, peinture pure, Simultanéité’, and the two terms thus became largely synonymous.
The poets and critics had played a considerable part in stimulating and organizing the first manifestations of the Cubists, but the connections between Orphism and contemporary literature were stronger and more direct.
Apollinaire, who at the time was fascinated by the interrelation of the arts, and was exploring the visual possibilities of poetry in his Calligrammes (for which one of the original titles was Moi aussi je suis peintre), was inspired by Delaunay's paintings Les Fenêtres to compose, late in 1912, his poem of the same name, in which the means are to a certain extent analogous.
This poem, written in free verse, was one of the first in which Apollinaire eliminated punctuation, and was composed of seemingly disconnected, partially self-sufficient phrases and ideas, which by their placing and interaction serve to evoke both form and atmosphere.
Early in 1913 Cendrars published the first ‘simultaneous’ book, La Prose du Transsibérien et de la petite Jehanne de France, a poem over six feet in length, which was printed in letters of different colours and sizes on an abstract coloured background designed by Sonia Delaunay.
The avowed programme of Montjoie was to find the link between various arts and to investigate their common tendencies, and Canudo invented the term ‘cérébrisme’ to describe this attitude: ‘Montjoie is the mouthpiece of Cerebrist art, for Cerebrism, according to its own definition, embraces and explains the entire artistic evolution of our age during the past forty years, and in the widest sense, being an aesthetic that is indissolubly cerebral and sensual — against all sentimentality in art and life.’
Writing  about Stravinsky, Canudo gave a practical demonstration of his outlook when he claimed that: ‘He partakes of our aesthetic, of Cubism, of synchronism, of the simultaneity of some and the nervous, matter of fact onyrhythm of others.’
An author named Henri Martin, who wrote under the name of Barzun, published a ‘Manifeste sur le simultanisme poétique’, and disputed with Apollinaire the invention of what he called literary Simultaneism.
Apollinaire felt that he had achieved simultaneity in his poèmes conversations, where ‘the poet at the centre of life records somehow the lyricism around him’.
Later in the same article ‘Simultanisme-Librettisme’ in which he expounded these views, Apollinaire, using Picasso's work as an example, extended the idea of Simultaneity to cover the combination of various view-points of objects in a single image.
Orphism appeared before the public at the Salon des Indépendants of 1913.
As in the case of Cubism, Apollinaire tried to give the word as much of an all-inclusive meaning as possible: ‘Orphism has already been talked about a great deal.
This is the first time that this development has been made manifest.
It comprises painters of very different kinds, who all, in their work, are animated by a vision of life that is more internal, more popular and more poetic.
This tendency is not a sudden invention; it is a slow and logical evolution from Impressionism, from Divisionism, from the works of the Fauves and from Cubism.
Only the term is new.’
Generally speaking, however, although Orphism was regarded as a new school its derivation from Cubism was acknowledged.
This had, of course, been made clear at the Salon des Indépendants by Delaunay's L'Equipe de Cardiff which, compared to his more abstract works, appeared simply as a highly coloured and more mouvementé Cubist painting.
Warnod noted in Comoedia that ‘Cubism and Orphism belong to the same family.
While Cubism aims at purity of draughtsmanship, Orphism is an attempt at ‘pure’ painting, not that it involves pure colours, that is to say colours as they come out of the tube.
but rather painting divorced from all other considerations'.
Apollinaire, who in Les Peintres Cubistes had defined Orphic Cubism as being represented only by Delaunay, Léger, Picabia, Duchamp and Picasso in so far as his use of light was significant, now saw Orphic tendencies in Laurencin, Gleizes and Metzinger, and later (more understandably) in La Fresnaye.
More often, however, the term was reserved for Delaunay and his disciples, Bruce, Frost, Sonia Delaunay and Alice Bailly, and for painters such as Picabia, Kupka and Duchamp who had all been originally classified as Cubists but whose work was becoming more abstract, although it had little or nothing to do with that of Delaunay.
Léger, whose researches had always been more highly personal than those of the other Cubists with whom he showed, and whose art was now becoming more obviously divergent, is also sometimes referred to as an Orphist; this, however, is understandable since his work did have something in common with Delaunay's.
At the Salon des Indépendants all these artists were grouped together in Salle 45, together with the work of Morgan Russel and MacDonald Wright, who called themselves ‘Synchromists’ and somewhat pretentiously purported to be representatives of a new school which was to be the culmination of all European painting; they were, in fact, rapidly absorbed into the more vital Orphist movement.
The Cubists were hung in the adjacent Salle 46.
During 1912 many of the critics, and in particular Hourcade and Allard, had been anxious to point out that the work of the Cubists was becoming more individual and less austere and didactic.
Colour had begun to reappear, particularly in the work of Léger, who had only seriously restricted his palette in 1910.
Now, under the influence of Orphism, the tendency to reinstate the more sensuous aspects of painting grew stronger.
At the Salon d'Automne of 1913 Salmon was struck by ‘The range of colours used in many canvases’, but added, ‘however, the Salon of 1913is a frankly Cubist exhibition’.
The Orphists were not adequately represented at this Salon, since Delaunay himself refused to show there, but at the Indépendants of 1914 the Orphist canvases were so numerous and of such large dimensions that they had to be placed in the largest and most important hall on the ground floor.
The Cubists had gained new recruits also, but the impact of the Orphist section caused Salmon to write, ‘Orphism and Simultanism  seem to me to represent a threat to that sense of structure so miraculously rediscovered’.
A few months earlier La Fresnaye, a member of the jury of the Salon d'Automne of 1913, had written, ‘painting is clearly becoming more abstract.’
Even allowing for the fact that Orphism, as the most recent artistic novelty, was attracting the attention of a press and public made restless and sensation-hungry by the numerous artistic upheavals which the twentieth century had already witnessed, the fact is that by 1914 the abstract tendencies in European painting were already assuming an importance second only to that of Cubism from which they had largely sprung.
Mondrian, who had felt the impact of Cubism even before reaching Paris, had first exhibited at the Indépendants in 1911, submitting his painting from an address in Amsterdam.
At the same Salon in the following year, after he had come to Paris, his entries were included in the Cubist room, and by 1913 his work was beginning to attract special attention.
In one review Apollinaire referred to ‘the very abstract painting of Mondrian’, and added in another, ‘his trees and his portrait of a woman are of great interest.’
Apollinaire was furthermore at pains to stress that while the work of Mondrian derived from that of Picasso and Braque, it was completely different in appearance.
This came about through the fact that although Mondrian made use of the Cubist grid-system of Composition, he had already begun to develop a new form of painting which finally culminated during the war in the purely abstract idiom of De Stijl and Neo-Plasticism.
In Russia, too, the abstract possibilities of Cubism were being explored and developed.
Cubism was known there largely through the exhibitions which involved the painter Larionov, who kept in touch with all the most recent developments in Paris and Italy.
Larionov had in 1911 invented Rayonism, a movement which had a strong abstract bias, although it was closer in many ways to contemporary Futurism than to Cubism.
In 1913 Malevitch, whose work at this period showed traces of both Cubist and Futurist influence, was preparing to launch the Suprematist movement which stood for a more purely abstract style than anything yet seen.
Writing of the Salon des Indépendants of 1914, Apollinaire saw another influence at work: ‘This year Futurism has begun to invade the Salon, and whereas from the reproductions they publish, the Italian Futurists appear to be ever more strongly influenced by the innovators of Paris (Picasso and Braque), it would seem that a certain number of Parisian artists are being influenced by Futurist theories.’
This may to a certain extent have been true.
Unlike the Cubists, the Futurists had never limited the colours on their palettes and were concerned with a wide range of subject-matter, so that they may have contributed to the general ‘loosening-up’ process that Cubism was undergoing.
Certainly pictorial Futurism owed a great deal to Cubism and was even considered by some to be, like Orphism, an off-shoot of it, although its development was exactly the converse of that of Orphism.
Most of the Orphists were Cubists who had broken away and formulated new stylistic and aesthetic principles.
The Futurists, on the other hand, were men who started from violent ideological principles of their own but looked to Cubism for guidance as to how they could best express themselves.
Marinetti, the organizer of the movement, who launched the first Futurist manifesto in 1909, had spent much time in France and was in touch with the most advanced French thought.
He had been connected with the Théâtre de l'Oeuvre at the height of its activity, was a friend and admirer of Jarry, and a regular visitor to the Tuesday gatherings at the Closerie des Lilas.
In 1910 Boccioni and his friends got to know Marinetti well, and were undoubtedly excited at the prospect of creating a new form of painting to correspond to his novel ideas.
But when the Futurist painting manifestos appeared early in 1910 the work of the painters themselves still lacked a sense of direction.
Of the five painters who had signed the manifesto only Severini, who had been in Paris since 1905, had any claim to be considered avant-garde, whereas the others were mostly working in a debased divisionist technique and relied for novelty on the rather obvious imagery of their subject-matter.
At that same moment the Cubist painters, other than Picasso and Braque, were making contact with each other on the basis of common pictorial interests, while the Italians were banded together with an elaborate  programme but no adequate means of expressing it.
They were, however, aware of the developments in France.
In 1914 Boccioni wrote: ‘We were aware of Cubism as it had been publicized in France in articles and books when we came out with the technical manifesto of Futurist painting (11 April 1910) and with our first exhibition at the Bernheim Gallery (6 February 1912).’
In actual fact little had been written about Cubism by April 1910, but Boccioni's work of 1911 shows some indirect Cubist influence, and he was certainly in correspondence with Severini, who, though as yet little touched by the movement, was a friend of both Picasso and Braque.
Boccioni, Carrà and Russolo showed recent works at the Esposizione d'Arte Libera in Milan in the Spring of 1911, and owing to the polemics already aroused by Futurist propaganda their work attracted great interest.
The Futurists were severely criticized in La Voce by the painter-critic Ardengo Soffici, for the triteness of their imagery and their lack of technical control.
A friend of Apollinaire, Soffici was possibly the only man in Italy at the time with a clear idea of Cubism and its aims, and in contrasting it with the work of the young Futurists no doubt felt that his strictures were justified.
Severini, who had signed the manifestos but was not exhibiting, had come to Milan to ask Marinetti for financial assistance, and he advised that the Italian painters should visit Paris before exhibiting there as they intended.
Boccioni convinced Marinetti of the necessity of the expedition, and accordingly Marinetti took Boccioni, Carrà and Russolo to Paris, arriving in the autumn of 1911.
Severini, who had only recently met Carrà and Russolo, now took the Italian painters on a tour of the Paris studios and galleries.
By the time that the Futurist exhibition opened at the Galerie Bernheim in February of the following year, Boccioni had reworked his States of Mind, a series of paintings which he felt held the key to a new range of subject-matter in painting, and Carrà and Russolo had abandoned or reworked some of their largest pre-Parisian canvases.
Futurism's debt to Cubism was universally recognized.
Apollinaire pointed out that Boccioni's best works were those in which he came nearest to recent works by Picasso which he had seen in Paris.
Hourcade wrote of the Futurist exhibition in the Revue de France: ‘One would swear that a clever pupil of the Cubists and an even cleverer pupil of Signac had painted the works in collaboration…
Can it be that our hot-headed guests want to burn the museums in order to destroy the evidence?’
Even pictorial Futurism of course contained much that was new; as opposed to Cubism it was primarily an art of movement, concerned with treating large ambitious subjects, and with an aggressively contemporary aesthetic which expressed itself in its destructive attitude towards the past and a glorification of the machine; unlike Cubism it was a highly romantic and literary kind of painting.
But the means by which the Futurists were expressing themselves at this point were largely borrowed from the Cubists, and occasionally in some less well-informed criticism, the two terms became synonymous.
The linear Cubist grid was adapted to become the Futurist ‘lines of force’ by which the representational elements are traversed.
The fusion of the figure and its surroundings on which the Italians insisted was something that the Cubists had already achieved, and although the Futurists went further and added that the painting must be a synthesis of things seen and things remembered, visible and invisible, this had very little effect on the means employed.
The interacting transparent planes used by the Cubists to achieve this fusion and to explain and develop form, coincided with the Futurists' conception of the transparency of objects, and proved capable of adaptation to give a sense of dynamic balance or movement.
Explaining one of the sections of their manifesto in the preface to the exhibition at Bernheim's, the Futurists, now aware of Cubist painting, talked for the first time of ‘battles of planes’; and Boccioni summarizes most concisely the debt of Futurism to Cubism when in Pittura Scultura Futuriste, published in 1914, he wrote under the heading ‘Compenetrazione dei Piani’: ‘It is the pictorial method of rendering movement in a painting, making the surrounding objects fuse with the structure of the object placed in their midst’.
The end is purely Futurist but the means are Cubist.
But as the movement became more fiercely nationalistic, the Futurists began to complain that they in turn were being plagiarized in France.
In articles in Der Sturm and Lacerbal Boccioni claimed that the Futurists had been the first to introduce the concept of Simultaneity into painting, and that Léger's article ‘Les Origines de la Peinture et sa Valeur Représentative’ was really a Futurist statement.
Léger was certainly more in sympathy with Futurism than most of the other artists associated with the Cubist movement.
Delaunay, for example, violently repudiated any analogy between his own art and that of the Futurists both in an open letter to the press and in a long essay written immediately after attending a lecture given by Marinetti at the time of the first Futurist exhibition in Paris.
Actually the quarrel was largely due to Apollinaire's careless use of terms and to a rather wilful misunderstanding on the part of Boccioni.
The idea of Simultaneity first appeared in the preface to the Futurist exhibition at the Bernheim Gallery: it had its origin in Boccioni's series of States of Mind, and was primarily the Bergsonian concept that a picture must be a synthesis of what is remembered and what has been seen, a synthetic visual impression comprising not merely the various aspects of a single object, but any feature related to it, physically or psychologically.
A painting by Carrà entitled Simultaneità, which shows a figure in a series of successive attitudes, indicates that Simultaneity had for the Futurists also the simpler meaning of the combination of different aspects of objects or people in motion into a single painting.
For Delaunay and Léger the term had much more purely plastic connotations.
For Delaunay it was the interaction of colours which produced a sense of form and space in a picture, whereas for Léger it meant the simultaneous presence in a painting of the three pictorial elements of line, form and colour, all used in a system of deliberate contrasts.
The Futurists, however, undoubtedly had an influence on the terminology of French painting and literature, and the bewildering mass of ‘isms’ springing up in 1913 and 1914 reflects also some of the spiritual restlessness which Futurism  did so much to engender.
The first Futurist manifesto was published originally in French in the Figaro, and the manifesto of the Futurist painters appeared in full in Comoedia shortly after its publication in Italy.
Apollinaire, whose enthusiasm and readiness to support any new cause (often without any very deep understanding or sympathy with its aims) did much to add to the artistic confusion of the period, was himself persuaded to write a Futurist manifesto which appeared in Milan in June 1913 — L'Anti-tradizione Futurista.
Late in 1913 he wrote on a more factual note: ‘Futurism is not without importance, and its manifestos drawn up in France have had an influence on the terminology which is employed today amongst the most advanced painters.’
The relations between the Cubists and the German painters with whom they came into contact were less stormy, although the internal situation in Germany was complex from an art-historical point of view owing to the fact that during the pre-war years Germany seemed to become the melting-pot for western European painting.
By 1912, however, the influence of Matisse and the Fauves, which the Brücke had grafted on to a more purely native form of Expressionism, was definitely on the wane, and German painters were feeling the influence of both Cubism and Futurism.
Picasso's work was first seen in Germany in 1909 at the Thannhauser Gallery in Munich, and paintings by many of the other painters subsequently known as Cubists were shown at the second exhibition of the Neue Künstlervereinigung in Munich in 1910.
Throughout 1912 and 1913 the works of Picasso and Braque were to be seen at the Sturm Gallery in Berlin and in the avant-garde exhibitions in Cologne and Munich.
The most significant and direct connection with Germany, however, was that between Delaunay and the artists of the Blaue Reiter.
In 1911 the German painter Elizabeth Epstein, a friend of the Delaunays, drew the attention of Kandinsky to the works of Delaunay at the Salon des Indépendants, and later in the year Kandinsky wrote inviting Delaunay to join in the first exhibition of the reconstituted Neue Künstlervereinigung, now known as the Blaue Reiter, which was held in December at the Thannhauser Gallery in Munich.
Delaunay was represented by three paintings, all of which were sold, and his reputation and  influence in Germany increased steadily.
In the spring of the following year (1912) Delaunay was visited in his studio in Paris by Paul Klee, and later on by Marc and Macke.
While in Paris Klee saw and admired Cubist works at Uhde's, and he may have known the rapidly growing Rupf collection in Berne, but he remained most impressed by Delaunay's scientific approach to the handling of colour, which fitted in with his own ideas; in the autumn of 1912 he translated some of Delaunay's notes on light for the review Der Sturm.
The climax of Delaunay's success in Germany came when he was given a large one-man show at the Walden Gallery in Berlin early in 1913; both Delaunay and Apollinaire travelled to Germany for the opening.
Orphism appealed particularly to the Germans, since like so much of their own painting it was brightly coloured and was simultaneously a more theoretical and a more popular type of art than Cubism.
Although the influence of Cubism on the German painters was less direct than it had been in the development of Futurism (the work of Delaunay which the Germans most admired, for instance, was no longer really Cubist at all ), unlike the Italians the Germans made no attempt to disguise their interest in the movement, and several of the artists of the Blaue Reiter actually thought of themselves as Cubist painters.
This was in a sense strange, since not only was their art far removed from true Cubism from a purely visual point of view, but their aims, though not as aggressively stated as those of the Futurists, were equally at variance with those of the French painters.
The work of both Klee and Marc was tinged by a strong literary flavour, and, particularly in the case of Marc, by a strong underlying current of Germanic mysticism.
In fact Marc's painting after 1911, with its intense, vibrant colour, and its sense of drama and dynamic tension, was in many ways closer to Futurism than to Cubism.
In the work of Macke, even at its most controlled and classical, a jagged expressionistic feeling keeps breaking through, while his subject-matter at its most typical invites, once again, Futurist analogies.
However, what all three painters learnt from Cubism, largely through Delaunay, was the means of organizing a canvas in terms of interacting and transparent facets or planes, which could be made to suggest movement and depth, while preserving the unity of the picture-plane; Chagall, another painter whose work was known and admired in Germany, and who had also flirted briefly with both Cubism and Orphism, acknowledged a [31]similar debt to Cubist painting.
But whereas Futurism had been to a large extent aimed at and against Paris and Parisian painting, the Germans were content to remain on the receiving end of things and their work, in the pre-war years at least, had little or no influence back on French art.
With the declaration of war the Cubist painters, many of whom had begun to grow apart artistically, were physically separated, and the movement rapidly broke up.
Cubism, however, had already won its most important battles.
Though not appreciated by the public it certainly was accepted or at least recognized by all the significant critics and by several important dealers.
It had temporarily reasserted the ascendancy of painting over other art forms by overshadowing any advances in literature or music.
The style was constantly attracting new figures and had influenced, directly or indirectly, almost every significant young painter in Europe; even Matisse, whose art had always seemed at the opposite pole to Cubism, was introducing a hitherto unknown severity into his painting in preparation for Cubistic experiments in 1915.
Whatever directions artists were to take after the war, it was already clear that painting could never be quite the same again.
PICASSO AND BRAQUE 1907–12
When Picasso painted the Demoiselles d'Avignon, those of his friends who were allowed to see it seem to have felt that in some way he had let them down.
In his ‘Histoire anecdotique du Cubisme’ Salmon records their disappointment.l Gertrude Stein writes that ‘Tschoukine who had so much admired the painting of Picasso was at my house and he said almost in tears, what a loss for French painting.’
Derain prophesied that one day Picasso would be found hanged behind it.
Braque was frankly bewildered by it.
The Demoiselles is not, strictly speaking, a Cubist painting.
Most of the Cubists were united in declaring that theirs was an art of realism, and in so far as Cubism was concerned with reinterpreting the external world in a detached, objective way it was also in a sense a classical art.
The first impression made by the Demoiselles, on the other hand, is one of violence and unrest.
Indeed, the savagery of the two figures at the right-hand side of the painting (which is accentuated by the lack of expression in the faces of the other figures) would justify its classification as one of the most passionate products of twentieth-century Expressionism.
But it is incontestable that the painting marks a turning point in the career of Picasso and, moreover, the beginning of a new phase in the history of art.
It is, too, the logical point to begin a history of Cubism.
For as an analysis of the painting will show, many of the problems that faced Picasso and Braque in their creation of the style are stated here, crudely perhaps, but clearly for the first time.
‘These are stark problems, white equations on a black-board’, Salmon has written of the figures in the Demoiselles.
‘This is the first appearance of painting as algebra.’
In the spring of 1907, when he began the preparatory sketches for the Demoiselles, Picasso was already establishing his reputation as one of the most outstanding of the younger figures in contemporary French painting.
Since he did not exhibit at the big Salons his name may not have been as well known to the general public as those of Matisse and Derain, who in the previous years had emerged as the most important and controversial figures in the Fauve movement, but there were a large number of people who believed in his genius.
There are even indications that many of Picasso's circle, the artists, writers and dealers who used to meet at his studio in the Bateau Lavoir and at the Steins' house in the rue Fleurus, already saw Picasso and Matisse as the two rival personalities most likely to influence the course of twentieth-century painting.
A year earlier Matisse had show his painting Le Bonheur de Vivre (Barnes Foundation, Merrion, Penn.) at the Salon des Indépendants, where it had received a great deal of attention, and during the winter of 1907 Derain was engaged in painting a canvas of bathers (Museum of Modern Art, New York) which he intended to show at the Indépendants of 1907, so that it is possible that the Demoiselles may have been prompted by a spirit of rivalry.
At any rate Picasso seems to have realized, even before he began it, that it was to be no ordinary painting.
Salmon, who was an intimate friend of Picasso's at this time, described a few years later his restless state of mind: ‘Picasso was unsettled.
He turned his canvases to the wall and laid down his brushes…
During long days and as many nights, he drew, giving concrete expression to abstract ideas and reducing the  results to their fundamentals.
Never was a labour more arduous, and it was without his former youthful enthusiasm that Picasso began on a great canvas that was to be the first result of his researches.’
There are no fewer than eight sketchbooks concerned with the Demoiselles and although odd pages of these have been removed, Picasso kept them with him until the end of his life, guarding them jealously.
Individual sketchbooks show him, most significantly, alternating between his ideas concerning an ambitious, multifigure composition layered in iconographical implications, and the exploration of formal problems and innovations most frequently approached in sketches of single figures or images.
Many of the canvases produced in the later part of 1906 constitute what might be called a ‘crisis’ point in Picasso's art in that he was becoming increasingly obsessed with creating figures which were heavily volumetric, indeed often almost grotesquely bulky, but which simultaneously adhered or clung to the picture plane: the effect they produce could best be described by imagining a series of pneumatic models pushed up against heavy panes of glass and pumped up with air, so that they get larger and larger whilst simultaneously flattening up against the surface in front of them.
Looking at these pictures one senses that an explosion was inevitable and in a sense the explosion was the Demoiselles.
An important canvas of the autumn or early winter of 1906, Two Nudes, now in the Museum of Modern Art, New York, could equally well be seen as two studies of a single figure viewed from diametrically opposed positions, an indication that Picasso was not only attempting to produce images of almost unprecedented weight and girth, but that he was also becoming impatient or dissatisfied with the idea of viewing his subjects from a single, stationary point of view.
Many of the pages of the Demoiselles sketchbooks show single figures in upright, hieratic stances, their limbs disposed symmetrically; some are seen frontally, others from the back; sketchy ghosts and erasures unite backviews with the more definitive frontal poses and vice versa.
Although the historical importance of the Demoiselles cannot be overestimated, it is not hard to understand why it disappointed Picasso's friends.
It must have then seemed in many ways an unresolved and unsatisfactory painting.
To begin with there are the obvious inconsistencies of style.
Even a cursory  glance is enough to show that Picasso had several changes of mind while he was working on the canvas.
Kahnweiler throughout his life was to maintain that the painting was unfinished, and on occasion was even to assert that Picasso himself saw it in this way.
In fact it seems more likely that Picasso felt that the Demoiselles as he decided to accept or leave it represented a truly astonishing challenge with which he himself must come to terms; obviously if he had been dissatisfied with the look of the painting he would not have left it as it is, and it has been argued that the stylistic discrepancies within the painting are essential to its iconography, to the message which it is intended to convey.
Unlike the Joie de Vivre, which was intended to soothe and delight the eye, the Demoiselles can hardly have been calculated to please.
Whereas Matisse's painting is, as the title suggests, wonderfully joyful and full of rich colour and sensuous rhythms, the Demoiselles is angular, harsh and grating.
The charm and wistfulness of so much of Picasso's earlier work has been deliberately suppressed and the mood of the Demoiselles is quite clearly consciously disturbing, physical and erotic yet savage, simultaneously inviting and repellent.
Derain's Baigneuses is in many ways closer in spirit to the Demoiselles, and it was regarded by Vauxcelles at least, as a revolutionary work, but it had the advantage that it could still be fitted into a traditional frame of reference.
It looked, so to speak, like a follow on from other painting.
The Demoiselles did not.
Nevertheless, there are many things about the Demoiselles that serve to relate it to other painting of the period and, more particularly, to the contemporary work of Matisse.
Both the Demoiselles and the Bonheur de Vivre refer, if only indirectly, to a wealth of other art.
The sources of the Bonheur range from the decorative ‘cloisonnist’ aspect of Gauguin's painting and back through Ingres to the bacchanals of the Renaissance.
Both Gauguin and Ingres are relevant to the Demoiselles, too, and the names of Delacroix and Manet have been invoked in connection with it.
During the early years of the century the influence of  Cézanne had become increasingly pronounced among the progressive young painters who showed at the Salon des Indépendants, and after its creation in 1903, the Salon d'Automne.
Matisse, who was one of the first of the painters of his generation to appreciate the true genius of Cézanne, had been working under his influence since 1899, the year in which he bought Cézanne's Trois Baigneuses from Vollard, choosing it in preference to an Arlésienne by Van Gogh, and in the figure pieces that lead up to the Bonheur, the influence of Cézanne is immediately obvious.
Derain, although as early as 1904 he had executed a still life in which he seized in a more or less superficial way on some of the aspects of Cézanne's art which were later to fascinate and influence the Cubists, did not begin to look at Cézanne really seriously until 1906.
The fruits of his study can, however, already be seen in the Baigneuses in the firm modelling of the figures and in the angular severity of their contours which recall in particular much of Cézanne's portraiture of the 1880s.
Now, looking for guidance in his construction of a monumental figure composition, Picasso too turned to Cézanne, although he approached him, characteristically, not only with veneration (later in life he was to say ‘Cézanne was my one and only master’) but also in a spirit of aggression, even of iconoclasm.
To begin with, the closest prototype for this kind of painting — a large composition of naked and partially draped women — is to be found in Cézanne's Baigneuses.
The first of the preliminary sketches for the Demoiselles, on the other hand, suggest that at first Picasso may have been more drawn to Cézanne's earlier, more romantic figure pieces.
These sketches show that Picasso originally intended the composition to include seven figures, five women and two men, grouped in a curtained interior around still lifes of fruit and flowers.
Picasso later explained, in 1939, that the man seated in the centre of the composition was a  sailor enjoying the company of the naked women.
The second man (who appears at the left-hand side of the composition, drawing back a curtain) in one of the earliest sketches, carries a skull, and Picasso identified him as a medical student.
The entire painting was thus conceived if not exactly as a kind of memento mori, at least as a statement about sexual compulsion and gratification and concomitant feelings of disgust, danger and fear of disease.
The erotic implications of the subject, the motif of the figure holding back the curtain and the very prominent position of the still lifes, call to mind such works by Cézanne as l'Eternel Féminin, the various Temptations of St. Anthony and the Après-Midi à Naples.
In the later sketches, which become cruder and less Cézannesque in style, Picasso abandoned the idea of including the two male figures in the composition.
Some of the original significance of the painting was, however, preserved in its first title, Le Bordel Philosophique, suggested in a spirit of humour by Salmon, Max Jacob and Apollinaire.
The painting seems to have acquired its present name after the war, when it entered the possession of M. Jacques Doucet.
Even so it is only a more oblique reference to the same theme, since the Avignon of the title refers to a street in the prostitutes' quarter of Barcelona.
In the last analysis, and in spite of the indoor setting, the Demoiselles is related more closely to Cézanne's canvases of bathing women than to his earlier, less structural figure pieces.
Indeed, it would have been quite natural if, when Picasso became more interested in the purely pictorial problems involved in composing and unifying a picture the size of the Demoiselles, he had begun to look with greater concentration at Cézanne's later figure work.
The differences between the Demoiselles and the late Baigneuses of Cézanne are, of course, much more obvious than their similarities — too obvious, indeed, to need much elaboration.
Picasso's work is crude and direct both in colour and execution.
Cézanne's is the reverse.
There is a strong linear element about the Demoiselles and a lack of  modelling in certain parts of it that Cézanne would never have tolerated.
And any influence of Cézanne that there may be in the Demoiselles as it now appears is of the most general kind.
Nevertheless, the liberties taken with the human body, the overall composition and the way in which the figures are closely grouped together in shallow depth and intimately related to their surroundings, all these things indicate a debt, however remote, to the Cézanne Baigneuses.
Furthermore, when one looks at these paintings by Cézanne one is often struck by the closeness between the poses of certain figures and those of the ‘demoiselles’.
This is a point which it would be useless to push too far; the pose of the second figure from the left in the Demoiselles, for instance, was one which Picasso had already used frequently in his earlier work.
But in one case at least it is likely that this similarity is not simply fortuitous.
The squatting demoiselle with her broad back and splayed-out legs must surely be derived from the figure at the right of the Three Bathers owned by Matisse, a work which Picasso could well, indeed almost certainly must, have seen In a discussion of the general composition and appearance of the Demoiselles another possible influence should be mentioned: that of El Greco.
The Spanish writer Gomez de la Serna, a friend of Picasso's at this time and an habitué of the Bateau Lavoir during his visits to Paris, recalls that Picasso's walls there were decorated with reproductions of El Grecos.
Moreover, some of Picasso's painting of 1906 bears testimony in a very direct way to his admiration for this Spanish master.
The angular, and in the case of the three women at the extreme left and right of the Demoiselles, rather ‘faceted’ appearance of the figures, and the heavy, chalky highlights found in  certain parts of the drapery could well have come from a study of El Greco's work.
But on a more concrete level the Demoiselles owes most to Picasso's use of ‘primitive’ sources.
In this respect, too, the Demoiselles was related to much of the most advanced painting of the period.
The interest in primitive art had come about largely, of course, through the work of Gauguin.
Developing certain of his ideas, the Fauves and the German painters of the Brücke undoubtedly saw primitive art as a liberating force, stimulating them in their attempts to achieve a more direct and spontaneous form of expression, although the Fauves, at least, were more immediately influenced in this respect by the passionate painting of Van Gogh than by primitive art.
By 1906 Picasso had known the work of Gauguin for some time.
But while the melancholy air and the mannered, somehow archaistic appearance of much of the work of his so-called ‘blue period’ remind one of some of Gauguin's painting, it was not until several years later, in the work executed during the year preceding the Demoiselles, that Picasso's work became bolder and more direct, in some cases one might justifiably say more primitive, in appearance.
In the spring of 1939, Picasso stated to Zervos that at the time when he was painting the Demoiselles his attention had been centred on Iberian sculpture in the Louvre.
Picasso had, it is true, for some time been frequenting the different galleries of the Louvre.
Indeed, one gets the impression that his painting of 1906 is in some ways a synthesis of elements derived from a whole variety of different types of ancient art: the drawings on Greek white-ground vases, archaic Greek and Etruscan marbles and bronzes, and Cycladic and Mesopotamian figurines.
As a Spaniard he must have been particularly interested in seeing the important series of Iberian reliefs from Osuna when they were put on show in the Louvre in the spring of 1906.
Their installation was, furthermore, widely publicized.
One of these reliefs, which shows a man being attacked by a lion, is, as James Johnson Sweeney has pointed out, of obvious importance in relation to the work of Picasso.
It accounts in fact for the new facial type which  begins to make its appearance in his work during this year, l and which reached its most precise definition in the work executed by Picasso on his return from Gosol (a village in the province of Lerida in Spain, where he spent the early part of the summer of 1906), notably in the Portrait of Gertrude Stein.
After countless sittings during the early part of 1906 Picasso, unsatisfied with the face, wiped it out completely.
Immediately on his return from Gosol, while Gertrude Stein was still in Italy, he repainted the face, using the conventions of Iberian sculpture, although, since he was anxious to achieve a likeness, they appear in a slightly modified form.
The same facial type is adapted to his Self-Portrait (Philadelphia Museum of Art) of a few months later, and it is used again, in a more sculptural way, in the Two Nudes (The Museum of Modern Art, New York) also of late 1906.
The Two Nudes represents in many ways the culmination of the ‘Iberian’ phase in Picasso's art.
The two central figures of the Demoiselles relate more closely than any other part of the picture to Picasso's work of 1906.
They differ, however, in several respects from anything that had preceded them.
The bodies are flatter, more distorted and more angular, and the heads more truly primitive in appearance.
All this could be accounted for by the fact that Picasso was working on a very large scale and found it necessary to simplify his technique and adopt a bolder approach.
But there are new elements in the treatment of the heads that cannot be so easily explained.
A painting of a male head, which is almost certainly a study for the figure of the sailor that Picasso originally intended to place in the centre of the composition, while it is bolder and sketchier than a work like the Self-Portrait, shows all the earlier Iberian devices.
On the other hand in the heads of the two central ‘demoiselles’ the severe, regular ovals of the typically ‘Iberian’faces of 1906 give way to new, asymmetric shapes.
The jaws and chins become much heavier and the bulging eyes stare out vacantly at the spectator.
The ears, previously almost always small and compact, reach fantastically large proportions.
All these new features are to be found in two Iberian stone heads of a different type, one of a man and one of a woman, which entered Picasso's possession in March 1907.
Both heads have the same staring expression, the same irregular contours and the same heavy jaws as the central figure in the Demoiselles, although the male head seems to have interested Picasso most.
This head has the typically Iberian ear, with a scroll or shell-like shape at the top, but it is grotesquely exaggerated in size — a comparison of a side view of this head with a watercolour in the Museum of Modern Art in New York shows that Picasso found this feature of it particularly fascinating.
The Osuna reliefs were not in fact ‘primitive’ at all, but rather a perfectly valid reinterpretation of classical Greek sculpture.
The two examples that Picasso owned on the other hand could certainly be called primitive, both in conception and execution.
If one is willing to discard the possibility of Picasso having focused his attention on these particular heads in the Louvre — and this is unlikely since they were  not shown on the ground floor like the Osuna reliefs, the Dama de Elche and other important Iberian pieces, but in a small room in the basement together with some twenty other heads — his acquisition of them is useful in establishing a chronological sequence for the painting of the different sections of the Demoiselles.
For the evidence set out above suggests that the heads of the central figures, which still relate to a certain extent to the work of 1906 and which were almost certainly the first to be painted, were not executed until the Iberian stone heads came into Picasso's possession in March 1907.
Throughout his life Picasso always reacted very directly to the stimulus of events in his day-to-day life, and the acquisition of two fragments of antiquity from his native land must undoubtedly have fired his imagination.
Nevertheless, in the last analysis he was most influenced by the composite picture he had formed of Iberian art he had seen, although one particular head which remained in the Louvre seems especially relevant to the central figures of the great canvas.
It is now generally agreed that the concept of the work as a whole dates to early 1907 and possibly to the very month in which Picasso acquired his two heads.1
It cannot have been long, however, before the painting began to undergo a series of striking changes.
The head of the figure at the extreme left, for instance, is different in colour from those of the central figures, and even different from the body to which it is attached; in it the pale pinks that had characterized so much of the work of 1906 have been mixed with black to produce a much more sombre effect.
There is a more sculptural feeling about it, too.
In this it is related to the heads of the Two Nudes painted a few months earlier, but as opposed to them, it is more completely mask-like, and every area or section of it is clearly defined and forms a self-contained unit.
Thus there is a clear division between the forehead and the lower part of the face, and a lighter line running down the edge of it suggests that if more of the forehead were seen it would be divided down its central axis.
The nose is a self-subsisting pyramid that could be lifted off the rest of the face, and so on.
The heads of the two women at the right are different again.
They are savagely distorted, and the long thin noses, which have a flat ridge running down the centre, are pulled into the side of the face by thick black lines.
There are touches of green on the head of the standing figure, while the face of the squatting woman is orange, relieved by strokes of blue and yellow.
The bodies of both these figures are even more angular than those of the other three women, and the planes that compose them are occasionally differentiated by touches of pure colour; the body of the squatting figure is in the same darker tonalities of the head.
The area behind the two central figures is a pale, chalky grey, while the curtains on the right are a bright blue with strong highlights.
The still life is painted in the same direct, rather violent technique.
Radiographs of the various individual heads taken for the Museum of Modern Art show that originally the faces of the figures at the right were painted in the same idiom as that of the figure at the left.1 Since the head of the standing figure represents an intermediate stage between that of the figure at the left and the one directly below it, it follows that the squatting figure, the still life and the drapery at the right were the last parts of the picture to be painted.
The first ‘Iberian’ state of the painting probably dates from May through into early June.
Picasso then abandoned the painting briefly before beginning to make increasingly radical changes to it.
Kahnweiler saw the painting in its present state ‘rather early’ in the summer, probably in July.
These abrupt changes of style in the Demoiselles are due to the fact that while he was working on it Picasso came into contact with tribal art.
Vlaminck always insisted that he was the first to have ‘discovered’ African or Negro sculpture (and he and his contemporaries used the term ‘art negre’generically to cover not only African but also Polynesian art and indeed any tribal art at all that came their way) and his claim was to pass into legend, although Gauguin himself possibly owned examples of African as well as Polynesian sculpture.
Undoubtedly both Vlaminck and Derain were looking at tribal art in a somewhat unfocused way before 1906, the year in which Vlaminck purchased his first ‘discoveries’, as were many other young artists.
But 1906 was the year in which consciousness of  so-called ‘primitive’ art began to affect and colour the aesthetic concerns and standards of young French artists, and Picasso was certainly aware of it by then.
Salmon, who was close to Picasso at the time and whose interest in tribal art probably antedates Picasso's, confirms this.
Gertrude Stein, too, wrote in her book on Picasso: ‘Upon his return from Gosol he became acquainted with Matisse through whom he came to know African sculpture.’
In the autobiography of Alice B. Toklas she insists that this was ‘just after Picasso finished painting Gertrude Stein's portrait’.
Matisse substantiated this story by his statement to Warnod that he had bought a negro statuette in a curiosity shop in the rue de Rennes, on his way to Gertrude Stein's, and that Picasso saw it and became enthusiastic about it.
Picasso himself, on the other hand, said that he became familiar with negro art only after having painted the Demoiselles, and that his introduction to it took place in the Trocadero.
In view of the appearance of certain heads in the Demoiselles, however, it is perhaps permissible to think that his recollections are not completely accurate.
The truth of the matter is that Picasso was almost certainly aware of tribal art when Matisse showed him the piece which he admired, but that he was still not taking it very seriously and only ‘discovered’ it for himself during his now legendary visit to the Trocadero.
And the visual evidence all goes to prove that this took place while he was working on the Demoiselles, probably in June.
Unquestionably the visit was to alter the entire course of his development as an artist.
Talking to Andre Malraux years later, Picasso went so far as to say that it was on this occasion that he all of a sudden received the revelation of why he was a painter at all and that ‘I realized what painting was all about’.
The head of the figure at the extreme left of the Demoiselles is, like that of her companions in the centre of the picture, expressionless and impassive but now has about it a mask-like quality that recalls a wide variety of African tribal masks in which the component parts of the head and face have about them exactly the same quality of definition, although here the similarities may possibly be simply affinities rather than derivations; the heads of many of the paintings of late 1906 had also been severe and mask-like although they tend to resemble sculptures in stone, whereas the head of the demoiselle in question looks more wooden in both colour and texture.
The deformations of the heads of the two right-hand figures are infinitely more radical and extreme and again evoke analogies with a wide range of tribal art which cannot be simply fortuitous.
In certain respects they resemble or recall the heads of Kota and Hongue reliquary figures from the French Congo, some of the most abstract and inventive of all African tribal sculptures, and which existed in a wide and varied selection in the collections of the Trocadero at the time of Picasso's visit.
These heads are usually oval in shape and are mostly covered with scarifications, striations or incised lines; the ears are almost always ignored, as they are in
Nevertheless, it is dangerous and indeed impossible to push too far the analogies between the heads of the two outer demoiselles and various particular kinds of tribal art.
In the Trocadero large quantities of objects were displayed in a crowded, haphazard fashion, and, while Picasso was undoubtedly overwhelmed by what he saw and experienced, the impression he carried away with him must have been of a very general, metaphysical kind.
It might be fair to say that the paintings Picasso executed during the following eighteen or so months tend to look like all tribal art, an indication that he was ultimately interested and immersed in its spirit and its formal principles rather than in any of its individual manifestations.
And it is deeply revealing that recent scholarly research into what tribal art he could have encountered during the time of his first enthusiasm for it has demonstrated that he could not have seen most of the examples which art historians have previously compared and juxtaposed to his paintings.1
Tribal sculpture and the painting of Cézanne, both of which were used extensively by Picasso as sources for the Demoiselles, were to be the two major influences in the creation of Cubism; in fact the constant inspiration which Picasso and Braque drew from the art of Cézanne and the stimulation which tribal sculpture provided for Picasso were the only important outside influences in the development of a style which was to be very self-contained.
It is in the Demoiselles that these two influences first appear together in the art of Picasso, and it is this that in part makes the picture a natural starting-point for the history of Cubism.
Cézanne and tribal art are not yet, it is true, interpreted in a Cubist way.
However, their influence on the Demoiselles is not the only feature of this painting that gives some indication of what Cubism was to achieve.
In the mask-like head of the figure on the extreme left, for instance, Picasso has shown an almost sculptural interest in reducing the forms of the face to their simplest component parts.
This sort of dispassionate investigation of the nature of simple, solid forms in space was one of the starting-points of the Cubism of both Picasso and Braque.
On a more general level, the treatment of the figures in terms of simple, angular shapes or planes arranged in shallow depth foreshadows some of the later techniques which Picasso and Braque evolved to suggest the forms of  solid objects and their relationship to the space around them.
There are several things in the Demoiselles that cannot be explained completely either by the influence of Cézanne or of tribal art and which point ahead to one of the most important and revolutionary features of Cubist painting: the combination of various views of a subject in a single image.
In the three figures in the left-hand half of the painting this sort of optical synthesis is accomplished in a crude, rather schematic fashion.
The noses of the two figures that are seen from in front are in profile, while the figure at the left, which is in strict profile, has a full-face eye.
The bodies of all three figures, however, are seen as in normal vision, from a single (or stationary) viewpoint.
In the squatting figure on the right, on the other hand, all the canons of traditional linear perspective have been violated.
The subject seems to be posed in what is basically a three-quarter view from the back, with the breast and the inner part of the thigh visible between the arm and leg, but the far leg and arm have been pulled around into the picture plane so that the spectator has the impression of seeing a simple back view, abnormally splayed out, as well.
It is as if the painter had moved freely around his subject, gathering information from various angles and viewpoints.
This dismissal of a system of perspective which had conditioned Western painting since the Renaissance marks, more than any other single feature of the Demoiselles, the beginning of a new era in the history of art.
Although it was a powerful but very generalized recognition of the properties of tribal art that first struck Picasso during the following years he also became familiar with a wide range of its artefacts and almost immediately began amassing a collection of his own.
Gomez de la Serna remembers that Picasso's studio in the Bateau Lavoir was filled with African and Oceanic ‘idols’.
Paris Journal referred in 1911 to the enthusiasm with which Picasso would show his collection to visitors to his studio in the Boulevard de Clichy.
Later, after Picasso had denied any knowledge of African art in the Enquête sur l'Art Négre conducted by the review Action in 1920, Paul Guillaume, the first Parisian art-dealer to become interested  in African and other primitive sculptures as works of art, wrote: ‘Picasso owns a certain number of pieces of very different origins; he makes a pretence of attaching no importance to their chronology.’
In fact this ignorance was not assumed.
In the early part of the twentieth century very little was known about the chronology of tribal art (most of it was considered to be much older than it is), and the stylistic differences between the work of various regions had not been examined; Guillaume himself included Oceanic work under the term tribal art, and felt that it could be extended to include Alaskan art as well.
To the end of his life Picasso himself did not bother to distinguish between African and Oceanic art, although he must have been aware of distinctions between the two during his contacts with the Surrealists in the 1920s, for they tended to prefer and extol the ‘marvellous’ properties of the latter.
By the end of 1908 Picasso owned at least five tribal objects and he went on to amass a large collection, much of it of very doubtful quality, although after the war when his own work was commanding large prices he occasionally exchanged a painting for a choice piece.
But he continued to be interested in the principles behind tribal art rather than in the aesthetic appeal of individual objects; and these principles could be embodied even in the contemporary ‘forgeries’ which quickly began to be produced in quite large numbers to meet the demand for ‘primitive’art.
He knew the fine private collections that were being amassed by men like Frank Burty, who was a friend, and most of all he must have been interested in the objects bought by his painter friends.
Derain in particular soon acquired a large number of excellent pieces.
Significantly enough Matisse tended to collect relatively conservative examples of tribal art, whereas Picasso was often most attracted to abstract, fanciful and esoteric sculptures and artefacts.
Thirty years later, recalling the revelation of tribal art, Picasso spoke of the Demoiselles as his ‘first exorcism picture’: ‘For me the masks were not simply sculptures, they were magical objects…
They were weapons — to keep people from being ruled by spirits, to help free themselves.’
And it was undoubtedly at this deeply atavistic and liberating level that he responded from the first to tribal  art.
But it must also be remembered that this statement was made after his involvement with Surrealism and that he might not have phrased his reactions in precisely this way in earlier years.
To Salmon he said he admired tribal sculptures because he found them ‘raisonnables’.
In stressing the more ‘reasonable’ or rational character of African art, Picasso was underlining the quality that distinguishes it most fundamentally from Western art.
As opposed to Western art, tribal art is more conceptual, much less conditioned by visual appearances.
The tribal sculptor tends to depict what he knows about his subject rather than what he sees.
Or, to put it differently, he tends to express his idea of it.
This leads inevitably to great simplification or stylization, and, at the same time, to a clarification and accentuation of what are felt to be the significant features or details of the object depicted.
Many African pieces, for example, are characterized by their angular contours and the emphasis on the solid, simple forms of trunk and head.
The navel, as the central feature of the body, is usually enlarged and emphasized and sometimes the entire stomach is thrust forward in a protruding shield-like form; the limbs are shortened and seen as simple tubular forms, or reduced to a few incisive, sharply differentiated planes.
The features of the face are sometimes treated in the same simplified way, or else are so highly stylized that they become simply decorative signs.
Ultimately the process of creation is one of intuitively balancing formal elements, and, in the case of the most abstract tribal sculpture, the finished product has the quality not of a representation but a symbol — a re-creation rather than reinterpretation.
‘The great law that dominates the new aesthetic,’ wrote Salmon in 1920, possibly still echoing his earlier conversations with Picasso on the subject, ‘is the following: conception overrides perception.
Picasso's instinctive appreciation of the aesthetic principles of trial art was indicative of a new attitude towards primitive art.
Gauguin's glorification of the art and life of the South Seas was part of a conscious revolt against what he felt was a corrupt society and the art which it inspired.
Through him, more than through any other single force, the aesthetic worth of primitive art forms came to be recognized.
His attitude was, however, coloured by a highly literary romanticism, and despite his efforts at identifying himself with a primitive culture, his outlook naturally remained that of a sophisticated European; he borrowed freely from primitive sources but reinterpreted them to suit his own decorative and symbolic purposes.
The painters of the Brücke, who spiritually and intellectually were some of Gauguin's truest heirs, saw primitive art as a healthy outcry against rationalism which paralleled their own ‘Nietzschean affirmation of life’.
This attitude was, of course, purely subjective, and their appreciation of primitive art was almost entirely emotional.
The Fauves, who owed more to Gauguin from a purely pictorial standpoint, inherited from him some of the spontaneity and decorative rhythms of Polynesian art; and by 1907 both Matisse and Derain had absorbed into their own work some of the formal properties of tribal sculpture.
Primitive art may have confirmed them in their desire to achieve a greater directness of expression, but they remained interested in it from a visual point of view.
Picasso, on the other hand, while he was undoubtedly fascinated by the formal and sculptured properties of tribal art, also admired it intuitively for a more fundamental reason; for its ‘reasonable’ or conceptual quality.
This was the real link between Cubism and tribal art.
For, like tribal art, the Cubism of Picasso and Braque was to be essentially conceptual.
Even in the initial stages of the movement, when the painters still relied to a large extent on visual models, their paintings are not so much records of the sensory appearance of their subjects, as expressions in pictorial terms of their idea or knowledge of them.
‘I paint objects as I think them, not as I see them,’ Picasso said to Gomez de la Serna.
And it was the conceptual element of Cubism that enabled the painters at various times to detach themselves from visual appearances without losing touch with the material world around them.
In the period following the execution of the Demoiselles Picasso's art was informed by two main principles or types of tribal art, the one flatter, more abstract and remote from European art, in which the basic planes of the face are differentiated not by relief but by the directions of the striations or hatchings with which they are covered, the other more solid, sculptural, three-dimensional and naturalistic.
Much of Picasso's work of 1907–8 falls into two complementary, though by no means exclusive categories, according to which of the general types of tribal masks inspired it.
Indeed, Picasso's admiration for various complementary, at times even formally opposed categories of tribal sculpture is indicative of the instinctive pull which he was feeling between an increased interest in solid, sculptural forms and an awareness of the need to depict them in a manner that did not violate the flat, two-dimensional plane on which he was working.
When Picasso's art became truly Cubist, in 1909, he had begun to see solid forms in a new pictorial way, without the aid of linear or mathematical perspective.
A new treatment of volumes required, naturally, the invention or formulation of new techniques to reconcile it with the demands of the flat picture surface.
In these pre-Cubist paintings of 1907 and 1908 it is as if Picasso were preparing himself for the difficulties involved in creating a new style by taking stock afresh of some of the basic problems inherent in all painting since the invention of illusionistic perspective.
The first type of ‘Negroid’ painting is more purely pictorial and is represented by the sketches and series of heads which culminate in the Nu à la Draperie, a painting of late 1907 which is known also as the Danseuse aux Voiles.
In this painting the various forms of the body are distinguished from each other by heavy black outlines and, as in African bronzes, by the direction of the striations with which they are covered.
The strong linear flavour emphasizes, of course, the flatness of the picture plane and this effect is further strengthened by the fact that the entire picture surface is broken down into angular forms of almost equal size, which are all dealt with in the same vigorous technique.
Later, when their work had become completely Cubist, Picasso and Braque devised a more elaborate and sophisticated method of dealing with solid forms but the means which they used to differentiate between the parts of planes or an object or figure and the devices they used to reconcile it to the picture plane were, it will be seen, not unlike those which Picasso used so boldly here.
The colours which  underlie the dark linear striations of Nu à la Draperie and related paintings terid to be yellow or golden, coppery and metallic, tempered by passages of blues, greens and reds.
Picasso approached Cubism, however, primarily through his interest in analysing and investigating the nature of solid forms.
This more sculptural approach can be seen in the second kind of Negroid painting.
In fact, some of the canvases of this type have almost the appearance of being paintings of sculptures and masks.
This intensive investigation of simple, solid forms culminates in the paintings of the late summer and autumn of 1908, although by this time Picasso's work was becoming less specifically Negroid.
La Paysanne, executed at La Rue-des-Bois (where Picasso spent most of August), or shortly after Picasso's return to Paris, is one of the largest and most powerful of the group.
Whereas before, in 1906, Picasso had simplified and reinterpreted the human form in a more empirical fashion under the influence of archaic sculpture, now he explains it rationally in terms of simple self-contained planes differentiated by the use of a consistent light source.
The colour harmonies of La Paysanne and other works of the period are mostly predominantly earthy, creating a sensation of something midway between wood and flesh.
The touches or larger areas of primary colours that throw the figures into relief are now less strident, more resonant.
The head of La Paysanne which conveys the same monolithic, blocklike quality as her body, has features, like those of so many of her immediate predecessors in Picasso's work, that are set into a concave or volumetrically negative facial plane, often set under convex foreheads.
These are paintings of solid forms stripped of all their inessentials and reinterpreted with almost geometric exactitude.
‘If a painter asked me what was the first step necessary for painting a table’ Picasso remarked to a friend at this time, ‘I should say, measure it.’
The subjects of Picasso's paintings have just such a measured look.
One is reminded, too, that this was in actual fact the practice of the Douanier Rousseau, a painter whom Picasso much admired.
Indeed, it is at exactly this stage of Picasso's evolution that one senses behind his art the presence of this great ‘primitive’ who in his naiveté had unconsciously succeeded in ignoring the forces which had influenced French painting for the past fifty years, the forces against which Picasso and his friends were most immediately reacting.
From 1909, when Cubism emerged as a fully mature idiom, through until the months immediately preceding the outbreak of war in 1914, it was to be not only very self-contained as a movement, but also in certain respects curiously unaccentuated.
Pictorial discoveries and transformations succeeded each other rapidly.
The quality of the works produced by Picasso and Braque was on the whole consistently high (Gris' output was more uneven in this respect despite the singlemindedness of his vision).
There are landmarks and turning points in the movement's evolution but few paintings that demand to be considered or discussed at the expense of others.
During the winter of 1908–9, however, Picasso produced two very large canvases (larger than any he was to produce until the summer of 1914) which seem to stand out from others that surround them and which have been the subject of much stimulating argument and discussion.
These are the Three Women, which originally belonged to Leo and Gertrude Stein and is now in Russia, and the monolithic still life Bread and Fruit Dish on a Table, now in the Kunstmuseum in Basel.
Both of these pictures throw retrospective light on some of the problems faced in the Demoiselles; and although, once again, neither of them is truly Cubist, they are of great significance in the emergence of the style.
A photograph taken in Picasso's studio in the summer of 1908 shows an earlier, apparently more or less completed version of the Three Women executed in a style which makes use of rough, almost violent striations, used to emphasize the different areas to the sides of the figures, while the figures themselves appear to have the rough-hewn bulkiness of much of the most characteristic contemporary African-influenced figure pieces.
The canvas was re-worked during the winter months, after the return to Paris from La Rue-des-Bois in the autumn.
Each of the three women is now rendered somewhat differently.
The figure at the left is the most ‘African’ in appearance.
The body of the woman to the right is modelled in softer, riper forms.
The third figure is the most abstracted and schematic.
But whereas the Demoiselles is a stylistically disjunctive painting, here each figure seems simply to qualify  and reaffirm the properties and existence of her neighbours.
The figures now form a tight sculptural group and the space around and behind them is limited and seems to press in upon them.
In the two figures on the right in particular the earlier striations and hatchings have given way to more discreetly and subtly modelled planes delineating the component parts of the trunks and limbs of the figures; these planes are angled away from each other along clearly defined ridges in some passages, but softly opened up into each other in others.
The violence of the Demoiselles has given way to a mood of gravity: the monumental figures appear to be in reverie or slumber.
Bread and Fruit Dish also existed in an earlier version; and it too began life as a figure piece.
The composition of the painting and its original theme was developed from two ambitious watercolours of late 1908 entitled Carnaval au bistrot, which showed five figures, one wearing a harlequin's hat and another a beret, disposed round a drop-leaved table; the compositions of these watercolours are markedly horizontal.
A presumably slightly later gouache, executed on a block-like, upright format, shows the number of figures reduced to four: three seated figures and the same female attendant advancing from the background holding a bowl of fruit.
Seated from left to right are a woman, a central harlequin and a man wearing a Cronstadt hat.
In the lower part of the great still life, sketchily blocked in, we see the same configuration of legs as in the studies on paper.
Above, the compotier with fruit and drapery replaces the female figure at the left.
William Rubin has suggested that the Gilles-like figure in the watercolour studies is a reference to Douanier Rousseau, clad most characteristically in his beret, and that his presence is still evoked in the left-hand side of the still life through stylistic allusions to his work in terms of insistently if softly modelled forms, smoothly rendered in nuances of Douanier-like greens.
The central harlequin of the studies Rubin identifies as Picasso himself (and so indeed he was wont to portray himself) and the man in the Cronstadt hat as Cézanne, who often wore one.
These figures have been replaced in the still life by loaves of bread, echoing the position of their arms; their trunks and heads have been eliminated.
The right-hand side of the painting, as Rubin points out, is Cézannesque in feeling.
Like the Three Women, Bread and Fruit Dish is a work of  extraordinary gravitas; and it has about it a physicality and a presence seldom associated with ordinary still life.
But it is deeply revealing that in neither of these paintings are the revolutionary perspectival implications of the Demoiselles explored or developed, or indeed more than hinted at, and that in the Basel painting figures have been transformed into still life.
The formal experiments and innovations on which Picasso was about to embark, and which were to result in a fully developed Cubist language were too innovative, too complex and demanding to be developed or pursued within the context of multifigure compositions.
For the next six years Picasso, like Braque, was to fix his attention on single figure compositions, still lifes, and, to a lesser extent, landscapes.
Braque may have been at first bewildered by the Demoiselles d'Avignon, but he nevertheless responded to its stimulus, most immediately perhaps in the pen and ink drawing of three nudes published in 1910 as La Femme: the central figure, seated on her haunches, is a clear reference to the squatting Demoiselle, although the composition as a whole curiously anticipates that of Picasso's Three Women.
The left-hand figure of the drawing Braque developed into his large Baigneuse or Grand Nu which occupied him over the winter months of 1907–8.
It fits uncomfortably into Braque's oeuvre but it is nevertheless a milestone in the history of Cubism.
The debt to Picasso is immediately obvious; the large canvas, the scale of the figure itself and the distortions within it, the muted pinks, buffs and greys (which if they do not closely resemble those of the Demoiselles are surely a response to them), the treatment of the background in terms of large angular planes — all these features are new in the work of Braque.
But Braque's work contains none of the expressionistic violence of Picasso's.
As opposed to the harsh angularity of the Demoiselles, the Baigneuse is dealt with in terms of free, curving rhythms which owe a lot to Fauvism and to  the contemporary work of Matisse.
And, fundamentally, Braque's painting is much more thoughtful and reasoned; while the Demoiselles must have excited him by its immediacy and directness, it also posed for Braque various pictorial problems.
For instance, in the squatting ‘demoiselle’ Picasso had dislocated and distended the various parts of the body in an attempt to explain it as fully as possible, without the limitations of viewing it from a single, stationary position.
In the Baigneuse the far side of the figure is pulled round into the picture plane so that the body becomes unnaturally broad; and the pentimenti show that the figure was originally to have been even squatter and broader.
One gets the impression that Braque wanted to show the spectator as much of the figure as he possibly could.
Braque sensed, too, that by dismissing the conventional, single viewpoint perspective it was possible to synthesize into the depiction of the head a variety of information; thus in a three-quarter view the knot of hair at the back of the head is seen clearly, as if from the side.
Then Braque has capitalized on the element of ambiguity in the Demoiselles (it is not immediately clear for instance whether the leg of the ‘demoiselle’ on the left is the far leg or the near leg, and the lower part of the twisted forearm of the squatting figure is left undefined) as a means of emphasizing the flatness of the canvas he was working on: the far buttock of the Nu is connected to the foremost leg and heightened in tone so that it appears to stand in front of the nearer part of the figure; if the outline of the neck were extended it would not join the shoulder naturalistically but pass by its outer edge, and the fact that the outline is deliberately broken allows the neck, shoulder and arm to flow into each other and fuse.
Hitherto Braque had attracted attention as a significant latter-day recruit to the Fauve movement.
Now his awareness of the new pictorial possibilities which Picasso had instinctively hit upon in the Demoiselles and his study of the work of Cézanne (whose influence, indeed, can already be sensed in the Baigneuse) were to make him, within the space of a few months, a major force in twentieth-century painting.
By 1907, the year that preceded the painting of the Baigneuse, Fauvism had already lost much of its original impetus, and Braque, like the other Fauves, had for some time been searching for some more solid basis for his art.
Matisse, as has been seen, had for the past years been turning to the work of Cézanne for  inspiration, and by 1906 Derain was looking at his work also, so that it was only natural that Braque, who had discovered Fauvism through them, should once again follow their example, although he was already well acquainted with Cézanne's work.
The influence of Cézanne becomes very apparent in the landscapes of La Ciotat of the summer of 1907, which show Braque's work hanging in the balance between Fauvism and a much more structural kind of painting.
The loose, undulating rhythms of trees and foliage are still of a kind seen in Fauve canvases by Matisse (and have their origin ultimately in the late work of Gauguin), while the colour is decorative and heightened to an unnatural degree.
But the compositions, which are now built up of a series of flat planes mounting upwards behind each other in shallow depth, are clearly derived from Cézanne.
In the View from the Hotel Mistral, executed on Braque's return to Paris a few months later, the influence of Cézanne is even more marked.
It has been put, too, to more obviously constructive ends.
The composition, in terms of vertical and horizontal elements, is stronger, even slightly rigid, and there is an obvious concern with the definition of forms that is a new element in the work of Braque.
The heavy, crude outlines are now no longer broken and sporadic as they were in some of his most characteristically Fauve works, and every shape is carefully and fully outlined; only a certain emphasis on the oval forms of the foliage, and a few touches of arbitrary colour retain any flavour of Fauvism.
Colour has become relatively sombre (warm earth colours, blues and greens).
The radical simplification of forms which characterizes the painting can be accounted for by the fact that this was one of the first canvases in which Braque attempted to work from memory.
This dismissal of a visual model marked a decisive break with Fauve procedure and an important step towards a new, more rational and intellectual kind of painting.
The influence of Cézanne on contemporary painting was renewed and strengthened by two enormously important exhibitions held in 1907.
In June the Bernheim Jeune Gallery showed seventy-nine of Cézanne's watercolours and in October the Salon d'Automne featured a restrospective of his work, the largest to date, which included some of the iridescent, highly abstracted late landscapes  and some ‘unfinished’ paintings — paintings in which patches of bare canvas were retained; these must have allowed painters further insights into Cézanne's thought processes and working methods.
Simultaneously the Mercure de France published in its October issues the letters of-Cézanne to Emile Bernard, including the letter which contains the passage: ‘Allow me to repeat what I said to you here: deal with nature in terms of the cylinder, the sphere, the cone, all seen in perspective, so that each side of an object or plane is directed towards a central point.
Lines parallel to the horizon give breadth, that is to say a section of nature…
Lines perpendicular to this horizon give depth.
However, nature for us men is more depth than surface…
’ As the influence of Cézanne grew, so that of Gauguin, who had hitherto been an important influence in the work of the Fauves, waned.
In one of his articles Bernard quoted Cézanne as having said of Gauguin: ‘He did not understand me.
I have never sought and neither will ever accept the dismissal of modelling or gradation, it makes no sense.
Gauguin was not a painter, he simply made Chinese images.’
Cézanne died in 1906 with the feeling of only partially having achieved the end for which he had striven so long and hard.
He seems to have realized, however, that there was a younger generation of artists who were to carry on his work.
‘I think that the young painters are more intelligent than the others, the old ones can see in me only a disastrous rival’, he said to his son in a letter written only a few days before his death.
Certainly no other nineteenth-century artist was so widely studied and so differently interpreted by the painters of the succeeding age.
Cézanne's intensely ‘painterly’ art with its brilliant use of colour and its mysterious deformations, which suggested a range of new pictorial concepts, was a source of inspiration for almost all the significant young painters working in Europe during the first quarter of the twentieth century.
And no other painter was such an important influence in the formation of Cubism.
Indeed, in many ways, Cubism was more justified than any other movement in claiming Cézanne as its father.
Even the Cubists, however, interpreted Cézanne in a variety of ways.
Leger, for example, deliberately disregarded the complexities of his art, the irregularities and ‘distortions’, and seized on the element of definition and structural  precision as a starting point for his own Cubist experiments.1 Delaunay, on the other hand, eventually concentrated on his use of colour.
Roger de La Fresnaye saw him as a classicist, trying to return to a tradition of painting lost by the Impressionists, while Gleizes and Metzinger emphasized his importance as a revolutionary.
Even Picasso and Braque, who shared their discoveries so intimately that for a while they came to share a common vision, looked, it will be seen, at Cézanne in different ways.
All the Cubists, however, studied Cézanne in a more or less constructive fashion.
That is to say, all seized on an element of structural and formal strength in his work, which they saw as a corrective to the formlessness which had characterized so much French painting since the Impressionists had insisted on the validity of an instantaneous form of vision, that had so often dissolved the solidity of the material world into a haze of atmospheric colour and light.
The Cubists saw, too, in Cézanne's obvious concern with purely pictorial problems an antidote to the emotionalism and decorative symbolism of so much other post-Impressionist painting.
In a sense his painting was, to use an expression current in Cubist circles, ‘pure’ painting.
But while it is impossible to overstress the importance of Cézanne in the emergence of Cubism, it is wrong to see even the earliest Cubist painting simply as a direct continuation of him.
Gleizes and Metzinger, carried away by their enthusiasm for his art, went so far as to suggest at one point in Du Cubisme that Cubism was simply a development of his work: ‘To understand Cézanne is to foresee Cubism.
Nowadays we are justified in saying that there is only a difference of intensity between this school and the manifestations which preceded it.’
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Although Cézanne's painting was profoundly original, his ambition was to use his own intensive study of nature to revivify classical or traditional painting; the means he used, although they were highly personal, were founded on the optical discoveries of the Impressionists.
This art remained deeply rooted in the nineteenth century.
The true Cubists, on the other hand, while they made their discoveries intuitively, were nevertheless very  conscious of the fact that they were the beginning of something completely new; in a sense they were anti-traditionalists.
Their way of looking at the exterior world, the means they used of recording their ideas about it, even their concept of what a painting was, all these things were different from anything that had gone before them.
And they were reacting not only against the art of the past fifty years but also against the techniques and traditions of vision that had shaped Western painting since the scientific discoveries of the early Renaissance.
But it was Cézanne who formed the bridge between their art and the art of the preceding five centuries.
In the View from the Hotel Mistral Braque had been influenced decisively by Cézanne, and a significant and till recently little known Landscape with Houses, executed probably a month or two later shows him putting his studies of Cézanne to daring if not totally satisfactory conclusions.
The painting is awkwardly and laxly structured but now the contours of many of the compositional elements have been freely and insistently opened up into each other so that the eye is led quickly not only into depth but also steeply up the picture surface, a premonition of things to come.
The meeting with Picasso, which probably took place around the time this picture was being painted or soon after, must have encouraged him in turning his back completely on Fauvism.
The great Nu bears witness not only to the impact which Picasso's work had on Braque, but also to the fact that Braque realized the extent to which the Demoiselles d'Avignon was a revolutionary work.
But in the Baigneuse Braque's vision exceeded his technical means.
And unlike Picasso Braque did not see in African art an answer to some of the problems of contemporary painting.
Although many years later Braque recalled how strong an impression tribal art made on him, it is hard to see any direct reflection of this in the paintings executed at the time when Picasso was reacting so positively to tribal sculpture; even in a painting like the Nu any influence from tribal art seems to have come at second hand, through Picasso's Demoiselles.
However, Braque was sufficiently unsettled by the example of Picasso to turn his studies of Cézanne to increasingly revolutionary ends, and in the canvases executed during the summer of 1908 at l'Estaque, Braque produced a  series of completely original works, the first group of truly Cubist paintings.
These were the controversial paintings rejected by the jury of the Salon d'Automne and later exhibited at Kahnweiler's gallery in the rue Vignon.
Reviewing the exhibition, Vauxcelles wrote: ‘M. Braque is an exceedingly audacious young man…the misleading example of Picasso and Derain has encouraged him.
Perhaps he has also been unduly obsessed by the style of Cézanne and by recollections of the static art of the Egyptians.
He constructs deformed and metallic puppets which are of a terrible simplification.
He despises form, reduces everything, sites and figures and houses to geometric complexes, to cubes.’
Apollinaire, on the other hand, although he did not entirely understand the nature of Braque's new development and failed to realize that even though Braque was beginning to paint largely from memory, his work was still often related directly to his models, instinctively realized that Braque had accomplished something important and original.
In his preface to the catalogue he wrote: ‘He no longer owes anything to his surroundings.
His talent has chosen to evoke the twilight of reality and now he is evolving within himself a universal pictorial renaissance.’
It is instructive to compare an early work of the series, La Route de l'Estaque, with what was probably the last, Maisons a l'Estaque.
In both all the sensuous elements of the previous years have been banished; colour has been reduced to a severe combination of browns, dull greens and greys.
In the earlier work the circular, arching and swinging elements are played off against an angular, somewhat disjointed pictorial armature.
In the later work the curving rhythms have given way to a system of verticals and horizontals, broken only by the forty-five degree diagonals of roof-tops and trees.
All details have been eliminated and the foliage of the trees reduced to a minimum to reveal the geometric severity of the houses.
These are continued upwards almost to the top of the canvas so that the eye is allowed no escape beyond them.
The picture plane is further emphasized by the complete lack of aerial perspective (the far houses are, if anything, darker and stronger in value than the foreground house), and by the fact that occasionally contours are broken and forms opened up into each other.
There is no central vanishing point; indeed in many of the houses all the canons of traditional perspective are completely broken.
The debt of this sort of painting to Cézanne is clearly visible.
But it is almost immediately obvious that Braque had begun to study Cézanne in a much more intellectual and thoughtful way, and that this was resulting in the creation of an entirely new type of painting.
In the first place Braque had detached himself from visual appearances to a much greater extent than Cézanne, who while he was obviously very much aware (if only instinctively) of the purely formal or abstract side of painting, relied nevertheless, in his still lifes and landscapes, on an exhaustive study of the ‘motif’ as his point of departure, although it is worth mentioning that in his articles Emile Bernard had suggested that Cézanne's vision ‘was much more in his brain than in his eye’.
At l'Estaque, Braque was working from nature but one feels that the forms in his painting have not been suggested by those of particular landscapes but rather that he has imposed on the natural scene his own austere, angular, almost geometrical form of vision.
In this sense Braque's painting is, like Picasso's ‘Negroid’ pictures, conceptual.
The forms are more crudely simplified than in Cézanne, and while there is the same sensation of recession that one gets from Cézanne's paintings, as one's eye moves from one clearly defined plane to another, Braque's paintings are composed in such a way that the feeling of depth is very restricted.
Moreover, Cézanne had felt he was respecting the laws of traditional, scientific perspective.
When these are violated in his painting, it is because the pictorial theory involved conflicted with his intensely visual and empirical approach, and with his desire to reconstruct the three-dimensional form of his subjects as fully as possible.
The irregularities of this kind in Braque's work of 1908 are much more conscious and deliberate.
In the still lifes, which have the same general characteristics as the landscapes, the Cézannian device of tipping certain objects up on to the picture plane is exaggerated to the point that one realizes at once that the artist is no longer making use of scientific perspective.
Finally, there is the question of colour.
Cézanne worked with a full Impressionist palette, and it is evident, not only from a visual analysis of his painting, but also from his letters and from Emile Bernard's observations on his method of work, that Cézanne relied on the exactness of tonal relationships to produce a sensation of volume and recession; indeed, the necessity he felt to verify these relationships was one of the reasons why he was compelled to turn back continually to a study of nature.
With the l'Estaque paintings, Braque, on the other hand, began to limit his use of colour severely, and in this respect his work was typical of most early Cubist painting.
When colour was finally re-introduced into Braque's painting, it was to appear as a completely independent pictorial element, related to solid forms and the space surrounding them, but clearly distinguishable from them as a separate artistic factor.
It was to be used, in other words, in exactly the reverse way to Cézanne.
The  spatial sensations evoked by Braque's L'Estaque landscapes are already of a new order although his handling of space was to become increasingly original.
They are structured in such a way that while we feel our way visually into the space suggested by the subject our eyes are simultaneously being run up the picture by short thrusts in and out of a limited pictorial depth.
Because the eye is allowed no escape at the top of the canvas we are also forced to ‘read’ the picture downwards again, through its component geometricized elements, with the result that they seem to advance towards us.
Braque himself tells us that he began his L'Estaque pictures by establishing a background plane and ‘advancing the picture towards myself bit by bit’.
Kahnweiler in Der Weg zum Kubismus is probably echoing conversations with Braque when he writes: ‘Representation of the position of objects in space is done as follows: instead of beginning from a supposed foreground and going on from there to give an illusion of depth by means of perspective, the painter begins from a definite and clearly defined background.
Starting from this background the painter now works toward the front by a sort of scheme of forms in which each object's position is clearly indicated, both in relation to the definite background and to the other objects.’
In fact many of Braque's Cubist paintings have dual readings, into depth and forward again, advancing not so much from the ‘background’ as from the picture plane.
The spatial dialogues so fundamental in Braque's art touched Picasso's but were of subsidiary concern to him.
When Picasso and Braque met, Picasso was already familiar with the work of Cézanne.
He had used the figure pieces of Cézanne as a source for the Demoiselles, and from the middle of 1907 onwards he was executing simple still lifes of pots, bottles, glasses and fruit in which he used Cézanne's high, informative viewpoints.
Indeed, some of the paintings of this type, notably the group that was most probably begun towards the middle of 1908, seem to be almost exercises  employing the sphere, the cylinder and the cone.
But it is only in the second half of 1908 that Picasso turned to a more concentrated study of Cézanne.
The first group of paintings in which this new development is clearly visible are the canvases executed during the few weeks spent at La Rue-des-Bois in the autumn and in Paris during the succeeding months.
There can be little doubt that Picasso was excited by the work that Braque brought back to Paris from l'Estaque in which he was drawing such original answers from the questions he had been putting to Cézanne's art.
Matisse tells us that he actually saw one of the l'Estaque pieces in Picasso's studio and that Picasso ‘discussed it with his friends’.
The presence of Cézanne is felt strongly behind both Three Women and Bread and Fruit Dish on a Table, and the borrowed Braque may well have been in his studio when he painted them.
At any rate the gravity of Picasso's great canvases probably reflects some of the thoughtfulness with which Braque had approached Cézanne's art.
The period of the two painters' great intimacy and of their unique collaboration was about to begin.
It is perhaps hard to see what Picasso found to admire that was common to both tribal sculpture and the work of Cézanne, two arts which are in many ways diametrically opposed.
For while the tribal sculptor is often not particularly concerned with natural appearances, Cézanne's painting is the result of the acutest kind of visual observation.
It is obvious that Picasso, who had admired the formal, sculptural element in tribal art, also appreciated the abstract, structural side of Cézanne's work.
But it has been seen that Picasso was also attracted to tribal sculpture because he admired its conceptual quality.
Now Cézanne's art, despite its use of simple, often almost geometrical forms, could never be described as conceptual although he did of course impose a very rigorous sense of pictorial order upon his subjects.
He was not so much concerned, as the tribal sculptor was, with conveying his idea about an object, but rather with recording it or interpreting it in pictorial terms.
Or to put it differently, he saw in nature a storehouse of artistic forms.
Nevertheless, Cézanne had intuitively evolved a means of explaining the nature of solid forms in a new, very thorough way.
To start with, he generally studied the objects in his still lifes from slightly above eye-level, so that the spectator sees them in their most informative aspect; this high viewpoint  was probably assumed largely in order to limit the pictorial depth and ensure the unity of the picture surface in so far as that looking downwards on to the subject one's eye is not allowed to wander off into limitless space.
However, Cézanne very often goes further and tilts up the top of an object even more towards the picture plane, so that it appears sometimes as if seen almost from directly above, while continuing to show the rest of the object from a more normal, slightly lower point of view.
It is impossible to say to what extent Cézanne was aware of the fact that he was doing this, and in the process breaking the laws of scientific linear perspective, but it seems likely that it was part of a natural desire to emphasize the two-dimensional aspect of the canvas while continuing to explain the nature of objects and also insisting on their solidity by modelling them as fully as possible.
Many of these ‘deformations’ may also owe something to the fact that, as Cézanne moved from one section of his canvas to another, he unconsciously altered the structure of objects in an effort to relate rhythmically each passage of painting to the areas around it.1 But apart from emphasizing the aesthetic or two-dimensional plane on which he was working, the tipping forward of certain objects or parts of objects also gives the sensation that the painter has adopted variable or movable viewpoints and that he thus has been able to synthesize into a single image of an object a lot of information gathered from looking at it from a series of successive viewpoints.
The way in which the contours of objects are continually broken in Cézanne's painting reinforces the impression that he looked at his subject from more than one position.
Picasso, who was anxious to paint an object as he ‘thought’ it, or to express his ideas about it, was naturally anxious to explain as fully as possible the nature of its formal composition.
He thus seized on the concept of volume implicit in Cézanne as one of the means of doing so.
This was a development which of course took place in Picasso's work over a period of many months.
However, when approaching Cézanne after an intensive analysis of the predominantly  simple, sculptural forms of tribal art, Picasso was naturally most immediately drawn to the precise, solid treatment of volumes that is found in so much of Cézanne's portraiture and still-life painting.
The aspect of definition in Cézanne's work, its ‘measurable’ quality, is well illustrated by the fact that in one of his later Cubist phases Gris was able to interpret one of Cézanne's portraits of his wife in terms of a few sharply defined, superimposed planes that capture much of the structural feeling of the original.
Then the landscapes at La Rue-des Bois which are influenced by Cézanne are still related in many ways to Picasso's more ‘primitive’ or ‘Negroid’work; indeed, this series of paintings begun in La Rue-des-Bois is contemporary with other canvases which represent only a continuation of his earlier work; some of the simplest of the La Rue-des-Bois landscapes, with their almost naive interpretation of houses and trees, remind one strongly of the art of the Douanier Rousseau.
However, in the more elaborate and sophisticated paintings of the series, the influence of Cézanne can be sensed in the general construction, in the technique of small, flat, rhythmically applied brush-strokes which build up the forms, and in the devices which Picasso has used to retain the picture plane.
For example, besides assuming Cézanne's high viewpoint, Picasso now often continues the outlines of walls or buildings at slightly different levels or angles as they appear at intervals behind the objects in the foreground.
This feature derived from Cézanne's work can be seen also in some of Braque's l'Estaque landscapes.
Indeed, the Rue-des-Bois landscapes already have much in common with Braque's contemporary works.
In both there is a reinterpretation of Cézanne in thoughtful, more conceptual, terms.
Both painters take slight liberties with conventional perspective; that is to say, in their canvases the angles of vision are no longer completely consistent.
Further, neither painter relies completely on the use of a single, consistent light source to model forms.
Both have begun to produce a sensation of relief by arbitrarily juxtaposing lights and darks rather than by using shading in a naturalistic way.
This is a feature of Cubist painting that was soon to become very apparent.
Like Braque, Picasso had restricted the range of colours on his palette to browns, greys and greens, though the greens he uses are brighter and tend to predominate.
And if one is forced to use the term ‘geometrical’ when talking about Braque's work, it is even more applicable to Picasso's.
The forms are severely simplified: tubular tree-trunks, heavily stylized  masses of foliage and ‘cubic’ houses.
Picasso's approach is harder, more sculptural than Braque's.
The contours of the objects are unbroken (although they are occasionally slightly dislocated as has been seen) and the modelling is more aggressively three-dimensional.
Braque, on the other hand, has used Cézanne's technique of opening up the contours of objects, so that in his paintings the eye slips inwards and upwards from plane to plane without having to make a series of abrupt transitions or adjustments.
This use of new spatial sensations was to become an increasingly important feature of Braque's work.
The still lifes which Picasso executed during the winter of 1908–9 and the early spring of 1909, such as for example the Compotier in the Museum of Modern Art, New York (a work of late 1908), are more frankly Cézannesque than anything that preceded them.
Once again the forms are more solid, more firmly drawn and roundly modelled than in Braque's contemporary work.
Cézanne's method of building up form by a series of parallel hatchings or small overlapping brush-strokes is used by Picasso in a severe and logical way; indeed, in the gouaches of early 1909 this method of work becomes almost a refinement of the earlier, cruder striations.
The objects in Braque's painting like the Still Life with Fruit Dish (Moderna Museet, Stockholm), which is roughly contemporary with the Compotier, are more faceted, and the whole surface is broken up in terms of the same angular but subtly modulated planes which carry the eye back into a limited depth and then forward again on to the picture plane in a series of gentle declivities and projections.
In the work of both painters one becomes increasingly aware of the fact that they are making use of a variable viewpoint.
One sees more of the bowl and stem of the Picasso Compotier, for instance, than one would in normal vision if one assumed the same high viewpoint when looking at the top of it; and the gourd behind is painted as though in silhouette or directly at eye level.
The table top is tipped up into the picture plane more sharply even than in a painting by Cézanne.
The human figure always played a much more important part in the work of Picasso than in that of Braque, and Picasso looked with particular interest at Cézanne's figure work.
What seems to have fascinated Picasso about Cézanne's figure studies and portraits, besides his obvious interest in their structural formal properties, is the complete disregard of details, which is at times extended even to a disregard of the individual features of the face.
This is combined in  Cézanne with an extremely elaborate build-up of form in terms of small flat planes based on empirical observations, which, following countless adjustments, fuse into the whole and become inseparable from each other.
Some of Picasso's studies of single heads executed during the autumn and winter of 1908 show the earlier, more sculptural, Negroid type reinterpreted in a new idiom.
The severe outlines of the facial mask are retained and the noses are the same protruding, convex forms, usually flattened into a ridge along the top.
But the treatment of the rest of the face is more complex, subtler and more empirical; it is no longer divided into a few clearly defined sections, and eyes and mouth are not so precisely stylized and deliberately emphasized as they had been before.
In many of the figure paintings of the winter of 1908 and the spring of 1909 the Negroid elements are superseded, and the empirical or experimental treatment of form is extended to whole or three-quarter length figures.
Under the influence of Cézanne, Picasso's work becomes once again more purely painterly, and these figures, though still simple and often clumsy and awkward in appearance, never give the impression, as did so many of the paintings of the Negroid phase, of being the pictorial counterparts of wooden sculptures.
Forms become much more generalized; and they are no longer thrown into relief by the use of a single, consistent light source as in most of the Negroid work.
The limbs are generally thin, but there is a marked tendency to distend or inflate the trunks of the bodies so that they become unnaturally broad.
Picasso's work is, of course, by now totally different, both in spirit and appearance, from that of Cézanne.
It is a great deal more abstract, and the deformations within it are much more radical.
This was partly because Picasso, like Braque, was at this time working largely from memory; indeed he had been doing so for the past three years.
This partial detachment from natural appearances, which has already been seen in the landscapes of Picasso and Braque of 1908, is one of the factors that distinguish most clearly their approach from that of Cézanne and other nineteenth-century artists, and even from the Fauves, whose vision, with the occasional exception of Matisse, despite the liberties they took with their subjects, was still conditioned by their instantaneous reactions to their surroundings.
Cézanne in particular had as a rule relied completely on visual models, and had looked at the subjects of his paintings with a concentration and intensity as great as that shown by the artists of the early Renaissance in their rediscovery of the natural world.
Only in the figure compositions did he work largely from imagination and memory.
The element of distortion and the handling of the space in these paintings relates them intimately to Cubism, although most Cubist painting is close, too, in feeling to the more constructive and austere portraits, still lifes and landscapes.
It was the deliberate disregard of the more sensuous and immediately appealing aspects of painting, and the temporary dismissal of all human and associational values, combined with the fact that they were working in a conceptual way, relying on memory as much as on visual models, that allowed the Cubists to distort and dislocate figures and objects to a degree hitherto unknown.
This is particularly noticeable in Picasso's drastic treatment of the human body in the series of paintings under discussion; in some of them the subject's limbs are abruptly truncated.
There is furthermore an atmosphere of harshness and unrest about them that makes one realize how much closer to the spirit of Cézanne Braque's contemporary work is.
Some figure paintings, however, probably mostly from the spring of 1909, are, like many of the contemporary still lifes, more purely Cézannesque.
Less extreme in deformation, quieter and less agitated in mood, these paintings form a prelude to the important work which was to be done by Picasso during the summer in Spain at Horta de San Juan.
Examined over a certain length of time, the course of Picasso's development, though often paradoxical and breathtaking in its rapidity, can be clearly charted.
The discovery of new sources of inspiration, world events, emotional and intellectual disturbances, or the stimulus provided by new contacts in his personal life, mark starting points for various periods into which his artistic career can be divided.
And in his later work the careful dating supplied by Picasso himself eliminates any chronological problem.
But during the early Cubist period, when the pictures were unsigned and undated, and when the wealth of discovery and invention makes differences of months and even of weeks important, it is extremely difficult to establish an exact chronological sequence.
Nearly all the signatures and dates on Cubist paintings executed by Picasso and Braque between 1907 and 1913 have been added much later.
Often the paintings appear to be signed on the reverse and occasionally a date is inscribed there also.
These  ‘signatures’ were mostly added by an employee of Kahnweiler's when they reached his gallery; this was usually, though clearly not always, within a few weeks of being painted.
Even in the case of Braque, whose development was more methodical than Picasso's, the dating of certain works is problematical, and Picasso's sporadic method of work makes it doubly hard.
The approach of both Picasso and Braque was primarily intuitive, but Picasso's innovations and changes of style give the impression of being realized more suddenly and spontaneously.
Then, after having taken the most daring steps forward he sometimes retreats a few paces, so that on comparing two paintings close in date the earlier example often seems more advanced and developed.
The same themes, the same subjects and poses are reinterpreted over and over again, often in some completely original way, but sometimes also in a manner reminiscent of a previous phase; any novelty is eventually assimilated to what had preceded it; nothing is ever discarded.
This overlapping of styles is seen throughout the entire pre-war period, and since every phase contains the seeds for future developments, one is forced to take as focal points works in which discoveries or innovations are fully realized, rather than those in which they are first suggested.
The problem of establishing a satisfactory chronology for Picasso's work between 1907 and 1914 is largely solved by the invaluable landmarks provided by the months, generally in the summer, spent outside Paris.
Because of their subject-matter and homogeneity of style, and often also because of photographic records, the paintings of these periods are usually securely datable.
Furthermore, these months were usually periods of synthesis and discovery.
It is in some of the drawings and sketches executed at Gosol that the facial types begin to harden towards the ‘Iberian’ style of the autumn.
Another, contemporary series of Gosol paintings is characterized by a gentle, pastoral mood that is quite distinctive.
The influence of Cézanne is seen strongly and consistently in some of the paintings Picasso brought back from La Rue-des-Bois in the autumn of 1908.
Now, at Horta de San Juan, in the summer of 1909, Picasso consolidated the achievements of the past years to produce the most important single group of paintings of his early Cubist period.
Picasso and Fernande Olivier arrived there  in May and remained, with interruptions, until September.
The Horta figure pieces in particular are of vital importance in the history of Cubism.
In the more sculptural, formal, Negroid paintings the starting point for the investigation of form had been the logical or rational division of the human form and face into their component parts.
Later, after he had been influenced by certain paintings by Cézanne, Picasso began to treat solid forms in a more arbitrary, empirical or experimental fashion and to explore the possibilities of representing them without the aid of traditional perspective.
At Horta, Picasso fused the Negroid and the Cézannian types of painting.
Looking at these canvases one gets the sensation that the time spent in Horta was a period of almost unequalled concentration in Picasso's art.
The series of Horta heads all have more or less the same basic subdivision into several clearly defined areas.
That is to say, Picasso uses as a starting point the same logical or rational analysis of volume that he had evolved in his Negroid paintings.
The forehead is usually divided by a central ridge or furrow as in much of the Negroid work.
Two simple planes connect the sunken eye socket to the forehead, and a small disk extends below from cheekbone to the inside corner of the eye, while the jaw, the nose and the section from nose to mouth and from mouth to chin are each clearly defined.
But these areas then become the starting point for further subdivision and countless small refinements conditioned by the eye alone.
The same approach is applied to the whole body of a three-quarter length figure, which is the culmination of the series.
The basic pyramidal or shield-like form of the stomach still recalls tribal sculpture, but the deformation of the figure is at once more geometrical and less extreme than in most of the Cézannesque paintings and less rigid than in the Negroid paintings; forms are faceted or subdivided in a more elaborate fashion than hitherto, so that one's eye passes freely from one sculptural element to another.
There is, too, an increased feeling of sensitivity and subtlety.
Most important, in these heads and figures the Cubist concept of form is expressed in a fully developed way.
The heads are viewed from slightly above or at eye level but the undersides of nose and jaw are clearly seen.
The side of the neck is swung forward in a great curving plane that is the basis of the sculptural breakdown of the neck and throat.
The knot of hair  at the back of the neck is, in some of the paintings, incorporated in an almost full-face view, and the back of the shoulder is tipped up into the picture plane.
In the three-quarter length figures the sides of the body are pulled or folded outwards to broaden and expand the trunk.
In other words, in each image Picasso synthesizes information obtained from viewing the subject from various angles, and, relying on his knowledge and memory of the structure of the human figure, he gives a complete and detailed analysis of the nature of the forms that compose it.
The Horta still lifes show the same combination of complexity and lucidity.
The problem of combining various aspects of an object into a single image was one which, it has been seen, had concerned Picasso and Braque for some time.
Indeed, it should be emphasized that Picasso had been dissatisfied with the limitations imposed on pictorial volumes by a scientific or linear system of perspective for some time before he became aware of the fact that Cézanne's painting suggested a new concept of form and space.
As early as 1906, in many of Picasso's paintings influenced by Iberian sculpture, forms are distended to the point of distortion, and because of this, in the heads of figures, the features, and particularly the mouths are unnaturally elongated.
This is very obvious in the Portrait of Gertrude Stein, where in a three-quarter view the far side of the mouth is almost duplicated, while the disparity between the eyes further accentuates the sense of breadth.
In other figures where both the bust and the head are expanded in this exaggerated way, the neck clearly presented a problem: by nature a slender form, it must now be used to connect convincingly two abnormally heavy masses.
(A satisfactory solution was not to be reached until the work of Horta de San Juan, where, using the tendons as an axis, the back of the neck is swung around into the front of the shoulder.)
Then, in the Demoiselles, a further step is taken.
The noses of the full-face figures are in profile, and in the squatting figure, with its distended pose and dislocated head, the canons of traditional perspective are completely violated.
Braque had stated the new concept of form more consciously in the Baigneuse or Nu of early 1908, where the unnaturally squat proportions of the figure are further exaggerated by the inclusion of certain aspects of it not visible from a single point of view.
In a three-quarter view of the head the knot of hair at the back of the head is seen as in a profile view, and the double outline of the foremost shoulder gives the impression that the top of it has been tipped up into the picture plane.
Picasso's Baigneuse, a work of early 1909, shows the painter accomplishing the desired optical synthesis in a very thorough but slightly schematic way.
Here both buttocks and the far side of the back are visible in what is basically a simple three-quarter view of the figure; one leg is in strict profile, while the other is seen almost from a frontal position.
The face, divided down the central axis, is a crude combination of a three-quarter and profile view, and the elongation of the mouth suggests even a purely frontal viewpoint.
In Braque's Still Life with Musical Instruments, painted in the autumn of 1908, the neck of the mandolin is bent round to an exaggerated degree, so that the top and underneath of it are visible simultaneously.
And from the middle of this year onwards, both painters had adopted and accentuated Cézanne's device of lifting the tops of objects up towards the picture plane.
This aspect of Cézanne's art, and the way in which he distended forms and continually opened up their contours as though in an effort to broaden them even further, must have appeared to the Cubists as an early manifestation of the simultaneous depiction of various views of an object in a single image, and as a justification for their deliberate dismissal of linear perspective.
The new concept of form reached its fullest expression to date in the work of Picasso done at Horta de San Juan, and some sheets of drawings which date from the early days of his return to Paris, show Picasso methodically applying the Cubist concept of form to objects of different kinds and shapes: to a human head, a box, an apple and so on.
But even in these drawings, which have the character of a study or demonstration, there is nothing theoretical about Picasso's approach.
There are in Cubism many seemingly contradictory features, and one of the most obvious is the fact that despite the strong intellectual and rational strain that characterizes the style, the painting of Picasso and Braque remained markedly unscientific.
The method of work of both artists was throughout primarily intuitive.
Traditional perspective was abandoned but no new system was substituted for it.
On the contrary, the painter's liberty had become absolute.
He was free to move around his subject and to incorporate into his depiction of it any information gained by this process or acquired through previous contacts or experiences.
Memory, therefore, played an increasingly large part in the artist's new vision of the world around him, and this led at first to a great simplification of form.
But at the same time the painter now felt  compelled to give in every painting a multiplicity of information about the formal properties of his subject, and this in turn rendered his task in some ways more complex than it had been hitherto.
No ready-made solutions were offered for the problems posed.
If the mind or memory suggested new forms, the means of expressing them were purely pictorial.
Pierre Reverdy, a young friend and supporter of Picasso and Braque, was quick to realize the fact that true Cubism had not been the product of pictorial doctrines and theories, and also that the search for the means of expressing a new concept of form and space had made Cubism a style of almost unequalled pictorial discipline.
In the first issue of Nord-Sud, a periodical which appeared in 1917 with the purpose of reintegrating and stimulating artistic life in Paris, Reverdy, feeling that some kind of objective evaluation of Cubism was by this time possible, wrote: ‘Today for a privileged few the discipline can be taken for granted, and as they never sought for an art that was cold, mathematical and anti-plastic, wholly intellectual, the works which they offer us appeal to the lover of painting directly through the eye and the senses.
Besides the figure work, Picasso also executed several landscapes at Horta de San Juan.
Trees and natural forms are here almost completely eliminated, and the concern is with the relationships between the cubic, block-like buildings and the reconciliation of their obvious solidity with the picture plane.
Colour is even more limited than before, and the palette for the succeeding years is established: some of the paintings are in earth colours, greys and blacks, with a few touches of dull green, while others are in softer grey-blues and buffs.
In all the paintings the deviations from traditional perspective, which in landscape painting had hitherto been only slight, are carried to new lengths.
Not only is there no central vanishing point, but the perspective, rather than being convergent is actually divergent, so that the roof tops and sides of the buildings are often broadest at their furthest ends, and have the effect of opening up, fan-wise, on to the picture plane.
Picasso's use of light is by now completely arbitrary: darks and lights are opposed to each other simply to accentuate the incisive quality of the outlines and to throw form more sharply into relief.
Since atmospheric perspective is disregarded  also, the furthest buildings appear to be placed above rather than behind the ones in the foreground.
The picture plane is further stressed by the device of dropping the small doors or openings below the bases of the buildings, and by the way in which some of the forms are opened up into each other and fused.
The sky, too, is treated as a series of planes continuing the composition up to the top of the canvas, so that there is very little suggestion of depth even behind the buildings and mountains on the horizon.
This particular feature in the landscapes at Horta de Ebro, the solid, almost tangible, treatment of the sky, had been developed first in Cubist painting by Braque as a result of his new ideas about pictorial space.
It is particularly noticeable in the Port, a work painted from memory in the spring of 1909.
In the late landscapes of Cézanne the sky is often treated in much the same way — as a complicated system of small, thickly painted facets or planes inextricably fused, and having a quality of weight and material existence.
Despite the austerity of his early Cubism, Braque's interpretation of Cézanne was more painterly than that of Picasso, and he was undoubtedly fascinated by the surface quality and the actual technique of Cézanne; there is in the handling of the sky in the Port, and indeed throughout the whole picture, a much greater emphasis on the richness of the pigment itself than there is in contemporary works by Picasso.
The forms of lighthouses and boats, while almost toy-like in their basic simplicity, are developed internally in terms of a large number of planes or facets, and since the sky receives the same treatment, the painting resolves itself into a mass of small, shifting planes, jointed together or hanging behind each other in shallow depth.
Out of this, forms emerge, solidify, and then disintegrate again as the spectator turns his attention back from the individual forms to the painting as a whole.
In Braque's l'Estaque landscapes of the previous year, the two-dimensional surface of the picture is retained partly by allowing the eye no way of escape beyond the mountains, buildings and trees, and here the same effect is achieved by the concrete treatment of the sky, which is as elaborately and solidly painted as the rest of the canvas, and which is fused with the landscape below by the extension into it of all the main compositional lines.
A few years later, in 1912, La Fresnaye, attempting to describe a certain aspect of Cézanne's work and to assess his influence on contemporary painting said: ‘Each object, in one of the late canvases, has ceased to exist only in itself, and becomes  little by little a cell within the whole organism of the painting.
That is the really fruitful aspect of Cézanne's painting and the reason for which it is at the root of all the modern tendencies.’
The first sentence describing Cézanne's late work, could equally well be applied to this kind of painting by Braque.
Something has already been said, in connection with the landscapes and still lifes of 1908 and early 1909, about the emergence of a new spatial sensation in Braque's work.
In the Port this had become very marked.
The treatment of the sky and of the areas between the various landscape objects, the boats, lighthouses and breakwaters, in terms of the same facets or pictorial units into which the objects themselves are dissolved, has the effect of making space seem as real, as material, one might almost say as ‘pictorial’ as the solid objects themselves.
The whole picture surface is brought to life by the interaction of the angular, shaded planes.
Some of these planes seem to recede away from the eye into shallow depth, but this sensation is always counteracted by a succeeding passage which will lead the eye forward again up on to the picture plane.
The optical sensation produced is comparable to that of running one's hand over an immensely elaborate, subtly carved sculpture in low relief.
It has been suggested that the Port was shown, together with another painting by Braque since destroyed, at the Salon des Indépendants of 1909.
If the Port is indeed the landscape listed in the catalogue, it is the first surviving Cubist painting to have been seen in a large public exhibition (the Braque exhibition in the previous year had been at Kahnweiler's gallery which was small and at that time known to relatively few people).
Braque's entries in the Salon des Indépendants were hung in the Fauve room.
Reviewing the exhibition for Gil Blas, Vauxcelles wrote: ‘everything, down to the cubic, and I must admit barely intelligible eccentricities of Bracke [sic](there is someone, Pascal would have said, who abuses the geometric spirit!) makes this room passionately interesting.’
By 1909 then, Picasso and Braque had initiated the first phase of Cubism; the art which both painters were producing was the result of a new freedom which  arose from their having discarded all scientific systems and theories.
But despite the spirit of communal research which had begun to characterize their work, it had already become apparent that there was still a fundamental difference of approach between them.
The similarity of subject-matter between Picasso's Horta landscapes and those which Braque was executing at exactly the same time at La Roche Guyon (that is to say in mid 1909) enables one to appreciate with clarity the fact that, although they were reaching much the same conclusions, it was for different reasons.
Braque's paintings show a continuation of the fragmentation of form and the elaborate surface treatment already seen in Le Port.
The brush-strokes have become smaller and more numerous, and perspective is distorted to such an extent that the buildings occasionally appear to be composed of completely dislocated or dissociated walls and roofs.
Picasso's landscapes are more incisive and linear, and the solidity of the forms is deliberately emphasized.
The paint quality is less seductive and the technique itself less conscious.
The Braques are softer, shapes and objects tend to fuse and merge more, and there is almost a suggestion of the atmospheric shimmer of light.
Picasso has said, ‘Cubism is an art dealing primarily with forms.’
Braque, on the other hand, is quoted as saying, ‘what especially attracted me — and what was the main preoccupation of Cubism — was the materialization of that new space which I sensed.’
Picasso's dismissal of traditional perspective had been the result of his interest in investigating the nature of solid form and of a desire to express it in a new, more thorough and comprehensive, pictorial way.
This accounts for the strong sculptural feeling that characterizes so much of his early Cubist painting; and, indeed, from the Negro period onwards, he was executing small experimental sculptures which relate directly to the contemporary paintings.
In his bronze Head, for example(a more important work, which will be discussed below) he dealt in three dimensions with the problems he had faced in the figure paintings at Horta de San Juan.
Because of his interest in the properties of pictorial volumes, the device of combining into a single image various views of an object, one of the fundamental features of Cubism, was worked out more consistently in Picasso's work than in Braque's.
Furthermore, Picasso was anxious to present in each image as much essential information about the subject as he could.
When he subdivides and facets form, it is in an attempt to break through to its inner structure.
This is exactly the effect achieved, for example, by the treatment of the necks in the Horta figures.
One gets the impression that Picasso is striving for some ultimate pictorial truth, some absolute representation of reality.
Braque was dissatisfied with traditional perspective for many of the same reasons as Picasso.
‘Since it is mechanical, this perspective can never lead to a complete possession of objects’, he has said.
But while he was interested in giving as complete an idea as possible of the nature of his subjects, he was not so much interested in the formal, sculptural properties of individual objects as in their relationships to each other and to the space surrounding them.
Linear, scientific perspective allows for a fairly accurate mental reconstruction of the distances separating objects.
Thus, in front of a still life by Chardin or Courbet, for example, one can say that one object must be separated from another behind it by so many inches, and so on .
Braque, on the other hand, wanted to paint these distances or spaces, to make them as real and concrete for the spectator as the objects themselves.
In order to accomplish this it was necessary to convey the sensation of having walked around his subjects, of having seen or ‘felt’ the spaces between them.
Braque has said ‘there is in nature a tactile space, I might almost say a manual space…
This is the space that fascinated me so much, because that is what early Cubist painting was, a research into space.’
And Braque's early Cubist work gives exactly that impression of ‘manual’ space which he has talked about.
Every object in these paintings is separated from those surrounding it by layers of tactile, visible space which enable the spectator's eye to reach from one part of the canvas to another, from one object to another, by a series of clearly defined pictorial passages.
When he fragments and decomposes the objects in his still lifes and landscapes, it is not in order to strip form bare or to disengage some essential quality, but it is rather as a means of creating a completely new kind of pictorial space.
And it was probably because of his desire to ‘touch’ space that he  began to abandon landscape painting and to devote himself increasingly to still life, in which the depth was naturally more restricted and could be more easily controlled.
Braque's interest in space gives his work an ‘overall’ quality, which has ever since remained one of the main features of his style, whereas in Picasso's painting the attention is usually riveted on the subject while the background or surround is often treated in a simpler or more cursory fashion.
Before going on to discuss the stylistic changes in the Cubism of Picasso and Braque during 1910, it is necessary to interject a word about Picasso's bronze Head, the most important early Cubist sculpture.
It might have been expected that the tribal masks and statuettes that had such a profound effect on Picasso's painting would have excited him to a new activity in the field of sculpture as they did Derain and, to a certain extent, Matisse.
And during 1907 and 1908 Picasso did produce a handful of wood-carvings (many of which have the appearance of being unfinished), a couple of small bronze heads and masks, and one or two incidental pieces in plaster.
But most of these can be regarded as experimental works designed to clarify the problems that Picasso was facing in his painting.
Picasso, it has been seen, was anxious to introduce into his paintings what might almost be called a ‘sculptural completeness’.
One of the things that he objected to about a tradition of painting that was governed by a scientific, single viewpoint system of perspective was that it gave the spectator an incomplete picture or idea about the subject.
In other words, he wished to give his own canvases a dimension that in a sense already existed in sculpture, or at least in free-standing sculpture.
For clearly one of the principal characteristics of sculpture in the round is that the spectator is able, and is indeed often encouraged or compelled, to walk around it and study it from all angles.
In other words, he is free to do what Picasso was trying to do for him in his painting.
This is probably why, even when a ‘school’ of Cubist painting came into existence, there was at first very little Cubist sculpture.
On a more general level it is possible to say that since painting is in any case an art of illusion, in so far as it conveys sensations of volume and depth on a two-dimensional surface, it was easier for the Cubists to break with traditional conventions, to push the ‘illusion’ one step  further, and to invent a new pictorial language, than it was to find a new way of dealing with the solid, tangible forms themselves.
Nevertheless, Picasso's bronze Head is in many ways a revolutionary work.
It is clearly related to the Horta figure work although it came a few months later, and it shows the same intensive analysis of the nature of solid forms.
Picasso makes full use of the play of light across the rough, irregular texture of the bronze to accentuate the dissolution of the face into sharp, angular and incisive planes.
Certain sections, when they fall into deep shadow, give the effect of having been gouged out in order to show the interior as well as the exterior structure of the head.
This was something that Picasso had also conveyed in the necks of the Horta figures, where the area between the projecting tendons appears to have been cut back into a deep recess.
Then the head is distorted in a sweeping spiral movement so that the spectator is obliged to move completely around it and thus gathers a very complete idea about it; and, owing to the element of distortion, from several positions one sees more of the head than would be possible in ordinary vision.
But this sculpture remains an isolated example, emphasizing the fact that in its earliest stage Cubism was primarily a pictorial revolution.
And it was not until several years later, after Picasso and Braque evolved new methods of dealing with solid forms in their paintings, through their papier colles and constructions, that there emerged with the work of men like Laurens and Lipchitz a real school of Cubist sculpture.
During the latter part of 1909 and the early months of 1910 the work of Picasso and Braque became increasingly elaborate and complex.
In Picasso's Horta work there had still been some reference to the earlier, simpler and more rational forms derived from tribal art, but in the paintings done on his return to Paris this aspect is completely abandoned, and in the figure work, the approach becomes once again less rational and more empirical.
To control the elaborate complex of facets or planes to which forms are now reduced, Picasso had to resort again to the use of a consistent light source, and there is in many of these paintings a new and strong sense of chiaroscuro.
Inside the objects and figures the planes begin to be opened up into each other more fully and are less clearly differentiated than hitherto.
And by the spring of 1910, in works such as the Portrait of Uhde (Pullitzer Collection, St. Louis) figures and objects have become partially fused with their surroundings or with the background.
In the  work of Cézanne, where the outlines of objects are stressed again and again, and then as often broken, the eye, while conscious of the limitations of normal vision, has the sensation of being carried around the object beyond its boundaries.
Here, in the work of Picasso, the device of fusing or merging the subject with its surroundings allows the painter to insist on the surface unity of the picture but also has the same effect of allowing the spectator to reconstruct form beyond the boundaries stated.
These works of Picasso's produce, too, some of the same spatial sensation that is conveyed by Braque's.
The move towards this more complex kind of painting reaches a climax in the still lifes that Braque painted late in 1909 and early in the following year, for example Violon et Cruche and Violin and Palette.
These paintings give the sensation that Braque has felt his way visually around each object and examined its relationships with the other objects around it from several viewpoints.
By rendering the areas between the objects in a tactile, material fashion, Braque succeeds in fusing objects and space into a spatial continuum composed of small, fluid, interpenetrating planes.
It is this concrete rendering of the space around the highly fragmented objects that gives these paintings a sensation of almost unprecedented complexity.
The intense visual concentration and the technical discipline underlying these paintings transmits itself to the spectator in a feeling of tension, almost of unrest.
Although it has been seen that early Cubism was in no sense simply a continuation of Cézanne, the paintings of Picasso and Braque of this period represent, in many ways, the culmination of the investigation of form and pictorial space initiated by him thirty years earlier.
They mark also the final phase of the first period in Cubist painting.
Both painters, and Braque in particular, seem to have realized that the technique of Cubist painting must become more suggestive, more abstract.
Of the two painters Braque was the more ‘painterly’.
He was always more conscious than Picasso of the actual surface quality of his work, and moreover more consistently conscious of the need for respecting the demands of the picture plane.
It was therefore natural that it should have been Braque who solved the present problem, largely a technical one, of finding a new, easier means of representing the new concepts of pictorial form and space in all their fullness and complexity.
In a couple of landscapes executed at Carrières Saint-Denis, where he had spent a week or so working in the company of Derain, late in the  autumn of 1909, Braque had already begun to transform the subtlety and observational quality of the Roche Guyon landscapes into tighter, more arbitrary compositions, reminiscent in the emphasis on the vertical and horizontal structure broken by forty-five degree diagonals (and also in colour, which is once again darker and harsher) of the Maisons à Estaque.
Next, in a few small still lifes of early 1910, such as the Glass on a Table, the objects are blocked in a much more direct manner than hitherto.
The linear quality of the original idea or sketch is retained, and these outlines become the starting point for the breakdown of the entire surface in terms of flat or tilted planes, a few of which are quite arbitrary.
Another still life, Les Poissons, probably begun a few months later, during the summer (but finished later), shows the new compositional methods carried a step further.
The table top and the bottle provide the main compositional accents, while the remainder of the surface is broken down in secondary vertical and horizontal sections.
Through these planes the bodies of the fish, fragmented and dislocated, can be traced in a series of subsidiary diagonals.
Only their heads remain immediately legible, and these provide the spectator with a starting point for the reconstruction of the subject.
A contemporary landscape, Les Usines de Rio Tinto à Estaque, though the subject is still quite recognizable, is markedly more abstract than anything Braque had painted before.
By now the painting is virtually constructed in terms of a loose grid or framework of vertical and horizontal lines suggested by the outlines of the buildings.
The buildings themselves are no longer self-contained or fully circumscribed forms but are opened up completely into the space around them to form a composition of interpenetrating, shifting planes, suggesting an extremely complicated transparent sculpture in low relief.
Braque himself has best described his new method of work when he said, ‘the fragmentation (of objects) enabled me to establish space and movement within space, and I was unable to introduce the object until I had created the space.’
Picasso's Jeune Fille à la Mandoline (also known as the Portrait of Fanny  Tellier) is not only one of the most beautiful, lyrical and accessible of all Cubist paintings, but is also a valuable document of the period.
For the fact that at the time Picasso saw the work as unfinished, allows us an insight into his aesthetic intentions and his technical procedure.
In the first place, the legibility of this canvas demonstrates conclusively that although Cubist paintings were becoming more abstract in appearance, the artists were still deeply conditioned, at least in the early stages of their works, by the material existence and the physical appearance of their subjects.
Then again the painting illustrates in a very concrete fashion the pull Picasso felt between the desire to give forms an explicit, volumetrical treatment, and the need to flatten them up onto the picture plane (compare, for example, the almost sculptural treatment of the breasts and the arms with that of the head, which is rendered in terms of two flat planes).
Had the painting reached completion it would have become simultaneously more elaborate, more abstract and more consistent in style; closer, for instance, to his Portrait of Vollard.
In Picasso's subsequent move towards a more abstract kind of painting, the work of Braque may once again have been a stimulus, and Picasso's remark to Braque, quoted by Michel Georges-Michel, ‘I have tried your methods and I feel one can do excellent things with them’ was perhaps made in connection with the new kind of painting Braque had invented in his still lifes of the first half of 1910.
Always more extreme than Braque, Picasso, in his work at Cadaquès in the summer of 1910, used the same grid type of composition to produce some of the most abstract and hermetic of all Cubist paintings.
At Horta Picasso had been concerned with the breakdown of the human figure into its sculptural units and the relationships between them.
Now, working from sketches (often of a type relating to the work of 1909 and early 1910) Picasso uses the outlines or the main directional lines of the body and its limbs as the starting point for his compositions.
Around this linear framework is built up a complex system of open and interacting planes, which sometimes seem to represent the forms of the body but which are often quite arbitrary compositional elements.
This system of transparent, interpenetrating shapes or planes suggests form in shallow depth, and from it the figure re-emerges as the spectator studies the canvas.
This new  method of composition can be seen clearly by comparing an etching of a figure done as an illustration for Max Jacob's Saint Matorell and securely datable to Cadaquès, with a drawing done a few months earlier.
The oil paintings of this period are considerably more abstract than the etchings and drawings, and many cannot be deciphered or reconstructed without the aid of preliminary sketches.
Picasso had abandoned the use of a consistent light source a year earlier only to reinstate it a few months later in the paintings done in Paris during the winter.
Now once again lights and darks are juxtaposed arbitrarily to create a sense of shallow relief, and are evenly scattered over the entire picture surface to maintain a compositional balance.
Kahnweiler, who was in continual contact with both Picasso and Braque at this time, realized at once that with the type of painting created by these artists in 1910 (and of which the Cadaquès paintings are the most extreme examples) Cubism was entering a new phase.
In 1915 he wrote: ‘Much more important, however, was the decisive advance which freed Cubism from the language previously used by painting.
This occurred in Cadaquès…where Picasso spent his summer.
Dissatisfied even after weeks of painful struggle, he returned to Paris in the fall with his unfinished works.
But he had taken the great step.
Picasso had pierced the closed form.
A new technique had been invented for new purposes.’
Already there existed in Braque's work a dialogue between objects and the tactile space in which they were embedded; now, in Picasso's work and subsequently in Braque's, there was initiated a dialogue between the subject matter and the highly abstract way in which it was rendered.
Looking at works of this second analytical phase of Cubism we are always aware of the presence of images, but sometimes they materialize only gradually from the complex of interacting transparent planes which surround and indeed constitute them, only to be reabsorbed into the painting's overall spatial flux.
If Picasso was dissatisfied with the Cadaquès paintings, this was probably because he felt them to be too hermetic and abstract.
And it was at this time, in 1910, that Cubism entered its most ‘difficult’ or hermetic phase, which subsequently gave rise to so much misunderstanding.
The ignorant, baffled by the  appearance of Picasso's and Braque's paintings, tended, indeed, to classify them as complete abstractions.
Even the critic Arthur Jerome Eddy, who was the author of the first English book on Cubism and a cautious supporter of the movement, was able to write: ‘In short Picasso and a few followers have reached a degree of abstraction in the suppression of the real and the particular that their paintings represent the same degree of emotion as the demonstration of a difficult geometrical proposition.’
It is therefore perhaps necessary to pause here to reaffirm some of the intentions of the movement which have hitherto been suggested only in passing.
Cubism, despite the strong intellectual bias and obvious concern with purely formal pictorial values, was never at any stage an abstract art.
In fact the painters themselves and the contemporary writers who were genuinely anxious to understand their work, claimed that Cubism was an art of realism.
Even Apollinaire who, excited by the complete break that Cubism had effected with traditional painting, had tended to suggest that the ideal programme would be a move towards complete abstraction, could still insist that the Cubist was a realist, since his inspiration was drawn from some transcendental truth beyond the world of appearances.
As early as 1911 at least one commentator was viewing Picasso's art as a plastic search for the essential.
Maurice Raynal, although less extreme and volatile in his thought than Apollinaire, adopted much the same idealist view while realizing that abstraction was not the end or goal of Cubist painting.
In 1913, in his first attempt to define the movement, he wrote: ‘Sincere artists today feel the need to canalize and tame their inspiration in order to extract from their faculties the maximum returns, and to strike a balance between sensitivity and reason…
They therefore no longer imitate the misleading appearances of visual phenomena but the truer ones of the mind.’
When writing on a less metaphysical level, and in face of the paintings themselves, even Apollinaire had to admit that the subject played an important part, and that the realism of the movement lay in its attempt to make a totally new but nevertheless very concrete statement about the visual world.
Apollinaire describes Picasso's method of work in this way: ‘Using planes to render volumes, Picasso enumerates the different elements composing objects in such a complete and penetrating manner that they only assume the aspect of objects thanks to the spectators’ efforts, who are of necessity aware of their simultaneity, precisely because of their arrangement.
Is this art more profound than it is elevated?
It doesn't dispense with the observation of nature and it works on us as familiarly as nature itself.’
Apollinaire further stresses the realistic character of the movement when he writes, simply and perhaps instinctively: ‘Courbet is the father of the new painters.’
Gleizes and Metzinger also emphasize in the opening section of Du Cubisme that to evaluate Cubism it is necessary to go back to Courbet ‘(He) initiated a move towards realism which has touched all modern endeavours.’
Two years earlier, in 1910, Metzinger had written: ‘Picasso doesn't negate the object and he illuminates it with his mind and his spirit’, and again, ‘Picasso openly declares himself a realist.’
Discussing Cubism, Picasso himself has said: ‘in our subjects, we keep the joy of discovery, the pleasure of the unexpected; our subjects must be a source of interest.’
And Braque: ‘When the fragmentation of objects appeared in my painting around 1910, it was as a technique for getting closer to the object…’
The iconography of Cubist painting in itself serves to confirm the realistic intentions of the painters.
Picasso and Braque turned to the objects closest to hand for their subject-matter, objects forming part of their daily lives and relating to their most immediate and obvious physical necessities and pleasures.
The wine glasses, tumblers, pipes and so on were articles which each painter handled regularly in the course of day-to-day life.
The fans and musical instruments which become recurrent themes in the still lifes were part of the equipment or decoration of many typical advanced studios in Montmartre; Braque who had been responsible in 1908 for the introduction of musical iconography into Cubist painting was furthermore seriously interested in music.
Picasso worked mostly from memory, but when he used models for his figure pieces they were  usually people he knew well, his friends and mistresses.
So even in the first exploratory or formative phase, when human values were largely suppressed, the Cubism of Picasso and Braque was in some ways an expression of the private life and experience of the painter.
The early researches had required the acceptance of a severe discipline, and individualities and personal tastes had been sacrificed in a common urge.
But after the new concepts of form and space had been clearly formulated Cubist painting at once became much more personal, more human.
Through some of his paintings of 1912 Picasso went so far as to say candidly to the spectator, ‘j'aime Eva’; at the same time he wrote to Kahnweiler of Eva, ‘I love her very much and I shall write it on my paintings.’
In 1913 and 1914, after all the most important discoveries had been made, Cubist painting naturally became freer and more decorative, but the same simple subject-matter was retained.
In a vein of intimacy the Cubists introduced into their compositions the names of popular songs, the programmes of theatres they had visited, the packets of cigarettes they had smoked, or the headings of newspapers they read — elements which, as Apollinaire put it, were ‘already drenched in humanity’.
And yet, despite the extremely personal aspect of so much Cubist painting, the movement remained free from introspection, and the painters continued to view and record their ideas of the material world of their immediate experience in a detached and objective way.
This seemingly contradictory combination of an extreme objectivity of vision with a strong vein of intimacy and personal humour emerges as one of the main characteristics of the classical and immediately pre-war Cubism of Picasso and Braque.
The desire of the Cubists to keep closely in touch with visual reality explains Picasso's uneasiness about his Cadaquès paintings: clearly he could not go back to his earlier, more laborious methods of dealing with form, and yet at a single stroke he had carried the new technique suggested in the work of Braque to something very near complete abstraction.
The Portrait of Kahnweiler, painted in Paris soon after Picasso's return from Cadaquès in the early autumn of 1910, may have helped Picasso towards a solution of his problem, since in dealing  with a particular individual he was forced to find a less difficult and hermetic means of expression; in any case the portrait serves to illustrate what steps Picasso took to make his work once again more legible.
Picasso worked from a photograph he had taken of his friend and dealer who recorded that Picasso nevertheless demanded some twenty sittings.
The basic method of composition of this painting is the same as in the Cadaquès work, but the subject is made identifiable by the retention or introduction of ‘keys’ or ‘signs’within the looser, more generalized, structure of the figure.
Distinctive features of the sitter, his eyes and hands for example, are rendered with a greater degree of naturalism, and these, together with the stimuli provided by other details such as a button on M. Kahnweiler's coat, a lock of hair, or the still life to the side of him, permit a reconstruction of the subject and his surroundings;(one of the New Caledonian sculptures owned by Picasso appears in a ghost-like form to the left of the sitter); and these more realistic touches in turn forced the painter to restore or preserve the naturalistic proportions of the figure.
The distortion of scale which had appeared in the Cadaquès paintings is not encountered again in the following year, and while all subsequent paintings are understandably not as easily legible as this portrait, almost all of them do contain some kind of clue or stimulus which serves to identify the subject, and which renders it immediately recognizable to anyone familiar with Cubist iconography.
Kahnweiler, who himself often helped the painters to choose titles for their paintings, in Der Weg zum Kubismus emphasizes the importance of the descriptive titles attached to the works as further means of enabling the spectator to reconstruct fully the subjects.
Although Braque had been responsible for taking the first steps towards a more abstract type of painting, his own use of the new procedure was much more cautious than Picasso's.
In a painting such as the Female Figure, executed in the winter of 1910–11, the subject is still much more easily recognizable than it had been in Picasso's Cadaquès work, or even in the Portrait of Kahnweiler.
When, a year later, with paintings such as Man with Violin, Braque's Cubism reached a second climax of complexity and became also highly difficult to read or interpret, one senses that it was not owing to the excitement of working  with a new, more abstract technique as it had been with Picasso, but because his interest in elaborately breaking up the picture surface so as to analyse the relationships between the objects and the space surrounding them, slowly and inevitably led him to this kind of painting.
And whereas Picasso had been forced to reintroduce clues, small fragments of legibility, into his work to render it more accessible to the spectator, Braque, even at his most abstract, instinctively retained them as a link with reality.
This is very clear, for example, in the beautiful crystalline Hommage a J. S. Bach; not only do the stencilled letters and the graphic marks enable us to reconstruct the musical subject matter of the still life, but the painting as a whole seems to become an analogy of its musical connotations.
The method of composition used by the painters brought with it a new element of ease and fluidity.
Most important, since form was now largely suggested rather than clearly defined, and since a strong linear quality was retained in the finished painting, it became much easier to combine the various views of an object or to synthesize in its depiction a greater amount of information.
For example(although the painters never worked in such an obvious and theoretical way), plan, section and elevation of an object could be laid or drawn over each other , and then adjusted and fused to form a single, legible and highly informative image.
Secondly, it was now obviously much easier to fuse figure and surroundings, thus emphasizing the ‘materiality’ of space and also ensuring the unity of the picture surface, while the greater complexity and concentration of the central areas generally serves to isolate and emphasize the subject.
Thirdly, with this method of composition the lack of a fixed light source, the arbitrary juxtaposition of light and dark, becomes a consistent and, indeed, a salient feature of the style.
In some ways the dismissal of a single light source can be regarded as a natural consequence of the dismissal of a single viewpoint.
In the work of Cadaquès Picasso had moved ahead of Braque with characteristic impetuosity, and then late in 1911, when Picasso's painting is once again comparatively legible, Braque had in turn produced a series of unusually elaborate and highly personal paintings (of which the Man with Violin (discussed above) and the still life Soda in the Museum of Modern Art in New York are good examples) which represent the most hermetic stage of his Cubism and which have no counterpart in the work of Picasso.
But on the whole the canvases of 1911  show the painters at their closest point, and the year and a half from the autumn of 1910 until the spring of 1912 was the period during which Cubist painting of the pre-war period appeared to change least radically.
Perhaps no pictorial revolution of the magnitude and depth of Cubism had been effected with such extreme rapidity, and during the years between 1907 and 1910 every few months had witnessed some radical change in the appearance of Cubist painting.
Now the style reached a moment of poise and equilibrium.
The series of figure compositions executed by Picasso during the summer of 1911 at Céret and in Paris on his return, represent the culmination and perfection of this particular phase in his Cubism.
These paintings do not differ fundamentally from his work of the previous autumn and represent only a very gentle movement towards a softer, more lyrical kind of painting.
Another Man with Guitar by Braque is a close parallel to Picasso's Céret work of 1911 (although it is slightly richer in the actual paint quality) and was probably executed in Céret also.
Two etchings of early 1912, Fox by Braque and Still Life with Bottle by Picasso, would, if unsigned, present a problem of identification except to the highly trained eye.
As a result of the feeling of greater ease, decorative touches and small colouristic accents begin to appear in the smaller canvases of both men.
In the work of Picasso of early 1912 certain objects are discreetly tinted, while in many contemporary Braques small, rippling strokes begin to be applied in bright reds and greens.
Both painters were by now introducing stylized, almost illusionistically painted strips of decorative roping or braiding.
The oval format, too, is used frequently.
But if Cubist methods of composition did not change fundamentally between 1910 and 1912, in the spring of 1911 Braque introduced a new element into one of his paintings which was of vital significance.
Across a painting entitled Le Portugais (Kunstmuseum, Basel) l Braque stencilled the letters BAL, and under them numerals.
Braque had first introduced letters into a still life, probably of early 1910 (Le Pyrogène et ‘Le Quotidien’), but they are blended into the composition and have no function other than that of identifying as a newspaper the object over which they are painted.
More important was the introduction  of illusionistic nails into three still lifes of early 1910.
At a time when the Cubists were beginning to restrict severely their use of colour, when all details and incidentals had been suppressed and eliminated, when the objects in their paintings had been dislocated and fragmented to a degree where they are occasionally almost unrecognizable, there is an element of contradiction, almost of perversity in this inclusion of a trompe l'oeil detail.
But this particular device had a deep significance.
Intensely concerned with retaining contact with external reality, Braque must have realized, unconsciously perhaps, that at this particular time Cubism's means of expression could become only more abstract, and the illusionistically painted nail may be regarded as an affirmation of the realistic intentions of the movement.
The stencilled letters and numbers are assertions of this also —‘as part of a desire to come as close as possible to a certain kind of reality, in 1911 I introduced letters into my paintings’, Braque has said — but the implications are wider.
In Le Portugais they fulfil several obvious functions.
In the first place, in a style in which one of the fundamental problems had always been the reconciliation of solid form with the picture plane, the letters written or stencilled across the surface are the most conclusive way of emphasizing its two-dimensional character; Braque has stressed this when he said of the letters: ‘they were forms which could not be distorted because, being quite flat, the letters existed outside space and their presence in the painting, by contrast, enabled one to distinguish between objects situated in space and those outside it.’
In other words Braque is in effect saying ‘My picture is an object, a flat surface, and the spatial sensations it evokes are a painter's space which is intended to inform and not to deceive.’
Gertrude Stein expressed much the same idea when she wrote, ‘Picasso in his early Cubist pictures used printed letters as did Juan Gris to force the painted surface to measure up to something rigid and the rigid thing was the printed letter.’
Secondly, the letters in Cubist painting always have some associative  value; in Picasso's Ma Jolie series the words, from the title of a popular song, relate through their musical connotations to the still lifes with musical instruments and paintings of figures playing them.
Here the letters D and BAL (the D must be the last letter of the word GRAND) were probably suggested by a dance hall poster hanging in a bar, and help to convey a ‘cafe’ atmosphere.
Then, in the Portugais the letters have a purely compositional value, providing a terminal note for a system of ascending horizontal elements.
Fourthly, they have a certain decorative value.
But the stencilled letters and numbers have yet another effect on the paintings in that they serve to stress their quality as objects.
When, during the first years of their friendship, at Braque's suggestion he and Picasso stopped signing their works they were automatically emphasizing the autonomous existence of their creations.
Now, the introduction of elements of reality, such as the stencilled letters and numerals in Le Portugais, affirms clearly the material existence of the painting as an object in its own right.
For in the same way in which the number or title of a painting in an exhibition catalogue gives it an identity as a material object different from all others of the same type, so the letters and numbers on a Cubist painting serve to individualize it, to isolate it from all other paintings.
Then, again, and in this they point ahead to the invention of collage, the letters and numerals stress the material existence of the painting in another way: by applying to a canvas or sheet of paper letters, other pieces of paper or fragments of glass and tin — elements generally considered to be foreign to the technique of painting or drawing — the artist makes the spectator conscious of the canvas, panel or paper as a material object capable of receiving and supporting other objects.
Kahnweiler recalls that the painters themselves talked a great deal about ‘le tableau objet’.
In their studios the canvases stood on the floors, on the chairs and other pieces of furniture, or hung high on the walls.
When their work was framed they preferred the frames to be ‘en fuite’, or to project the canvas forward, rather than traditional frames which enclosed paintings and made them recede.
It would obviously be dangerous to deduce too much from this, but at the same time the painters' attitude towards their work unconsciously mirrored a whole new  concept of painting.
Reacting against the momentary quality of Impressionism, which had been like a window suddenly opened out on to nature from a sheltered interior, against all forms of violent personal expression, against the decorative and symbolic element which had characterized the work of the Nabis and Gauguin and so much late nineteenth-century painting, and even against the Fauves (and the strong fin de siècle flavour of Fauvism has never been sufficiently acknowledged or stressed), the Cubists saw their paintings as constructed objects having their own independent existence, as small, self-contained worlds, not reflecting the outside world but recreating it in a completely new form.
Gleizes and Metzinger stressed that Cubist painting had no specifically decorative function, and that it did not attain its full meaning only when hung on the wall at eye level.
In Du Cubisme they wrote: ‘A decorative work exists only by virtue of its destination, comes to life only in relationship to determinate objects…
A painting justifies its own existence.
One can just as reasonably move it from a church to a gallery, from a museum to a bedroom…
It doesn't harmonize with a particular ensemble, it harmonizes with things in their entirety, with the universe; it is an organism.’
Later in 1925, Gleizes wrote again: ‘…what will come out of Cubism…will be the painting as an emotive event in itself with nothing descriptive about it, having the quality of an object and the same relationship to nature.’
The Cubist painters had claimed for themselves the right to move around their subject and incorporate aspects of it not visible from a single point of view, and they bestowed, in theory if not in actual practice, the same liberty on the spectator in relationship to their own work.
During the war the Cubist concept of the work of art as an autonomous, constructed object became more and more widespread and was to have a profound effect on the emergence of Purism, one of the pictorial styles to which Cubism helped give birth.
In an article entitled ‘Quand le Symbolisme fut mort’ which appeared in Nord-Sud in 1917, Paul Dermée attempted to sum up the new aesthetic trends.
He proclaimed a classic revival in the arts in which the work of art was to be judged as whole and not on the merits of its parts or in relation to its  creator: ‘…the work of art should be conceived as a pipe or a hat is conceived by the craftsman who produces it; all parts should have a strictly determined place according to their function and importance.
It is the object which matters and not any one of its elements.’
In the same periodical, Reverdy, who admitted that much contemporary literature at this time reflected an aesthetic first developed in Cubist painting, added: ‘the poet's aim is to create a work which lives independently from him, from his private life, which  exists in a special realm.’
Max Jacob, who had been a friend of the painters and in particular of Picasso, published in 1917 in Le Cornet à Dés one of the most lucid definitions of contemporary aesthetic.
After condemning the ‘Baudelairean’ atmosphere of the nineteenth century (‘it is the triumph of romantic disorder’), and its cult of individual genius, Jacob goes on to stress the objectivity of modern poetry (which is by contrast ‘a universal poetry’) and the fact that a work of art ‘is of value in itself and not because of any confrontation one can make with reality’.
Discussing the prose poem — a form of literature which, as used by Jacob, provides one of the closest literary parallels to Cubist painting in that it embodies simultaneously actions or events normally separated by time and space, which are fused into formal, difficult but rational and understandable creations — Jacob warns the poet and artist against ‘the too dazzling precious stones which attract the eye at the expense of the whole’, and adds ‘The poem is a constructed object and not the display window of a jeweller's shop.
Rimbaud is the jeweller's shop window, and not the jewel; the prose poem is a jewel.’
The stencilled letters and numerals in Braque's Portugais are the prelude to the introduction of collage into Cubist painting, and collage was in many ways the logical outcome of the Cubist aesthetic.
In the work of Picasso and Braque it ushered in a new phase of Cubist painting.