

Responding to trouble
Teaching the unteachable: teacher strategies in disruptive units
In this chapter Rod Ling describes two off-site units for ‘disruptive’ pupils, the Victoria and Delphi centres.
He concentrates on the attitudes and personalities of the headteachers.
In a centre of twenty or so pupils with three or four teaching staff, heads have tremendous influence even where, as at the Victoria Centre, they espouse democratic principles.
The atmosphere and approaches within the two places may appear quite different at first.
The Victoria Unit is concerned to reintegrate pupils whilst the head of the Delphi Centre rarely sees this as his aim.
However they have much in common.
Both start from an acceptance that it is the pupils within their care who have to be changed and the organization of both emphasizes the superior physical strength of male staff.
In the report of the macho-methods of staff one is left wondering about the position of women teachers and girl students within these units.
Look Graham no-one objects to you having problems — so long as you're prepared to talk about them
(Owen, Head of the Victoria Centre)
We get curious pride, you know, working with these kids…it's rather like the kind of pride and fascination you get when you persuade a wild animal to eat from your hand…a curious feeling
(Roger, Head of the Delphi Centre)
Introduction
In this redeveloped wedge of the inner city, monotonous tower blocks dominate the skyline and encircle a cluster of public and commercial buildings: the shops, pub, community centre and local primary schools.
The latter, built of brick and glass in the functional and unelaborate manner of the early 1970s, were originally planned to occupy adjacent premises but the numbers of infant children were such that another larger building was needed which now stands a few hundred, wind-swept, yards away.
The original, redundant infant school comprising two flat-roofed, one-storey blocks subsequently became the home of the city's first disruptive pupils' unit, the Delphi Centre.
Approaching these buildings one begins to notice the signs of wear and tear; the cracked window, peeling paintwork and doors in which the original toughened glass panels have been replaced by more serviceable ones of sturdy plywood.
Inside one of the two classrooms in the ‘teaching’ block, we may see twenty or so young people seated behind individual formica-topped tables.
About half these pupils are black and more than a third are girls.
They are of different ages and wear a variety of clothing.
There is no noise.
On the tables lie opened books, magazines, and, in one or two cases, comics.
One pupil, sitting in the coveted position alongside the radiator, is gazing through the window and  into the distance.
The majority however are reading.
At a desk by the window the head of the Delphi unit is seated, surveying the classroom.
At the same time, on the other side of the city centre, but still within the inner zone where industry and housing are entangled, other pupils are attending another special unit.
The buildings occupied by the Victoria Centre are more typical of special units and have a much longer history.
Built in the revivalist Gothic style, popular in the Victorian period as a Board school, they are located on a rise in the manner of the medieval churches the architecture celebrates.
Overlooking the railway line, the new dual carriageway that runs alongside it and the surrounding housing development these buildings look even more dishevelled and uncared for than the Delphi Centre.
The many tall ogival windows provide the classrooms with a great deal of light but they have proved more difficult to protect.
A number of them are patched with squares of the ubiquitous plywood which is also employed to board up the now empty, adjoining, caretaker's house.
Inside the building the atmosphere is more inviting.
Pupils are to be found in a number of rooms and there is more noise here.
Some children are chatting across the desks whilst working unsupervised in their project folders, a few others are constructing a ‘trolley’ and making table-tennis bats in the craft room and another group is involved in another classroom in a range of art activities.
In the office, some girls have engaged the secretary in conversation.
A boy with pool cue in hand is hoping that his presence in the games room will not be noted by the staff.
Scenes such as these may be witnessed in many of the special units for disruptive and disaffected pupils which have been established in the last ten years.
There are now more than four hundred off-site units (Ling and Davies 1984) and an unknown, but probably similar, number of on-site units i.e. located on the campus of an orthodox school.
Not all of these off-site units are administered and funded exclusively by LEAs although this is so in the majority of cases.
In addition referral procedures and working methods exhibit considerable variation.
Taken as a group, however, their expansion, in a period of considerable financial difficulty, indicates the ‘success’ of their operation and, by extension, the ‘failure’of popular schooling.
This success raises some important questions.
Given the long-standing behavioural problems that the pupils attending these sites have set the teaching staff in schools, how is it that they can be brought together in a seemingly improbable admixture with the results, orderly and controlled, as described above?
When each pupil's deviant career embraces many hours of chastising, cajoling and counselling, how do unit teachers succeed in teaching the unteachable?
What skills and strategies do they employ and what, if any, are the implications for schools?
It is the purpose of this paper to explore these questions through a detailed examination of the two units to which we have already been introduced.
Both units, catering for a similar age-group and facing similar pressures and demands are part of a sizeable unit provision established by education and social services departments in one large urban authority.
Special units do not have the extended hierarchies of schools, the majority having no more than three or four teaching staff and a secretary.
A high degree of social and ideological cohesion is made both necessary and possible if the staff are  to work closely together.
It is this feature that makes the identification of a ‘collective strategy’ largely shaped by two strong-minded headteachers possible.
Owen and Roger, the two heads of centre, have developed their respective strategies in response to the broadly similar sets of expectations and demands that confront them.
I shall argue however that in attempting to satisfy these demands, with all their inherent contradictions, each employs a distinctly different strategy.
This comparative analysis is assisted by the fact that although their individual biographies are different, both are motivated by a similar ambition — they wish to secure a position of deputy headteacher in one of the city's comprehensive schools.
Owen and the Victoria Centre
Owen is in his middle thirties and his working background is in education.
Over ten years ago he was teaching in a school, that was to become one of the LEA's first comprehensives.
Even then his interests lay with the disadvantaged groups.
He was active in the fields of multiracial education, pastoral care and curriculum innovation for the ‘ROSLA’ pupils.
After a period teaching abroad he returned to the UK and worked in one of the city's newly opened centres for suspended pupils.
Three years later he became the Head of the Victoria Centre.
For Owen the resolution of the conflicting pressures and the demands made of him and the unit staff takes place through an education philosophy that reconciles the interests of the child, the school and the LEA.
Such a resolution emphasizes an egalitarian and humanistic view of society and the place of schools within it.
Its main contention is that there is no irrevocable conflict of interest between the different parties.
Disruption in school is epiphenomenal and dysfunctional.
The interests of the child reside in obtaining the best possible education, something that only regular attendance at school can bestow.
Certificates are one outcome of schooling and will enable the pupil to compete effectively in the labour market.
If children approached schooling in this manner schools would have no wish to ‘lose’ their pupils, the throughflow of children with genuine adjustment problems in units would be assured and the ‘moral order’re-established.
A child-centred philosophy which for many free schools in an earlier period, was part of the justification for an alternative educational provision has been transformed.
Units, in some ways the descendants of the free schools (Francis 1979, MacBeath 1977), are not seen as alternatives to schools but as supplementary.
A child-centred approach has become pupil-centred; the interests of the child, particularly the working-class child, are seen as being compatible with and not antagonistic to, those of the school.
This approach does not reduce to a simple acceptance that the child or the family are deficient and in need of‘treatment.’
Schools cannot escape criticism.
Many are considered to be ineffective and contribute to the problems of disruptive and disaffected behaviour — but for unstructured and individualized reasons — an uncaring and insensitive teacher here, an inappropriate and irrelevant syllabus there.
Owen, significantly, makes repeated reference to the work of those who insist that ‘schools do make a difference’.
For Owen therefore there is no ‘philosophical’ objection to the goal of returning a pupil to school in the manner that the LEA is eager to encourage:
School is where these kids should be.
If they are not going to fit into school then they must be placed somewhere more suitable.
It makes no sense for them to stay here; that's been tried and it didn't do them any good in the long run.
It is only within the context of this ‘world view’ that particular features of the Victoria Centre and the attribution of meaning given to them can be understood.
PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES AT THE VICTORIA UNIT
The emphasis upon the consensual nature of school and pupil interests which is symbolized by Owen's adherence to the ‘return goal’ can create real difficulties for staff-pupil relations within the unit.
It means that pupils must both want to come to the unit and eventually, to leave it.
Engineering this balance of aspirations is inherently difficult.
The former is usually approached by the promotion of close personal relationships, but such relationships may be threatened by an insistence that the placement is temporary.
In order to ensure that pupils who have come to enjoy the advantages of the unit do not deliberately fail on a return to school, Owen refuses to readmit them once reintroduction has taken place.
Such pupils may then be left outside the school system for a considerable period of time, perhaps indefinitely.
This may be distressing not only to the child and his or her parents but also to the unit staff who have got to know the pupil well.
In order to reduce the possibility of failure of this kind, with all its implications for staff and staff-pupil relations, Owen seeks to systematize and formalize the process of referral.
He stresses the importance of establishing rules and procedures that will govern unit-school relations.
Data is collected with a view to determining which ‘kind’ of pupil ‘succeeds’and which does not.
This data is incorporated in publicizing of the unit and its work; in articles, meetings with other professional groups and in a display on the wall of the head's office-cum staffroom where it is often referred to in the course of interviews with parents and pupils.
Owen: Well Kevin, we are trying, and we'll be working with your parents on this, to get you back to school and up onto that list up there…see…that's a list of those who've returned to school.
It won't happen until you've done a term here but it will be within the year.
Referring schools are expected to assist in the collation of information by providing a case history, attending meetings and co-operating in assessments (using the Bristol Social Adjustment Guide and the Rutter Scale).
This information is supplemented by reports requested from the Education Welfare Service and Schools Psychological Service.
Pupil files contain these records together with the brief notes recorded daily by the staff, copies of termly reports, and completed conduct forms which accompany the pupils when they commence a programme of phased re-entry to school.
The collation of this information and its subsequent analysis is seen to be central to the procedures within the unit.
In referral meetings attended by all the staff, an educational psychologist, and an education social worker, decisions on particular cases are taken according to a broad consensus which operated around two major and related considerations.
The first of these concern a judgement  as to the likelihood of the pupil returning to school which in turn is seen to be crucially influenced both by the nature of the pupil's case history and the record of the school in re-admitting pupils.
The second entails a projection as to how the pupil will behave in the unit but this is often obliquely expressed and reworked in terms of the first.
The ‘ideal’ pupil is one who is thought to require a period of adjustment coming from a school which has expressed a willingness to take the pupil back.
It is of interest to note that in seeking to systematize referral procedures Owen has begun to undermine the principle of flexibility which was one of the advantages such provision was thought to have over special schools.
One senior teacher in a referring school has bluntly informed Owen that if he continues to insist upon the adherence to detailed procedures and referral criteria ‘they will be forced to lie.’
Though he is aware that there is another, more commonly accepted, way of working Owen is reluctant to compromise
Some people do this I know; they say ‘if you take this one then we'll help you out over another’— deals in other words.
I couldn't do that.
Another feature which brings us closer to the issue of the control of pupils within the unit is the ‘unit contract’.
This arrangement comprises a documented exchange of obligations between the unit staff and the pupil.
It is signed by all the parties present at the pupil's initial interview.
Whilst the pupil agrees to be polite, attend punctually, behave considerately and ask for permission before leaving the premises the staff agree to provide specific curricular inputs requested by the pupil and to secure a place for him or her back in an orthodox school.
Establishing this agreement with its quasi-legal status does not, of course, spare the staff the continual difficulties of maintaining control.
Its significance is symbolic; it represents a tangible token of the consensual nature governing the pupil's attendance and in so doing attempts to counter the punitive and coercive meaning which accompanies referral.
These elements are also present in other features and an important one concerns the operation of what Owen terms ‘participatory democracy’.
Group meetings are a regular daily event.
Staff and pupils are usually seated in a circle in the games room.
The meetings are often prolonged, ungoverned by the timetable and the bell, ending when the staff feel it to be appropriate.
An obvious and important feature of these meetings is the way in which Owen makes the personal and the private, public, and a subject for general discussion.
Individual pupils are praised for their achievements and transgressors have their sins exposed.
This is not to say that staff do not seek to ensure that an apparently open exchange concludes with the ‘correct’ decision.
On one occasion the group were being asked about their thoughts on the question of how pupils who disrupt lessons by walking out should be disciplined.
Owen:When George, or you Robert…or you Carol walks out and slams the door that means the teacher has to give up time they could be giving to the others in the class, the ones who need the help.
Now how do you think they should pay back the time wasted?
Several:Detention, give 'em detention.
Chris (member of staff): No, not detention.
Owen:Not detention.
[After some conversation and the usual smattering of frivolous suggestions, one pupil interjects]
Steven:Stay in at break.
Owen:That's what we were thinking, not detention…but why should the people who misbehave have the nice things here like pool and table tennis?
[After further comment Owen sums up]
Owen:It's agreed then people who misbehave and cause the teacher to waste time must pay it back at break.
This notion of ‘paying back time’ is yet another example of the way in which the pupil-teacher relationship is couched in moral terms, on this occasion in the language of ‘consumer ethics’.
This leads the staff into some contortions since logic would suggest that those who ‘consume’ more than their fair share of ‘teacher time’should lose some in the future rather than take up still more as the monitoring of the punishment will entail.
The purpose of group meetings is not just the demonstration of those aspects of ‘negotiation’ and ‘making the private public’that have already been referred to.
They also function as a focus for the generation of collective values and a group identity which is considered desirable given the fragmented and impermanent nature of pupil attendance.
This desire is also reflected in the encouragement given to pupils to undertake group projects, perhaps in making a display, organizing fund-raising events or planning for an excursion or residential experience.
Lunch periods are also intended to be a group activity.
All pupils and staff are encouraged to eat together around a U-shaped arrangement of tables.
An additional feature of the unit's organization is the administration of a Behaviour Modification or ‘points’ system.
This can be viewed as a fairly powerful mechanism for exerting control over a number, if not all pupils, in a situation where few sanctions exist.
In fact, because the pupils have exhausted the range of sanctions available to a school, new and additional ones can only be created by the granting of rewards and privileges.
The removal of these then constitutes a sanction.
In this sense the privileges and goods that pupils can ‘purchase’ with the points they earn provide for an effective degree of control.
Rhetorically the points system is also designed to reinforce specific identified behaviours that will be ‘learnt’ and carried over into other (school) situations.
A further feature, implicit in much that has already been said, is the emphasis given by the staff to ‘openness’ and ‘accessibility.’
Owen operates what he terms an ‘open door’ policy that permits pupils access to the staff at all times.
Moreover he welcomes the involvement of other agencies in the work of the unit.
These and others; schoolteachers, students, the.police, media, and even researchers, are welcome, if only, ‘to show kids that there are other adults besides teachers around the place prepared to talk with and listen to them’.
THE USE BY STAFF OF PHYSICAL CONTACT
Chris and Owen often indulge in brief physical exchanges apparently designed to communicate acceptance and friendliness and thereby reinforce the consensual nature of social control.
These exchanges may take the form of ‘mock fighting’ in  which a clear set of rules may be said to operate.
Firstly the teacher must ‘win’ or at the very least not ‘lose’in a manner that would result in a loss of face.
No real violence may be done, intentionally, to either party and as accidental injury may cause the definition of the situation to change quite radically, it must be avoided.
These encounters are for this reason accompanied by a great deal of laughing, smiling and verbal exchanges.
This continuous flow of information may be seen as maintaining the equilibrium in a situation which entails considerable risks, particularly for the teacher.
The secretary at the Victoria Centre in conversation with staff referred to this behaviour as ‘joshing’ and when questioned confirmed both its frequency and importance, ‘Oh yes, they like it — especially the black kids’.
Female staff are less likely (though not unknown) to adopt such approaches largely it is assumed, because they have less confidence in their ability to control a potentially hazardous interaction.
In this context it is of interest to note that male staff in the city's special units often have sporting interests and a significant number are former PE teachers.
Not only then do they come from a professional sub-culture which permits and often encourages a range of physical contact (quite apart from the obvious sporting activity, PE departments in schools often administer their own disciplinary code) but they also have the physical self-confidence to undertake the risks that are present in these encounters.
Physical contact of a different yet similar nature is also entailed in the sporting activity at the Victoria Centre known as ‘murderball’.
The onset of this ‘game’ is often triggered by instances of behaviour during the lengthy lunch break which is likely to be seen as ‘boisterous’and ‘high spirits’.
The object of this activity is for one side to carry a ‘ball’ from one end of the assembly hall to the other.
The opposition's task is simple — to prevent this and attempt to ‘score’ their own ‘goals’.
Both sides are permitted considerable licence to achieve their aims and in the ensuing melee, where there is little prospect of administering rules, many old scores are settled.
The effect of this activity is cathartic.
In an environment where considerable emphasis is placed upon the regulation of behaviour by reference to a moral code the playing of murderball is an anarchic act.
Underlying it however is the demonstration by the staff of their superior physical strength.
Pupils and staff meet in direct physical confrontation.
Pupils may well score goals but the staff assert their strength and in addition their willingness, given the shared knowledge of the event's unusual nature, to indulge in unteacherlike behaviour.
In summary, the use of physical contact in the Victoria Centre, the organization of the daily cycle of activities, the regulation of the pupil's unit career and the attribution of meaning to these events demonstrate continuities which are also evident in the educational philosophy which Owen articulates.
The underlying connection reflects an adherence to a moral solution to the configuration of demands which he and the staff must confront.
In asserting the common interests of schools, pupils, LEA and parents, Owen does not of course escape the consequences of the inherent tensions and contradictions.
In many respects the adoption of this approach increases the problems of containment and control and thereby demands a greater degree of commitment.
The ‘high profile’ that this gives Owen provides the satisfaction that he requires and in addition holds out the prospect of career advancement.
Roger and the Delphi Centre
Within the Delphi Centre, although it is possible to identify the employment by Roger of a distinctive strategy for resolving the demands that are made of him, it is radically different from that of Owen and the Victoria Centre.
This alternative strategy is in many respects less coherent than Owen's and it is this which helps to explain the fact that Roger's approach is often misunderstood by those outside the unit.
He is seen by colleagues in special units including Owen, as reluctant to pursue the ‘return to school goal’.
He is considered, partly as a result of this, to be particularly child-centred, willing to keep pupils for longer because he is unwilling to make the potentially painful decision to insist that a child should leave an environment to which he or she has grown accustomed.
‘They love him’ says Owen ruefully, ‘but it's very short sighted.’
On this issue Owen and Roger have come into open conflict but, although the observation that Roger lacks commitment to the aim of returning pupils to school is a correct one, the implications drawn from it are not.
Roger's background, unlike Owen's has been in social services establishments.
Prior to his appointment as head of the Delphi Centre he taught for a number of years in an Observation and Assessment Centre.
Roger sees himself and the unit not as child but as school-centred:
Only after we have helped the schools are we child-centred.
If we can do things for the kids then that's fine, a bonus, but otherwise we are trying to help the system, to respond to what it wants of us.
It is Roger's belief that the cause of a substantial amount of disruptive behaviour is due to the size and impersonal nature of many schools.
The solution to this situation revolves around a celebration of ‘variety’ which contains an element that is hostile to the principle of comprehensive education and considers it ill-conceived.
There should be a variety of schools.
Too often they are forced into being the same.
There should be schools of different sizes with different disciplinary procedures; not all children respond to the same approach…and even different kinds of curriculum.
This would cater for the variety of children that exist.
The argument is extended to the work of the units themselves each of which is felt ‘to have its own strengths’ and which, at a time when some pressure was being exerted by the LEA, should be permitted to retain its distinctive and separate character.
Roger has little interest in the development of a local association for those working in education and social services units.
He and his staff rarely attend their meetings which he tends to view as an extension of the interests and personalities of those to which he is, to some degree at least, in opposition.
This would include not only Owen but the education officer responsible for the administration of the units.
Roger does not share the commitment to a ‘return to school’ or the educational philosophy on which it is founded.
PROCEDURES AND PROCESSES AT THE DELPHI CENTRE
The processes entailed in referral and admission are less accessible at the Delphi Centre because they tend to be concentrated in the hands of Roger himself; decisions are often made instantaneously, without consultation and frequently in the course of a telephone conversation.
More emphasis must therefore be placed upon Roger's explanation of events.
A feature closely related to the celebration of variety referred to above is Roger's scepticism towards any attempt to systematize the operation of the unit The identification and espousal of appropriate regulations and procedures is considered to be an illusory goal.
It is more important in his view to give unit staff the freedom to respond to the particular circumstances that exist with each pupil.
Allied to this is the tendency to work closely with those schools which share this unstructured and flexible approach to referrals.
We work with kids from schools which treat us properly.
I've taken someone this afternoon from Highdown just until the half term when they should go to a special school.
Some schools abuse us and once a kid's in, they leave them here — but if I think a school understands us then I'll fit in with them.
For the Delphi as with the Victoria Centre it is important that schools recognize their needs but for Roger this is based upon a mutuality of interest which is unimpeded by the operation of specific criteria.
When pupils return to school from the Delphi unit it is because the pupils themselves wish to (in Roger's words ‘the problem solves itself’) or because the staff are anxious to ‘relieve the pressure’ in the unit rather than as part of a scheduled policy of reintegration.
The pragmatic nature of this relationship with referred heads is exemplified by the absence of almost any interest in the collation of information about the pupils attending the centre.
None is required of schools and only the barest details are maintained on the files:
We don't believe in keeping information.
I tell the kids that they start afresh here.
I don't wish to know what has gone wrong in school.
In the almost total absence of information there can be no interest in systematizing procedures in the manner of the Victoria Centre.
Similarly other features such as the Behaviour Modification System are considered to be of little value.
Roger has also dismissed the use of ‘contracts’: ‘as if you can hope to put relationships down on paper’.
In interviewing pupils and parents Roger is not constrained by the need to ensure that ‘acceptance’ of a place is conditional upon a future wish to leave.
The formal and contractual element between the staff and the pupil is not present; conditions are laid down, but verbally and not on paper.
In an interview attended by a newly referred pupil, his parents and the head and year tutor of the referring school Roger was blunt and uncompromising:
We aren't a unit that believes in giving kids a lot of freedom.
They have to follow school routines, can't swear, smoke, or call the staff by their first names and we will use physical means of punishment if we have to, if they're naughty.
If they are verbally aggressive to staff they will be dumped unceremoniously in this room.
If you don't want me to touch your child then I would not take him.
I should say as well that we are mostly concerned with behaviour here, not academic progress.
You must realize that we cannot provide all the subjects when they are all at different stages.
There is no attempt to persuade the pupil that his perception of the experience of schooling is in need of readjustment, only his behaviour.
At the Delphi Centre pupils are told that whatever happens they will never be suspended (except in the case of persistent truancy).
The impression given to those outside the unit is that the staff are prepared to tolerate misdemeanours that others would not.
The reality is different.
In effect the staff, in making this statement, are erecting a ‘fence’ around the unit which excludes those agencies that might otherwise expect to be involved.
There was very little evidence at the Delphi Centre of the involvement of the Education Welfare Service or Schools Psychological Service.
The events within the unit are privatized, pupils and staff must be left to establish their own solutions to problems.
I want my staff to sort out their own difficulties with the kids.
Jean Gray (the former head) ran this place like a headmistress.
If the teachers had a problem they sent them to her.
I won't do that.
I won't have staff justifying themselves to me.
This approach means that the task of establishing and maintaining control takes on a different form at the Delphi Centre; the deliberate employment of ‘control periods’.
Two examples can be given of this.
Lunchtimes at the Victoria Centre are intended to be a communal affair but at the Delphi Centre they are strikingly different.
In Roger's words, lunch provides an opportunity in the middle of the day to exercise control over all the pupils in one group.
The partaking of the meal is compulsory.
Pupils are seated in groups of up to four around a number of evenly spaced tables.
Silence is established before the meal is served, the staff patrolling the perimeter of the room, affecting indifference as to how long the pupils continue to talk.
Compliance to the often unspoken demand for silence is eventually forthcoming, though the dignity of the pupils necessitates that this is not given immediately.
When Roger feels that the group is sufficiently quiet he will ask for someone to say ‘Grace’.
This brief ritual has little or no religious significance.
It is a symbolic episode echoing the experience of the primary school (an experience which is generally thought to have been more successful and with which all units make connections; most notably in the organization of an ‘academic’ morning and an ‘activities’afternoon).
The pupil who says ‘Grace’ earns for his or her table the privilege of being first in the queue.
I asked one pupil if he ever said Grace.
He replied, ‘sometimes, yeah, if it's fish for dinner’.
The staff have no illusions as to the secular nature of the ‘trade’ being made here.
When the meal is over Roger once again insists upon a ‘satisfactory’ degree of silence before pupils are dismissed.
Compliance on this occasion is advanced by the pupils' desire to enjoy the recreational facilities, most importantly the ‘pool’ and table tennis.
A further example of the use of ‘control periods’ is the ‘reading lesson’.
With all pupils gathered together in one room always with Roger supervising, at the end of the day, control is enforced in a highly visible and audible manner.
At the same time Roger demonstrates his unique position in relation to the other staff, a distinction that Owen with his emphasis upon ‘staff democracy’ attempts, with only limited success, to blur:
I really don't mind if they're not reading.
Graham spent a lot of time staring out of the window — did you see him?— but it was very quiet.
It's good to end the day like  this — they often don't get the opportunity to experience this at home.
It might be thought of as repressive but they actually enjoy it.
I asked Roger how he managed to establish this kind of control, to reproduce with twenty or more disruptive pupils the semblance of a ‘model’ lesson.
It was difficult at first.
In my first six weeks here I had lots of battles — taking on the bigger ones.
But when that was won it was much better.
I now occasionally have to look fierce but generally it's fine.
The other kids will warn the one who is going too far.
At the Delphi Centre there is no equivalent of the group meeting.
Problems are individualized or even suppressed rather than openly explored with all the possible difficulties that this entails.
Race is a real problem amongst the girls at the moment — not with the boys, they are active and have to mix, but with the girls.
We try to keep it under the surface but it's definitely become much more of a problem.
Pupils are encouraged to establish their own personal accommodation with each other, the staff and particularly with Roger who will play the major role in the decision-making process.
Rules and procedures would interfere with this approach but even in their absence an appeal may be made by pupils to a wider understanding of a moral order.
In one conversation Roger was accused of favouritism in the placing of some girls back in school.
This pupil went on to criticize him for his lack of ‘fairness’.
‘Fairness’ said Roger, ‘doesn't come into it, it's a question of what is best for you’.
That ‘fairness doesn't come into it’ is of considerable significance for Roger.
His view is that pupils at Delphi are ‘naughty but normal’.
Sometimes pupils react to insensitive or even boorish and bullying behaviour on the part of some teachers, but this has to be accepted by the child.
His definition of a Delphi Centre pupil is:
One that can't cope with the fact that some teachers are pretty hopeless.
Others see this and they do cope, but keep their heads down.
THE USE BY STAFF OF PHYSICAL CONTACT
Reference has already been made to the preparedness of the staff at the Delphi Centre to use overt forms of control both in terms of language and physical contact.
Many such incidents are of a consensual nature as is illustrated in the following example.
In one of the morning's brief, structured lessons the pupils were told to draw a still life composed of cups, a tea pot and a coffee pot.
During the lesson the male member of staff was continually engaged in a physical interaction with a number of pupils.
The teacher used a stick to repeatedly tap or prod pupils whenever he felt that they had spoken too loudly or obscenely.
The pupils were evidently prepared, despite their protests, to accept this physical means of censure in return for the continued excitement of being noisy and abusive.
The pupils probed the boundaries of accepted behaviour, trading the acceptance of a physical rebuke for the freedom to enjoy verbal skirmishing of a kind that would be generally unacceptable in school.
When one boy attempted to impart some sense of movement to the still life by pouring himself an imaginary cup of tea the teacher lightly but firmly kicked him back to his seat, smiling and talking in a manner that confirmed for the pupil the ‘naturalness’ of this action.
Physical contact of a different nature was employed by another member of staff when during a break period he enquired disarmingly of a pupil whether he'd ever seen an ‘Irish whip’.
When the pupil replied in the negative his wrist was seized and swung violently up behind his back.
‘You have now’ said the teacher.
Roger was observed to favour during one period an indirect form of physical contact but one that remains based upon the demonstration of a superior strength, ability and resolve.
At the end of an outdoor games session Roger encouraged the pupils to risk themselves by attempting to catch a cricket ball he would throw into the air.
No one could be persuaded to attempt this feat until Roger offered the pupil a monetary inducement.
Three or four pupils danced at a distance of thirty or forty yards and occasionally sprang forward to catch the ball.
None were successful.
The fifty pence went unclaimed and all had been witness to the head's control of events.
It appears that underlying these and other instances of physical contact is the staff's preparedness to inflict physical discomfort and to demonstrate quite openly the nature of their authority.
This does not mean that they are in continual and open conflict with their pupils.
Some pupils did, on occasion, object to the behaviour of the staff but many derived considerable excitement from these exchanges.
Conclusion
In summary, Owen and Roger present fundamentally different approaches to the similar situation in which they find themselves.
The difference between them stems from the choices made in the context of organizing a provision for those who have challenged the authority of their schoolteachers.
The creation of special units as an administrative response to disaffection heightens the tension between the principles that operate when deviant behaviour is perceived and subsequently acted upon.
Owen's aim is to repair the moral order breached by the challenge to the teacher's authority and the assumptions of intrinsic worth upon which it is founded.
This repair entails the reconstruction of the child's experience of schooling.
Control at this level is likely to be difficult to establish but when it is achieved it will be deep and self-sustaining.
Roger on the other hand does not attempt any such reconstruction.
Those who contest authority may be genuinely unable to ‘cope’ in school and may therefore need alternative provision.
The majority, however, are simply in need of a demonstration that ‘authority’ cannot be challenged with impunity.
The acknowledged and exclusive aim of the unit is to control and contain.
In many respects this releases the staff and pupils from the moral imperative and may well come closer to an authentic understanding of the pupil's experience.
It provides for a sense of continuity and is not invasive of the pupils private and meaningful ‘worldview’.
It permits the pupil to derive unfettered satisfaction from the excitement of ‘skirmishing’ and the release from school-like demands.
The paradox is, of course, that this may well enable the staff to establish relationships with some pupils which would not be possible in school or in the Victoria unit.
Although control is, in these circumstances, more easily established it is unlikely that it will be generalized to other sites.
The reintroduction of pupils to school is therefore given less emphasis in the Delphi Centre.
It is not my intention to argue that the strategies identified here are necessarily exhaustive of those that pertain in other units.
They are shaped by the nature of the particular circumstances in these two units and the biographies of the staff and particularly their heads.
Nevertheless it is hoped that this analysis will provide a framework within which the detailed practice of other unit staff can be examined.
The other aim is to suggest that in order to understand ‘how teachers teach the unteachable’ one must recognize the manner in which they are engaged in managing a delicate balance of perceptions — that they be like and unlike schools.
November 27th: a day in a ‘maladjusted’ school
The headteacher of a day school for maladjusted pupils asked the staff of his school to keep a diary on one day, 27 November 1985, to try to record an impression of the activities, concerns and pressures which make up daily routine.
Of course, no day is typical and there are particular tensions which emerge in the few weeks before the Christmas break.
Yet the extracts from the diaries of staff contained in this account demonstrate the stress and emotional intensity encountered in working in a small school of this kind.
The amount of time and energy staff need to spend in communicating (and sometimes miscommunicating) with each other comes over very strongly, and one can see how easily misunderstanding, resentment or perhaps even hostility can develop when individuals work in close proximity under pressure, even where channels of communication may seem open and well defined.
In this school there is a staff code of practice agreed by all, and working procedures are continuously reviewed at regular staff meetings.
After a brief description of the nature of the school and the order the staff attempt to impose, Stewart Butterfield lets the diaries speak for themselves of the way this order appeared on one day.
The school in question offers day provision for children with emotional and behavioural difficulties, and is the only one of its kind in its Inner City Borough.
Internally the school is organized into separate departments, primary and secondary, which between them cover the entire school age range.
The five classes are of mixed ability and each has up to eight children of similar age and/or developmental level.
Three classes make up the primary department, while there are two in the secondary department.
There is a head of department for each side of the school, who has particular responsibilities for the curriculum, and each teaching group has a teacher and a welfare assistant.
These assistants undertake a wide range of duties under the supervision of the class teacher, from working with individual children to preparing classroom materials, and are invaluable in enabling the school to more closely meet the needs of individual children in a variety of ways.
The school aims whenever possible to reintegrate children back into mainstream schools, and is reasonably successful at doing so, especially in the case of primary aged children.
At any given time then, a number of pupils may be involved in supported full-time or part-time placements at other schools in the borough.
The deputy head has a particular responsibility for supporting children in mainstream schools with the aim of obviating the need for special school placement.
A high but realistic standard of work and behaviour is expected from all pupils, and generally the response is positive.
Parental support and co-operation are regarded as of paramount importance and to facilitate this the school is open until 9 p.m. on one evening each week during term, when parents meet heads of departments and/or class teachers according to a system of appointments.
We try to see parents at least once every half-term to discuss children's progress.
Transport is provided for those parents who require it, either by the caretaker using the school's mini-bus or by the part-time school social worker.
The great majority of the children were recommended to the school because they presented severe management difficulties to teachers in mainstream schools and many of them experience a multiplicity of adversities in their personal lives A majority of children have intractable learning difficulties, and few of them have responded to conventional interventions by members of child guidance clinic teams or remedial services before admission.
The school attempts to provide a positively structured learning environment where sound appropriate educational opportunities are available, together with suitable attention to individual difficulties.
It is considered that in the past the children's learning in crucial areas of their lives may have been either insufficient or inappropriate.
Reinforcement of appropriate behaviour is seen as a key issue pervading the work of the school, as is enabling the children to experience regular feedback concerning their performance in any given area.
Children are encouraged to assume as much responsibility as possible regarding their own learning, and to be involved in setting their own personal goals when appropriate.
We focus on the need for change in a way which does not regard the child as being ‘damaged’ or having something ‘wrong’with him or her.
In order to maximize consistency of management at the school, and to ensure regular positive, feedback to pupils, the deputy head set up a reward system some five years ago, when the primary department was first established as a separate department.
This has enabled staff to match their management techniques to an agreed standard and children have thereby experienced a more consistent approach.
The system has been continuously discussed and amended in the light of experience and has also thereby provided a most valuable focus for staff support and development.
The diaries
For reasons of space the diaries are limited to those of the school secretary, school social worker, head of primary department, supply class teacher (juniors) and welfare assistant (infants).
SCHOOL SECRETARY: 25 HOURS PER WEEK
Arrived for work at 9.30.
First job is to check that Tony, a boy who is brought to school by mini-cab is in.
Then search for the Junior bus list.
Infant teacher has it and asks me to make sure that the Head of Primary knows that one of the children had a fit on the bus this morning.
Also sort out the dinner money!
9.40:Phone call from Education Office re.
Petty Cash Account.
I still have nightmares about this!
They want to know why we have to send in so often for reimbursment.
I explain to them that the local garage which supplied us with petrol has closed and we therefore no longer have an account.
We now have to buy it from our petty cash.
Obviously we use up the money more quickly.
I don't think they really understand, so I suggest sending them a copy of the bank statement.
10.00:I complete the dinner and attendance registers.
Then I sort the internal mail for the office.
Phone call from our School Nurse to let us know that the School Doctor, who had to cancel medicals because of illness, is out of hospital but will not be back to work for some time.
We must get him a card.
Head comes in, has already thought of this, and agrees to organize a collection from staff for fruit or whatever.
Type some letters for parental appointments.
Phone call from a parent saying she cannot make next week's appointment.
Could we postpone it until the following week?
Juggle the appointments around and manage to fit her in.
(Her husband works shifts and they have a small baby.)
Next I photocopy the bank statements for the Office.
Start typing a letter for Head of Primary who is trying to sell some raffle tickets to raise funds for a new mini-bus.
Another parent phones.
She is going off to work, but in the meantime we have had to send her son home with the Head of Primary Department (see his diary ).
He arrives just before she leaves.
Head of Secondary explains why he was sent home.
11.00:Break for five minutes for a cup of coffee.
11.05:Back to typing letter.
Phone call from Education Office, re.
dinner money summary sheets.
We get them to balance over the phone.
Discuss the possibility of getting a 51 school meals debt taken off our books.
Am advised to let the School Meals Organizer deal with it.
I don't think we will get this money from this particular Mum.
We have tried repeatedly.
11.30:I phone the School Meals Organizer.
She tells me that the Mum has applied for free meals but should really pay back the money owed.
Agrees to write it off for me.
At least I don't have to keep carrying it forward any more.
11.40:Continue typing letter.
I'll finish it eventually.
Phone again!
(This time for the Deputy Head.)
Phone — Office again to let me know that free school meals have been confirmed for pupil B. Back to typing.
12.10:Discussion with Head about a suspected case of head lice in the juniors.
How shall we word a letter so as not to offend the parents?
Head starts scratching himself.
Type the letter (see appendix letter 1) and look up information on Head Lice (no pun intended!)
Send a precautionary letter to all the parents in the class concerned.
Also the Head discusses the problem with the School Nurse who agrees to do a home visit to the child in question.
12.45 to 1.15:Lunch Break.
1.15:Work on my favourite book-the Petty Cash Account.
Enter receipts, work out VAT, deduct from our own books and dole out the money.
Phone call for Head of Secondary.
Phone calls for Head who has gone to visit a school where one of our pupils now attends full time.
Take messages.
2.00:Video comes back from the repair shop.
I have to search for a two-way adaptor and a tape to try it out.
Engineer tests it out.
Working OK now.
2.10:Careers Officer pops in to say goodbye.
She has been talking to the Seniors about working on Saturdays.
2.15:Type the Agenda for tonight's Primary Department staff meeting.
Looks like quite a long meeting.
2.30:Class Teacher comes to have a word about the ‘Head Lice’ letter.
Could I retype it?
(See appendix letter 2.)
2.35:Public works section arrive to repair a fence which has been causing a lot of problems.
Have to find the caretaker for them.
At the same time our School  Social Worker arrives back in school.
Had a brief discussion about B's dinner money owing.
2.55:Internal Audit Officer phoned.
Could I make an appointment to see her at the Education Office to sort out the dinner money debts once and for all— hopefully.
She also needs a list of equipment that we transferred to another school.
She suggests next Monday afternoon might be a good time.
3.00:Typed a third letter for child to take home re the Head Lice problem.
Hope this one will do.
(See Appendix, letter 3.)
3.05:Typed letter to parent about child's fit on the bus this morning, he has had two more fits during the day.
Tidy up, lock the safe, time to go.
SCHOOL SOCIAL WORKER: SPLIT POST — 20 HOURS SCHOOL, 15 HOURS AREA TEAM
Arrived Area Office 9.05 a.m. having spent fifteen minutes trying to park car.
9.10:Collected eight urgent messages from reception left from yesterday.
Make coffee.
9.15:Confronted by Admin Worker with case file problems re Senior Social Worker last week.
9.20:Telephone call to Work Supervisor of ex pupil of School.
Very angry with me as he had not got his cheque for 82 for ex pupil's tools.
Stated I had done report to justify it and had the expenditure approved — not my fault.
Would ring back.
9.26:Telephone call to Finance Section.
Cheques have been delayed.
9.30:Telephone call back to Work Supervisor explaining cheque delay.
Also asked him for report which I needed for Statutory Review.
(One message dealt with.)
9.40:Ten minutes late for meeting of Area Team.
Difficult meeting as some Social Workers are refusing to work with colleagues and have taken steps to frustrate the function of the Area Team.
I supported my Senior and therefore have been ‘sent to Coventry’ by my peer group.
11.20:Meeting finished.
11.30:Talk with Student Social Worker about three cases of children at School.
11.55:Make telephone call (answering second message) to Rowntree Family Fund re pupil C.
12.10:Telephone call to boy's mother to reassure her.
12.15:Telephone call to check if pupil B is in school (engaged).
12.20:Another Social Worker asks me to arrange half-day visit to the School.
12.30:Student Social Worker worried.
Late for appointment at School with Deputy Head.
School numbers still engaged.
12.40:Psychiatrist on phone to confirm meeting with him for December 3rd.
(Told by receptionist three more messages in.)
12.45:Telephone call to Rowntree Family Fund re pupil A for holiday September 1986.
Discussed.
Call back to mother to discuss.
(Three messages dealt with now — five to go still from yesterday.)
12.50:Urgent telephone call from IT (Intermediate Treatment).
Told I have broken Borough policy by recommending custodial maximum on lad.
Telephone call took twenty minutes and had to explain how I had arrived at such a decision.
Resolved by arranging case conference.
Left message with reception that I had only dealt with three calls — no more time to deal with any others.
Will deal with rest of calls tomorrow.
1.30:Allocation meeting.
Long time in discussion about moving desks needless waste of time.
Feel very frustrated.
Called out of meeting — dispute between Admin Officer and Social Worker re my cases at School.
Admin Clerk burst into tears, could not cope with situation.
Back to desk to prepare letter and telephone call to arrange Statutory Review on ex pupil 7.30 next Thursday.
2.20: Reminded Senior to check with Area 4 re.
NAI (Non Accidental Injury) personnel to be at case conference at School next month.
Leave office for School.
(Two clients waiting to see me.)
Late for appointment with Student for 2.30 at school.
2.44:Arrive at School.
Secretary mentions pupil's dinner money.
Discuss.
2.50:Try to find Head of Primary Department to confirm collection of parents for appointment at School at 4.15.
3.00:Told by School Secretary not to pick up parents.
3.05 to 4.15:Supervise Student Social Worker.
4.15 to 4.45:Discuss four pupils with Head.
Lots of worrying developments in home circumstances of two of them.
Can't get much co-operation from parents of another.
It's not been the most satisfying of days.
HEAD OF PRIMARY DEPARTMENT
8.40:Arrived at school with Welfare Assistant to whom I give lift each morning.
Greet other staff and have a coffee in Staff Room.
8.55:Begin preparing materials for pupil at a local Junior School who is having difficulties with reading.
This help is being offered during my visits to see one of our children who is attending the same school for one day a week.
9.05:Gave Welfare Assistant permission to take her car to garage for minor repairs before children arrive.
9.10:One of the three coaches arrive at School earlier than usual.
Go out to supervise children into playground and check with Coach Guide about any absences or misbehaviour on journey home yesterday or to school today.
Saw children into playground and checked for staff on duty.
Returned bus list to Office.
9.15:Checked with supply teacher if she needed my help while Welfare Assistant was out.
Supply said she would not start cookery lesson until she returned.
9.30:Children brought into classes.
9.35:Check money and ticket stubs returned from parents for the Christmas Draw to take place at the school social evening next month.
We still need 3,000 more to replace our ageing mini-bus.
9.50:Rang Supplies Office to cancel enquiry about monitor shelf for new computer trolley.
Have at last worked out how it fits on to the trolley.
9.55:Looked for Social Worker's copy of Directory of Charities.
Found local Handbook of Voluntary Organizations and Community Groups to which I will send begging letters.
10.00:Was informed that a child on the small coach had an epileptic fit on the  way to school this morning and that Coach Guide was very upset.
Should I have been told before this?
10.15:Completed materials needed for pupil at the mainstream school.
B (secondary pupil) on bench outside Office refusing to work in class and otherwise being totally uncommunicative.
Has been given notice by Head that he will be returned home if he continues to refuse to co-operate.
10.25:Check with class teacher who is covering my playground duty this morning in my absence.
10.30:Prepared to leave for the junior school.
Secondary pupil still not communicating and has to be taken home.
Begin to look for route to his home in A-Z.
Interrupted by other senior pupil asking for materials.
10.35:Leave school in mini-bus with B as passenger.
10.40:Tried to engage B in conversation but this proved useless.
Decided to play him at his own game.
Drove for fifteen minutes in silence.
Now in right locality and have just realized I did not finish looking up where he lived in A-Z.
Will look silly if I have to spend time driving around in circles to find it.
See diversion sign and ask B if he knows the best way around it.
He directs me.
Breathe sigh of relief.
10.55:Arrived at B's home.
Spoke to mother who as we arrived was holding a conversation with Head of Senior Department over the telephone.
11.00:Left for the junior school.
11.10:Arrived at junior school just as driver of one of the coaches which brings our children was delivering dinners.
Spoke to him about child who had epileptic fit in coach on journey to School this morning and he supplied further details.
11.15:Dashed into the junior school.
Met Headteacher and asked if he would be willing to extend the time our pupil spent with them from one day to three after Christmas.
No problem; Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays agreed.
Head will write to mother arranging a meeting during last week of term to inform her of details, also Social Worker.
Passed on friendly reminder about forthcoming Christmas social at our school and sale of Christmas draw tickets.
11.20:Left for Annexe where our part-time pupil and his class teacher are located.
11.25:Arrived Annexe — children were in school hall for ‘International’ activity.
Spoke to class teacher in corridor about work I proposed to do with one of his children.
Spoke to Acting Head of school where Annexe located.
Managed to let him know about our Social and sold him a book of Christmas Draw tickets.
Continued discussion with J's teacher about how he could extend the work I would be doing with his pupil during week before my next visit.
11.35:Spent time with J. Talked about how his day was going, what work he had done etc.
He has settled well and is enjoying his time here.
11.45:Worked with nine-year-old girl.
Left materials plus work to be getting on with next week.
Told Class Teacher about arrangement with Head to extend J's time after Christmas — no problems.
12.02:Left to return to my own school.
12.10:Stopped at Petrol Station to give our old mini-bus a drink and some air.
12.28:Arrived back at School.
Met Head in corridor who wished to see me urgently regarding an incident which occurred when I was out.
Head informs me that after play this morning a Welfare Assistant asked  Deputy Head for assistance to bring a child into school who was refusing to move.
Welfare Assistant tried again but child still refused.
Deputy Head brought child into school and was dealing with the incident in his office when the child's Class Teacher burst in in a frenzied manner shouting that this was what she didn't want to happen and the child was getting too much attention.
Deputy Head would like a meeting with me and Class Teacher to discuss the matter.
Would I please see Deputy Head before dinner.
12.40:Saw Deputy Head re incident and arranged to see him with Class Teacher in his office when I have completed my dinner duty.
12.48:Started Dinner Duty in hall.
Had school dinner with children.
It was a mistake.
I think I ate the courses in the right order!
13.14:Finished Dinner Duty.
Made a cup of coffee.
13.16:Started meeting with Deputy Head and Class Teacher who has since apologised.
Discussed the incident and clarified the need to have clearer lines of communication.
Apparently the Class Teacher has been unaware that the Welfare Assistant asked the Deputy Head for help.
13.30:Took class for the afternoon.
13.45:Prepared to go out to collect leaf specimens.
13.50:Loaded children onto coach and left for woods.
13.54:S has a mild epileptic fit on coach.
Dealt with by Welfare Assistant.
(Second today.)
Turn back.
14.00:Return to classroom.
Welfare Assistant takes S to medical room.
14.03:Took remainder of class to small woods next to School.
Collected examples of evergreen leaves.
One or two of the children have not really understood the concept of evergreen.
I found one carrying an old umbrella and another a length of old rope!
14.40:Returned to classroom.
Informed that S had a third fit while we were out.
Left Welfare Assistant with class to go to see about Junior Staff Meeting Agenda.
14.45:Secretary informed me that Class Teacher had written a letter to parent of child with Head Lice to replace one written by Head.
Told her she must send out the original.
14.50:Teacher sees me about letter.
Checked pupil for Head Lice and tried to unscramble the situation.
15.00: Dictated letter for parent almost word for word as Head's letter.
(See appendix letter 3 and letter 4 which shows the reply which came back from the parents.)
15.05:Dictated letter to S's parent about fits on coach and in school.
15.10:Gave letter to coach guide and checked children onto coach.
15.15:Told Social Worker not to pick up parent as previously arranged.
Asked Caretaker to collect parents who have confirmed appointments.
15.20:Started Junior Staff Meeting.
Discussed:
1
Christmas decorations and other arrangements.
2
Children (3).
3
Reports to parents for the end of term.
4
Timetable changes.
5
Playground behaviour.
6
Next week's agenda.
16.10:Meeting ended.
16.15:Quick word with Class Teacher about parent coming to School this evening.
16.20:Made a cup of coffee which I hope to finish.
16.30:Write up part of diary.
16.55:Parent arrives.
Introduce her to Class Teacher who begins meeting.
17.00:Discussed traffic delays with Caretaker.
17.01:Address envelopes for begging letters to charities etc.
17.15:Head asks me to tell Class Teacher that he would like to see her after meeting with parent is over.
17.20:Join Class Teacher and parent in meeting and discuss child's progress so far and our hopes for the future.
17.45:End meeting.
Class Teacher goes to see Head.
Write up diary.
Check up on possible sales of raffle tickets.
Grade a number of reading books.
Clear tray of work pending.
18.28:Head ends meeting with Class Teacher.
Go for drink with Head to discuss plans for sale of raffle tickets on Saturday morning.
Approach barman to try to sell some tickets in pub.
19.15:Leave pub.
19.30:Call at another pub to give raffle tickets to Head of a Junior School.
Meet Head of PE at Secondary School and arrange to collect spare PE clothing for some of our children.
20.20:Arrive home.
SUPPLY TEACHER (JUNIOR CLASS)
Arrived at school (8.50 a.m.)— ten minutes later than usual because I overslept.
Still had time for the essential cup of coffee!
Welfare Assistant arrived and then disappeared!
Maybe I'll abandon cookery lessons if she's not back in time.
(I obviously rely on her very much for this.)
9.20:Kids arrived.
S had a fit (epileptic) on the bus so I took him to lie down.
He insisted on staying in the class with me and the others.
He enjoys colouring and drawing when he's had a fit.
I question my medical knowledge for looking after a child that fits.
9.40:We start to write out diary for OU.
Welfare Assistant returns.
Hooray!
We can make chocolate crispies as we planned.
Children are very well behaved this morning in cookery room.
S does lots of pacing.
M forgets to be grumpy (angry) and is so helpful and capable.
They love making chocolate crispies.
10.50:We've nearly finished making the cakes.
Deputy Head arrives to chat and have a cake.
D wants to share his cakes with the little ones.
They all go very quietly to play.
11.00:Art students are here today one day a week this term from the local Poly.
Ask me if I did ‘marbling’ with kids last week.
Had to admit I was not ambitious and did pasta/bean collage instead.
Deputy Head arrives in staffroom with Swann Report.
I take one look and think how uninspired I'd be to read that.
Welfare Assistant with Infants class gave me her telephone number so that I can arrange to have my hair highlighted by her daughter.
11.20:End of playtime.
Two minutes silence in class with children.
Explain it is clearing up time in the cookery room.
M and J always tidy up well, so did not let them do the washing/drying up.
R and N worked together — D and A did the same.
A, who shows so little spark, proved to be slow but a very good washer-upper.
I was really pleased to see the eight of them clearing up so well and independently.
Welfare Assistant and I chatted about life (i.e. something outside of school) whilst they busied themselves around us.
They must have done this for at least ten minutes.
(A time when there was no ‘lid on’— they controlled themselves — very exciting feeling.
What I'd like to achieve with them all the time).
12.00:Back to classroom.
Time for them to write their diary.
Each person gave one thought about the day.
I wrote them down for each person.
They copied down their sentence and then illustrated it.
Meanwhile I started my diary.
Most of them left me alone whilst I wrote and if they did want something they waited till I looked up.
I read my diary (not the part about S's fits) to them.
No one listened except D, who was really interested.
He has such potential which is not being used.
How can I help him to achieve this?
So far he has done very little ‘work’ for me.
Then they all drew pictures till lunch.
12.55:I sat down and had lunch with the kids.
Sat next to M in infant class.
This lot really are a challenge.
I decided to eat with them as Head of Primary Department is giving me this afternoon off and therefore I don't need a break from the kids.
It's hard not to get indigestion when eating with them as you are constantly chatting with them.
Back to staffroom for a cup of coffee.
Chatted about the diary.
I really enjoy this — usually I'd never make time for it.
1.25:Afternoon free.
Head of Department has the kids.
Spend time mounting pasta/bean collages from last week to make calendars for Christmas.
It's now 2.18 and this is near the end of my diary.
Must dash at end of school to meet Tom, David and John from school (my own boy and two of his friends).
I'm now going to think about tomorrow.
Must buy calendars for the kids' work.
2.50:Am in staffroom.
Had some thoughts for tomorrow.
School Social Worker is here and has had a bad day.
He's discussing this with Student Social Worker.
Two art students wonder if they should be writing diaries too.
School Secretary has shown me hers.
She hasn't put any personal thoughts into hers.
I just can't stop chatting to the paper.
Must go back to the kids and see them to the bus.
Will I be working here tomorrow?
3.05:They're on the bus.
S had two more fits this afternoon.
Still haven't asked if I am here tomorrow!
CLASSROOM ASSISTANT (INFANTS)
9 a.m.:Prepared an assault course with apparatus.
Fed and watered birds, checked for bread for children's toast just before break.
9.30:Helped T with house picture (drawing by numbers).
9.45:Help A with colouring of shapes.
10.05:T undressed ready for PE.
10.10:T redresses himself (too noisy).
G has chocolate button, reward, for being the only boy undressed and sitting quietly.
10.15:T undresses again.
I remained in class with A and P to finish their work.
10.25:Work completed go into hall.
10.27:Brought P back to class (behaviour unsatisfactory in hall).
Ah, well!
I did have two minutes to see A do his ladder climb, and T's climbing feat.
10.28:Persuaded P to get dressed and beat the clock — 3½ minutes, then back to coaxing him to finish some colouring.
10.40:A returned to class announcing he felt unwell.
Chatted with him and found he'd missed breakfast.
Helped him dress, then we made tea and toast.
Whilst doing so he managed to chomp his way through several broken biscuits.
Not altogether sure he didn't break them deliberately!
Colour now back in his cheeks.
So…
11.00:Playtime.
11.20:Photocopying for Deputy Head.
11.50:Returned to class.
Sorted out some more work to be photocopied.
12.00:My lunch break.
12.30:Back to class.
Storytime before dinner.
12.40:Hands washed for…lunch .
R (part time pupil who comes in at lunch time) seemed quite placid, so was easier to control; alas when dinner was presented he announced it was ‘finished’ without tasting it.
He seemed keen to try the jelly and oranges for pudding, but ended up choosing to give me a cuddle after fingering it all.
Meanwhile, G was playing for attention, so I was haggling with him over how many forkfuls he was to eat.
(He said four I said five he said five I said six…)
With the hassle, I somehow missed out on the pudding, but G assured me he'd had the usual number of five.
(I had my doubts after seeing the squashy mess left on the table where he'd sat.)
1.15:The rest of my lunch break.
1.25:Got R to take off his coat and hang it up but I wasn't quick enough for him as he removed his shoes and socks in a flash too.
Then into the playroom for a chat with the birds, numerous visits to the corridor to talk to the fish and feed it two grains of fish food at a time.
We looked through several books, did puzzles, played cars.
I would turn my back a second and find him sitting in the sand tray.
There were other climbing feats, like into the sink and on top of the wendy house furniture.
2.00:Another Welfare Assistant takes over with R from me at this time.
Back into class to help the boys make surprise birthday cards for her birthday (today).
Got out assortment of crayons, pencils, coloured paper.
Boys very excited.
2.30:Called her into class and sang ‘Happy Birthday’.
Gave her cards and boys all got a kiss on cheek.
2.35:‘Faces’ time.
(System of reporting to parents via ‘Smiley Face’ stickers, which we send home with our younger children each day.
Children can earn smiles when they do well by their own standards.)
Put faces on sheets, then folded and put into covers ready for going home.
Coats on and out for bikes etc.
R wanted to talk to the birds (yet again).
Oh! and see the fish.
2.50:Boys come in for orange and cornflake cakes (made by boys in next class).
3.00:Assisted with lining up boys for bus.
Tidied up classroom and playroom.
3.20:Staff meeting.
4.15:Home time.
 Postscript 
Although only about one third of staff are represented by their diaries, the reader can still perhaps get a ‘feel’ of how some parts of the school operate, and may on occasion be able to read between the lines.
One might focus particular attention on stress points in the day, perhaps where a mismatch of perception between individuals or even outright conflict occurred.
On this  particular day such differences were resolved through later discussion, but how could conflict have been avoided altogether?
The day was chosen at random, and although subjectively it felt like quite a difficult one, apart from the fact that staff were asked to complete personal diaries, it was potentially just like any other.
Appendix
LETTER 1
27th November 1985
Dear Mr and Mrs Williamson,
It appears that Thomas has head lice and I enclose some information that we have in school relating to this.
Nurse Buckle intends to visit you this afternoon to advise you further.
Obviously Thomas should not be in school if his head is in an infested condition.
Yours sincerely,
School Secretary.
LETTER 2
27th November 1985
Dear Mr and Mrs Williamson,
Thomas has been scratching his head a lot and appears to have nits in his hair.
Please could you have this checked by a Doctor and treat him with the appropriate shampoo before sending him back to school.
Nurse Buckle may visit you this afternoon to check Thomas's head herself.
Yours sincerely,
Class Teacher.
LETTER 3
27th November 1985
Dear Mr and Mrs Jones,
Thomas has been scratching his head a lot and appears to have head lice in this hair.
Nurse Buckle may visit you this afternoon to check Thomas's head herself and advise you further.
Obviously Thomas should not be in school if his head is in an infested condition.
Yours sincerely,
Head of Junior Department.
LETTER 4
Tom has no more flees I done his hair 4 Times
Going against the grain: alternatives to exclusion
In this chapter Denis Mongon argues that the predominant approach to disruptive incidents in school is through the displacement model whereby pupils are increasingly subjected to negative sanctions until they are finally excluded.
He contrasts this with an approach to education said to characterize ‘effective schools’ and argues that this is undermined when schools are preoccupied with removing troublesome pupils.
He attempts to account for the prevalence of the placement model despite its lack of apparent success and offers a number of suggestions for reversing the trend to identify and exclude ever-increasing numbers of pupils as deviant.
The displacement model
Central government, local authority and academic reports (e.g. Department of Education and Science 1978a, Inner London Education Authority 1986, Rutter, et al 1979) answer the question ‘What processes contribute to effective schooling?’ with elements of a consensus along the following lines.
Schools tend to be more effective when the relationship between the teachers and pupils is ‘good’ and when the latter are offered status and respect; when expectations are high; when there is an emphasis on rewarding good, rather than punishing bad, behaviour; when there is an overall approach characteristically described as neither permissive nor authoritarian.
Schools which do not adopt these processes tend to have greater difficulties than those which do.
However, it is fair to claim that the common response to individual instances of difficulty in the classroom is the antithesis of what seems to be known about the more effective school.
Table 11.1 illustrates how poor behaviour provokes evermore interest and attention as, paradoxically, pupils become literally and metaphorically isolated — the educational equivalent of irresistibly poking a sore tooth with your tongue.
The language and procedures for dealing with that alienation encompass conflict and confrontation at the expense of planned purposeful strategies.
Table 11.1 Sanctions employed: a composite list indicating a trend in seriousness
The dominant approach to behaviour problems in schools is based on identifying and categorizing individual pupils with a view to removing some of them from mainstream schools.
Although it would be glib to presume that the removal of a pupil from his or her usual classes is necessarily the wrong strategy, there are obvious contradictions in operating a system based on negative sanctions and the off-loading of responsibility for one group whilst attempting to accept and cater for the diversity of the rest.
Moreover, when the dominant approach to problems of behaviour is to remove the pupils it is not surprising that an increasing proportion of the school population is drawn into that model.
The growth of the ‘displacement’ model would be understandable if it resolved individual difficulties or reduced the general incidence of difficulty.
The available evidence suggests otherwise.
In fact no one argues that the marked increase in provision to service this model (Department of Education and Science 1978b Ling and Davies 1984) has led to a marked improvement in pupils' behaviour.
Lloyd-Smith (1984) provides a telling summary of the shortcomings of the ‘displacement’ model in his account of three ‘Guidance Centres’established by a West Midlands Local Education Authority.
These were opened for the temporary short-term placement of pupils in danger of suspension, with the expectation that suspension rates would be reduced.
Ten years later, after a 17 per cent drop in the secondary school population of the area, suspensions are up 230 per cent, the centres admit suspended as well as pre-suspension pupils and a fourth centre has been opened.
The adversarial ‘displacement’ model, whatever occasional, temporary relief it offers, is having little if any positive impact on underlying patterns.
Instead it is associated with unforeseen increases in rates of difficulty and displacement.
Despite this, the model has a grip on our imagination which inhibits enquiry.
It does so by providing scapegoats —‘the disruptive pupil’ and ‘the parsimonious LEA’which have sufficient reality and credibility to bear a disproportionate blame for the ills of present-day schools.
As a result, difficulties in the education service can be explained as the consequence of incidents of which they are probably the cause.
Four notable factors have sustained the model in the absence of supportive evidence: short-term expediency; the idea that a number of pupils are ‘irremediable’; the structure of support services and the political context of behaviour.
SHORT-TERM EXPEDIENCY
The simplest explanation for the persistence of the displacement model is that problems arising from pupils' behaviour are so stressful that they provoke an expedient response.
In a recent study (Kloska and Ramasut 1985) sources of stress were placed in the following order by teachers:
1
Lack of pupil motivation.
2
Lack of time to resolve problems with individual pupils.
3
Pupil indiscipline.
4
Lack of consensus on discipline by staff.
5
Completion of records and reports.
6
Meetings, during and after school.
7
Marking and preparation time.
8
Lack of resources and equipment.
Kloska's findings echo those in other research (e.g. Docking 1980, Dunham 1977, Kyriacou and Sutcliffe 1981) which record an increasing sense of occupational stress of which the predominant sources are said to be classroom control and pupil misbehaviour.
Teachers believe that their interaction with pupils and the disciplinary problems which arise are the greatest source of stress in their work.
A consequence of that belief is the pursuit of expedient solutions which remove the problem and therefore, it would be hoped, the stress.
Teachers need to feel, and to be seen to be, in control.
When their control is threatened it is possible for them to obtain relief by displacing a prominently misbehaving pupil.
The existing system for doing so is there to be used, alternative systems are not.
In those circumstances, the displacement system provides its own self-fulfilling momentum.
IRREMEDIABILITY
The causes attributed to behaviour problems — and the frequently attendant learning difficulties — are often thought, by teachers, to be beyond their influence.
In turn, the problems and difficulties themselves are thought to be irremediable (Hargreaves 1975, Leach 1977), in the sense that they cannot be resolved in the usual school or classroom context.
The sample of teachers who identified the causes of learning difficulties and behaviour problems for Croll and Moses (1985) illustrated a common belief that the role of the school is relatively insignificant.
In less than 4 per cent of cases did teachers think that teachers and schools contributed to problems of disruption.
Almost 40 per cent of such problems were attributed in whole or part to the pupils' characteristics whilst in about 65 per cent of cases the home was thought to be wholly or partly to blame.
A worrying indicator of teachers' sense of helplessness in dealing with such problems is found too in Kloska and Ramasut's study.
Asked to describe their strategies for coping with stress, teachers were concerned ‘to focus upon situations  or activities well removed from the work place’.
There were no sustained views that stress — arising again in the main from discipline issues — could be alleviated by efforts directed at or close to its source.
It follows that if teachers believe they are incompetent or impotent in these matters, they will accept and expect that the proper strategy is to pass on the problems to suitably qualified colleagues.
THE STRUCTURE OF SUPPORT SERVICES
A third factor which supports the system for separating teachers and ‘uncontrolled’ pupils is the recruitment of experts to advise, support and assist in resolving the difficulties.
The experts travel in various guises: support teachers, unit teachers, special school teachers, child guidance workers, educational psychologists, special education inspectors and others.
What they have in common is that with still rare and recent exceptions their main role has been to consume whatever problem is identified for them.
Access to their help, leaving aside the question of whether it employs a separate, distinct expertise, has usually meant passing on pupils from the classroom or the school.
This process confirms the belief that many of the difficulties cannot be resolved by teachers in their classrooms and so require specialist services in a specialist context.
This, in turn, provides the displacement model with further self-justification.
THE POLITICAL CONTEXT
At the point of referral the system is primarily concerned with pupils whose behaviour is ‘aggressive,’‘extrovert’ and ‘disruptive.’
There are many other pupils, of whom a significant number are girls, who are alienated and disaffected but who provoke no response from professional services.
Whether pupils' behaviour is itself a political statement or not, the aggressive forms impress themselves onto educational politics.
Schools and teachers are part of a wider political arena and it is inevitable that school disruption is sucked into the wider debates about and responses to law and order.
Nor can the expectations of senior staff in relation to‘control’ be ignored by others looking to the hierarchy for guidance and favour.
The politics of law and order and the demands for ‘standards,’ whatever that means, are consistently presented in ways which undermine the capacity of schools to tolerate any forms of deviance.
An alternative perspective
The displacement model has persisted and expanded in part because of its own self-fulfilling features but also in the absence of credible alternatives.
That can now be corrected.
The credibility of alternatives depends in a large measure on three factors: a new perspective on disruption and disaffection; support for teachers; a re-alignment of current resources.
There is an increasing amount of evidence (see Galloway 1985, Reynolds and Sullivan 1981) which shows that teachers can make a difference to the levels of disaffection and alienation in their schools.
Ouston summarizes such a view: ‘Successful schools appear to prevent too many difficulties arising rather than being exceptionally skilled in dealing with them once they have arisen’(Ouston 1981).
To this we can add the cumulative evidence that school-focused approaches to problem behaviour can be effective (e.g. Kolvin et al 1981, Coulby and Harper 1985).
Behaviour problems are not the inevitable product of pupils' characters or home backgrounds, nor are they irremediable in classroom or school contexts.
Instances in which they are ‘irremediable’ or ‘inevitable’are a mere residue of the much larger number of cases currently treated as if they are.
In the face of this evidence there is no sense in continuing to rely on the pathological or medical model as the main basis for the development of additional or specialist services.
That model was consistent with the view that the only factor in the equation which was not reasonable, constant and satisfactory was the pupils.
Any element of the curriculum and organization of schooling can contribute to the production of difficulties and is therefore a reasonable subject for intervention.
That is the basis for a new rationale which services should reflect.
Many teachers feel that their training inadequately prepares them for dealing with behaviour problems in schools (Mongon 1984).
There is a need to offer them opportunities in initial and in-service professional development to acquire or improve relevant skills.
That in itself would not reduce the stress which teachers report unless they could also be allowed to tolerate the normality of some problems.
It would, for example, be an extraordinary institution which could encompass a thousand or so adolescents and not encounter some difficulty.
So long as teachers are made to feel guilty about such difficulties in a negative and personal manner then they will be susceptible to short-term placebos.
If they are encouraged to be analytical in a positive and practical sense they will be more able to take a longer-term and reforming perspective.
Such change will not come about by chance but it is now possible to describe the ways in which it can be brought about.
REALIGNING RESOURCES
The common belief that resources are not available to implement the necessary changes is a major obstacle to the development of a new service delivery pattern.
More resources are required and one has to acknowledge that because of their absence the teaching profession is wary of accepting additional responsibilities.
However, present resources can be better deployed.
A campaign for the effective use of current resources is not at all incompatible with a campaign for additional ones and may enhance the clarity with which the shortfall in support for teachers is expressed.
Three areas of potential development within current resources, outlined below, are familiar propositions and can be dealt with quite briefly.
The fourth, liaison between Local Education Authorities and teacher training establishments will be considered in a little more detail.
Developing a unified service
Ling and Davies' (1984) questionnaire survey of a sample of 132 off-site units found that 16 per cent operated under the auspices of  social service departments or voluntary agencies, 56 per cent were said to be part of the special education sector and 27 per cent had some other administrative background.
Whatever its historical justification, this diversity now reflects ad hoc developments lacking in central direction leading to a chaotic, patchwork pattern (Inner London Education Authority 1985, see also Chapter 7).
If we add to that the distinct empires which units and special schools often constitute and whose border crossings have indeterminate customs regulations, then there is scope for duplication and confusion in most LEAs' provision.
The first steps to remedy this can be taken by an LEA prepared to think of its specialist services as a coherent structure.
It may well then have to face the vested interest of different institutions and organizations and there may be difficulties defining where some provision could fit in.
That in itself would only be a further illustration of the need for an innovative, coherent plan.
A single service with a unified management structure for on-site, off-site and what is currently special school provision would considerably enhance the professional opportunities of its staff and reduce to a minimum the duplication or even rivalry that exists.
Its chief asset in the longer term would be flexibility.
From one post within the service a teacher could at different times within the week or year act in a range of teaching or advisory roles.
Conversely, using a negotiated, contractual approach with schools, the head of this service can respond more directly to expressed local need.
A school with, for example, a difficult second year might need and could be offered a selection from in-service training for staff, an analysis/assessment exercise focused on the whole or particular parts of the school, a support teacher for particular departments, some kind of on-site unit, some share in off-site provision.
The negotiation and offer would be limited on the one hand by the school's ability/willingness to use different initiatives and on the other by the head of service's management of his or her total team resource and his or her balance of support to all the schools in the team's catchment area.
This also provides an instant monitor of the distribution of actual and/or perceived problems presented by schools.
Redirecting off-site staff
Although it would be wrong to presume that teachers who are excellent in their off-site unit work with small groups of pupils could necessarily become the vanguard of a new service they can provide the focus for some initial developments.
An increasing number of these teachers already have experience of peripatetic, school-based work on behaviour problems (Lane 1978, Coulby and Harper 1985).
In addition, the number of people involved — usually as few as two, three or four adults with pupils at a ratio around 6 to 1 — provides a more manageable unit for change than special schools of at least twice that size.
This is not to underestimate the possibility that for many of these staff this work is a consciously chosen alternative to teaching in primary or secondary schools.
However there are, perhaps, an increasing number who recognize some of the contradictions in the outward referral model and are looking for alternatives.
These changes can be encouraged and supported by an alert LEA.
The authority will not only need to provide opportunities for development in schools in the form of in-service training opportunities and ‘non-contract’ periods but also to anticipate an adverse reaction from schools who believe that the outward referral of their pupils is the only acceptable solution to their troubles.
Because LEAs are not required to provide data on units to the DES as they are, for example, in respect of special schools, it is impossible to say how many teachers work in them.
Surveys are faced with the limitations of non-response rates and unreliable respondents.
Nevertheless there are some clues.
The HMI finding of 321 teachers in 108 visited units (Department of Education and Science 1978b) is consistent with Ling and Davies' (1984) finding that three-quarters of the units in their survey had between two and four teachers.
They identified about four hundred units and suggested that they accommodate over seven thousand pupils at ratios rarely exceeding 6 to 1.
It seems reasonable to draw these strands together and to presume that considerably more than a thousand teachers are now working in off-site units.
These are in effect posts withdrawn from primary and secondary schools where difficulties with troublesome pupils persist despite the removal of the ‘worst’ cases.
A realignment of the work of those thousand teachers aimed as much at servicing teachers and schools as at treating individual pupils is a realistic consideration.
Bringing in the special schools
The latest available DES figures (DES 1983), probably the last to list schools by ‘categories,’ identify 200 maintained schools for maladjusted pupils.
There were 8,576 pupils in these schools.
If the staffing ratio of seven pupils to each teacher, recommended in circular 4/73 (DES 1973), is accepted as a basis for calculating the necessary teaching force for this group, then 1,225 teachers would be required.
In 1983 the figure was 1,424 plus 39 full-time equivalents made up by part-time appointments.
Heads are excluded from all these calculations.
Staffing standards therefore exceed the 4/73 baseline by a fifth and that should be welcomed so far as it is an attempt to provide favourably for a group in need.
What should be questioned is the use to which that additional staffing is put.
If it is used only to improve the pupil-teacher ratio within special schools then its value is limited.
It is difficult to believe that pupils gain a great deal more from being in a group of six rather than seven pupils; or that the curriculum of a 43-pupil school (the average size derived from these statistics), can be much more enriched by seven rather than six teachers.
If, however, the staffing improvement can be imaginatively exploited to create links between the special school provision, other special provision and primary or secondary schools then it could create the first stages of a unified, coherent service whose institutional boundaries are eroded.
If life could be as readily organized as statistics can, then the additional staff would be spread fairly evenly at about one teacher for each of the 200 schools for the maladjusted.
Inevitably that will not be the case; areas and individual schools within areas will be in quite different positions with regard to their staffing.
For some, the ratios mentioned and the ideas which followed will seem pious and wishful.
The corollary is that some areas will be better placed to initiate a shift away from the isolated role of special schools.
Whether they do so or not depends simply on the decisions which teachers, headteachers, local authority officers and elected members choose to make.
The statistical data points unequivocally to the potential within some, if not many, LEAs, for the special schools for maladjusted pupils to transfer staff away from the immediate treatment/curricular activities without unduly diminishing the quality of that work.
These teachers could become the seminal elements of a newly aligned service.
What is at issue is whether improved resource levels should be used to make special schools internally more satisfactory, doing what they have historically done but doing it in some sense more efficiently, or whether those resources are used in an attempt to improve the general education service in ways which might reduce its need for transferring pupils to special schools.
Using the potential of in-service training
Although the resources allocated to in-service training are numerically small it is a potential source of notable innovation.
There is an analogy between teachers' in-service development and the mounting evidence that intervention in pupils' careers which take place away from their school have limited value for either pupil rehabilitation or for changes in school ethos (Topping 1983).
The further in-service training occurs, literally and metaphorically, from their school base the less likely it is that teachers will be able to sustain personal changes and motivation for innovation.
It is therefore remarkable that the amount of co-operation and collaborative work between local authorities and higher education institutions has been so limited and only shows recent signs of expansion.
Those signs have included Open University distance-teaching approaches, the development of modular courses in the North West of England and the school-based element of courses funded by the DES under its Circular 3/83 and subsequent arrangements.
However, it is not only in these but also in most longer courses that there is scope for an imaginative alliance between the institutions, authorities and students.
It remains to be seen whether the DES's new funding arrangements for in-service training will enhance or inhibit that alliance, despite its avowed intentions to do the former.
Many courses require that some kind of placement project is undertaken by the student.
A caricature of this exercise is that the tutor and student agree on a suitable project at a school which has been selected on the basis of its willingness to be disturbed by the student.
When the project is completed copies of the project report, written up and assessed, gather dust, one on the tutor's shelf another on the student's.
Whenever this happens it is a sad waste of the stimulus which projects can engender.
The alternative approach is for the project to be more explicitly a contract between the LEA or schools concerned, the higher education institution and the student.
Schools and LEAs can be invited to tender projects and schemes which reflect their current preoccupations.
Within the constraints of their courses the institutions then attempt to match potential projects to the interests and availability of individual students.
Some negotiation is required but the outcome is that in exchange for using the schools/LEA, the student/institution provide a service; and vice-versa.
The scheme is applicable whether or not the school in question is the student's main base.
This is typical of the approach used in a number of the DES funded one-term courses.
A different illustration is provided by the collaboration in 1983–84 between the ILEA and the London Institute of Education, in which one of the former's advisory teachers acted as placement tutor for six students from the emotional/behavioural difficulties option of the latter's Diploma Course.
The students were placed in pairs in three secondary comprehensive schools with which the advisory teacher was familiar.
The advisory teacher was then well placed to act as broker between the course requirements, the students and the schools.
The  Authority, and its schools, were able to draw on the skills of six experienced teachers; the institute and the students were able to use the local knowledge and pragmatic insights of the schools' staff and the advisory teacher.
The success of that initial project has encouraged the establishment of similar schemes in following years.
Other LEAs and colleges have taken different collaborative steps, including the creation of joint lecturer/advisory appointments.
The approaches taken by, for example, Lawrence (1980) and Taylor (1985) have also shown how school staffs can rationalize their approach to disruption.
It is quite clear that some need to do this.
In one school senior members of staff sat in rotation in a room to which disruptive pupils could be promptly sent from the classroom.
The rule was that three referrals there led to an automatic three day ‘cooling off’ suspension but in the absence of agreed criteria the referral rationales varied wildly.
The PE department sent pupils who turned up with inadequate kit, by contrast, other teachers would not send even obviously disruptive pupils for fear of causing their suspension.
Use of the facility was bound to be capricious until there was some agreement about the intent and purpose in committing the equivalent of a full-time senior post in this way.
The absence of a thoughtful approach blights this area of schools' work.
It is difficult to imagine a school appointing a Head of French or Science without having either a fair idea of what a French or Science curriculum should be or a commitment to quickly devise one.
Yet schools are prepared to tie up the time of senior staff, in effect the resource equivalent of at least a full-time head of department post, with the vaguest responsibilities for taking difficult pupils away from classrooms.
Conclusion
The displacement model which has historically prevailed in schools' responses to troublesome children has failed to show a satisfactory effectiveness either in terms of outcome for identified pupils or in terms of relieving pressure on teachers.
The belief that there is no real alternative is being challenged by the activities of teachers working in consultative/support roles and by an increasing body of research.
The pursuit of the alternatives can be inhibited by the view that little if anything can be achieved within present resource limits.
Although improved resources are a pre-requisite for the necessary level of services, a start can and should be made to adapt service delivery models within present levels.
The deployment of current resources within a coherent, unified service, the adaptation of the use to which off-site units are put, the mobilization of resources from within the special schools sector and the imaginative employment of in-service training each provide some opportunity for developments in the very immediate future.
School assessment panels at St Augustine's School
In this chapter Neil Toppin describes the assessment panels at his school in Scotland, which were established to attempt a flexible response to problems of disruption within the school and to offer pupils excluded from other schools or returning from special provision another chance in the mainstream.
He and his staff reject the option of off-site provision and argue for an individually tailored solution involving guidance (pastoral) and curricular staff: They see the assessment panel as providing an alternative, non-punitive role, for guidance teachers.
The chapter contains an outline of the panels, case studies of three boy pupils and Neil Toppin's evaluation of the successes and problems they have met.
School-based assessment panels were established in St Augustine's in 1979–80 for a number of reasons.
The school's philosophy of child-centred education required that an individual-based assessment of problems and difficulties be attempted.
The panels therefore are a contribution by the guidance staff to a total school philosophy which includes continuous assessment, a school-based certificate in years three and four which covers both the cognitive and affective domains and which is wholly positive in its comments, and mixed-ability teaching in years one and two.
They were also set up as a way of avoiding off-site referral.
It was the school's belief that the creation of special units would not solve the behavioural problems which we encounter and furthermore there was little likelihood of re-integration into mainstream schooling (a view largely substantiated by the available evidence of many of the existing units).
Finally, we were supported in our approach by the social work department's growing emphasis on trying to deal with problems in the context of the local community and where possible through mainstream schooling rather than any other provision such as residential schools.
We identified several aims for the panels:
1
To identify the nature and causes of behavioural difficulties of each pupil referred to a panel.
2
To establish an integrated approach incorporating teachers, social workers, child psychologists, pupils and parents plus any other relevant people.
3
To establish if a pupil can be sustained within St Augustine's (to date only one panel declined to accept a pupil).
4
To be flexible in devising ways of  supporting pupils.
5
To ensure that all those involved fully understand their contribution.
The panels in practice
Every panel has two permanent members, the assistant headteacher (guidance) and the school psychologist.
Other members include the pupil, the parent(s), the  appropriate member of the guidance staff and, where appropriate, other members of the teaching staff such as the principal remedial teacher or form teacher, social worker and staff from other educational establishments such as an assessment centre or residential care.
The meetings are informal.
All participants are encouraged to contribute to the definition of the problem and its solution.
A minute is kept of the meeting and everyone present receives a copy.
Referral to an assessment panel may come from staff or parents or external agencies.
To date there have been almost two hundred.
Of these about 25 per cent have been from outside St Augustine's, including referrals from List D , school psychologists in other areas and special education.
Many of the external referrals have been exclusions from other schools.
While the panels normally take place in St Augustine's in many instances it has been judged more beneficial to hold the meetings outside school (e.g. in the secure wing of St Mary's List D, at Rosevale school and at Larchgrove Assessment Centre).
Staff have also found it necessary to attend children's hearings  both before and after an assessment panel.
As a result a strong working relationship has been established with the reporter's department.
TONY
Tony was in Larchgrove Assessment Centre when his case was first referred to St Augustine's.
He had been involved in housebreaking and an assessment had been requested.
At fourteen, Tony got on well with his peer group and had settled quickly into the assessment centre routine.
His educational attainments, however, rang alarm bells.
He had a measured reading age of only seven years and could cope with only the most basic calculations.
His educational problems were aggravated by his refusal to wear glasses, without which his eyesight was very poor.
At Larchgrove some expressed the view that the remedial input necessary to develop Tony's literacy and numeracy could be provided best at a residential school, but there was a stronger view that it would not be to his benefit to remove him from a secure and caring home.
The children's panel hearing which followed the assessment period concentrated on Tony's brushes with authority both in and out of school and his learning difficulties.
They went along with the feeling that Tony should have a non-residential supervision order but strongly recommended that he should change his school.
An approach was made to St Augustine's and an assessment panel was held to consider Tony's enrolment in the school.
Represented at the meeting were Tony and his mother and sister, assessment centre staff, social work, child guidance and three members of St Augustine's staff, including the assistant head (guidance) and the member of the guidance team that would look after Tony.
The other member of the school staff was the principal teacher of the remedial department who it was felt would play a key role in Tony's remaining time at school.
The assessment panel agreed to Tony's enrolment in St Augustine's and attempted to co-ordinate the help which could be provided by the different agencies.
With the agreement of Tony's parents, Tony would follow a partial timetable for between two and three weeks, allowing him to phase himself into full attendance at the school.
This arrangement received the full blessing of the children's panel who agreed that ‘too much, too soon’ might be a retrograde step.
Tony himself suggested attending at different times each week in order to familiarize himself with different subject areas of the curriculum.
In light of Tony's learning difficulties, Tony was to attend the assessment centre two evenings a week for help with basic reading and writing.
The principal teacher of remedial education at the school agreed to accompany Tony to the assessment centre after school in order to get the arrangement off the ground.
A review of these arrangements would be held in the assessment centre after a suitably short period.
With the help of his mother and sister, he agreed to continue this work at home which would be set by the school and assessment centre jointly.
A review of the assessment panel was to be held within one month of Tony's enrolment and thereafter when deemed necessary.
Tony remained at St Augustine's for the remainder of his schooldays, a period of eighteen months.
By the terms of his enrolment, there is little doubt that the provision of regular review assessment panels helped him by offering support, encouragement and occasionally chastisement for letting himself down.
Where previously Tony had struggled to accept even basic school discipline, he was able to survive St Augustine's with only the occasional small-scale disagreements with a minority of staff.
In terms of the development of social skills, Tony undoubtedly was a success story.
Tony's learning difficulties and in particular his own attitude to them, proved more intractable.
A series of review panels wrestled with the problem and provided a series of responses.
Child guidance offered two half days a week for half his final year.
Under the supervision of the principal teacher of remedial education, he received an extraordinary degree of help with basic reading, writing and arithmetic.
Arrangements were made for a voluntary tutor to visit his home to supplement his studies.
His attitude to all these arrangements was somewhat cavalier.
It was with disappointment that a final review assessment panel decided that, despite the earnest efforts of all concerned, Tony would leave school with a limited ability to read and write.
However, since he left school he has been in no further trouble with the police and, although unemployed, remains happily at home with his family.
JIM
Jim is the second youngest of five children and the only boy.
Jim's father has a chronic drink problem and he eventually put the family out of their house.
They went to live elsewhere in Easterhouse in very poor accommodation.
Jim was an extremely nervous child and was subjected to bullying, both by his family and by his peer group.
As a result he early on developed the habit of staying out of the house as much as possible.
In December 1982 Jim's family started squatting in council housing and were referred to the social work department by the housing department.
Bedsitter  accommodation was eventually provided but in the course of the investigation by the social work department it was discovered that in addition to Jim's persistent truancy, he was also staying away from home, sleeping rough for days at a time.
The children were eventually admitted into care as a result of neglect.
(One of Jim's sisters had to be rushed to hospital with a critical diabetic condition.)
Within a short time, however, the children were allowed to return home.
Jim was described by his social worker as ‘looking haggard, dirty and withdrawing more and more into his old ways again'.
Jim was due to leave another school in the area at Christmas 1984 and shortly before summer 1984 a panel hearing was requested due to Jim's non-attendance at school and the theft of a pushbike.
The children's panel noted the family problems and Jim's increasingly introspective nature.
The panel accepted the social work argument that if there was a high degree of Social Work input to the family home, and that if Jim could be placed in a new school for his remaining few months of statutory attendance, then this might be the most suitable response.
In the course of the assessment panel, several salient points were made.
Jim had little or no support at home apart from that provided through social work.
He had a long history of truancy.
He had few friends.
He enjoyed good relationships with adults especially on a one-to-one basis.
He said he wanted to attend school and had a particular liking for technical subjects.
It was the view of the assessment panel that a few months of reasonably stable attendance could be of great help to Jim when he left school and they decided that a flexible arrangement might encourage attendance where previous efforts had failed.
Jim was therefore enrolled at St Augustine's.
He was given a flexible timetable which, in terms of classes, could be built up as seemed appropriate.
The technical department provided a base for him in order that he could pursue Technical Studies over and above normal classes.
The assistant headteacher agreed to see him every day, on an informal basis, to get a chance to talk to him about home, family and school and to offer support where possible.
He also arranged with the school resource centre for him to have access to the library area at certain periods, during which he could relax with a book or magazine.
The social worker and the assistant headteacher agreed to meet regularly to discuss his progress.
In the event Jim completed his schooling at St Augustine's with little difficulty.
He certainly had a number of absences, but all were explained with notes from his mother or from his doctor.
He enjoyed his final few months at school and even returned after Christmas to visit and to say hello to members of staff.
He had, meantime, managed to get himself a job on a building site.
WILLIAM
William is at present completing his third year at St Augustine's.
He lives at home with his mother and stepfather and younger sister.
His behaviour at school, and apparently outside school, alternates between the ‘angelic’ and the ‘diabolical’.
His parents alternate between feelings of pride and moments of frustration and desperation.
Unfortunately, as William's behaviour deteriorates, so does his relationship with his parents .
Early in the first year his behaviour pattern was showing dips and troughs.
Money problems at home led to a temporary fragmentation of the family and a new school for William but when the family got back together and William returned to St Augustine's, reports from the other school followed the previous pattern at St Augustine's.
This pattern of behaviour could be described as generally good with occasional bouts of attention seeking.
However, what was particularly worrying, was that William was becoming more and more involved in solvent abuse, and as the abuse became more frequent, so the behaviour both at home and in school, became more extreme.
On one occasion William catapulted a lump of metal into a classroom full of pupils and a girl was quite badly injured.
On another occasion he kicked in the glass in a series of school doors.
On neither occasion could he say why he had done what he did, nor had he done it in the company of other pupils he wanted to impress.
In the wake of this behaviour, which resulted in the police pressing charges, William was placed in Larchgrove for a 21-day assessment.
The children's panel hearing which followed this assessment felt that he should be placed on home supervision, given the generally supportive nature of the family home, but that he should attend a privately-run child guidance facility in Glasgow, instead of mainstream schooling, for long-term assessment, as a day-pupil.
Following a period of many months, William expressed a desire to return to mainstream schooling and approaches were made to St Augustine's by the educational psychologist concerned.
An assessment panel was convened and all the relevant agencies were invited.
At the assessment panel it was pointed out that William was doing very well.
He had seemingly conquered his solvent abuse problem and his relationship with mother, stepfather and sister were good.
He was genuinely keen to return to St Augustine's where his sister was now a pupil and both social work and child guidance were keen to see him return to mainstream schooling.
In light of this, St Augustine's was prepared to accept his re-enrolment in the school, although the assessment panel expressed a strong wish to keep his case under constant review.
The panel also arranged for William to spend two half-days a week at child guidance.
In addition, the psychologist from child guidance arranged with the assistant head (guidance) in the school to meet every three weeks to discuss William's progress.
At the time of writing these provisions have been in operation for nearly six months and appear to be effective.
The children's panel met four months ago to consider the termination of William's home supervision order.
Prior to this, an assessment panel review meeting was held in the school to consider a submission to the children's panel.
Acting jointly, William's parents, the social worker concerned, child guidance and the school all advised against terminating the supervision requirement as all felt William needed the joint supervision.
William, who attended the meeting, also agreed that he behaved better when the eyes of the world were upon him.
Not only, therefore, was William party to the decision to request continuation of the supervision order, but he now looks back and agrees it was the right decision.
He certainly has not become an angel overnight, but his more extreme behaviour has been left behind and usually he can be relied upon to be helpful and co-operative.
Our conclusions
A review of the assessments to date shows we cannot claim total success.
We have had partial successes and failures.
We have had to adjust and re-assess the format, aims and processes of the panels.
But in a majority of cases there has been some success, and in many instances the outcome has been very successful.
In general we have been most successful with pupils excluded from other schools and returning from special provision.
We have been less successful where the difficulty already has a long-standing history in our own school.
The assessment panels have contributed to the development of the general idea that, within reasonable constraints and parameters, schools should be sufficiently flexible to adjust to defined needs and problems rather than impose rigid, homogeneous solutions to particular and individual problems.
That is what the guidance staff of St Augustine's believe to be the essence of their role and work.
In the light of the experience of two hundred assessment panels, it is our confirmed view that an approach in which a whole school can and will adjust to individual need, without prejudice to majority rights, can offer a viable alternative to ‘sin bins’ or the like.
All teachers are or should take responsibility for guidance work.
The assessment panels have contributed to a better working relationship between guidance staff and other members of staff.
The fact that such a relationship has been established in a difficult but rewarding area is of significance to all staff.
The willingness of all staff to co-operate and contribute serves as a useful counterpoint to the divisive and negative views which are commonly expressed elsewhere.
This is helped by the fact that all teachers involved with pupils from an assessment panel receive full and positive information.
The support of the staff and their willingness to adjust their provision and their reaction, clearly demonstrates that given the proper approach teachers are in both principle and practice more willing to review their methods and sustain alternatives than is usually acknowledged.
The value of a co-ordinated approach is without question the most significant conclusion.
The improved relationships between the school, the parents, the child guidance service, social work and others has been of immense and profound benefit.
The creation of a more positive and co-operative attitude by all involved, based on an appreciation of the legitimate areas of parental and professional responsibility and competence, has proved beneficial not only at assessment panels but in the total life of the school.
The removal of barriers between services, the removal of traditional doubts and reservations and the acceptance of disagreement and dissent has contributed greatly to realistic and constructive relationships.
The amount of time required to pursue a highly individualized approach cannot be discounted.
The time required for arranging meetings, preparing reports, attending assessment panels, producing and circulating minutes, contacting relevant staff and monitoring induction and/or progress is considerable.
Yet had the assessment panel system not existed in most cases equal amounts of time would have been occupied later but in the negative cycle of suspensions, parental interviews, referral procedures and the preparation of reports.
We have learnt much about the possible pitfalls of a flexible approach.
For example, if pupils are on part-time timetables some staff must accept that a pupil will not attend their class for a period of time.
This also requires a good working relationship with the attendance department.
Where a personality clash exists between a pupil and a teacher and the obvious solution is a change of teacher this must be achieved without demoralizing the teacher or reducing his or her personal and professional status.
Equally, it must be ensured that other pupils do not see such a change as a precedent which they can then seek to exploit.
Assessment panels cannot produce all the answers.
They do, however, produce a forum in which all of the questions will be asked, where all who should be listening and responding are present, and where all those involved in the ‘total child’ can contribute to an individualized solution.
Perhaps the most important aspect of the scheme is that it ensures that guidance staff are not deployed as disciplinarians.
Rather it is an opportunity for them to contribute positively to the educational, social and personal support which many pupils do need but often do not receive.
Discussion as a basis for action
In this chapter Rob Grunsell gives a brief outline of his approach to in-service training which he developed at the schools council and published in Finding Answers to Disruption (Grunsell 1985).
It involved identifying common concerns of teachers and then producing stimulus materials to initiate and focus discussion and trigger groups working on them to devise their own plans of action.
Rob Grunsell encourages teachers to adapt his materials to their own needs or use them as a source of ideas for devising their own training.
He stresses the participatory nature of training and the need for it to be grounded in teachers' own priorities.
‘To produce in-service training materials which will help teachers respond more effectively to problems of disruption in schools.’
That was the brief for a one-person project I took on with the late schools council some four years ago.
This is an account of how I reacted to that very tall order.
I came to the project from a background in and around off-site education, convinced that while removing a disaffected minority from the mainstream might give those pupils a better chance of survival and their teachers relief from extreme disruption, it did nothing to change the factors which produced that disaffection.
I believed then and still believe now that schools make a difference.
Features of background experience and personality may create potential in pupils for disaffection; ‘disruptive’ or ‘passive.’
How far and in what form that potential is realized depends on where they go to school.
There is a wealth of evidence to say so.
‘Disruption’ is not an objectively definable illness suffered by a precise percentage of youth, nor a given set of behaviours.
It's what teachers individually and collectively define it to be: the limits of their tolerance, moral and personal.
It's the expression of a negative dynamic, in which the cycle of action and reaction between teacher and pupil seems only to confirm the pupil in the disruptive role and of escalating sanctions which consume energy, time and morale in large amounts.
So what could in-service training offer teachers in locating and treating the causes of this dynamic?
Looking around I had to conclude that if the training has no roots in the ‘real life’ of school then the answer is bound to be — not very much.
Thus many techniques for analysis and reaction presented through in-service training as ‘cut flowers’, have failed to grow in schools because they do not make sense to the teachers once back in their schools.
All too typically I saw enthused teachers returning from training, armed with new perspectives who became progressively drained of optimism as they faced non-understanding in colleagues, shortage of resources, lack of follow-up support, and who ended up despairing and cynical about possibilities of real change.
But, if the methods of delivery were frequently inappropriate so, I felt, was the content of training.
Talking about disruption involves admitting and examining failure, professional and personal.
It's a difficult, demanding and, at times, painful process.
The doctrine of ‘coping’, keeping the classroom door shut, is still  very heavily entrenched in the teaching profession.
It is unsurprising, therefore, to find that the great majority of training about disruption places the problems firmly within the child, their family, their background, their learning difficulties.
There would seem to be little incentive for teachers to examine the problem in dynamic terms, as a product of interaction; everyone's or no one 's fault.
I decided that what was urgently required was a method and content which didn't place either the problem or the expertise ‘out there’, which helped teachers to share and analyse their own experience, define their problems and priorities, identify their own routes to solutions.
Whatever I designed would have to take account of circumstances as they are for the hard-pressed teaching population.
They have very little time to talk; our education services allow scant space for the education of its own workers.
The overload of urgent daily business constantly distracts teachers in their attempts to step back to examine underlying causes and long-term problems.
And the difficulty of starting that examination is compounded by the existence of a bewildering range of equally valid starting points for explanation.
I have travelled round England and Wales listening to many teachers who had much to say.
I constructed a map of their principal starting points for concern; teacher stress and the need for support, the social dynamics of the classroom, the efficiency of sanctions and rewards, the school's relationship with parents and outside agencies and many more.
For each of these I then evolved time-limited discussion structures applying to the subject of disruption a simple group interaction method (for which I would make no claims of originality), a process intended to maximize the chances of ‘on-task’ participation leading to clear definition and appreciation of areas of agreement and divergence and needs for further analysis or action.
The group is invited to start at a common point: response to a specific trigger — a research quote, a statement about opinions to be completed, a range of factors to be ranked for importance, a role play.
Responses have to be shared, first, in the relative safety of small numbers in order to enable participants to build up confidence in coping with the frequently painful nature of talk about disruption.
Group members have to co-operate within the disciplines of time and equal opportunities for participation.
So much discussion of disruption loses its way with attention wandering from one priority to another.
Here people are asked to focus upon one topic only.
An example of the way activity sheets are used to structure discussion is given below.
It is a ‘unit’ entitled Everyone a winner , taken from the pack I developed (Grunsell 1985)(see Fig. 13.1).
Stage 1 invites group members to spend five minutes in quiet reflection, a space in which to clear minds crowded with concerns of the teaching day, to focus on the cartoon and commit their first reactions to paper.
Moving into their stage 2 subgroups they are asked to share and relate these reactions.
There is safety in numbers but less risk of embarrassment when the numbers are small.
Whatever response is formed, is fed into a second round of sharing, this time with the whole group in stage 3.
In pooling their ideas the group can work towards establishing by the end of the session, a prioritized agenda for further discussion, enquiry or action.
There is no unrealistic assumption that one hour of talk will produce any    definitive solutions.
Rather the aim is to help people bring their specific and collective perceptions about the problems quickly into focus — a basis from which a course to direct action can be plotted.
Over four years, through a process of trialling of exercises with teacher groups and much instructive error, I have evolved some forty discussion units which are presented in sections organized according to areas of concern — for example‘Problems with the whole class ’; ‘Describing disruptive behaviour for yourself and others ’; ‘Support: what you want and where you get it ’; ‘Schools and parents ’.
Because every teacher group which decides to discuss disruption will need to find its own starting point, its own trigger for concern or anxiety, the materials are offered, not as a prescribed course of discussion, but as a resource bank from which groups are invited to select discussion units appropriate to their needs.
The pack is fronted by user notes which offer advice on how to set up working parties, the pitfalls and key points in locating ‘appropriate’ school and teacher groups, how to narrow the choice of relevant issues, to find exercises which match urgent concerns.
The exercises are aimed at a common denominator of concerns amongst secondary school staff but their value lies, not in specific content, but in the process they demonstrate for the structuring of discussion.
Users can hang their own content on the framework.
They can modify, adapt, improve, the existing units.
They can write their own.
They can be primary or special schools, mixed groups of teaching and outside agency staff.
The process can be relevant and effective for all these groups.
That, then, is the theory — but how does it work out in practice?
Describing  what is demonstrated in practice needs a careful preamble.
No single teaching strategy, set of interpersonal techniques, no one package of in-service training materials can produce nationwide and instant results.
That seems too obvious to be worth raising, but it isn't.
The history of our education service is littered with burnt-out bandwagons.
The pursuit of fantasy solutions has repeatedly drained energy from the much more difficult business of pursuing workable models for change which are rooted in what  actually happens and could be made to happen in our schools.
I will say very clearly then, that the discussion process I am offering does not work in all schools, with any group of teachers.
Its a participatory method.
It can only realize its full potential when, at a school level, head and senior staff are actively committed to its use and prepared to involve themselves in discussion sessions, demonstrating, by example, allegiance to the notion that talking about areas of personal anxiety, confusion and failure is an essential part of professional development for all.
And those who take part in groups have to show a parallel commitment to working within the spirit of the process; putting as much energy into listening as in talking, staying on task, collaborating rather than competing in the pursuit of common objectives.
It looks like a great deal to ask of our underpaid and undersupported teachers.
But there are many teachers in many schools who feel the need to break out of the cycle of crisis management and low  morale so keenly that they are prepared to make those commitments.
They want to replace ineffective reaction to the symptoms of trouble with positive action aimed at the roots of the problem.
Trialling has been done through weekly after-school sessions, through whole staff conferences in school and weekend courses.
The materials have been used as the sole in-service training source and in  combination with role-play, the use of outside speakers and video.
Predictably the reactions from teachers who have used the exercises have been varied.
For a minority there was disappointment: ‘Well, it was all very interesting, I found out a lot about what other staff think.
But so what.
Nothing's happened ’, or, ‘It's still just talk’.
Significantly others have reacted with ambivalence:
That exercise on support really took the lid off things in our school.
All hell broke loose.
Everybody — senior and junior — started talking about how they weren't getting the support they needed.
And it hasn't stopped since.
When views and feelings, previously hidden, do get a chance to show themselves, the situation may indeed seem worse.
Staff have to face the challenge of turning their honest, even depressing appraisal of difficulties into action.
However an encouraging number of teacher groups did find a first step of action to take as a result of using the process.
Some of these were minor, others were administrative.
A significant number were aimed at positive prevention and these included altering the time allowed for lesson changeover to reduce crowd chaos, a decision to involve all staff in corridor supervision, a move to set up mutual support pairs amongst staff and the creation of a rewards system following the realization that for non-academic pupils the school offered little or no incentives.
A final evaluation of the process will have to wait.
The benefits of teachers identifying common problems or feeling solidarity, take time to appear.
They are cumulative, subtle and frequently indirect.
In one group a discussion on referral  procedures may produce a lessening of resentment amongst senior staff.
In another school an oppressive staffroom atmosphere may be lightened as a spirit of mutual concern filters in from groups who have shared their needs for support.
I have seen enough to believe that the materials, over time, will prove to be of real help to teachers trying to solve their own problems by enabling them to see what support there is in the sharing of difficulties and by strengthening the belief that efficient discussion can lead to effective action.
Producing and reducing disaffection
‘The English culture is being swamped’: racism in secondary schools
In this chapter Cecile Wright provides an insight into attitudes towards black people in two midland secondary schools (‘A’ and ‘B’) based on interviews with staff and pupils.
They are both mixed comprehensives.
In school A the proportion of pupils of Afro-Caribbean and Asian origin is approximately 25 percent, whereas for school B the ethnic ‘minority’ pupils are in the majority, comprising over 60 per cent of the school population.
Despite these differences the school experiences of the Afro-Caribbean pupils, on which she concentrates, appear very similar.
School A —‘Everybody just seems so disillusioned’
This was originally a boys’ grammar school.
It amalgamated with a boys' secondary modern in September 1975 to form a mixed comprehensive but retained a strong grammar school ethos amongst a section of the senior teachers.
These teachers exerted considerable influence within the school, because they held positions as heads of departments or as year heads.
They saw themselves as wanting to get on with the teaching of their subject.
However, they felt frustrated by teaching in a comprehensive school rather than a selective school and by what they saw as the poor quality of the pupils.
This in turn led to feelings of disillusionment.
As a probationary teacher explained when she talked about the general attitude:
Everybody just seems so disillusioned…everybody seems fed up…the staff as a whole, I mean.
I came in as a young teacher, enthusiastic, full of new ideas but you soon find that the old attitudes rub off on you, and so you end up thinking, ‘Oh, why am I doing this?
Do I want to teach after all?’ and this is because of what the others say to you, the more experienced teachers.
I think instead of encouraging you to try out new ideas they seem to get some kind of kick out of telling you how bad it is…
I don't think it is a bad school.
The headmaster responded in a similar way when asked if staff portrayed attitudes which are conducive for teaching in ‘both a comprehensive and a multiracial school’.
His reply was:
In the positive sense of showing sympathy and understanding and above all, in listening to the children talk, I am not so sure about there being a majority…
In a comprehensive school attitudes conveying sympathy, understanding and concern for the pupils are fundamental.
This does not necessarily mean letting everyone do exactly what they want to do…
I think that attitudes that come from people who are concerned with academic excellence and expect it to be so (remember, it wasn't a dirty word ten years ago, it was what society expected, the school to be achieving), now find themselves faced  with having to turn right around and in many cases, do feel disillusioned, very upset and bitter indeed and honestly, the kinder the system can be in terms of early retirement, the better.
I'LL SEND YOU BACK TO THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY
It is difficult to say conclusively that there are differences in the way in which teachers in the classroom interact with Afro-Caribbean pupils.
However, the following dialogue noted during a classroom observation, demonstrates how a teacher's insensitivity can result in conflict with Afro-Caribbean young people.
The teacher was talking to the class.
Whilst he wrote on the blackboard, a group of four white boys, sat talking to each other in an ordinary tone of voice.
The teacher, being annoyed by the noise level in the room, threw a piece of chalk at an Afro-Caribbean boy who was not being particularly noisy.
Teacher:Pay attention [shouted].
Teacher:[To an Asian boy]Could you get me that piece of chalk.
Peter:[Afro-Caribbean]Why don't you use black chalk?
Teacher:[Turning to the researcher]Did you hear that?
Then I would be accused of being a racist, take this for example, I was down at lower school, I had a black girl in my class, she did something or another.
I said to her, if you're not careful I'll send you back to the chocolate factory.
She went home and told her parents, her dad came up to school, and decided to take the matter to the Commission for Racial Equality.
It was only said in good fun, nothing malicious.
Keith:[Afro-Caribbean (aggressively)]How do we know that it's a joke, in my opinion that was a disrespectful thing to say.
Teacher:[Raising his voice and pointing his finger at Keith]If I wanted to say something maliciously racist, I wouldn't have to make a joke about it.
I'd say it.
I've often had a joke with you, haven't I?
Keith:[Angrily]Those so-called jokes, were no joke, you were being cheeky.
I went home and told my mum and she said that if you say it again she would come and sort you out.
As for that girl, if it was my father, he wouldn't just take you to the CRE, he would also give you a good thump.
My father says that a teacher should set a good example for the children, by respecting each one, whether them black or white.
He says that any teacher who makes comments like that in front of a class, shouldn't be in school that's why he said to us that if a teacher ever speaks to us like that he would come up to school and sort him out.
Harry:If it was me that you said that to, I wouldn't go home and tell my parents, I would just tell you about your colour.
Keith:Teachers shouldn't make racist jokes.
THEY JUMP TO THESE CONCLUSIONS
One way in which attitudes towards and categorization of black pupils was fostered was through gossip among staff.
This is an important medium in the school, since a fair proportion of teachers do not actually teach the pupils they hear talked about.
Its effect was described to me by a white probationary teacher:
A lot of teachers jump to conclusions about pupils before they've even come into contact with them and broken through the pupil's resentment.
They jump to these conclusions and these conclusions are passed round in the staffroom.
You only have  to sit in there and you hear the rumours and the gossip that's going around and the thing is, in the staffroom it's always the bad kids that are talked about, never the good ones, which I suppose makes sense in a way, but as a new teacher, you come in, you hear these rumours like, I used to hear rumours about Kevin (an Afro-Caribbean pupil) and I thought, ‘Oh, God, I'll have to watch out for Kevin, everybody thinks he's a trouble-maker and that means he's bound to be in my class’, but I mean it's not as simple as that, it really isn't…
There are a few white kids that are talked about but I mean that's inevitable.
I think to a certain extent the West Indian kids tend to get labelled and these labels they feel they've got to live up to.
I mean, you might think ‘well, what goes on in the staffroom doesn't get round to the kids’ but it does, it does, even if it is just through the teacher's own attitude.
They can sense it, they are not stupid.
This teacher's view that the Afro-Caribbean pupils felt obliged to live up to the labels given them by the school was reiterated by other teachers.
A black teacher claimed:
The West Indian pupils, especially the boys, are seen as a problem in this school because they are so ‘aggressive’.
You see, I am using a quote here, they are so openly aggressive and surly…
If it is always assumed that they are intellectually inferior, what else is there for them to do…every time teachers are constantly amazed by the fact that in the first year they have at the moment there are two or three really bright West Indian boys, and it's of constant amazement to people like Mr G…‘my goodness he's bright where does he get it from’.
Pupils here in the fifth year are generally thought to be dross.
How might the behaviour and attitudes of the pupils be affected by the organization of the school and the teachers' attitudes and expectations?
From discussions within a racially mixed group of sixty pupils, both from the fourth and fifth year, there seems to have been a consensus of opinion that the streaming system does not truly reflect ability.
There was also a consensus that the streaming system works more against black pupils, indicated in the following remarks from a white pupil:
I think that black kids are treated rather badly in this school, for example, there are less black kids in the ‘A’ band.
In my opinion it is not because they are not capable, it's because they are not given the opportunity.
Teachers generally hold a low opinion of them, for example, I'm in the ‘A’ band, I'm doing ‘O’level English.
I find that some of the ‘B’ band kids are doing the same syllabus, and in some cases they get the same marks or better marks than us, yet they can't do ‘O’level and they're in the ‘B’band.
Conversations with two black pupils further revealed the dissatisfaction felt about the school's organization:
We came here because our brother and sister went to this school.
They got on badly, they were unhappy with the school, so they didn't try.
They were also put in the ‘B’ band.
However, they are now at (another school) in the sixth form.
The headmaster would not allow them to go into the sixth form here.
Anyway, they're better off there.
They are both doing ‘O’ levels and ‘A’levels.
Since going there my brother has got ‘O’ level Grade A in Maths.
He never did any good here.
THEY DON'T GIVE HALF-CASTE KIDS NO HASSLE
Further conversations with black pupils revealed a general belief that the school's organization was against them because of its attitude towards their colour.
They saw little point in trying.
School seemed to be a ‘battle ground’, a hostile environment: rejecting their colour and identity.
The dialogues which follow clearly emphasize this.
A group of eight black boys in this discussion reveal how they feel about certain teachers making derogatory comments about their skin colour in the form of a joke, and also how it affects them emotionally when this takes place in front of the class.
Michael: It's like once the man (referring to the teacher) come in the class, and ask me in front of the class, ‘Why me coffee coloured’, he say, ‘How come Wallace dark, and Kennedy black and Kevin a bit browner?
How come you that, you a half-breed?’
Me say, ‘No man, me no look like me half-breed’.
Me say, ‘just like some a una white like a chalk and another couple a una got blond hair, some have black hair, me no come ask wha that!’…
That's how he is, he just come around, crack him few sarcastic jokes about black kids.
Paul: But they're not nice at all.
They're not nice.
The jokes aren't nice.
The jokes are disrespectful.
Kevin: They're not jokes man.
Errol: You can't call them jokes.
When he cracks a joke or whatever he does in front of the class, he just turn round and laugh.
You get him and the class laughing at you.
Kevin: What he is doing is running you down.
He's just bringing you down like dirt.
Nobody is bring me down (said with anger).
Every time I'm chuck out of(subject) completely man, because every time in (subject) he always keep calling me something about me colour and I answer back.
Errol: The teachers are forever picking on the black boys.
Michael: Like me now, them no too bother with me because them think, say me a half-breed, you know.
Half the teachers in the school think say me a half-breed so they don't too bother me.
Just lately they find out, say me black, so they've started bothering me.
Like the half-caste kids them they used to left me alone.
Kevin: They don't give half-caste kids no hassle, no hassle whatsoever.
However, if the half-caste kids act black, they pick on them hassle man.
The boys were asked in what ways they felt that this so-called ‘hassle’ affected their academic performance.
Paul succinctly voiced the views of the group when he said:
You're not really given the opportunity to learn.
Most of the time we're either sitting outside the head's office or we are either fighting or we are either arguing with them.
It's just we got no time, as you sit down to work they pin something on you.
WE ARE BEING FACED WITH A BARRAGE OF PATOIS
The above dialogues illustrate the resentment, bitterness and frustration felt by the Afro-Caribbean boys towards the school — as reflected through the attitudes of certain teachers.
The kind of social relationship which existed between certain teachers and this group of boys became very apparent when one examined the terms of reference used by the boys when they were referring to the teachers and  themselves; ‘us’ and ‘them’.
The pupils have developed a sub-cultural adolescent group within the school which is not only anti-school, but is also somewhat anti-white.
This ‘all-black’ group is composed of both boys and girls: pupils from the third, fourth and fifth years.
The thirty pupils or more making up the group move around together in the school during the school breaks.
Most teachers were aware of the presence of this group but unaware of the reason for its development, with the notable exceptions of a teacher from South Africa and the deputy headmistress.
As the teacher pointed out:
This group is a reaction to the racism in this school, we have what can be described as a very strong ‘black mafia’ within the school.
They feel that they belong together, so they stick together.
This point was further expressed by the deputy headmistress, who said:
There is certainly a race problem here at the moment.
There is certainly, not so much a race problem between pupils, but there is a great problem here at the moment with the congregation, shall we say, of black pupils.
By the time they get to the fourth form there are very few black pupils who are not mingling largely with black pupils.
There are identifiable groups of black pupils as they move around the school and we have had problems this last year with a particular large group of black pupils who have set out their stalls to appear aggressive.
The group attempts to assert its presence through both verbal and non-verbal means.
As the headmaster points out:
A number of black children, particularly boys, seem to lose interest in the school's aims (unless they are good at games, then they dissociate that from the rest) in the third year and, from then, become increasingly seen as an anti-culture…probably the most striking manifestation of West Indian pupils, is just that group of large boys, and the sort of threatening physical presence, which you can see consistently around the school.
Even more important than this ‘gang’ behaviour was the deliberate assertion of ‘blackness.’
This was done successfully through the use of patois both defensively and offensively by the group.
Patois was a success for the group insofar as they used it succinctly to communicate rejection of authority.
Although the teachers were aware of this ‘weapon’ they had great difficulty in finding anything to attack it with.
This point was reiterated by the deputy headmistress:
We've got a problem at the moment, which is very nasty…where we are being faced with a barrage of patois.
It is so worrying because you see when that happens we as teachers have a choice.
We either ignore it, but if it's done in public you feel threatened, or you feel that you are showing weakness if you just ignore it.
You can either react equally aggressively and verbally back in Spanish, or French, which in fact is what is happening, but that is not helpful, or as one member of staff said to me today, ‘I came very close to clobbering him today’.
There was a parallel feeling amongst the black pupils that they were under surveillance.
As Errol remarked:
I try to keep out of trouble the best I can.
If they cause trouble with me I cause trouble with them it's as simple as that.
If you are a troublemaker, right, and you're pretty intelligent, they still keep you down.
Look what they've done to Delroy, he's  pretty intelligent, yet they keep him down, no wonder he causes trouble.
Because I want to get on I try to keep out of trouble.
School B ‘The school never recovered’
School B was originally a girls’ grammar school.
It became a mixed comprehensive in September 1972 by amalgamating with two single-sex secondary modern schools.
Some members of staff at the school felt that it had suffered and was still suffering from the effects of the reorganization.
This comment from a senior teacher expresses a general view held by staff:
When you have a very small, very select, very ladylike grammar school, joined with two rough and ready secondary moderns what basically happened in my view is that when they joined together the grammar school staff, or most of them, couldn't cope with the rough and ready aspect the school they came to have.
They were all in positions of heads of department, consequently I got the feeling that the secondary modern staff who could cope with it to a certain extent, withdrew labour.
I don't mean that they went on strike, it was well, ‘let them buggers do it-they're the ones in the position let them do it’.
The school has never recovered from this.
Although many of the original grammar school teachers are no longer at the school there is still a strong academic ethos amongst some of the senior teachers, though this is sometimes more a sense of nostalgia than something realized in their teaching.
There is also an element of nostalgia, too, amongst the original secondary modern teachers, in the sense that, ‘the staff knew where they stood within a small school’, with ‘a more traditional authority pattern’.
‘THE SCHOOL IS FOR TEACHING ONLY WESTERN WAYS OF LIVING’
Since the reorganization twelve years ago, the ethnic composition of the school has gradually changed until the proportion of black pupils entering the first year is well over half.
This intake of children from ethnic minority groups has been associated by some with difficulties within the school, such as‘declining standards’ and ‘discipline problems’.
A year head who originally came from the secondary modern school at the time of reorganisation had this to say on the status of the school:
This school is a low-ability school because of its catchment area, which consists of a low social class and a high immigrant population.
More fundamentally, it is the high proportion of immigrants in this school which is responsible for the lowering of standards.
Many teachers try to obscure the fact that they are teaching in a multiracial school.
Little attempt is made to acknowledge the ethnicity of the pupils.
However, what is perceived as the belligerent, aggressive, lively, gregarious character of the Afro-Caribbean pupil, cannot be easily ignored by the teachers, and presents a constant reminder of the nature of the school.
One teacher remarked on the lack of acceptance of the pupils:
The pupils in this school come from working class and multi-cultural backgrounds.
It seems to me that very few staff are addressing themselves to the kinds of things (e.g. resources, teaching style, subject content, and attitudes and the hidden curriculum) that can be used to bring out the best of the pupils' cultures and backgrounds.
The attitudes of teachers to West Indian and Asian cultures is at worst negative, and at best condescending and patronising.
These cultures are viewed as remote and distant, and few teachers go out into the community to learn or take part in community activities…
Pupils are seen as recipients, with very little to offer to the curriculum.
Teachers view themselves as doing a good job by educating ‘these immigrants’ in the ‘best education system in the world’…
For these ‘immigrants’ to start demanding having a say in the way their pupils are taught and what they are taught is viewed with great disdain…
There is so much that pupils can offer to the school if there can be someone to listen and take notice.
The end result is that pupils switch off any interest in the school, and how they manage to go through five years of their school years still amazes me.
They have a negative view of the school, of the West Indies, Africa and Asia and of themselves and their abilities.
Some of the views of this teacher were echoed by an Asian pupil in a Social Studies lesson, where the class was looking at the issue of ‘prejudices in society’.
The pupil pointed out to the teacher and the class that she felt that there is pervasive racial prejudice in the school, which the teachers failed to acknowledge.
As she says:
We were discussing in form period, Asian languages in this school, about people who want to take it, that it would be a chance for people to learn another language, say, if non-Asian children take it they would come to respect it.
The form teacher then was on about that the school is for teaching only Western ways of living, and European ways of living.
She said that's what you come to school for.
That opinion really shocked me, coming from my own form teacher.
She was trying to tell me that we're nobody.
She then said that when there was a lot of Polish people in the school, they never practised any of their culture here, they went away to their own community.
She also tried to tell me there wasn't any prejudice in the school.
And the worst thing is she was trying to tell a coloured person that there wasn't any prejudice, and that you only come to school to learn about the European way of life.
That's the thing that needs bucking up in this school…
I said to her, ‘I'm not willing to argue with you here because it would get me into trouble but if I ever saw you on the street I would’.
Because I made a mistake once when a teacher told me that there wasn't prejudice in this school.
I blew up and I tried to tell her, no you're wrong.
I got myself into trouble…
I made a mistake of doing it then in such an organized atmosphere.
If I was going to…
I should have done it out of school because in school everything is organized.
The teachers are willing to back each other up.
I asked another teacher, ‘Well, what do you think?’ she said ‘You were wrong to shout back at her full stop!
Never mind what you were saying’.
The following comment from a year head provides direct support for this pupil's observations:
I find it very difficult to accept the immigrant people and children that I come into contact with.
I cannot change my feeling because it is part of my upbringing — I feel that the English culture is being swamped.
I do not see how the Asian and West  Indian pupils that I am responsible for can take on English behaviour for half a day when they are at school and change to their culture when they are at home.
‘GO BACK WHERE YOU CAME FROM’
To what extent then do attitudes of this nature shape the Afro-Caribbean pupil-teacher relationship?
Informal discussions with Afro-Caribbean pupils indicated that the pupils felt that certain teachers disrespect them on the basis of their ethnicity and that for these pupils the pupil-teacher relationship was based on conflict, with the pupils attempting to play the teachers at their own ‘game’ in order to survive.
They saw the school as condoning these teachers' attitudes.
A discussion with a group of twenty Afro-Caribbean girls illustrates this:
Barbara:The teachers here, them annoy you, too much.
Researcher:In what ways do they annoy you?
Barbara:They irate you in the lesson, so you can't get to work.
Susan:For example in Cookery, there were some knives and forks gone missing, right, and Mrs B goes ‘Where's the knives and forks?’ looking at us lot (the Afro-Caribbean pupils in the class).
Vera:Yeah, all the blacks.
Sonia:Seriously right, in the past most coloured children that has left school they've all said she's prejudiced.
Jean:She's told some kids to go back to their own country.
Sonia:Seriously right, if you go to another white teacher or somebody, and tell them that they're being prejudiced against you, they'll make out it's not, that it's another reason.
Jean:When Mrs B told Julie to go back to her own country she went and told Mrs C (the deputy headmistress), Mrs C said that Mrs B was depressed because her husband was dying.
Sonia:So why take it out on the black people then, she's told black people to do many things, she's even called them monkey.
Sandra:As for that Mrs C I can't explain my feelings about the woman.
Because Mrs B, right she just prejudiced, she comes up to me in the Cookery lesson, tell me to clean out the dustbin, and I was so vexed I started to cry, I was so vexed by it.
I didn't come to school for two weeks.
Sonia:You see the thing is, right, they can get away with saying anything to your face, there isn't anything you can do about it.
Susan:Mrs C is prejudiced herself because, I mean, she said to Karen that she is only getting bad because she hangs around with too many black people.
It's not as if (shouting in anger) as she says, black people are going to change you to bad.
Researcher:Would you say that the Afro-Caribbean boys have the same experience with the teachers as yourselves?
Vera:The boys I know don't get the same treatment because most of the lads are quicker to box the teachers-dem than the girls, you see.
Assertions from pupils about what teachers call them may not always be believed by sceptical readers.
A year head who talks about one of the phrases —‘go back to your own country’— referred to by this group of girls, provides evidence in support of their assertions — but about a different teacher.
He reported a familiar parental complaint which began in the following way:
I have come to see you because that Mr R said to my son ‘If you don't like it here then go back where you came from and where you belong’ and I was so upset at that  because my son was born here and I have lived in this country for over twenty years and how dare he say that, because my son comes from here.
I came from Jamaica over twenty years ago and I got married in this country and I have stayed here ever since and although perhaps I might want to go back to Jamaica it's not home to him.
The year head had no doubt that the protest was well-founded
And that lady was quite genuine.
The member of staff when I spoke to him about it afterwards — I did not call him in to speak to him about it immediately because I did not think it was either my place or my duty — I told him that she was very concerned about that being said to her son and quite frankly so was I, and really was that the sort of thing to say and he agreed it wasn't the thing to say but he said ‘I was so angry at the time.
The pupils had been going on at me about ‘You're always picking on me’ ' and then finally the boy said to him that he was picking on him because he was black and he said ‘That just triggered it off’.
He said ‘I just turned to him and what I said.
Yes, I did say that’.
He also reported times when a parent complained about the way their child was treated when he knew the reason before they did:
I know he said it in anger but you don't even say things in anger if you don't feel them and that really bothers me a bit.
But that's not the only one.
I have had others who've actually said ‘X doesn't like my child’, but then of course X doesn't like any black child.
And I think we both know who I'm referring to…
Black children react in a certain way because they feel they are being picked on, and because they react badly then further reaction follows.
HE'S BLACK SO IT'S TO BE EXPECTED
Discussions were also held with Afro-Caribbean boys, particularly with one group of fifteen pupils in this school.
In these discussions the boys often voice similar complaints to the girls.
In the extract below they refer to the effect the teachers' attitudes have on their behaviour and on the way prejudices appear to match their gradations of colour:
Stephen:I suppose it makes me behave bad, they pick you out, on your colour anyway.
They tend to say, oh well, he's black so it's to be expected, they're bound to do that, so when they give you that kind of attitude, you think oh well, blow them, if that's what they think, why not act like that.
David:It's not really as bad for me because they can't really tell that I'm half-caste (this pupil in appearance looks more white than Afro-Caribbean) like the rest of them.
But I still feel it the same, but not as much as this lot.
Lee:I haven't experienced any problem in classes, but when I'm in the group hanging about the corridors I do, not really in class, like David.
I'm not really full black, I'm half-caste.
From conversations, like this, with Afro-Caribbean pupils it appears that many see a conflict with teachers as an inevitable response to the attitudes held by teachers towards their ethnicity.
As one pupil succinctly put it ‘you then treat them without any respect because they don't give you any, so really it's just a two-way thing’.
Nevertheless, the pupils did acknowledge that not all teachers held negative attitudes towards their ethnicity.
WE BEND OVER BACKWARDS TO BE FAIR
A number of senior teachers and other staff were asked whether they acknowledged that an estranged relationship existed between the Afro-Caribbean pupils and teachers, and whether they attributed the nature of the relationship to negative racial attitudes projected by teachers towards these pupils.
The deputy headmistress in charge of discipline was categorical that Afro-Caribbean pupils were treated fairly:
We bend over backwards to be fair, to get to terms with the pupils, to try to get their confidence.
And when you do have to grumble about something, they are always asked ‘is this fair’, ‘did you do this?’ and only then do you jump.
I would never punish any child who didn't agree with me that they had done something…
That's the important thing about discipline, to make them see themselves as they really are, not as they think they are.
A deputy headmaster similarly attributed problems to the behaviour of pupils:
There are not many, a tiny minority, who have done outrageous things, who've misbehaved outrageously and who've been allowed to persist in their misbehaviour.
For example, two children, Simon a white boy, and Jane, a West Indian girl, are two children who have disturbed and disrupted this school ever since they came.
Although we have tried hard with Jane, we have not succeeded…in keeping her calm and amenable and pleasant, as she can be.
She is capable of a public display of aggression…
However, other teachers suggested that ‘race’was frequently the basis of the conflict between some Afro-Caribbean pupils and their teachers.
An Asian teacher who had taught at the school for six years stated:
There is a lot of racism in the school, and I have often believed that a lot of multicultural talk should start with the staff before it starts with the pupils.
There is little racism amongst the children…
I, even as a friend and a colleague of the staff notice it strongly in little points of racism, all the time constantly there, it gets beyond a joke, I've lost friends in the school or I don't associate with certain members of staff purely because of the constant jibing which eventually gets beyond a joke.
This teacher's annoyance was reiterated by a white teacher who related his experience of the school when he took up his post seven years before:
I had kept fairly quiet while I tried to establish myself and gauge the atmosphere of the school.
Even so, I had some fairly sharp differences with several members over their attitude towards the coloured pupils.
There were fairly frequent serious and ‘humorous’ comments made in the staffroom and at the dinner table that I sometimes challenged.
One or two other teachers were encouraged by my willingness to argue against racial prejudice and became more vocal themselves.
On reflection, racialist comments are much less common now, in my presence at least.
Comments from a teacher who had been at the school for two years added credence to the points raised in the above dialogues stating that there is ‘racism’ amongst staff within the school:
Teacher:Definitely I have come across incidents where I have actually seen teachers pick on children for no other reasons than the colour of their skin.
Researcher:What evidence have you to support this claim?
Teacher:Mr Y (year head) for example, I had a great verbal battle with him over a West Indian girl called June Green who I teach.
She was a bit troublesome and still is to some teachers.
She was a bit troublesome to me to begin with but I soon cottoned on to the fact that it wasn't her but the girl she was sitting next to within the class.
When I cottoned on to that I started to encourage June, sitting her on her own, it took me a long, long time, she is a very sensitive girl.
Now I can get her to virtually do anything for me.
She's great.
She is still a bit shy but she's tremendous with me.
Mr Y wrote me a note, ‘would I make some notes on her, there is a possibility of her going into the unit’(withdrawal unit for disruptive pupils).
I wrote back and said no way did I think that she ought to go into the unit.
He came back to me, went on about her being West Indian and all that.
I said to him on what grounds did you want to put her in the unit.
He said ‘she's a troublemaker’.
I said to him you just don't go and put a child in the unit because she is a troublemaker.
Of course, she has not been the only case.
In each case it has been a West Indian pupil rather than an Asian child.
Researcher:Well, you have only referred to one teacher.
Teacher:I have not come across such blatant attitudes amongst other members of staff but I would get that feeling and if I can, being white, feel an atmosphere like that then the children can too, especially if their skins are black.
THEY DON'T REALLY TALK TO YOU AS A PERSON
So far we have reported Afro-Caribbean pupils' perception of the attitudes held by certain teachers and how this may influence their behaviour.
How does their experience affect their educational opportunities?
There is concern within the school about the relative underachievement of pupils — especially amongst the Afro-Caribbean group.
This point is illustrated by the head of the sixth form, who describes its composition:
Head of sixth:This year they're mostly Indians, that is the largest ethnic group of people who stay on to the sixth form, followed by the white children, then the Pakistani and West Indian in very small numbers.
Researcher:Why is the percentage of Afro-Caribbean pupils staying on in the sixth form so low?
Head of sixth:Now I was asked this at my interview and what was I going to do about it.
I don't know.
I think to try and break down the barriers that some of the West Indian children have against teachers and academic things…
I find them all delightful in the first and second year, something happens between the second year and the fourth year, and in the fourth year they seem to have lost interest in academic things.
I don't find them any less delightful, but they don't seem as interested in academic things.
This observation was further expressed by another teacher who stated:
There's no specific area that I can lay my finger on to explain why West Indian kids underachieve…what is inevitable is that a lot of West Indian children particularly the bright ones will do fairly well up to either the beginning or the middle of the fourth year, and for some peculiar reason their progress will fall off towards the end of the fifth year.
There's no deterioration in intelligence or anything like that, the intelligence is there.
The hard work is missing, the motivation is missing, the need to get on is missing and the exam results inevitably suffer from that.
Conversations with Afro-Caribbean pupils suggest that, like the Afro-Caribbean pupils at school A, they believe that teachers held low academic expectations of their performance.
However, unlike the pupils at school A they saw the organization of the school as having little influence on their educational opportunities, rather they saw the attitudes of the teachers as being paramount, concluding that the prevailing attitudes held by certain teachers would undermine the organization of any school.
This point is suggested by the following comment made by a pupil:
Some coloured children in this school are getting bad because of the way they get treated, and they make out as if we're just doing it because we get low examination grades so we start getting bad with the teachers.
They think it is because we got no sense.
We're acting like that because of the way we've been treated in the past throughout the school.
See if you know that Mrs L and Mrs T can get away with talking about your colour and that knowing there's not a thing you can do about it because they don't believe you.
Another pupil points to the subtleties of a process which strikes at a pupil's identity:
When you know that they are sort of negative and they don't really talk to you as a person, you know that they're not really bothered about what happens to you.
Whether you pass an exam or not and you think to yourself, well they're not really bothered about what you do, so that means you don't really think of it in terms of, oh well, he is really taking pride in me or her and really want me to do well, it goes beyond just teaching me, it's something personal as well .
A further comment from an Afro-Caribbean boy indicates the way the label of ‘troublemaker’ interferes with academic success, just as earlier at school A a teacher had seen ‘trouble’as the avenue pupils were pushed towards when they were viewed as ‘intellectually inferior’:
A teacher called Mrs C she has even said it to us herself that she wants all the black people out of the school.
If a black pupil comes to see her a few times she automatically labels them as troublemakers.
If anything happens in a crowd their names are always shouted out, so they're labelled in front of all the teachers as a bad person.
So then the teachers think if he is like that he's not worth the trouble.
A concluding remark
From such observations and discussions in both schools, it seemed that the relationship between Afro-Caribbean pupils and teachers was often one of conflict and that the issue of race was frequently central to this conflict.
In school A from about the third form (as the headmaster pointed out) black pupils became aware of negative attitudes they felt that the school held towards them.
Similarly in school B teachers became aware of the barriers between the pupils and the teachers from the second year onwards.
The perceived attitudes of teachers seemed to convince them that the school system was ‘rigged’: some saw very little  point in trying.
Many were still frustrated by what they saw as not ‘getting on’ academically.
From conversations, it appeared that they were not against education per se; in fact a number of them had left school to go to further education.
However, in school their energy was not always tapped and was sometimes directed towards disrupting the school or, as one pupil said: ‘to get our own back on them for the way they have treated us’.
Slumptown: a community and its school
This chapter presents a series of cameos which together begin to sketch in aspects of life in a northern town and its comprehensive school.
It is also the story of John Schostak's research on which he based his book,Maladjusted Schooling (Schostak 1983).
Slumptown is a community which experienced a brief period of industrial expansion before a rapid economic decline.
It is also an area to which black people immigrated with positive expectations only to experience racism and to bear a disproportionate burden of hard times.
This is the context in which John Schostak interrogates the school.
How could it enable pupils to contest their lives?
They're spendin' a few thousand on the Town Centre plantin' all trees 'n' things.
They'll all be torn down when the bizzies get fed up patrollin'.
Spendin' thousands on trees when there's all this unemployment round 'ere.
If I can't get a job I won't stay in Slumptown — I don't want benefit or a Youth Scheme' all that crap.
(Darren Baily, fifth form)
What contribution may education make towards the development of a sense of individuality, a sense of identity and a sense of community?
To what extent does schooling reinforce the structures of inequality which produce feelings of valuelessness and which in turn contribute to problems of deviancy?
What would be an adequate educational response?
I did not commence my research with these questions firmly in mind.
They emerged as I began thinking about and writing about the data I collected.
Initially, I simply wanted to ‘do a case study’, a study in depth of a school.
At first I tried to make a comparison between a large northern comprehensive school and a smaller London church school.
But this aim proved to be too large and the northern comprehensive school, as it were, took over my interests.
For years I have had an interest in phenomenology, the attempt to get behind, understand and interpret the way others see the world.
This interest drove me to inquire in depth into the experiences and feelings of individuals and to try and identify the processes by which they came to define themselves and other people under one set of categories rather than another.
The only way I could do this was to make myself as familiar as I could to the members of the schools.
This involved being around, or hanging around, just watching, recording, holding conversations.
Obviously, the volume of data by making notes and by taperecording that I acquired made it sensible for me to concentrate on the one school rather than the other.
However, I continued to collect data from the church school.
I was permitted to use the office of one of the deputy heads in the comprehensive school as my base.
I could enter and leave at will.
I roamed the school.
After gaining the necessary permissions to enter classrooms my freedom to follow up themes and issues discussed in interviews was very great.
In this free and easy style, I accustomed myself to the rhythms of school life.
I had agreed to do a study of the pastoral care system for the school as the ‘price’ for this freedom to roam.
I  spent a great deal of time with housemasters (see Chapter 22) and hence I became interested in the kinds of problems they encountered and began to follow-up the children I saw regularly in their offices.
Most noticeable were the ‘naughty’ children, the ones who had been sent to be told off, or who in some way had become ‘cases’.
I thus became interested in the school's notion of ‘deviance’.
I heard such children contest the view of themselves as being deviant.
I wondered what would count as an adequate educational response to individuals being labelled deviant, a response which would not simply take for granted that certain acts were or were not deviant but would look at the whole context of the interaction.
This would include, not simply, the immediate members of a particular drama or interaction — the teacher and the pupil — but would extend outwards towards parents, friends, enemies, those in authority, the community at large, the historical structures of schooling.
To compel a pupil to obey a teacher makes no sense without placing it in the context of compulsory schooling enforced legally.
Any single act is embedded in historical events which preceded the act, making such an act possible.
I decided to try and sketch out such contexts in the book I wrote about my research.
However, I did not want to write about one single instance, one particular community.
I wanted to create a symbol of all such communities.
Hence I ‘invented’ Slumptown and its comprehensive.
The community
No one individual statistic or set of statistics holds the key to describing any community.
A community reveals itself gradually through a multiplicity of voices.
The unities, and disunities, commonalities and eccentricities of these voices mark out the divisions and the degree of integration within the community, those qualities which are rich and those which stagnate and fester.
The mother of Debbie Graves says of her home:
When I first came to Slumptown which is twenty-one years ago, this street was one of the quietest streets in Slumptown.
My sister came here and she said ‘It's like walking down a grave yard’.
Now this house had been standing empty when I came in it, for twelve months.
There wasn't a window smashed, no boards up outside.
Look at it now.
I mean I don't know what's happened to Slumptown.
It is a semi-detached council house.
There is a small overgrown garden in the front.
‘I planted a rose bush’, said Debbie's mother, nodding towards the front garden.
‘Someone had taken it by morning.’
Sharon, Debbie's friend, lives in a newer council house about half a mile away.
They are concerned that people condemn Slumptown without actually going there.
Her mother says, ‘Don't judge before you've not actually been and don't believe everything you read 'cos you can read the same stories about every town in England, good and bad.’
Sharon's father says:
There was nothing at all, just woods and empty fields, you know.
We had to build our own church, St Lawrence's.
We thought it was a barn at first.
And we gradually done our own church and things have gone on from there.
But they still haven't kept pace with the population even though it is slowing down now.
They're even thinking  of closing schools down.
But they, they never catered — just threw people out and said, ‘well, get on with it’.
This, refers to Slumptown's ‘new’ face, they feel there were not enough facilities to cater for the young population of the town.
Sharon's father blames it all upon the economic climate.
‘Everything's against us.’
He goes on to say:
They've killed the place.
A lot of it was new estates — Well, same as Newtown.
Government give them a grant (i.e. ‘new’ industries), cut the rent and all the rest and once the period of, you know, free rent period, free taxes…they move out.
This has happened all round here.
The whole top and bottom is unemployment.
Kids have got no money, so they get bored.
They see other people who have got money so they're taking it…
Sharon's father has been unemployed for the last three years.
His wife has a job and it hurts his pride, although he is grateful for the money.
Of Sharon and her future he says:
Here children like her and others are studying for ‘O’ and ‘A’levels knowing that soon as they leave school they go right on the dole.
And surely this is not conducive to kids really studying?
Of 354 fifth- and sixth-formers who left Sharon's school in the summer of 1981 forty had found real jobs by 18 November, four of these having entered military service.
The remainder were either on Youth Opportunity schemes, the dole, or had re-entered education.
Sharon's father talked to me both of the building and the killing of a community.
In the building was pride, and at its death sadness, bitterness, helplessness.
To Slumptown have also been attracted many from other countries who during the 1950s were drawn by the glittering promises of prosperity diligently advertised by Great Britain.
British industry needed cheap labour.
Indeed, the West Indians originally thought that they had much in common with British people and expected to be able to identify with the British way of life (PEP 1976).
However, many saw the 1962 Commonwealth Immigrants Act as ending ‘the ‘Mother Country’ hallucination' (Kapo 1981).
A similar reaction followed the publication of the British Nationality Bill in 1981.
This Bill redefined British nationality, excluding perhaps millions who previously would have been able to claim citizenship.
It all adds, little by little, to a climate of resentment which at street level may be interpreted as by this black girl (Lucy):
…she call us in to do 'er dirty work for her, build 'er up, she wants us out again 'cos she see that we're gettin' education and we're gettin' brainy, and we're comin' into power so she wants us all out before we reach too high.
That's why she wants us out.
So-called ‘structural racism’ is experienced personally.
In the end it come down to the individual's sense of being violated and the individual's reassertion of his or her pride.
Lucy describes her feelings:
Lucy:You're not safe in Babylon.
This is what we call Babylon — you know, England.
Babylon, y'know.
To we blacks, it is Babylon.
JFS:Why?
Lucy:Why?
Because there's so much tribulation goin' on now.
I mean, so much racism by the police against black people…
I've gotta carry a ‘dool’ around with me, right, that's a knife.
Got to carry a knife to protect myself.
'Cos I know I ain't lettin' police 'old me up 'cos they disgrace me.
They 'urt my pride.
An’ I'm aware of them so much now that I'd do anyfink in my power to do somefink to them to get self-satisfaction.
Growing up black involves asserting an individual identity, and an ethnic identity.
Establishing an ethnic identity itself facilitates the assertion of an individual identity.
A black identity allows the individual to oppose white authority; to assert the image of Babylon.
At every turn friendship is violated by the divisive image, an image which serves to predict and to explain.
When Babylon rules there can be no brotherhood and sisterhood between black and white, any apparent friendship does not deceive.
In one context a person may be a friend.
Yet in another context the ‘friend’ will shout, ‘You black bastard.’
Why?
According to Lucy: ‘It's a fing like, I'd be talking to Carol, right, and she's with Ann…’
And Carol and Ann are white and all it needs is for one of them to lead the other, censoring friendship, arousing hostility.
Thus the other follows because she does not want to lose face with her white friend.
Allegiances are formed according to colour and group censorship demands conformity as ritualized insults fly:
Lucy:(At school) there used to be a group of white girls and a group of black girls, right and y'know, they start…once they're on their own they're alright but once they're with their people they get a bit lippy so they start callin' me black bastard —‘Look at you you mother fucker’— an' all that fing.
An' I tell ya I, it really got to me.
It burnt my feelings an' I went over there an' I just hit her.
An' I kick her down.
She had to go to 'ospital, right.
But I also was injured 'cos her friends were hittin' me.
But yet I was suspended, right, for a long time and she after she came back all she had is a little scratch there but they took 'er to 'ospital just to make it seem serious and she come back in school the next day.
I said, ‘Oh that's fuckery,’ you know, ‘Oh, that's nice init?’
In response, a white friend of Lucy's says, ‘There's too much 'ate in this world' not enough love'.
But in the group the love, if any, is inhibited.
The group censors any expression which would break solidarity within the group.
Violence as ‘fighting back’ and ‘standing up’becomes a way of regaining dignity:
Lucy:…
I'm black.
I'm proud of it, right?
But I know, it's a strain to be black.
It's a strain.
You could be proud of it or not proud of it.
It's a strain.
It's a damn strain because I mean, I could be talkin' to 'er (Lucy's white friend) ' that, at the end of the day she can say, ‘You fuckin' black bastard’.
She can say it but, you know what I mean, it can 'appen…
Friend:Yeah.
Lucy:An’ I can take that.
I've gotta take that.
An' I ain't gonna take it!
I'll kick 'er down!
An’ I feel a, I won't feel no way for 'er.
I'll feel good inside me 'cos she shouldn't dare to talk to me like that 'cos I've never said to 'er noffink like that, you know.
But that's 'ow it 'appened.
It always works that way you know.
Unemployment in the area amongst black people is high — perhaps 60 per cent.
Amongst black school leavers, finding a job is practically impossible.
Unemployment becomes a symbol of the neglect by the authorities of the black people.
Lucy's black friend Yvonne puts it this way; ‘On the whole right, it's the people in authority what brings that tension around, you know, 'cos the black people are thinkin' 'ow comes they not gettin' all the jobs, you know.’
And the lack of money and lack of things to do may lead towards thoughts of crime:
Lucy:They have nothin' to do so all they're thinkin' about is crime 'cos that's the only way we can live, nowadays, to be frank wiv you that's the only way you can live.
To feel nice, to have a little nice time.
'Cos you're on the dole, as soon as your money comes — I mean you're prayin' for your money to come — as soon as it comes it goes.
You know, an' you're wonderin' what 'ave you done wiv it.
Lucy and Yvonne point to two distinct sources in explaining deviant behaviour:(1) racism and (2) those pressures, such as unemployment, also faced by white people.
Each individual within each community has a monetary value — the current market price at which he or she can sell his or her labour.
Some individuals are worth a great deal, some very little.
Some individuals have advantages heaped upon them (for they are so valuable), while others have disadvantages heaped upon them (for they are so valueless).
Individuals develop a sense of worth to themselves and to others by the ways in which people treat them and their communities.
These experiences and these senses of self valuation are carried by each individual into school.
The school
How does one suspend one's prejudices about a place so familiar as a school?
In my research I deliberately sought out alternative interpretations.
I would hear a teacher's viewpoint.
Then I would go and ask pupils for their viewpoint.
I tried not to give any extra weight to the explanations or justifications made by one individual rather than another.
As a parent, and as an experienced teacher, I sympathized with teachers, and recognized similar attitudes in myself.
But it is all too easy to accept one version of reality as opposed to another version, particularly if one version is backed up by authority or power.
The social reality, for me, resided in the complex of interpretations, which could not be reduced to any one of the interpretations which composed it.
To illustrate this, I will take the example of Nicky Wragg.
A student teacher, during dinner time, asked a boy, Nicky Wragg, to take the teacher's dinner tray of dirty dishes back to the kitchen hatch for him.
The boy refused.
The teacher insisted.
A confrontation developed and the aggrieved boy decided to take the matter to the headmaster.
The question was, did the student teacher have the right to compel Nicky Wragg to do something he did not want to do during what was supposed to be the boy's free time?
The headmaster was not a sympathetic audience.
Throughout the incident he spoke with an air of exaggerated outrage and disbelief.
The boy when I saw him was sobbing hysterically.
The deputy headmaster arrived on the scene and the headmaster proceeded to explain to him the cause of the fuss:
‘…
He'd come to complain to me because our student (teacher) had asked him to take a tray back to the (dinner) hatch.
And having this, this enormous insult and indignity, injustice thrust upon him, he wanted to complain to, to a headmaster.
I'm  not yet sorting out exactly why but within half-a-minute of my arriving here he'd been extremely rude to me as well…’
Nicky sobbing heavily gasps out,
‘…'Cos he was tryin' to f’ force me.’
‘Because what?’
‘He was tryin' to f’ force me.’
‘He was trying to force you?’
‘Yeah.‘
The head lets out a high-pitched ‘Wellll’ and proceeds to present his case, voice grating,
‘You see you have to have a situation in schools where in the end teachers — and this gentleman is a visiting teacher — can give reasonable orders to people just as you do in a home.
Now your problem is young man — is that you really don't believe that teachers ought to have authority, ought to be able to say ‘do this’ and you do it.
And until you do understand that you're just going to get into more and more trouble.’
Theoretically, in a free democratic society, especially in an academic community, it is open to dispute and argumentation as to what constitutes a ‘reasonable order’ in a given situation.
Schools are not democratic communities.
The headmaster continues by saying:
‘You're trying to fight a war old boy.
And rather a silly war to fight.
It's a bit like the Isle of Man declaring war on the United States or something like that…’
The deputy head supports him
‘You know, the headmaster is quite right, you can't tell a teacher what you're going to do…for your own good some time son you're going to have to learn the lesson that there are people who can force you to do things and you're going to have to do them and you've got no choice.’
In the opinion of Nicky, ‘I'm in the right’.
It's a war.
Nicky has run up a unilateral declaration of independence.
There are two basic strategies with which to fight a war such as this: all-out naked force or subversion of your opponent's will.
The latter is the technique used by the deputy head.
Nicky sticks to force.
He tries to gather reinforcements:
‘I'll come with me mum.’
‘Well, I'm sure the headmaster would be delighted to see your mum.
When is your dad going to call?
Is he home?’
‘He's in the house.’
‘I think it's one of the reasons why you're upset isn't it?
That you know that you made such an awful fool of yourself.’
‘I've not.’
‘Oh yes you have.’
‘I'm right, everyone is…’
‘But Nicky, you're not right.
This is the thing.
You're not right.
You're quite wrong.
And you're going to have to learn that you're quite wrong.
One way or another son you're going to have to learn.
I'm confident…
I know you pretty well by now Nick Wragg don't I?’
‘Sir, yeah.’
‘Yeah.
And I'm confident that I know that one reason why you are so upset at this moment is because you realize you made such an awful fool of yourself, haven't you?’
‘Sir, no.’
‘Yes you have Nick.’
‘I'm in the right.’
‘Well that's just you dreaming and I'm not going to argue with you.
I'm not going to argue with you at all…sit there until you've calmed down.’
The deputy head is trying to define the situation and the role of the boy in the situation.
The situation is defined as one where ‘you can't tell a teacher what you're going to do,’ the child who resists must face up to the consequence that ‘you've got to accept that you're going to get into more and more trouble.’
This definition is backed up by power.
It is the power to apply punishments as well as the power to control any discussion of rights and wrongs, the power to say ‘that's just you dreaming and I'm not going to argue with you’.
The child's point of view is relegated to ‘dreaming’; it is not a real and valid point of view at all.
Indeed, the deputy head is able to penetrate whatever act the boy plays because ‘I know you pretty well by now Nick Wragg don't I?’
It is almost as if the teacher can enter the consciousness of the boy.
Nicky is entangled in a sticky web of subtle rhetoric concerning ‘right’ and ‘wrong’, his mother's feelings, his own feelings, and underlying all this is the reality of the force to which he must ultimately submit.
Resistance to control makes Nicky a problem, a deviant, a troublemaker.
After reading about this incident in my book the headteacher involved wrote to me saying he felt that teachers do perhaps shout too much but that the issue for him was that the student was a ‘guest’ in the school which in turn was a family.
Nicky Wragg therefore was breaching etiquette.
But what kind of guest is it that compels a host to carry dirty dishes?
And what kind of family is it that is composed of nearly two thousand members?
However, the dominant issue emerging from this transcript centred on ‘force’ and upon obedience.
Are these truly educational values?
Forcing values upon another without full discussion of what are to count as rights and duties appear to me to be anti-educational.
Are children, when they grow up, better able to challenge injustices, misinformation and hollow values because of their experiences at school?
The Nicky Wragg incident raised a number of issues and questions for further exploration.
One could identify the political and social attitudes or perspectives, and the social structures or historical events which would have to precede such an incident for it to occur at all.
Or, one could attempt to see whether the issues raised occur again in the concerns of teachers and pupils as they speak of their experiences of schooling.
The political theme was raised in many different ways.
To what extent can a child challenge adults?
There is an irony in the way this issue was raised by a housemaster reflecting upon his school and what the school should be doing for children:
I think if I were fourteen or fifteen years old looking towards leaving school, average ability, I'd be thinking to myself ‘Well, what's the point of working at school?
These teachers are telling us that you've got to work hard if you want a good job but there's no jobs there anyway.
So I think we're coming up against…
And I've noticed it this  year more markedly than ever before, a certain resignation to unemployment when they leave school.
And I'm almost having to bully kids in the fifth year at present into getting hold of the Echo at night and writing off to jobs because they believe they are of no value.
And it all comes back to what I was saying earlier about trying to get kids to believe in themselves a little bit.
But having said that even if they all believed in themselves we still know that a lot of people wouldn't get a job.
Even if they were all trying like mad, a lot of them wouldn't get jobs.
And this is what I meant when I said circumstances outside the school over which we have no control, they have no control…
So perhaps we should be thinking more about political education and perhaps we should be thinking more about encouraging them to be non-conformist in the sense that they are prepared to ask questions, to challenge and not to accept glib answers that teachers give out willy nilly…
I asked this housemaster to develop this further.
‘Suppose the pupils started organizing themselves into writing letters, protest marches — what would happen to the school?’
His response was quick:
I think we would oppose it.
I think you would get the situation where the teachers would oppose it.
I mean, it's happened.
It's happened in the past.
It's kind of‘quash the rebellion’.
Because generally speaking…when they get a bee in their bonnet, they tend not to write letters.
It tends to be ‘violent revolution’ in inverted commas.
And that is unacceptable to teachers.
Maybe if we were teaching them properly they would know how to protest without just resorting to violence or vandalism of some type, without the first step being breaking the rules; but we don't.
You know, I'm not being just critical of this school.
I think it's very difficult to envisage a school of nineteen hundred-and-odd kids where kids are encouraged to disapprove.
And what happens, they come to me and they say, as housemaster, they say ‘I'm not going to maths because I don't like that maths teacher.
He was rude today and I don't want to sit with rude people and I'm not going any more.’
It requires a complete turn round in the way that teachers have been trained to think.
It requires society to allow us to turn round.
This passage, I believe, points to a basic educational question.
He said ‘if we were teaching them properly they would know how to protest…’
Yet, how possible is it for teachers to take such an educational stance with children towards the immensely depressing social issue of their communities?
Such issues grew out of my reflections upon the images of school which were built up incident by incident, interview by interview, comment by comment.
Although each interview, written comment and observation provided details particular to each individual and incident I began to discern commonalities, patterns or regularities.
The above housemaster felt that to change certain kinds of a teacher's relationship to children would need a major restructuring of society.
Another housemaster in describing what he would ideally like to do also set it in the context of his sense of powerlessness.
He expressed a need to talk to the pupils:
…the flotsam and  jetsam , the people…the kids who're failing in the system (and) uh (the) kids who, who're…probably successful in the system but really just need to talk to somebody occasionally, y' know uh.
J.F.S.:D' you, do you see a complete divorce between that kind of counselling and teaching?…the academic bit…
Brown:Yeah.
 J.F.S. :A complete divorce?
Brown:Uh…well yes because I really am talking about one-to-one stuff and that's why I don't think you can do what I'm talking about in a class…
I mean it crops up occasionally, spontaneously, y' know.
But it's so chancy that way uh and I don't think either if you gave y'self the role or y'know, the title, say, of school counsellor or whatever that you…it would work.
All…all that I'm saying is that I would like my job and what I do ideally to be like that.
The opportunity and the time to just talk to some kids and sound them out…or y' know, listen to what they've got to say — have the time to do that.
And we don't.
I haven't time to really listen and get good feedback from my kids…
In imagination anything is possible.
Set against this is the felt reality; the constraining influences of the number of individuals a person has to interact with at any one moment and the problem of time.
In addition, schooling he says:
isn't for all kids — some kids find it excruciating; boring, meaningless and fruitless as well 'cos they're not going to get anything.
They haven't got the ability…y'know, to succeed in a system that by definition says so many will fail.
A conception of a ‘system’ unifies these experiences and symbolizes this teacher's sense of frustration and powerlessness.
He constructs in his mind a sense of the overarching power and obdurateness of the ‘system’.
Some personal conclusions
I will not forget the many people I met in the course of developing the many images I now have of Slumptown Comprehensive.
For a while I became a part of their lives.
I learnt something of the joys, frustrations and bitterness of their lives.
Most importantly, I have learnt something of the responsibility a researcher has towards these people who have let him or her into their lives.
No one can represent fully the lives of those met during a case study; nor can full justice be done to the complexity and the range of issues, interpretations and concerns experienced by each individual.
Some voices do not find it easy to reach the public stage.
I listened to many tales of powerlessness, of personal degradation, hopelessness and unhappiness.
It is all too easy to emphasize the positive image, the tales of success.
These make happier reading and please the powerful.
In our concern to manage the lives of others and our intention to do this in the best interests of all, we can too often simply define those who cry out in despair as moaners, as ‘deviants’, ‘defectives’, or as the lazy ones who haven't played the game in the way they should.
The lives of others, I believe, are not mere management problems, their despairs are not simply amenable to technical solutions which ‘repair the system as it is’; they are cries for radical solutions, solutions which go to the root of the problem: the structures of society which gnaw away at their lives, their self-worth.
As Darren Bailey who introduced this chapter pointed out, it is no good simply putting a pretty gloss on the environment, the solutions require more than ‘spendin' a few thousand on the Town Centre plantin' all trees ‘n’ things'.
Education, I believe as a result of my experience with the people of Slumptown, is a radical solution.
Through educational critique the roots of the problems confronting people in their everyday lives can be faced and action can be founded then in educational critique.
Thus, children have the educational right to challenge racism, sexism, material disadvantage and other forms of social inequality and discrimination.
If this is so, then the educational role of teachers is to facilitate this.
Such an educational role clearly dismantles the authority of the teacher as the custodian of right and wrong answers and as a controller of behaviours.
Recall the Nicky Wragg example.
The issues raised there not only go to the root of the relationships between adults and children but also raise the issue of political control in general and in particular, the rights and duties of individuals to confront a sense of injustice.
‘Viking wives at home’: sexism and deviance in school
In this chapter Lynn Davies explores the sexism in the official and hidden curriculum of the school and its relationship to the forms of deviance of boys and girls.
She starts by examining sexist assumptions in curriculum materials and considers the possibility that what counts as knowledge in some subjects may also discriminate against girls.
She describes the results of her research into those pupils teachers identify as deviants and normal and argues that their typology is discriminatory.
She examines the connection between the curriculum and the deviance of boy and girl pupils and looks at the possibilities of combating sexist curricula.
A title which includes Sexism and Deviance must rate as unparalleled in its ‘shock horror’ value, combining as it does two of the current ghouls on the contemporary school scene.
The connections between sex, sexism and sexuality are easy to conjure up.
When I was working at a Polytechnic, we were once required to submit the areas of current research interest for storage on central records.
Mine reappeared on the computer printout spelled ‘Deviance and Sex Rolls in School.’
My colleagues fell about with mirth, demanding to know the nature of the in-depth investigation and whether I was seeking film rights.
Yet interestingly, ‘deviance’ and ‘sexism’are not two additive features which together portray the school as a fetid jungle of would-be Tarzans and Janes swinging over the desks and refusing to wear proper clothes.
This chapter will argue instead that deviance and sexism act as brakes on each other, and interact in a myriad of fascinating ways to make schools very complex and unpredictable places in which to work out pupil (and teacher) identities.
‘Sexism’ means setting people at disadvantage because of their sex.
It involves making judgements about how people will and should behave on the basis of gender stereotypes believed to be determined by their sex.
In the analysis of how schools transmit culture, there has been a swing away from the idea that schools were gender-neutral conveyors of ‘objective’ knowledge to the view that schools, through the way they structure knowledge, are almost complete reproducers of societal divisions — including sex role stereotypes.
Exploration of school deviance, however, indicates that an alternative position is required.
For we find, in looking at pupil resistance, that while sex roles may be transmitted, they are by no means always taken on board; and furthermore, that one of the ‘causes’ of pupil disaffection may be the presence of contradictions in gender ideologies — even within one school.
Schools are indeed sexist places; but they do not present a unified ‘role’ for each sex.
Instead they make selections amongst the many variations of ‘masculinity’ and ‘ femininity ’which suit their control purposes.
A girl may simultaneously have to wear a masculine tie; show womanly ‘maturity’; conceal feminine allure; present a female non-assertive front in the classroom; and read  male-oriented textbooks.
Teachers in the same breath convey the message that they value ‘quiet’ pupils (often girls), while patently giving more time and attention to noisy pupils (often boys).
Such contradictions may inspire various forms of strategic pupil resistance, and preclude any permanent ‘socialisation’ into a pre-determined sex role.
I have thus found the study of pupil deviance a fertile valley for optimism to set beside the forbidding mountain-like permanence of theories of gender reproduction.
Reflections on curriculum materials
The revelations about sexism within educational materials are now widespread and, I would surmise, relatively well-known.
Everything from pre-school picture books to university texts have come under scrutiny, and the detail is still coming in.
Whatever age range or subject under review, four main areas appear rife: sex role stereotyping; the under-representation of females; masculinist language; and the omission of gender as an issue in its own right.
Much of this is now widely available, and excellent coverage is provided in Janie Whyld's Sexism in the Secondary Curriculum (1983); hence a brief review is enough here.
With regard to stereotyping, the justifiable objections are not only that males and females are depicted as occupying separate and ‘traditional’ spheres, but that the books present an over-exaggerated version of contemporary gender roles.
A mother invariably in the kitchen while father is at work or cleaning the car does not in fact represent the actuality of British family life today.
The boy always having adventures and escapades while the girl looks on admiringly, tells him to be careful or stays to play with dolls, is by no means automatically true of the day-to-day play activities of young children.
Nor, in occupational terms, are men always the police officers and lawyers while women are always the nurses and the social workers.
In direct percentage terms, school books do not on the whole reproduce current gender reality, let alone encourage flexible orientations regarding future career and role planning.
Secondly, and perhaps even more significantly, the studies have demonstrated the basic invisibility of women in a large proportion of published material.
Simply counting heads reveals that men appear far more frequently in pictures, illustrations, examples, maths problems and examination questions.
History has indeed been history, with its bias towards ‘great men’ and ‘great battles’, and its scanty coverage of family or society history and its lack of interest in ‘great times of peace’.
Geography books may rely on European occupational concepts and, in typically depicting, for example, farmers as male, ignore the centrality of women in the agricultural economy of many countries.
The instances of the over-valuation of the male are endless and penetrate the entire curriculum; more disturbing is the corresponding under-valuation of the female, and the fact that when women and girls do appear they often have negative images.
One example from a maths textbook analysis will suffice:
Girls…are shown wallpapering across the door of a room…as prizes to be won by competing males…as onlookers while the boys cheer Match of the Day…as items to be scaled down from fat to thin, etc.
Image is infinitely more powerful than text.
(Sharkey 1983, p. 129)
A third related area of concern is that of language.
There is now some controversy  over whether attacks on the constant use of ‘he,’‘him,’‘Man,’ and whether the counter-insistence on ‘Ms and ‘Chair’are not trivializing the issue.
Yet it has been convincingly shown by Spender (1980) and others that ‘he’ and ‘man’do not include women as they are supposed to.
If man can suckle his young (because man includes woman) then man can give birth, become Pope or impregnate man.
But this is nonsense, only women can do some of these things and only men others.
(Mahoney 1985, p. 14)
Pupils, especially, appear unaware that man includes woman, for when asked to draw a book cover for ‘Man and His World’ they draw men, whereas when asked to do the same for ‘People and their World’they draw both sexes (Harrison 1975).
The effects of girls perceiving that their sex does not figure in a large part of school knowledge is immeasurable.
It is obvious, too, that image and language become combined in a more pervasive and subtle way still to give some words a gender — as in European languages — although they appear neutral: I find it a constant effort of will to look at picture books with my three-year-old and say ‘That's the farmer and that's the farmer's husband’.
Women themselves cannot escape conveying man-made language.
I had similar difficulties with the use of phrases like ‘working-class youth values’ when writing up research on subcultures (Davies 1985a): in the singular ‘a youth’does mean a young man, and hence while writers may use ‘the youth of today’to imply generalizations across male and female, the connotation is still of a masculine prominence and centrality in adolescent affairs.
Finally, it is not just that women are invisible, but that gender itself is.
Social studies textbooks have only comparatively recently begun to include gender as an area of study alongside social class or ethnicity.
Sociologists, as Oakley (1974) pointed out, have elected to focus on power, particularly as exercised through politics, the law, business etc. — which are ‘male dominated arenas’.
‘The more sociology is concerned with such areas, the less it is, by definition, likely to include women within its frame of reference.’
Economics textbooks may still hold to the notion of ‘work’ as paid employment and deny the importance of unpaid women's work (in agriculture or the home) in their theories and explanations and their insistence that most countries have moved to a ‘monetary economy’.
The contribution of different types of gender division to economic ‘growth’ or ‘recession’does not, I would claim, figure largely in economics textbooks.
And in educational administration textbooks, of course, written for potential (male?) managers of schools, gender barely even gets a mention in the index (Davies 1985b).
What counts as school knowledge?
Once one is in the right frame of mind, it is a relatively easy exercise to play spot-the-sexism within curriculum materials; indeed both teachers and pupils now use this serious game to highlight gender biases in their books and, rather than toss them out, make the best of distorted material to act as a starter for discussion.
More effort is required, however, to begin to question the whole logic on which our selection of school knowledge is based.
We have to look at the determination  of content within each subject, and at the various statuses of separate ‘subjects’ across the curriculum, to unpack any masculinist domination in the framing of school knowledge.
In terms of social class, sociologists since the 1970s have successfully revealed the power and class interests behind the acceptance of school art or school music as meaning the classics rather than pop or photography, and have shown that the unquestioned valuation of abstractness, ‘pure’ knowledge and literacy in school (in preference to immediacy, ‘applied’knowledge and practicality) acts to promote the interests and skills of the dominant elite.
A similar analysis for gender would begin to question in whose interests ‘hard’ sciences like physics and chemistry should enjoy higher status than ‘soft’sciences like biology and home economics.
It would challenge the boundaries between subject areas: for example, why science is construed and taught as a totally separate area from social science, when it might be argued that the social effects of science (particularly in our nuclear age) should be given equal weight to the mechanisms of science.
It is not, then, just a question of men being over-represented in science textbooks and girls lacking suitable role models; it is also the possibility that what does and does not ‘count’ as science itself is male-dominated.
The idea that science should be expressed in someone else's language, the compulsory ‘the test-tube was placed over the bunsen burner’, may disadvantage many pupils but especially girls if that other language is seen to be part of the world of men.
The tradition of distancing oneself from knowledge or research begins in school, and the horror of emotional interference or personal feelings is, I submit, a very masculine approach to the study of our world — whether the physical or social world.
Analyses of sexism in the curriculum should also include identification of what is left out, either within subject areas, or in terms of potential links between areas of knowledge: my contention is that the higher the prestige, and the more valuable a credential the subject becomes, the more likely it is to exclude issues, themes and approaches which relate to personal and female domains.
Additionally, we might profitably pursue how curriculum is evaluated and assessed.
So-called ‘objective’ tests may hardly be objective at all, for Harding (1980) reports that girls seem to do worse than boys when multiple choice questions are used.
They do better than boys, however, on open-ended ‘essay’ type questions.
Whether this relates to the greater verbal fluency of girls or to their being less prone to instant ‘right-answerism’ remains open.
As Kessler et al(1985) point out, school curricula often exaggerate the clear-cut distinction between right and wrong, relevant and irrelevant; there is little room for ambiguity, multiple layering of truths or open-ended explorations.
They argue that such an approach to knowledge ‘is associated with a particular kind of masculinity that is currently hegemonic’.
Typing the deviants
As with the official curriculum, much has been researched and written on the ways teacher-pupil interaction can be different for boys than for girls, and a brief initial summary will suffice.
Basically, in a mixed sex classroom, teachers  consciously or unconsciously spend about twice as much time with boys than with the girls (Spender and Sarah 1980).
Boys monopolize physical space, linguistic space  and teacher attention (Mahoney 1985).
Teachers may be more chivalrous towards girls (Grant 1983), but be preoccupied with the disruptive behaviour of boys (Buswell 1981).
Yet if forced to make a choice, about three-quarters of teachers say they would prefer to teach boys (Davies 1984).
It appears from my own research that while, overall, boys are seen to be less conformist, teachers prefer their type of classroom resistance to that of the girls.
Girls are seen to ‘bear grudges’, to be insolent, sulky, or ‘right little madams’.
Men teachers in particular find the various feminine strategies used by the girls difficult to cope with; both sexes of teacher deem the boys to ‘take their punishment better’ and hence teachers prefer the immediate thrust and counter-thrust of the predictable encounters with boys to the longer drawn out ‘deviousness’of the girls.
Teacher definitions of ‘normality’ and ‘deviance’are therefore very complex, and something I attempted to explore through stereotype questionnaires (see Davies 1984).
In terms of expectations of the ‘good’ pupil, I found  surprisingly few sex differences.
However, there were clear differences in expectations of deviant pupils.
In fact a continuum of behaviour emerged which explains more fully the teacher preference for boys.
I sub-divided deviance into ‘normal’ and ‘abnormal’for each sex (Table 16.1).
Table 16.1 A summary of teachers' perceptions of perfection, normality and deviance
While teachers would presumably like a class of thirty hermaphroditic paragons, they nonetheless expect pupils to ‘deviate’ from this — and on sex-differentiated lines.
Their perception of the ‘normal’ lad is the Just William type — rough, cheeky and slapdash; the ‘normal’Violet is passive, wet and emotional.
Boys are ‘boisterous’ but girls ‘sit like puddings.’
Hence teachers hold stereotypical views of normal deviants that correspond to social images outside the school or within the curriculum.
They have various strategies to cope with the showy behaviour of boys, such as giving more attention, allotting instant verbal or physical punishment, aligning the curriculum to interest them; the normal deviant girl does not anyway present too many control problems.
It is when we reach the realm of ‘abnormal deviance’ that the teacher's problematic really emerges, for here pupils are not only deviating from the ‘good pupil’role, but may be denying or over-exaggerating their gender image as well.
In the ‘good pupil’ list, teachers placed a high priority on ‘being interested in the opposite sex’, and the pupils who appear to deviate from this (‘cissy’boys or ‘tomboy’girls) call up spectres of homosexuality uncomfortable for many teachers.
Conversely, while pupils are expected to conform to certain role images, pupils who exaggerate these are also problematic.
Teachers will apparently expect and condone a certain amount of aggressive behaviour from boys, and even sexual harassment towards the girls, as both Jones (1985) and Mahoney (1985) would concur; but over-exaggeration of this ‘machismo’ of course is played out in terms of violence and destructive behaviour, which no teacher wants.
Similarly, teachers will expect girls to exhibit the demure, ladylike attributes of the female role, and to be interested in boys and fashion, but they castigate overt expressions of femininity or sexual allure, and are quick to label girls ‘sluts’ and ‘bitches’.
Such insults have no masculine equivalent, and arouse great hostility and counter-measures in adolescent girls very concerned to protect their moral identity.
The hostility can of course then take the form of ‘masculine’ behaviour being aggressive, or ‘loud with the mouth’; and we can find girls offending three behaviour rules; they infringe the good pupil role, the femininity rule and the girls-are-better-than-boys presupposition.
It is no wonder that teachers find ‘difficult’ girls far harder to cope with than the difficult boy.
What is the effect of the sexist curriculum
In highlighting gender differences in deviance, there is the risk of overplaying such dimensions and of confirming the very stereotypes that one is attacking in curriculum materials.
There are many aspects of school disaffection — alienation, boredom, ‘mucking about’, smoking, refusal to wear uniform — which are common to both sexes.
Sex differences are also less in actuality than they are in teachers' perceptions, as self-report schedules demonstrate, and clearly depend on who is defining what as ‘deviant,’‘disruptive’ or ‘disaffected’— that is, what and whose rules of ‘normality’are being infringed.
A second problem with attempting to make connections between (sexist) curricula and (sex-typed) deviance is the difficulty of establishing any causal effects.
With regard to the norm of ‘achievement’, Mahoney (1985) writes:
Distorted and offensive though it may be, riddled with he-man language though it still is, despite the information on the subject…no straightforward links can be  made between biased, sexist material and girls' alleged underachievement.
First, the same textbooks are used in single-sex schools and the contents are not always challenged by teachers.
Second, it is not true that girls underachieve across the board in education.
Relative to boys they achieve highly in English and modern languages, yet…the curriculum in these areas is no less biased in favour of males.
(Mahoney 1985, p. 14)
Similarly, Hingley (1983) comments on the ‘new wave’ modern language courses which
…settled on the lowest common denominator of European life as their vehicle — the nuclear family.
They depict a stereotyped norm where father makes all the decisions, goes out to work and waits for his meals to be prepared by the wife with occasional assistance of the daughter.
The son is indulgently allowed to be noisy, greedy and disobedient; the daughters are usually quiet, helpful, punctual, deputy mothers, but in a tight spot they have to be busily frightened while the (otherwise irresponsible) male child takes charge of the situation…the first two years of the (Longmans) course revolve around the Marsaud family and a not unreasonable answer to the question ‘Where is Madame Marsaud?’ might be ‘She is under house arrest’.
The one advantage of the Longmans course is that it is rather dull and lifeless and therefore less likely to have any impact on the pupils.
(Hingley 1983, p. 103, my emphasis)
While the portrayal of both normality and deviance may be stereotyped in curriculum texts, we have no way of quantifying how far they are internalized by pupils.
Pupils who are already alienated by school and its artefacts are even less likely to absorb curriculum messages than are ‘conformist’ pupils.
However, it is worth exploring some of the possible effects of sexist curricula.
Firstly they may reinforce a macho, non-caring image for boys.
Whether we are talking of the families portrayed in reading schemes and modern languages material, the heroes of novels chosen in English literature, or the personages selected as worthy of interest in history, the picture may be of a male who is larger than life, dominant and personality-projecting.
While one cannot say with certainty that such images ‘teach’ boys to be aggressive in class, there is on the other hand little there which would permit boys to be quiet and accommodating, the attributes valued by the harassed classroom teacher.
Secondly, it is possible that the roles portrayed by women do reinforce passivity and submissiveness from girls.
From the teacher's point of view this is acceptable up to a point, but in excess leads to an exasperating lack of response and an apparent stolidity from girls.
It does not provoke the adventurous independence favoured by teachers in their ideal pupils.
The absence of career models, particularly in maths and science, links of course to another aspect of female deviance —‘underachievement’, and intermittent aspiration in certain curriculum areas.
While the above are possibly reinforcing features, school curricula, may also evoke tensions in gender identities.
A third area of interest would be the contrast between the values celebrated by the working-class male culture (see Willis 1977) of action, excitement, collectivism and practical displays of hardness, and (whatever the materials portray) the actual route to school achievement, which is sedentary, book-based, individualistic learning.
While a large proportion of pupils manage to achieve multiple identities and to co-exist in a range of daily  cultures, there are some pupils for whom such transitions are problematic, and for whom the inconsistencies in curriculum messages are too great.
A final area of tension would again be for the girls, and relates to the invisibility and marginality of the female in curriculum material mentioned earlier.
Whereas boys may become alienated from the means of learning, girls would be alienated more swiftly by the content of learning.
In materials geared to male interest, male definitions and male language, girls seeking involvement and  identification are likely to become disappointed.
Girls are supposed to be conformist; but what appealing models are there for them to conform to?
This explains the joy with which single-sex or girls-only discussion groups plus non-sexist materials are met by girls (Deem 1984), because issues of direct relevance and impact can be raised and addressed without being filtered through male perceptions or boys' scorn.
Otherwise the continued experience of sexual discrimination in school and its artefacts may provoke a range of reactions from passive ‘opting out’ to outright rejection.
Without seeming too deterministic, it would appear then that at least two dimensions in the curriculum-deviance link can be identified in terms of gender.
One is the reinforcement of already inherently problematic behaviours for teachers; the other is the creation of sex role contradictions in curriculum transmission or content which, by forcing pupils to manage tensions in their own identity, may lead to alienation or disaffection from school life.
There then follows another complication.
Delamont (1980) in her case-study of a comprehensive school discovered that ‘the more teachers tried to make the lesson material relevant and immediate to the pupils, the more likely they were to make sexist assumptions and remarks’(p. 54).
The anecdotes and examples chosen to add colour to strictly academic material revealed highly sexist ideas about history, the pupils' homes or their own knowledge or interests.
It could be that such pupil cultures were sexist; but an interesting dilemma emerges.
Trying to prevent boredom and contain deviance by making the curriculum ‘relevant’ to pupils' cultures may elicit sexism; yet sexist curricula may exacerbate deviance.
How can sexism be challenged?
I have watched student teachers attempting dramatic role plays of the Vikings, only to come unstuck with parts for girls; not really able to encourage them to be raped or pillaged, the only alternative is, as one student hastily improvised, for them to be ‘Viking wives at home’.
Yet to challenge conventional curriculum stereotypes is not easy for teachers in co-educational schools, for the boys object and the girls are reluctant (Spender and Sarah 1980, Mahoney 1985).
It has even been argued in the US that stereotypes become more extreme in ‘progressive’ classrooms (Sussman 1977).
We cannot accuse teachers of being sole agents of reproduction: they may themselves be considered deviant by the pupils or parents if they try to encourage domestic skills in boys or engineering orientations in girls.
Sally Shave's attempt to counter sexism in her junior school invoked headlines in local newspapers such as‘A school recipe to turn boys into pansies’.
The chairman of the education committee said ‘If boys are to be turned into fairies and girls into butch young maids, it should be for the parent to decide and not the education authorities’(TES 13.10.78).
The confusion of sex and sexuality, invoking the dread of any deviations from ‘normal’ heterosexuality, means that anti-sexist curricula may encounter more resistance even than anti-racist measures.
Boys in particular seem to have more control over curricula with teachers making efforts to select materials that will interest them (Shaw 1980).
While girls are used to operating within a masculine frame of reference, boys object vociferously if presented with what they deem as ‘girls’ stuff'.
Organized responses to sexism have involved equal opportunities initiatives or more fundamental efforts to challenge curriculum assumptions through ‘girl-friendly’ curricula and anti-sexist policies.
Attempts to enhance opportunities for girls in traditionally male subject areas include GIST (Girls Into Science and Technology), GATE (Girls and Technology Education), and GAMMA (Girls and Mathematics Association).
The development into ‘girl-friendly science’ or indeed ‘girl-friendly schooling’in general, has engendered wide-ranging analyses of the way curricula are constructed, and of how schools could play a transformative rather than a reproductive role in gender  identities for both sexes (see for instance Kelly 1985).
The distinction between ‘equal opportunities’ and ‘girl-friendly’approaches has similarities to the ‘cultural deprivation/cultural difference’debate about social class.
An ‘equal opportunities’ ideology which focuses purely on girls aims to provide compensatory experiences for the ‘problems’ensuing from their (disadvantaged) socialization.
It tries to raise their aspirations, alter their attitudes towards science, technology and computers, to ‘widen’ their horizons — i.e. to make them more like boys.
A girl-friendly approach, on the other hand, sees girls inhabiting a different (not deprived) culture, which should be given equal value in school.
Girls' educational ‘problems’ would derive from female devaluation within the school; a girl-friendly school would restore to them through both organization and curriculum the time, space, attention and (sexual) dignity which has been usurped by the males.
Kessler et al(1985) has provided a useful recent critique of ‘equal opportunities’ strategies in Australia:
1
The strategy assumes that educational institutions are neutral, when not only is the education system controlled by men, but it actively constructs gender and actively produces women's subordination.
2
The knowledge sought is itself not neutral.
3
The programmes do not affect boys and need to combat their sexism.
4
They ignore homosexuality and take for granted categories of ‘male’ and ‘female’.
5
They are class-blind, in that the programme may reach only a minority, and separates this elite from the bulk of girls who are defined as failures and frequently pushed into opposition to the school's programme.
The equal opportunities strategy is, the writers claim, likely to be self-defeating.
They argue for the empowerment of subordinated groups, rather than giving them selective access to existing hierarchies; for the ‘democratization’ of the curriculum by reorganizing knowledge to advantage the disadvantaged; and for special teacher training for teachers to assist girls in resisting the sexist demands of their schools.
The debate is therefore about whether ‘gender equality’ means equal opportunities to study what is to girls a rejecting curriculum, or whether it means changing the curriculum so that boys and girls are equally advantaged (or disadvantaged).
If we attack curricula, the next level of debate centres round how fundamental the change needs to be.
Just as there is a fundamental difference between ‘equal opportunities’ and ‘girl-friendly’strategies, there is more than a semantic difference between non-sexist and anti-sexist initiatives.
Non-sexist material implies some neutral reality ‘out there’ waiting to replace the old gender biases; anti-sexist indicates a more radical assault on distortions and discrimination.
Spender claims that ‘if sexism were removed from the curriculum little would remain'.
Non-sexism can only be a utopian or post-revolutionary state arrived at after the massive change in social relations and ideas demanded by an aggressive anti-sexist policy.
A scissors-and-paste job on the existing curriculum — which removed masculinist language, substituted female examples and models, deleted stereotypes or debasing images — would provide a superficially ‘non-sexist’ transmission process, but it would not make many inroads into the valuation of, or boundaries around, such knowledge areas at present designated ‘home economics’or ‘applied maths’, or, indeed, have any direct effect on the hidden curriculum.
It is obvious that it would be insufficient and even counter-productive to tackle official curriculum areas in isolation from the rest of school life, from the rest of school-based gender construction.
A different direction is taken by projects such as DASI (Developing Anti-Sexist Initiatives) where the aim is ‘to give girls a positive self-image, and make them aware of the way society controls them rather than to direct them into ‘male’ areas of study or work' (Whyld 1983, p. 303).
Resources of anti-sexist teaching materials across the curriculum are built up, and some introduced into the official curriculum; there are courses on sex-role stereotyping, but the work also includes single-sex assertiveness training, and male teachers working with boys to change their attitudes.
The number of individual schools developing their own non-sexist and anti-sexist initiatives is increasing continuously, and most tackle far more than just the official curriculum, aiming to provide verbal and physical ‘space’ for girls, to tackle careers and option choices and to involve parents.
There is recognition of the need for realignment for both sexes, to ‘offer active support for all students.
The non-macho boy probably gets more teasing than the assertive girl’(Mahoney 1985, p. 99).
Thus the ‘Skills for Living’ course at Hackney Downs Boys School encourages boys to think about things such as food preparation, shopping and baby care, to anticipate their future domestic lives, to discuss sexism and ‘to treat each other in a caring way’(Arnot 1984).
Conclusion: the effects of change
The question remains as to how far non-sexist or anti-sexist curricula would act to alter amounts and styles of pupil disaffection.
Those including single-sex tutoring, courses on sex-role stereotyping and assertiveness training certainly report increased involvement and less truancy by girls.
 Conversely , projects which encourage a caring attitude in boys and acceptance of ‘non-macho’ traits would presumably act to deflect the automatic expression of male toughness or aggression  although it is always possible that hostility to the course itself could provoke even more of a ‘male backlash’.
One thing never to be forgotten is the way social class interacts with gender, and makes for different interpretations in different school milieux.
Another is that no school is static, and both before and after the introduction of non-sexist materials will be grappling with a range of possibilities for each sex, rather than a unified ‘role’.
Both teachers and pupils will select and experiment with different styles, depending on their immediate power needs; unless pupil deviance is gender-based, there is no guarantee that sex role shifts will reorient that deviance.
If pupils are disaffected with school because they fail to see its relevance to the labour market, then non-sexist curricula may become yet another target for displays of boredom and alienation, yet another part of the school fabric to be attacked.
It clearly depends on how far the ‘empowerment’ of pupils and ‘democratization’of curriculum and pedagogy can be carried out within the political climate deciding school objectives.
If power interests are threatened, then new models of conformity may merely provoke new forms of deviance.
To prevent male or female backlashes, to stop hostile retreats into conventional gender styles, it is essential for anti-sexist curricula to give pupils the power and courage to select from real alternatives in their future lives.
Paradoxically, a true anti-sexist curriculum is one that encourages creative and political resistance — both in and out of school.