

FAMILY, MARRIAGE AND MOTHERHOOD
1 Patterns of Marriage and Motherhood
For all women marriage conferred a higher status than spinsterhood, which connoted failure.
This was particularly the case before World War I, but marriage remained the normative expectation of women of all classes to the end of the period.
Spinsterhood was often referred to as ‘failure in business’ in middle class households, leading Cicely Hamilton to write bitterly about ‘marriage as a trade’in 1909.
Prior to World War I, a majority of spinsters faced an often lonely and marginal life in their parents' home or in the households of a male relative.
The prospect of remaining unmarried was undoubtedly materially harsher for working class women, because the average wage they could command in the late nineteenth and early twentieth-centuries was below subsistence level.
Marriage, then, was part of the typical experience of women throughout the period.
Between 1871 and 1951 the proportion of adult females who were (or had been) married never fell below 60 per cent, reaching 75 per cent in 1951 (Table 1), and when young unmarried women are excluded, the figure becomes much higher.
Thus the proportion of women reaching their late forties who were (or had been) married fell from a high of 88 per cent in the   late nineteenth century to a low of 83 per cent in 1921 and 1931.
The rest of the period saw both an increase in the popularity and duration of marriage, with life expectancies for both men and women improving and the divorce rate remaining low.
There were nevertheless many women who never married.
This was partly due to the imbalance in the sex ratio, which increased steadily from 1871 to 1911, and dramatically as a result of World War I. This ‘excess’ of women caused considerable anguish, particularly in the nineteenth century, because it became inevitable that some women would not be able to fulfil their ‘natural destiny’of marriage and motherhood.
The problem was considered particularly vexing because, as the research of contemporaries showed, it affected middle class women most.
In 1892, Clara Collet, a social investigator, reported that in the richer suburbs unmarried women aged 35–45 outnumbered unmarried men by over three to one, and only one-third of these were domestic servants.
Those women who were not married by their late twenties stood a very real chance of never marrying.
For most of the period about one-third of those unmarried by age 25–29 failed to marry during their reproductive years (the figure rising from 27 per cent in 1871 to 35 per cent in 1931).
Despite the fact that contemporary comment was no stronger than it had been in the nineteenth century, World War I had a dramatic effect on the marriage expectations of women, and it may be hypothesised that there were concomitant changes in attitudes towards the desirability of careers for daughters of middle class parents.
Of those women who were single and in their late twenties in 1921, 50 per cent remained unmarried a decade later: this figure is particularly striking when compared with that for men, of whom only 30 per cent failed to marry.
There were also changes in the numbers and age distribution of widowed and divorced women.
In general, the numbers of widows in the 15–44 age group remained fairly constant at about 200,000 throughout the period, despite steady increases in the total population.
The exceptions were the increase during immediate post-World War I years, and the decrease in 1951 to only 150,000.
By 1951, only 6 per cent of all widows were in the 15–44 age group, compared to nearly 20 per cent in 1871 and 1881.
In contrast, the proportion of all widows aged 65 or more increased from 38 per cent to nearly 60 per cent, while their numbers rose from 386,000 in 1871 to 1,529,000 in 1951, doubling between 1871 and 1921, and almost doubling again during the following thirty years, reflecting increased longevity amongst women.
Generally speaking, a widower or divorced man was three times as likely to remarry as his female counterpart throughout the period.
This was due to both the ‘surplus’ of women and conventions regarding the marriageability of older women.
Prior to 1914 divorce was largely confined to the middle and upper classes.
Changes in the aid given to poor petitioners in 1914, together with the effects  of World War I, produced an increase in the divorce rate after 1918, but it was not until 1946 that legal aid became freely available and therefore not until 1951 that divorce petitions began to come from a cross section of the population.
Prior to World War II working class couples made use of judicial separation machinery rather than divorce, but the number of informal separations was undoubtedly larger than the number that came to court.
Within marriage the most important change experienced by women was the steady decline in the fertility rate until after World War II (Table 2), while in the 1870s there were over 295 legitimate live births per 1000 married women aged 15–44, this figure had dropped to 222 by the first decade of the twentieth century and to only 111 by the 1930s.
The 1940s saw a very slight increase, accounted for entirely by the post-war ‘baby boom’.
Illegitimate fertility rates also decreased, both in absolute terms and relative to marital fertility, except for the war years.
Peter Laslett has suggested that the illegitimate fertility rate may be seen as a subset of general fertility.
Until the 1930s, illegitimacy was primarily a rural phenomenon, although there were wide differences in the illegitimacy rate between regions and between different groups of women.
For example, the ability to bear sons remained important in early twentieth-century farming communities.
An elderly fenwoman remembered her husband-to-be demanding ‘What you got under your apron?
I got to see if you're any good.
I ain't going to buy a piggy-in-a-poke’.
A 1911 survey showed that 46 per cent of the illegitimate children in Britain were born to women who had worked in domestic service.
John Gillis has shown from a study of the London Foundling Hospital that higher servants, such as ladies' maids, seem to have been particularly vulnerable which may be explained by the contradictions they experienced in attempting to combine customs of courtship and marriage appropriate to women of their class backgrounds with the standards of conduct expected by their employers.
Intercourse did not usually take place until marriage was promised, and marriage failed to take place usually because of job difficulties on the part of the man.
In 1938 the Population Statistics Act required the age of the mother at the birth of the child to be recorded, and these new data revealed that one-seventh of all children born between 1938 and 1939 were premaritally conceived.
The rise in the illegitimacy rate during World War II resulted from many marriages not taking place (owing to conscription and general wartime dislocation), rather than from a rise in premarital conceptions.
The decline in the general fertility rate was matched by a reduction in family size.
In the first decade of this century 55 per cent of women had three or more children and 25 per cent more than five, but by the 1940s these figures were 30 per cent and 9 per cent respectively.
However, there were also marked class differences.
In general the wives of men in working class occupations had larger families, marrying earlier and giving birth earlier in marriage, with more conceptions and live births.
The period saw a similar decline in the number of live births for both manual and non-manual families but the differential between these groups remained great, and indeed widened, until the inter-war years.
Between 1870 and 1879, the number of births to the families of male manual workers was 25 per cent higher than those to non-manual families, but this widened to 42 per cent for the period 1910–1924.
The fact that manual workers married on average, and throughout the period, about a year earlier helped contribute to this, as did the fact that there was about fifty per cent more childlessness among non-manual families.
The variations among specific occupational groups were often even more extreme.
Labourers' wives who married at age 20 to 24 during the first decade of this century had on average 4.8 live births, or over 80 per cent more than the wives of professionals.
(And, of course professionals tended on average to marry later and hence have even fewer live births, so the difference between the reproductive experience of the two groups was in fact even greater.)
The marital fertility of agricultural labourers actually rose during the late nineteenth century relative to other social groups, and this, together with their low levels of infant mortality, resulted in a large average family size.
Thus, while marriage was an experience common to women of all classes, there were substantial differences between middle and working class women in terms of first, their realistic expectations of marriage given the greater surplus of women amongst the middle class (at least prior to World War I), second, their experiences of marriage breakdown, and third, their patterns of  childbearing within marriage.
As the following chapters will show, the separation between the public and private spheres was much more rigidly maintained for middle class than for working class women.
While working class women increasingly went out to work, usually out of economic necessity, philanthropists and policy makers increasingly urged them to pay more attention to their duties as wives and mothers, which only tended to exacerbate the difficulties they experienced.
The struggle of working class women against scarce resources and ill health continued  throughout the period, while progress in terms of the reform of property laws relating to married women, of the divorce laws, and the change in attitudes towards the expression of female sexuality within marriage primarily benefited middle class women.
Nevertheless, by the early 1950s the extremes of difference between working and middle class women's experiences, which had been the result chiefly of poverty on the one hand, and a cloistered existence in a home where at least the heavy chores were performed by domestic servants on the other, had disappeared.
2 Working Class Women
Introduction
Most commentators on late nineteenth and early twentieth-century working class life have been struck by the prosaic attitudes of working class couples towards marriage.
One writer described couples entering and leaving church in the 1870s as ‘cool and businesslike, as though having paid the deposit on the purchase of a donkey or a handsome barrow, they were just going in with their witnesses to settle the bargain’.
Little seems to have changed by the 1900s, when compared to funerals, marriages were tame events.
In London, weddings usually took place on Saturday, so that a day's work was not lost, and in Middlesbrough, Lady Bell, the wife of the ironmaster, recorded that marriage was ‘merely an incident in the daily work’.
Parents often did not attend, and at most the couple might take a day off to celebrate.
By the outbreak of World War II rather more was being made of the ceremony itself, but it would appear that the reasons given by working class couples heading for the altar were still somewhat pragmatic.
Slater and Woodside found  that the couples they interviewed in the 1940s showed ‘a mutual liking canalised by prudential and social considerations’.
Certainly marriage was very much a practical necessity for working class girls, and the chief hope was for a good bargain.
Music hall songs showed that both men and women had a down-to-earth view of the advantages and disadvantages of marriage.
Girls of all classes preferred marriage to being ‘left on the shelf’, but working class girls needed a husband above all for economic support.
The average weekly wage of young women workers over the age of eighteen in non-textile industries was 12/11d in 1906, a sum that did not permit a fully independent existence.
As one woman who lost her job in 1921 recalled:
It didn't bother me, I knew I was engaged to be married, and in those days as soon as you were going to be married you left your job…that is the only thing we girls had to look forward to, getting married and going on our own, getting our bottom drawer together and things like that…
Most girls were aware of the realities of household labour and the difficulties of household management that awaited them after marriage.
Many would have helped their mothers, especially on washdays, minding the baby or turning the mangle, some, like the young Louise Jermy, at the expense of health as well as leisure.
Yet only a very few seem to have consciously resolved to make a different life.
On the who]e expectations were  confined — doubtless realistically — to hoping for a ‘good husband’: that is one who brought home a regular wage and with whom a relationship could be built upon mutual respect.
From his study of working class autobiographies, John Burnett has concluded that the virtues of a marriage partner tended to be described in terms of solid calculation, and that compatibility of temperament and affection seemed to be more important than sexual attraction.
It is by no means clear that working class girls regarded the constituents of marital happiness as being substantially different from those prized by middle class girls, but the realities of economic  constraints meant that their priorities were ordered rather differently.
Amongst the one-third of the urban population of London and York whom Booth and Rowntree found to be in poverty at the end of the nineteenth century, the chief concern of the married women was to provide food, clothing and shelter for themselves and their children.
It is therefore not surprising that, as Ellen Ross has pointed out, the marital relationship did not enjoin romantic love or verbal and sexual intimacy, but required financial obligations, services and activities that were gender specific.
It is important to remember that this conclusion was reached on the basis of urban evidence, for it is likely that the degree of sex segregation or jointness of marital relationships varied widely from region to region.
Gill Burke has shown that in Cornish mining villages, for example, the worlds of men and women were close until the 1880s and 1890s.
Cornish mining families tended to live in rural villages apart from the mines, and while very few married women worked full-time, husbands and wives took part in the life of their communities, attending the annual fairs and suppers and working together at harvest time.
With the rapid decline in the mining industry during the late nineteenth century, men were forced to work longer hours or to seek work abroad and this shared life largely disappeared.
For both town and country women it seems that children were the centre of their worlds.
Mrs Pember Reeves commented on this in her study of Lambeth, published in 1913, as did Slater and Woodside after a survey carried out during the 1940s.
One of their respondents commented: ‘A child is your life; men can go out and find their pleasures outside’.
Husbands were expected above all to make regular contributions to the family exchequer.
Mrs Pember Reeves noted that the Lambeth housewives she visited ‘seemed to expect judgement to be passed on the absent man according to the amount he allowed them.’
When money ran short, whether through neglect, illness or even death of the breadwinner, women would resort first to kin and to neighbours.
In large part it was neighbourliness that distinguished the behaviour of working from lower middle class women, although Lady Bell observed that even prior to World War I working class women in Middlesbrough saw virtue in keeping themselves to themselves.
Neighbourliness among the poor suffered greatly during the inter-war years, when unemployment rather than low wages became the chief cause of poverty.
Under the twin pressures of moving to seek work and household means-tested  benefits, community solidarity tended to disintegrate.
When family and neighbours failed, women resorted to the pawnshop and other ready means of obtaining credit or to whatever part-time work was available — hawking goods, taking in washing or going out charring.
The typical pattern of female activities among the poor and the very poor included borrowing, bartering and pawning, as well as housekeeping chores and paid employment, which do not fit neatly into the realm of either production or consumption.
Any woman who had to go further than this and shoulder the burden of full-time work in addition to her domestic duties was often pitied by other married women.
(The problems these women faced as workers are considered in Part II.)
Evidence suggests that working class wives were prepared to put up with occasional drinking bouts by their husbands and the physical abuse that sometimes accompanied them rather than lose the economic support normally provided.
It is also possible that late nineteenth and early twentieth-century working class women expected a greater degree of drunkenness and violence on the part of husbands than would be tolerated today.
But it is not easy to differentiate between the views of middle class commentators and those of working class women themselves on this issue.
It does however, seem likely that working class wives were tolerant of occasional abuse, provided that husbands had what they considered ‘just cause’.
In this context the 1912 Minority Report on Divorce may have been right in its opinion that ‘a blow in one class of life might not be the unforgiveable injury it would be in another’.
Working class marriages may perhaps be best considered as economic and emotional support systems.
Wives were not unaware of the pressures experienced by men at the workplace and on the whole tended to accept the burden of domestic responsibilities that fell to their lot, and which, if left undone or mismanaged, might provoke some kind of outburst from their husbands.
Above the level of the very poor, notions of respectability acted as a curb on abusive or violent behaviour within the family and increasingly dictated that married women should not work outside the home.
However, evidence regarding the latter, which is more plentiful than that on family violence, shows that it is hard to draw clear lines of demarcation between different sections of the working class.
For example, the experience of members of the Women's Cooperative Guild, who in both their own estimation and that of observers were adjudged respectable married women, shows that family misfortune, particularly in the form of sickness and unemployment, could quickly plunge a family into poverty, whereupon the wife would probably resort to strategies similar to those of her poorer sister.
She would still invoke the aid of neighbours but would be more likely to take in lodgers or do homework in the form of sewing, for example, than use credit systems (especially the pawnshop) or go out to work.
During the inter-war years the trend seems to have been towards increasing privatisation of the respectable  working class family.
Men in regular employment found their real wages rising and many families moved out to the new housing estates, where evidence rapidly came to light of female depression arising primarily from physical isolation.
The importance of the economic support provided by husbands is neatly illustrated by working class women's attitudes towards marriage breakdown.
Miss E. Lidgett, a Poor Law Guardian, provided some interesting and not untypical evidence in this regard to the Royal Commission on Divorce in 1912.
She described a case where the Guardians had taken a whole family into the workhouse, the father being ‘hopelessly out of work’.
Eventually, in what would then have been interpreted as a generous gesture on the part of the Poor Law authorities, the wife was freed in order to give her a second chance to build up a home.
She immediately began to live with another man and had more children by him, complaining to Miss Lidgett that the Guardians would not then allow her to visit her children by her first husband, who remained in the workhouse.
She ‘stoutly defended’ her new home, saying that her first husband ‘was no husband for her, and the one that worked for her she respected’.
While Miss Lidgett showed some appreciation of the woman's circumstances, she was unable to condone her course of action.
Irregular marriage relations was one of the main areas of working class family life giving rise to middle class anxiety during the period.
The Majority Report of the Royal Commission on Divorce used the existence of large numbers of working class common-law marriages as an argument in favour of relaxing the divorce law and thus permitting remarriage.
Bastardy law, on the other hand, remained extremely harsh, with the result that the unmarried mother who was rejected by her family had very little recourse other than the workhouse.
It is a moot point as to how far the apparent relaxation of attitudes towards unmarried mothers during World War I resulted in any real shifts in policy during the inter-war years.
The tenets of late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century middle class respectability imposed rules which were much stricter than the principle of legitimacy required, but which were consistent with the concern to regulate family life and promote a particular family form.
The harshness of the bastardy laws should therefore be read as an expression of the state's desire to reaffirm moral values, particularly as they governed female sexual behaviour, as well as a determination to curtail the burden of expenditure this particular group imposed on the community.
A similar effort to control the boundaries within which sexuality might legally be expressed was inherent in the late Victorian attempt to regulate prostitution.
A second major middle class concern was for working class parents to accept certain standards and codes of behaviour.
Throughout the period policy makers and social investigators were anxious that husbands should fulfil their obligation to maintain dependent wives and children.
The philanthropist Helen Bosanquet drew eagerly on the work of the French  sociologist Frederick Le Play to argue that the ‘stable family’ with its male breadwinner was ‘the only known way of ensuring with any approach to success, that one generation will exert itself in the interests and for the sake of another’.
This concern was balanced by a profound distrust of the male worker's desire and ability to provide.
Lord Shaftesbury voiced the common belief that working class women were ‘much superior to the men in tact, sound judgement, and economy, and yet melancholy to say there were instances every day of the homes of such industrious women being swept away by the rapacity of bad husbands’.
Politicians offered such women limited protection in the form of maintenance provisions and legal protection of their earnings.
At the same time as working class women were offered a measure of protection, more emphasis was placed on their responsibilities at home.
The working class family was increasingly subjected to closer supervision, first by visitors attached to voluntary organisations like the Charity Organisation Society (COS), and later by state officials, such as school attendance officers and health visitors, who attempted to exact new standards of behaviour from the working class wife in respect to domestic duties and childrearing practices.
As the ideology of motherhood strengthened during the early twentieth century in response to the high infant mortality rate and the implications it was feared to have for the health and welfare of an imperial nation, so the pressures exerted on working class mothers increased.
The rhetoric of maternalism was applied to women of all classes, but with differential effect.
In the case of working class women, Anna Martin, a suffragist, observed that mothers were being ‘ordered by the law to perform the impossible and punished if they fail’.
A woman who kept a child home from school to mind the baby while she worked broke the law, and if she left the baby alone and it injured itself, she was also liable to prosecution.
Throughout the period the needs of mothers were not considered in relation to providing a solution to the difficulties they faced (for example in combining paid employment and motherhood), but rather in respect to a precise concept of motherhood as a social function.
Working class women attempting to solve the problem of scarce resources by borrowing, pawning or taking paid employment, were condemned for either mismanaging or neglecting their home responsibilities, while under the guise of protection, efforts were made to limit their employment to ‘suitable’ occupations.
Family Size and Fertility Control
Working class family size remained large throughout the period.
In the 1950s two social investigators reported the reluctance of a working class informant to go for a walk with his family on a middle class housing estate because ‘they look at you and say, Oh look at all those children!’
Nevertheless, by the end of the inter-war period the working class fertility rate was dropping as rapidly as that of the middle class, with the result that the two-child family was fast ceasing to be a middle class phenomenon.
Indeed, by the outbreak of World War II, there is considerable evidence that working class families were not responding to the call by the Royal Commission on Population and policy makers for larger families (a result of anxiety regarding the dramatic decline in the birth rate during the 1930s).
Slater and Woodside met with comments such as‘I want some fun out of life; I'm not interested in raising the birth rate’.
There are then two aspects of the working class fertility pattern to be explained: first the slower rate of decline during the period before World War I, and second, the rapid decrease during the inter-war years.
Late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century working class wives have often been characterised as fatalistic in their attitudes towards childbirth.
The very few working class women who have left a record of their conscious decision to limit their families usually mention the plight of their mothers as the decisive factor.
Hannah Mitchell, for example wrote of her mother-in-law: ‘Poor soul!
I never knew her.
Child-bearing and cooking for twenty years…she must have been worn out before she died a comparatively young woman.
So I was definitely determined not to begin where she left off.’
Jessie Stephen, an active trade unionist, ended up teaching her own mother about birth control when the latter was 42 years old.
However, failure to limit fertility should not necessarily be interpreted as fatalism.
Jessie Stephen's mother wished she had not had so many children and did not desire to have more.
Similarly, the letters published by the Women's Cooperative Guild (WCG) in 1915 regarding the maternity experiences of 160 of their members whose husbands earned between 24 and 40 /a week and who mostly had been married during the 1890s, showed that women with large families bitterly regretted it, chiefly because of the hard labour necessary to sustain a large family.
One Guild member felt that three children had reduced her to a household drudge and in desperation resorted to propping up Lowell and Longfellow over her washtub and learning passages off by heart on washday.
The Guild members were not asked about birth control in the questionnaire that elicited these letters, so it is all the more surprising that twenty women volunteered the information that they either used or approved of contraception.
But what comes across from the letters is an overwhelming ignorance about female physiology and sexuality, the difficulty of gaining access to information, and a lack of privacy in their homes that would have  rendered the use of female methods of birth control extremely difficult.
Similar problems undoubtedly faced many working class women throughout the period.
Many of Rosemary Cook's respondents in the Rhondda, who had given birth to children during the inter-war years, said that birth control had been out of the question despite the fact that the birth rate for the Rhondda fell dramatically during the inter-war period.
Similarly, when in the late 1930s a leading obstetrician asked women in Aberdeen how many children they would like to have, he received the response: ‘Aye Doctor, I shall have me number’.
And in 1938, the editor of Woman's Own judged from her postbag that ignorance of sex was as widespread as ever, a view born out in 1948 by a woman who explained that:
having your normal period wasn't ever mentioned, I was just sent along to the lav, my sister came with me, she said ‘you wear this’, and that was that — My mother never even mentioned it…you got married and you had children, I didn't know there was such a thing that you could not have them and it just went on and on.
The social taboo placed on discussion of birth control and sexuality, and the acceptance by a majority of middle class women of the idea that they lacked sexual drives — what Judith Walkowitz has called the doctrine of passionlessness — meant that little information was likely to come within the purview of women generally.
It is also important to consider the views of working class husbands.
Jessie Stephens' mother had initially refused to contemplate birth control because her husband did not consider it ‘natural’.
When she began to use contraception at the age of 42 she probably did so without her husband's knowledge, but this would have been difficult for most working class women, given the lack of privacy in their homes.
As late as 1956 a team of investigators described the plight of a woman in a mining village whose husband refused to use a sheath and who, because she had no bathroom could not use a cap.
The woman's sister made an appointment for both to go to a birth control clinic, but in the end neither attended.
The organisation required to travel to the clinic and to sustain the project through to conclusion proved too much.
A similar picture of female powerlessness and male dominance in respect to fertility control is given in a 1950 portrait of families in Ship Street, Liverpool.
Perhaps not surprisingly, we have copious evidence throughout the period of women who felt no sexual pleasure because of the fear of pregnancy, and there is here some indication that working class women may have internalised middle class ideas of passionlessness and its correlate: male sensuality.
In 1912 Eleanor Barton, a spokeswoman for the WCG (albeit herself middle class), voiced the opinion that ‘women suffer a great deal through their husbands’ sensuality, and that is more evident amongst working people than other classes, simply because the conditions of life lend themselves to that sort of  thing, and they have not been taught the proper uses of their bodies'.
More straightforward were the comments recorded by Leonora Eyles of women in the early 1920s who declared that they would not mind married life so much if it were not for bedtime, or the anecdote related by a birth control pioneer to a 1930 conference on the provision of birth control information by public health authorities:
I was asking a women why she did not keep herself more tidy and make herself attractive to her husband.
‘I don't want to be attractive to him’, she replied, ‘Every time I am attractive to him, it means another kid’.
Women with uncooperative husbands were forced to resort either to wiles such as these or to abortion.
In this connection, it is interesting to note that Hannah Mitchell had the agreement of her husband to use birth control: ‘Fortunately my husband had the courage of his socialist convictions on this point’.
Quantitatively abortion was probably the most important female initiative in family limitation throughout the period, particularly among the very poor.
During the 1890s and early 1900s the British Medical Journal traced the diffusion of abortion involving the use of lead plaster as an abortifacient from Leicester to Birmingham, Nottingham, Sheffield and through some of the large Yorkshire towns.
This substance was scheduled as a poison at the end of World War I. By 1914, Ethel Elderton concluded that abortion was common in 26 out of 104 registration districts north of the Humber.
These districts were primarily urban and working class and eleven were textile areas.
Abortifacient pills, usually ineffectual, were widely advertised in newspapers.
A typical example read:
Ladies Only/THE LADY MONTROSE/MIRACULOUS/FEMALE TABULES/Are positively unequalled for all/FEMALE AILMENTS.
The most OBSTINATE/obstructions, Irregularities.
etc. /of the female system are removed in a few doses.
Such remedies were expensive at 2/9d or 4/6d a box; ‘extra strength’ pills were dearer.
The mixture of ten herbs, gin and salts consumed by a York woman provided a cheaper alternative at 10d a pint.
Other remedies included a liquid produced by soaking nails and pennies in water, gunpowder, gold leaf from painters' shops, and even rat poison.
The professional abortionist was a last resort.
The more desperate remedies undoubtedly reflected desperate motives.
A women quoted in Ethel Elderton's 1914 study declared that she'd ‘rather swallow the druggist's shop and the man in't than have another kid’.
Among northern textile workers poverty and the need to work probably played the most important part in the decision to seek an abortion, but it is also important to remember that working class women viewed abortion as a  natural and permissible strategy.
As late as 1938, a government Inter-Departmental Committee on Abortion found that ‘many mothers seemed not to understand that self-induced abortion was illegal.
They assumed it was legal before the third month [before quickening], and only outside the law when procured by another person’.
Abortion decisions and practices were very much part of a female culture and to some extent must be considered apart from, rather than as an alternative to, other methods of birth control.
For example, it cannot be argued that poor women resorted to abortion because doctors withheld information about other birth control methods.
Such women went to doctors but rarely on their own account, largely because they could not afford to do so.
However, there is evidence to suggest that some women distrusted other methods of birth control, and particularly that of male withdrawal; not all women could reckon on either being able to ‘push him out of the way when I think it's near’, or on their husbands' constant exercise of self-control.
It is difficult to assess the incidence of abortion.
The British Medical Association estimated that 20 per cent of abortions were criminal and using that figure David Glass calculated that a total of 68,000 criminal abortions took place in 1935.
However, a practising midwife in a small colliery village during the 1930s believed that of 227 miscarriages amongst 122 women over a period of seven years, few were accidental.
Prosecutions for abortion doubled between 1900 and 1910 and doubled again during the next twenty years, but this may merely indicate more vigilance on the part of the authorities rather than increasing incidence.
Since the Royal Commission on Population found that out of a sample of 7,625 pregnancies only 147 resulted in criminal abortions (equal to 2 per cent of all pregnancies and 17 per cent of all abortions), it is unlikely that changes in the abortion rate played a major part in accounting for the decrease in working class fertility.
Indeed, withdrawal was undoubtedly the main method by which the decline in working class fertility was achieved, and it continued to be as common a method of birth control as the sheath in post-World War II Britain.
While the percentage of middle class people using mechanical methods of birth control increased from 9 per cent to 40 per cent between 1910 and 1930, the comparable figures for the working class were 1 per cent and 28 per cent.
One of the main reasons for the popularity of withdrawal, especially prior to World War I, was its cheapness; sheaths cost an average of 2/ to 3/ a dozen, during a period when the average weekly wage of a labourer did not rise above 20/ a week.
The importance of withdrawal brings us back to the issue of women's sexual dependency and the fact that some degree of male cooperation was necessary, if only a willingness to be pushed out of the way.
Thus attention must be given to male motives for using contraception.
In his latest book on fertility decline, J.A.
Banks dismisses the argument that fertility control results from economically rational behaviour.
The  introduction of compulsory elementary education after 1870 may have prompted a re-evaluation of the cost of children because it seriously diminished the contribution the child could make to the family economy.
But on the whole, there is little evidence to suggest a link between male wage levels and fertility.
For example, the size of agricultural labourers' families, one of the poorest paid occupational groups, remained high.
Instead Banks stresses the importance of the development of a meritocratic career pattern for men and a concomitant future-time perspective on the part of all the mainly middle class occupational groups whose fertility rates fell fastest during the late nineteenth century.
The fertility rate of railway workers declined rapidly following the expansion of promotion hierarchies at the end of the century.
It is also interesting to note that even though the fertility rate of female textile workers was low from the beginning of the period, this was not the case in Preston, probably because the women weavers tended to be married to general labourers rather than to fellow textile workers, again suggesting that it was the occupational status and attitudes of the husband that were more important.
Certainly this view parallels both Sidney Webb's famous 1905 observation, that it was the thrifty of all classes who were limiting their families, and the classic complaint of social investigators that the large families of the very poor resulted from their ‘intense devotion to the present moment and their blind forgetfulness of past and future’.
(There was of course little incentive to plan for the future when work was often obtained on a casual basis and wages were irregular.)
The argument is strengthened still further by evidence from clinic data between the wars which show that the most popular method of birth control among skilled manual workers was the sheath.
However, in attributing prime importance to male decision-making on birth control, Banks is dismissive of the part women may have played.
We may accept that male cooperation was needed for fertility to fall, while at the same time arguing that the opinions of wives may also have had an important effect on husbands.
Ethel Elderton found that in Chorlton working class wives talked freely about birth control and said that they ‘made their husbands take precautions’.
The dynamics of decision-making and the exercise of power within the family are difficult to investigate today, let alone for the past.
But consideration of the process by which family size was negotiated between husband and wife is crucial, especially when evidence suggests that the couples who were most successful in controlling their fertility between the wars were those who discussed the issue and reached agreement.
Diana Gittins has concluded that couples whose worlds increasingly centred on the home, rather than on the culture of the workplace or on the spouses' respective circles of friends, most frequently achieved their ideal family size.
Such joint relationships could occur between spouses of very different backgrounds.
In the case of families where both husband and wife worked in the textile industry, joint role relationships were common and involved a  large amount of sex role equality.
In the absence of a family wage, husbands often shared household tasks, and major decisions, including that of family size, would be discussed jointly.
Gittins has also suggested that female textile workers' apparently greater knowledge of birth control methods emanated from their female friends and acquaintances at work (although Elizabeth Roberts' findings have not borne this out).
In contrast, female domestic servants led isolated work lives prior to marriage and their marriages usually involved a traditional sexual division of labour; but they also tended to enjoy a joint role relationship with their husbands in the sense that the husband spent his non-working hours with his wife and children, and they too tended to be successful in limiting the size of their families.
However, all the evidence concerning mining villages, where fertility rates continued to be high until the 1930s and where the average age at marriage was also significantly lower than the national average, suggests that role relationships within marriage were segregated.
During the inter-war period birth control was discussed more openly than ever before.
For example, women in the Labour Party made sure that resolutions asking for the provision of birth control information via local authority clinics came before the Party's Annual Conference in 1925, 1926 and 1927.
The 1927 Conference heard a moving appeal on the issue from a miner's wife who referred to the women's support for male trade unionists during the 1926 General Strike: ‘Surely you will not turn the women down on this question because it was the women who stood four-square with you in your dispute?’
In this context, it is likely that changes in the nature of marital relations resulting from the increasingly private nature of family life, together with an increasing tendency by working people to plan for the future, were the most important variables explaining the decrease in working class fertility during the inter-war years, at a time when the employed working man enjoyed a more regular and higher real wage than ever before.
It also seems that unemployment, the chief cause of poverty during the inter-war period, resulted in a different outlook from that induced by pre-World War I poverty, which was caused primarily by low wages.
The Commission for the Special Areas unsuccessfully recommended the setting up of birth control clinics in areas of high unemployment, believing the birth rate to be undesirably high.
But in the Rhondda fertility declined dramatically between 1911 and 1931, especially amongst younger couples.
In Lancashire the effect of unemployment was less dramatic, possibly because wife or child could continue to earn.
The birth control methods most commonly used by working class families were as readily available in 1870 as they were in 1950.
To explain why they were not employed as frequently as they were amongst the middle class until the inter-war period involves consideration of the complicated relationship between the occupational characteristics of both husband and wife with their respective values and expectations and how they related to each other.
Health and Welfare
The relationship between the improvement in women's health and their emancipation has been widely noted.
Early in the 1950s, Richard Titmuss pointed out that the average working class woman marrying in her teens or early twenties during the 1890s experienced ten pregnancies and spent fifteen years in pregnancy and nursing compared with an average of four years so spent by her counterpart in the years following World War II.
Titmuss felt that changes in patterns of pregnancy and childbirth had been a much more important factor in explaining changes in women's position in society than the acquisition of legal rights.
More recently, Edward Shorter has made a similar case for improvements in women's health status generally as a pre-requisite to an active feminist movement.
Certainly women's mortality rates have improved significantly faster than those for men (Table 3), but it is difficult to come to any general conclusions about health status for the period 1870–1950, particularly in respect to working class women.
Nor is the connection between improvements in health and feminism clear in the lives of individuals; large numbers of active middle class feminists were also chronic invalids.
What is striking from the admittedly patchy evidence regarding the health status of working class women is the apparent lack of any real improvement during the period.
It is interesting that wives aged under 45 suffered a higher mortality rate than unmarried women prior to World War I, and that the difference is not explicable solely in terms of maternal mortality.
In 1913, Mrs. Pember Reeves commented that it came as a shock to realise that working class wives in Lambeth who looked as it they were ‘in the dull middle of middle age’ in the 1950s, Viola Klein remarked that women generally looked old at 40, which may indicate some improvement.
However, a 1939 survey of the health of 1,250 working class wives found only 31.3 per cent to be in good health, 22.3 per cent were categorised as ‘indifferent’, 15.2 per cent as ‘bad’ and 31.2 per cent as ‘very grave’.
Similarly in a 1947 survey of 2,807 women (conducted as part of the Ministry of Labour's campaign to stimulate the recruitment of women to industry), older married women in particular often gave health problems as a reason for not working outside the home; 37 per cent of those aged between 45 and 60 mentioned ill-health to the interviewer.
The women in the 1939 survey reported a large amount of debilitating illness, especially anaemia, headaches, constipation with or without haemorrhoids, rheumatism, gynaecological disorders, toothache and varicose veins.
These findings are reminiscent of the self-reported morbid conditions of the Women's Cooperative Guild members published in 1915.
National health insurance statistics, which recorded the health experience of the small proportion of married women who worked in insurable occupations, also indicated that the health of married working class women left much to be desired.
By 1931–32 married women were experiencing 140 per cent more sickness than the insurance commissioners had anticipated, compared with the 25 per cent more sickness experienced by unmarried women and the less-than-expected sickness rates of men.
Mary MacArthur, a leading woman trade unionist, believed that these figures could be attributed to the ‘treble strain of child-bearing, wage-earning and household drudgery’.
Moreover, women had singularly low expectations of health.
A Cardiff woman, aged 35 in 1939, suffered from decayed teeth, bronchitis every winter and a prolapsed uterus dating from her second pregnancy, yet she did not consider herself ill.
Moreover, as the 1939 survey showed, few women sought medical attention for their ailments.
The National Health Insurance Act of 1911 provided access to a general practitioner for all insured workers, male and female, but not for their dependants, who were mainly women and children.
Women, whose responsibility it was to look after the family budget, were notoriously reluctant to incur the additional expense of a doctor's bill on their own account.
It was for this reason that one woman diarist writing during World War II was convinced that the introduction of a national health service would mean more to women than to men.
CONDITIONS OF MOTHERHOOD
The causes of the low health status of working class wives were related to frequent pregnancies, poor nutrition, hard household labour in often depressing conditions, and lack of leisure.
Most working class women's autobiographies tell of hard work and financial anxiety prior to childbirth, poor quality attendance and great pain during labour, with a swift return to  domestic and/or paid employment after the birth.
Hannah Mitchell's matter-of-fact account is typical:
one Friday, having done my weekend cleaning and baked a batch of bread during the day, I hoped for a good night's rest, but I scarcely had retired before my labour began.
My baby was not born until the following evening, after 24 hours of intense suffering which an ignorant attendant did little to alleviate, assuring me at intervals that I should be much worse yet.
Throughout the period, a majority of working class women gave birth at home with no pain relief, the common practice being to pull on a towel knotted round the end of the bed when the pains came.
In 1917 qualified midwives in London charged 12/6d for first births and 10/ for subsequent ones; by the late 1930s this had risen to between 25/ and 50/ for first births and 21/ to 40/ for subsequent ones.
A doctor would have charged at least twice as much.
After 1911, women whose husbands were in insured employment received a maternity benefit of 30/ rising to £2 after World War I, which was completely absorbed by the cost of an attendant, leaving nothing for extra food and necessities for the mother and baby.
Poor women often ‘made do’, like Hannah Mitchell, with unqualified attendance, seeking a ticket from the Poor Law Relieving Officer for medical help in cases of emergency.
Poor, unmarried mothers resorted to the workhouse hospital; 70 per cent of births in workhouses were illegitimate in 1907, and conditions in these hospitals varied considerably.
In 1885 the lying-in ward in the Strand workhouse was located immediately above the female insane ward and despite the effort to reform workhouse nursing during the 1860s, elderly pauper women still acted as midwives and childminders.
Prior to World War I, infant mortality rates in the workhouses were more than double the rate for the entire population.
Nevertheless, increasing numbers of poor women sought institutional care in both Poor Law and voluntary hospitals during the period, and after the local authorities took control of the Poor Law hospitals in 1929, the number of hospital births increased dramatically.
This trend was welcomed by articulate working class women's groups such as the Women's Cooperative Guild, because of poor working class housing conditions and because they believed that working class wives needed a respite from the cares of managing a household.
However, the Guild also asked for a comprehensive home-help service so that women would not worry about the welfare of younger children and husbands, but this was not forthcoming.
The legacy of childbearing was frequently one of impaired health.
Marie Stopes found that amongst her first 10,000 birth control patients, 1,321 had slit cervixes, 335 serious prolapses, and 1,508 internal deformations.
As late as 1937 only 10 per cent of women were attending post-natal clinics, whereas 54 per cent received ante-natal care.
One eminent obstetrician estimated in 1931  that 10 per cent of all pregnant women were disabled by the experience of childbirth.
The health and welfare of mothers suffered additionally because of the maldistribution of resources within the family.
As Ellen Ross has observed, ‘family socialism’ operated only among women and children.
Many wives did not know what their husbands earned — as many as one-third of those surveyed in Middlesbrough in 1907 — and the vast majority of husbands kept back a proportion of their income for their own use.
In 1908 George Lansbury admonished working class men for not practising the economic equality at home that they preached in public, and noted that men who gave their wives 10/ to 12/ out of 30/ to 35/ felt that they had done enough.
It was not uncommon for men bringing home as small a wage as 18/ to keep back 2/ for themselves.
In an early 1950s mining community, husbands kept their wives' allowances low so that they could skip a shift if they wished, but few wives expected their husbands ‘to work for nothing’ and it is not difficult to find examples of wives exercising considerable control over all but the husband's pocket money.
Mrs. Layton, a member of the Women's Cooperative Guild, made the decision to allow her husband the 1/6d to join the Cooperative Society in the first place.
As Anne Gray has pointed out, it is difficult to generalise about housekeeping systems.
Many husbands took responsibility for saving for such major items of expenditure as furniture or even boots out of the money they kept back for themselves.
In 1899 one York wife responded to a question about the difficulties of providing footwear for her family in the following way:
Well, as a rule…we ‘ave to get it out of the food money and go short, but I never let Smith suffer —‘e ‘as to go to work, and must be kept up, yer know!
When I want a new pair of shoes, or anythink, ‘e ‘elps me out of‘is pocket money, and we haven't to pinch the food so much.
Thus housekeeping allowances might bear little relation to the portion of the husband's net income devoted to collective expenditure.
However, it is interesting to note that during World War I, when soldiers’ wives received dependants' allowances totalling a maximum of 17/6d in 1915 and 31/7d by 1918 for a wife and three children (the average male labourer's wage in 1918 was £2), the heights and weights of schoolchildren and the infant mortality rate both showed improvement, which would suggest that wives and children found themselves rather better off.
With the sum their husbands allowed them, wives organised the family budget, which in the first place involved solving the food/rent equation.
Rent was a charge that had to be met first, although midnight ‘flits’ to avoid paying rent were common among the very poor and not unknown for the artisan in temporarily reduced circumstances.
Rowntree calculated that rent absorbed an average of 14 per cent of income in York in 1900.
In fact the proportion  spent on rent was inversely proportional to income.
Thus a detailed examination of Birmingham families in the early 1880s found that those earning 27/6d paid 6/ rent (23.7 per cent of their income), while in London in the 1900s it was not uncommon to pay 8/ out of 24/ (33 per cent) for two rooms.
Many families would therefore rent a four room house at ten or eleven shillings and let one room at two or three shillings.
The rise in rents between 1848 and the late 1880s more or less matched the rise in real wages during the same period.
When the rise in rents from 1912 onwards threatened to overwhelm the family economy it was women who protested and led rent strikes, for example in Leeds and, more famously, Glasgow, leading to the imposition of rent control in 1915.
In London Sylvia Pankhurst coined the slogan ‘No Vote No Rent’.
As a consumer protest based on the home, the rent strike was an important and relatively neglected form of working class direct action, which paralleled industrial unrest in the workplace during the late Edwardian period.
The task of household budgeting was an extremely difficult one and evoked harsh words from husbands if it was mismanaged, even though most husbands probably had little notion of how to manage on the sums they gave their wives.
In one Lambeth family investigated by Mrs Pember Reeves, the expenditure on margarine doubled during the week the husband took over the family budgeting in the absence of his wife, simply because he allowed everyone to take as large a share as himself.
The realistic appraisal by working class wives as to what was possible on a fixed budget was also shown in a study of savings conducted by Mass Observation during World War II.
Twice as many men as women felt that it should be possible to save more out of the housekeeping allowance.
Louise Jermy faced housekeeping on 13/ a week in the late nineteenth century with huge anxiety.
It took her from 25 February to 30 June to save a shilling, but once she had accomplished that she was content that she could manage and ‘never let it trouble me again’.
It was difficult to decide whether to spend more on better housing or food.
Mrs Pember Reeves was ambivalent on the issue, commenting that it depended largely on whether the accommodation was above or below ground and on the absolute minimum that was allowed for food.
During the inter-war period, when housing expectations among women were rising, one Medical Officer of Health found that mortality rates amongst families who had moved out of a slum area into new council houses actually rose, because correspondingly less was being spent on food.
As to the amount left for food and clothing after rent and a more flexible sum for heat had been deducted, wives tended to act as the buffer against the needs of husbands and to a lesser extent children.
Mrs Pember Reeves found that in Lambeth prior to World War I, the amount spent on food averaged 6d per head per day for men and 2½d per head per day for women and children.
As Derek Oddy has commented, ‘essentially the woman's diet was one of bread and tea, while almost all men consumed a  main meal of meat or bacon or fish or potatoes’.
Mrs Pember Reeves described the diet of the family of a feather cleaner's assistant, earning 25/ a week.
The father kept back 5/ for himself, out of which he bought his own clothes.
He also had 6½d a day allowed to him for lunches at work and demanded that 1/1d a week be spent on ‘relishes’ for his breakfast and tea — usually consisting of an egg, a piece of bacon, or fish.
At breakfast the father ate half the loaf and the mother and two children shared the rest.
Mother and children spent 1/2d a week on lunches and all shared the Sunday joint, which provided suppers for two days in the week following.
That apart, suppers closely resembled breakfast.
Yet, as Mrs Pember Reeves observed, despite the inequitable division of resources and the apparent selfishness of the father, his diet did not seem overly luxurious for a working man.
During the inter-war period more sophisticated research into diet showed a clear relationship between haemoglobin deficiencies, iron and protein levels in diet, and family income.
The Pilgrim Trust's survey of a sample of unemployed men included some 170,000 wives and it was calculated that these women ate only 70 per cent of the calories consumed by men, rather than the 85 per cent recommended by dieticians.
Sample research also showed that the addition of special foods and milk to the diet of pregnant women caused a significant decline in the maternal mortality rate, which remained high until the mid-1930s.
The ideal diet for a pregnant woman recommended by the Chief Medical Officer at the Ministry of Health included milk at a cost of 4/1d when the total allowance for the wife of an unemployed man was only 4/11d.
These often poorly nourished women undertook hard physical labour in their homes.
Very few husbands took on any household chores.
In cotton textile workers' families, where there was a long tradition of married women's work, one night a week was usually set aside by husbands and wives as ‘Mary-Ann night’.
But if the woman cotton worker were married to a miner or an engineer, then the husband usually refused to do housework, his substantially higher earnings gave him breadwinner status and, notwithstanding his wife's employment, the right to leisure while at home.
The time-consuming tasks of keeping families clean and fed were for the most part carried out with wholly inadequate equipment in depressing surroundings.
Provision of piped water and sanitary facilities varied widely from region to region and between different types of housing.
Despite the poor conditions in many towns, Margaret Loane, a health visitor, felt that the family of the pre-World War I urban labourer, earning 20/ a week and renting a small house or half a house, was better off than that of his rural counterpart, earning 13/ a week and living in a free, but often damp and usually overcrowded cottage.
In Barrow each house had a water tap by the 1880s, but in Lancaster 475 houses shared a single tap as late as 1925 and in Manchester in 1931 there were 70,000 houses classified as ‘unfit’ with thirty to fifty people sharing a tap in a tenement building.
Similar conditions prevailed  in Shoreditch tenements during the 1930s, and Elizabeth Flint remembered that pre-World War I houses near Waterloo Station in London had one tap for the row.
Very few working class houses had indoor lavatories before 1918 and at worst were provided with ash or midden privies.
A 1914 Local Government Board return on ‘scavenging’ in urban districts showed that as many as 54 per cent of households in Hull and 15 per cent in Liverpool had ash privies.
Midden privies were large uncovered receptacles sunk below ground level, but they were by no means watertight and often served two, four or more houses.
Ash privies were an improvement, as they were built above ground level and cemented at the bottom; ash was thrown in at the front and the contents withdrawn through a door at the back.
Alice Foley, growing up in Bolton during the 1890s, remembered the plague of houseflies emanating from the privies in summer.
When overcrowding was added to poor sanitary conditions the battle with dirt was invariably lost.
As Mrs Pember Reeves commented: ‘To manage a husband and six children in three rooms on round about a pound a week needs, first and foremost, wisdom and loving kindness, and after that as much cleanliness and order as can be squeezed in’.
Wives whose husbands earned a regular wage would usually have a copper in which to heat water for washing, and by 1914, a mangle.
Coppers were sometimes shared, which gave rise to disputes between neighbours, and mangles were sometimes rented to less fortunate families on the street at a 1d per load.
Clothes were pounded in a ‘dolly tub’ and the whole process of washing was made harder by the high cost of soap: 2d worth had to suffice for clothes, floors and people for a week in 1913.
Soda was much cheaper, if less effective, and was sometimes even used to wash the children's hair.
As late as World War II, reception areas reported that between 8 and 35 per cent of children evacuated from London to escape the bombing had infested heads.
By the end of World War 1, working class women's groups, such as the Women's Labour League, were making three basic demands in terms of housing design: an indoor bathroom, a scullery/kitchen for cooking, and a front parlour.
Middle class observers often complained that the parlour remained a showpiece in the respectable working class home, used only to house the piano and the aspidistra.
But working class women fiercely defended their right to a room which expressed their pride in housewifery and which also afforded additional privacy, a scarce commodity in working class households.
It was this desire for privacy that made the demands by some middle class feminists and leaders of the Women's Labour League for communal eating and washing facilities unpopular.
The evidence on housing interiors given by the Women's Labour League to the Tudor Walters Committee on Housing Design at the end of the War proved influential, although housing policy generally was formulated more from a fear of unrest by working class men than with the needs of working class women in mind.
The Committee approved the trend towards cooking in sculleries rather than on open fires in living rooms although the latter remained the only option for many families living in rooms until well into the inter-war period.
By the 1930s gas was cheaper and gas ovens more common, which also saved the labour expended on black-leading the old kitchen ranges.
(Prior to World War I, where gas had been available for cooking, it was often used only for the Sunday dinner.)
Forty per cent of local authorities houses built to Tudor Walters' standards between the Wars had parlours, but later, in the inter-war years, economies were often effected by diminishing the size of parlours and sculleries and by not providing hot water for baths.
A bathroom was perhaps the item most prized by working class housewives after World War I, and there is ample evidence of wives planning moves up the housing hierarchy until one was acquired.
The account given by an eminently respectable Bermondsey housewife to the compilers of the 1935 Survey of London Life and Labour illustrates this point well:
we have a nice bath in this flat which makes one feel glad.
I mean one can wash often when they have that convenience.
I was in apartments for 10 years, and when one has lived under those conditions it makes one contented to know we can use plenty of water.
However, working class wives living on the new housing estates of the inter-war period often had little but housework to occupy their days and, like many suburban middle class wives, tended to lead extremely isolated lives.
Nella Last, the respectable wife of a joiner and shop fitter in Barrow, who kept a diary for Mass Observation during World War II, led what she termed a ‘harem existence’ during the inter-war years, which resulted in a nervous breakdown just before the outbreak of the War.
Her wartime work for the Women's Voluntary Service and the Red Cross resulted in tremendous changes in her sense of self-worth, in her relationship with her husband and in her attitude towards housework.
She refused to put up with her husband's moods, and commented at length on the ways in which her skill as a household manager had been undervalued in the past.
She continued to record the details of almost every meal she cooked throughout the War but came to deplore the futility of her household routine:
I thought of the stack of dirty crocks to tackle after tea, of pictures and furniture that were once polished every week, and now got done when I had the time.
I wondered if people would ever go back to the old ways.
I cannot see women settling to trivial ways — women who have done worthwhile things.
In older working class communities, where neither housing conditions nor wages permitted such total devotion to housewifery, it nevertheless appeared that on the whole standards of housekeeping were high.
The wives of better paid working class men played their part in the creation of a culture of  respectability by the pride they took in their homes.
Freshly whitened steps signalled their status within the working class community and denoted the border of the respectable family's territory on the street.
Middle class observers often expressed the opinion that working class housekeeping had grown sloppy and that the food budget could be better managed.
Porridge, for example, was always recommended as a cheap, nutritious food, but for a family cooking in a single pot on an open fire it was an impossible choice, primarily because it tended to stick to the bottom of the pan.
Similarly, something like herrings, also cheap and nutritious, tended to add yet another offensive smell to poorly ventilated rooms and small houses.
Wives coping in these conditions were more likely to patronise fried fish and ready-cooked meat shops than would housewives with ranges or gas stoves.
There is also evidence that dietary customs, for example in the matter of baking bread, varied considerably from region to region.
Moreover, as Anna Martin pointed out, what might be judged as sloppiness and poor management on the part of a well-to-do woman was not necessarily the case in a poor household.
She quoted the example of a mother and daughter who habitually appeared ‘with dishevelled hair and untidy blouses at 11 o'clock in the morning’, and where dirty teacups rested on the breakfast table, but the fact was that both women stayed up until 4 am buttonholing, this being their only source of income.
The daily routines of most working class wives left conspicuously little time for leisure.
Rowntree commented that: ‘No one can fail to be struck by the monotony which characterises the life of most married women of the working class’, especially the respectable poor who, by definition, did not gossip in courts and streets.
In his book on working class leisure, Hugh Cunningham was able to find little evidence of any female pastimes.
Beatrice Webb recorded that she had been told by both a working class male school attendance officer and by the female manager of a block of ‘model dwellings’ that working class women were not able to talk to their husbands, having little in their heads but household details.
Generally women had much less opportunity than men for either reading or exercise.
Indeed, many women had no footwear suitable for walking beyond the local shops, boots always posing a major difficulty in household budgeting.
During the more prosperous years of World War II, the Board of Trade reported an unsatisfied demand for shoes, which it explained by referring to a backlog of demand created by the inability of families to buy them during the 1930s.
Increasing numbers of women went to cheap matinees at the cinema during the inter-war years, where 70 per cent of the weekly audiences in London comprised women and girls, and by 1939 the number of wirelesses had increased from 200,000 in 1923 to over 8.5 million.
But other opportunities for recreation remained few.
MOTHERHOOD AND THE STATE
During the early twentieth century a strong ideology of maternalism emerged, fuelled by eugenic concern about the quantity and quality of the race and the pronatalism induced by two World Wars.
Policy makers sought to promote national health and welfare and it was considered to be in the nation's interest to extend child and maternal welfare services.
As one prominent eugenicist put it, the state had ‘neither womb nor breasts’ and therefore needed to extend protection to those who had.
However, it was motherhood rather than the needs of individual mothers which evoked concern and relatively little attention was paid to the conditions faced by working class wives in their daily lives.
Health for women was held to be synonymous with healthy motherhood.
This had important implications for the debate over access to birth control information and abortion — rarely were demands for freer access to birth control information devoid of maternalist rhetoric.
The protection extended to motherhood as a means of improving child and maternal welfare was rooted in particular moral and social mental maps.
Working class women were encouraged to devote themselves to marriage and motherhood and to adopt middle class patterns of behaviour within their homes.
Between 1870 and 1918 it appeared to eugenicists concerned with finding ways of breeding a better race that the wrong class of people were using birth control.
The Malthusian League had addressed its message to the working class, emphasising birth control as the only remedy for poverty, and had met with understandable hostility from leading (male) socialists.
By the late 1930s, the rapidly falling birth rate made the quantity of population a more pressing issue than its ‘quality’.
In his 1935 budget speech, Neville Chamberlain, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, commented on the implications of a decreasing birth rate for an imperial power and appealed for more babies.
Thus birth control groups during the inter-war period were careful to argue that the use of birth control would not necessarily lead to an increase in childlessness or very small families, but rather would result in better planned families and healthier mothers and children.
The title Marie Stopes gave her birth control society — the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress — was thus significant.
Working class women's groups and the Workers' Birth Control Group, formed in 1924, which played a major part in the struggle for access to birth control information, also found it impossible to ignore the maternalist framework in their campaign.
They argued for birth control primarily on the grounds that it would improve the health of the mother rather than on the grounds that women had the right to control their fertility.
The Workers' Birth Control Group was anxious to show that women were not going to renege on motherhood if they were permitted easier access to birth control information: ‘the committee of this organisation consists of married women who have children, and they are not in any way  out to say it is a good thing not to have children’.
Limited gains were made in 1930 when the government agreed to make information available to sick women for whom pregnancy was deemed detrimental to health.
In fact, only 95 of 423 maternal and child welfare centres had established birth control clinics by 1937.
This policy was in line with the state's promotion of healthy motherhood, which did not encompass the right of individual mothers to choose whether they wished to bear children.
Access to abortion proved an even more difficult issue in relation to the state's desire to encourage motherhood.
The Inter-Departmental Committee on Abortion reporting in 1939, feared that women might shirk their maternal responsibilities if legal abortion became more widely available.
Nor did the Committee feel that birth control provided an acceptable alternative:
A proposal that public money should be spent on a measure which is likely to aggravate this position (the low birth rate) by making contraception universally available on request and thereby to affect adversely the continuity of the state, is one which we feel we cannot endorse.
On abortion, the Committee accepted the medical view that any abortion entailed danger to life and health and recommended only a clarification of the law to allow therapeutic abortion on health grounds.
The Abortion Law Reform Association, founded in 1936 by seven women, of whom Dora Russell, Stella Browne and Frida Laski were particularly sympathetic to the labour movement, believed abortion to be safe, but called only for legal abortion to be made available on health grounds, using as their justification the way in which deaths due to abortion inflated the maternal mortality rate.
Only Stella Browne, a socialist feminist, argued for abortion as an ‘absolute right’.
Thus feminists prominent in the labour movement and leaders of middle class feminist groups, such as Eleanor Rathbone and Eva Hubback, were prepared to join anti-feminists in using the rhetoric of maternalism to promote the welfare of women.
Their belief that it was possible for the individual to maintain a direct, unmediated relationship with the state made their position additionally vulnerable.
As Sally Alexander has observed, they ran the risk of leaving the door ‘wide open for all sorts of ideas equating the national interest with motherhood and children’.
The truth of this becomes clear when particular initiatives involving the protection of motherhood and the welfare of children are considered.
It was commonly held that the woman who worked outside the home could neither properly look after her child nor attend to her domestic duties.
During the late nineteenth century, Medical Officers of Health, in particular, contended that women going out to work were responsible for raising the infant mortality rate because they tended to bottle-feed their infants and because, by carrying them out to nurse in the early morning, they exposed them to bronchitis.
Women factory inspectors agreed that the less work women did in factories  the better it would be for their home life and children's welfare, but they were also forced to admit that working women usually needed their earnings.
It had not even proved possible to enforce the 1891 Factory Act, which obliged all women to take one month off after childbirth.
Nevertheless, during the 1900s, John Burns, the President of the Local Government Board and of the Conference on Infant Mortality, continued to call for legal restrictions on married women's work.
Women's work in sweated trades (defined with some difficulty by a Select Committee on the subject in 1890 as work carried on for inadequate wages and for excessive hours in insanitary conditions), was also opposed because of the threat it posed to motherhood and the rearing of an imperial race.
As A. G. Gardiner, the Chairman of the Anti-Sweating League, fulminated at the opening of the exhibition of sweated trades mounted by the Daily News in 1906:
It was seen to be not an excrescence on the body politic, having no bearing upon its general health, but an organic disease…a running sore that affected the entire fabric of society, a morass exhaling a miasma that poisoned the healthy elements of industry.
Mothers who were sweated workers were believed to produce physically and mentally enfeebled offspring which endangered the future of the race.
Ada Nield Chew, a working class mother, feminist and labour movement activist, was scornful in her assessment of the debate over the link between women's employment and infant mortality.
She pointed out that while the infant mortality rate was high in Burnley, where a large proportion of women worked, housing conditions were also very poor.
In Nelson, three miles away, an equal number of women went out to work, yet the infant mortality rate was lower than in John Burns' own constituency of Battersea.
However, working women generally were by no means in favour of the double burden of work at home and in the factory and Mary MacArthur may well have spoken for a majority when she said: ‘We are all familiar with the old ideal that women's place is in the home, and I am sufficiently old fashioned to agree that there is something to be said for it’.
Women nevertheless defended their right to work; one wrote: ‘If the Rt.
Hon.
John Burns will show me a way out of the difficulty [poverty]I shall be delighted, but it seems to me that until then I must work’.
Women supported the idea of compulsory leave from work as long as it was paid leave and called for the adoption of the International Labour Organisation's Washington Convention, which provided for six weeks maternity leave before and after childbirth.
Britain never adopted the terms of the Convention because the Government Actuary considered that it threatened to usurp the husband's responsibility to provide for his family and because it would have resulted in the payment of higher National Health Insurance (NHI) contributions.
Similar proposals put forward at the end of World War I, to provide financial support via NHI to  women after childbirth, were rejected largely because it was felt that they would offer an inducement to married women to work.
But this meant that the costs of protecting motherhood continued to be borne by women.
This was also true in respect to the regulation of homework, which followed the outcry about the sweated trades during the early twentieth century.
Homeworkers, who engaged in a wide variety of trades from matchbox-making to furpulling, did indeed suffer disproportionately from disease, particularly tuberculosis, and regulation was instigated not merely for the protection of the workers but also for the sake of the whole community.
But again the penalty consequent on regulation fell on the workers.
Mrs Layton described the unintended consequences of a small incident in her Bethnal Green childhood.
A friend had plucked up courage to ask the Sisters of Mercy for food and the Sisters insisted on visiting the family, where they found women making matchboxes in a house infected with smallpox.
As a result, the matchbox-making was stopped and the family's last remaining source of income disappeared.
During both World Wars less was made of the effect of women's work on childbearing and childrearing.
A report on women's work during World War I made the point that women's employment might be a lesser evil than poverty.
Dr Janet Campbell, who took charge of child and maternal welfare in the new Ministry of Health in 1919, believed that the dangers of underfeeding and anaemia were more acute than any danger resulting from the work itself, although fatigue was identified as a major problem.
(Paradoxically, married women tended to be put to work on many of the heaviest jobs, where welfare provision was least effective.)
However, the fact that women's health was no longer used as a reason for limiting their paid employment did not mean that the belief in women's proper place being at home faded completely from view.
Arthur Newsholme, the Chief Medical Officer to the Local Government Board, believed it would be ‘folly’ to infer from Campbell's report that ‘the industrial occupation of mothers is not a most injurious element in our social life’, and in 1919 the Women's Employment Committee of the Ministry of Reconstruction, set up to advise on the opportunities for women's employment after the war, expressed the hope that ‘every inducement, direct or indirect, will be given to keep mothers at home’.
Similar attitudes were expressed during World War II, when the rapid decline in the birth rate gave additional force to the argument that married women should stay at home.
Even when the demand for manpower was at its height, women with children under fourteen years old were never conscripted.
The day nurseries opened during both wars were rapidly closed when the conflicts ended, and as Deborah Thom and Penelope Summerfield have convincingly argued, the amount of support offered to working mothers during both wars has been much exaggerated.
A survey carried out by the Medical Officer of Health for Sheffield in 1912 showed very few MOsH to be  in favour of day nurseries.
Day-care provision also lacked the support of women trade unionists; Mary MacArthur declared that women had no desire to keep working in factories while trying to nurse their children in crèches.
Feminist arguments in favour of day nurseries were also conspicuously absent.
Even during World War II, a very large proportion of child care (and the entire work of housework and shopping) remained the province of the women worker, subject to whatever private arrangements she could make with friends and relatives.
Nursery schools, however, were generally supported because they were designed only to promote the health and education of children; their limited opening hours did not permit mothers to work.
Rachel McMillan argued that nursery schools were necessary to compensate for the cultural deprivation suffered by working class children.
Prior to World War I, those interested in child and maternal welfare had urged that nurseries might both improve child welfare and set an example to mothers.
The Department of Education had accepted criticisms of the provision made for young children in ordinary elementary schools and had phased out arrangements for under-threes by 1904 (in 1875 elementary schools accommodated 19,358 under-threes).
It also cut the number of places for 3–5-year olds from 610,989 in 1901 to 332,888 in 1911, but the nursery schools advocated by its inspectors never materialised.
The closure of elementary schools to young children made it much more difficult for mothers who needed to work to do so.
In its post-World War II Circulars, the Department of Education stated explicitly that the children of working mothers were not to be given priority for nursery education.
As well as attempting to limit the work of married women, policies to protect motherhood and enhance the welfare of children extended the direct surveillance of working class women in their homes.
During the late nineteenth century, an army of middle class lady ‘visitors’ had brought the ‘gospel of Godliness, cleanliness and needlework’to poor mothers.
Middle class women, including feminists, who deplored the idea of state employees entering working class homes regarded their own activities in this regard as right and proper.
In his survey of London, published in 1889, Charles Booth commented on the overlapping territory of the various visitors from churches, the Charity Organisation Society, and other charitable organisations in Deptford: ‘we hear of one woman busy at the washtub calling out [to a new visitor]: ‘you are the fifth this morning’ '.
Some philanthropic workers, such as Octavia Hill, who trained numerous lady rent collectors, insisted on maintaining a business relationship with the poor, but the relationship between visitor and visited tended to be paternalistic rather than contractual.
As Beatrice Webb pointed out, the visitors were a new breed of ‘governing and guiding’ women.
Octavia Hill laid down strict rules for her tenants including prompt payment of rent on pain of eviction.
She considered this encouraged regular habits and represented a kindness to her tenants, but the policy could have made little sense to the working class woman managing  on a tight and often irregular housekeeping allowance.
The motive behind much late nineteenth-century visiting was to put the social classes back in touch with one another.
As the Manchester Ladies' Health Society asked in 1893, who was ‘more fitted to break this ground than women?
Comparatively unfettered by the vexed relations between labour and capital, with their more ready sympathy and common interests with all other women, they would begin hopefully where men would have little chance’.
This Society aimed to popularise sanitary knowledge and thus to elevate the people physically, socially, morally and spiritually.
The notion of friendship between classes also motivated organisations such as the Girls' Friendly Society and the Metropolitan Society for Befriending Young Servants.
All visitors were exhorted to treat the poor courteously, but in general it was optimistically believed that women would be able to talk to women irrespective of social class: not until the 1900s were the difficulties of cross-class communication acknowledged more honestly.
Given the nature of their mission, the visitors were invariably judgemental.
Miss Mason, the Assistant Inspector responsible for children boarded out under the auspices of the Poor Law during the late 1880s, was not in favour of working class women sitting on local, voluntary boarding-out committees because they would not be able to pass comment on the homes of their social equals.
Visitors were instructed to ask what time working class wives got up in the morning and to elicit a history of the way in which they organised their day's work.
Charles Bosanquet assured his readers that ‘the London poor are accustomed to the notion of being visited and more inclined to complain of being neglected than to look on a visitor as an intruder’.
But there is evidence that working class women bitterly resented what they regarded as middle class interference.
Anna Martin spoke strongly of the necessity to avoid the attitude of ‘Ladies from the West End come to do good’ when organising mothers' meetings.
These meetings were originally suggested during the 1860s as a solution for visitors who could not manage to visit individual homes regularly enough.
Mothers were expected to bring needlework and the meetings were usually noted for their deeply religious tone.
Women's Cooperative Guild members also contrasted them unfavourably with their own more democratic Guild meetings, deploring the way in which ‘ladies came and lectured on the domestic affairs in the workers’ homes that it was impossible for them to understand'.
Late nineteenth-century visitors were concerned to inculcate general principles of household management.
As Mrs Bosanquet put it, ‘The great problem with this class is how to bring them to regard life as anything but a huge chaos.
The confusion which reigns in their minds is reflected in their worlds’.
During the early twentieth century a more focused attempt was made to instruct working class mothers in proper methods of infant care, in response to the concern about infant mortality.
George Newman, Chief Medical Officer to the Board of Education, argued in 1906 that infant mortality  was largely a ‘question of motherhood’ and that the most influential causal factor was domestic dirt and ignorance of infant care.
The infant welfare movement, like the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, whose inspectors also began to enter the working class home during the 1890s, too often interpreted lack of cleanliness as neglect.
In coming to his conclusion, Newman ignored the available statistical evidence regarding environmental variables, which showed infant mortality to be primarily a problem of poor inner city areas, where sanitation was particularly bad.
As Carol Dyhouse has pointed out, in concentrating their attention on mothercraft, medical experts tended to devalue women's knowledge regarding infant care, one doctor going so far as to label grandmothers as ‘infanticide experts’.
The ‘Schools tor Mothers’ and ‘Babies’Welcomes', set up by volunteers from 1908 onwards, set out to teach women to breast feed their children, so as to avoid the problem of contaminated milk and unhygienic feeding bottles; to follow a strict feeding schedule; not to allow dummies; not to use inflammable flannelette clothing and not to permit the infant to sleep with its parents for fear of suffocating.
Eugenicists, social purity campaigners and imperialists felt that strict schedules and regular habits would breed character in the child.
Such advice did little to counter the practical problems of cost.
Flannelette was the cheapest warm clothing available, and even the banana-box crib that was usually recommended cost 1/, with blankets and mattresses, 1/8d, which put it beyond the budgets of the poor.
Nevertheless, working class women could still filter out useful information from a visit to a School for Mothers, and as the local authorities increasingly came to take over the Schools and Babies' Welcomes and turn them into infant welfare centres, so they became more acceptable to working class women.
Certainly Hannah Mitchell wished something of the kind had existed to give her advice on childrearing.
The bedrock of the child welfare movement was still the visiting system however.
Health visitors employed by local authorities in the 1900s were advised to show courtesy to their clients in much the same manner as their late nineteenth-century counterparts.
Emelia Kanthack commented that she ‘always approached my East End patients with my very best manners and extended the same little courteous considerations to them that I would have served towards a lady’.
But evidence suggests that these women, like other state-employed ‘visitors’, were often resented.
Rebecca West referred in 1913 to health visitors as an ‘inadequate and slightly offensive substitute offered to the poor woman for the skilled service the rich can command’.
And Somerset Maugham wrote in Of Human Bondage in 1915:
The district visitor excited their bitter hatred.
She came in without so much as a ‘by your leave’ or a ‘with your leave’…she pushed her nose into corners, and if she didn't say the place was dirty you could see what she thought right enough.
The Mother's Defence League, organised during the 1920s, opposed all intervention in the working class home on the grounds that it threatened to undermine the working class wife's responsibility for the welfare of her family and reduce her to a servant and drudge.
This argument was closely related to that of Hilaire Belloc in his book The Servile State, which criticised the liberal welfare reforms of the period 190–14 for sapping the independence of workers.
The Mothers' Defence League was led by Ada Jones, the wife of Cecil Chesterton, Belloc's co-thinker.
However, the sentiments the League expressed were probably more widely held.
Anna Martin described the resistance of working class wives she knew to school meals, which they felt would undermine both their husbands' obligation to provide and their own role within the home.
…the women have a vague dread of being superseded and dethroned.
Each of them knows perfectly well that the strength of her position in the home lies in the physical dependence of her husband and children upon her and she is suspicious of anything that would tend to undermine this.
The feeling that she is the indispensable centre of her small world is, indeed, the joy and consolation of her life.
Robert Roberts also recorded the objections of working class parents in Manchester to the preliminary investigations regarding  eligibility for free school meals, which were made by the school attendance officers, ‘men of little education and known authoritarianism’.
Distrust of the expert was also a feature of middle class women's attitudes towards the medical profession.
In the case of working class women, intervention by primarily middle class volunteers or state officials often served to increase their burdens by exacting higher standards of childcare and housekeeping — what Anna Martin called holding the mother to her task of making bricks without straw — and punishing her if she failed.
With school attendance, for example, it was the working class mother who was visited by the school attendance officer if her child failed to attend school, whether through inability to pay the school fee charged prior to 1891, indiscipline, or because the child's services were needed at home.
In the late nineteenth century it was also the mother who attended the School Board ‘s hearing on the case and then, if necessary, appeared before the magistrate, despite the summons being invariably served on the father.
Later, under the 1907 provisions for the medical inspection of children, parents (and again the responsibility usually fell on the mother) were told what was wrong with their children but were left with the task of seeking and paying for treatment, dependants being excluded from the provisions of the 1911 National Health Insurance Act.
The protection of motherhood involved a series of measures designed to limit the scope of women's activities outside the home, and to make working class mothers more aware of their responsibilities within it.
This assumed that women could afford to be economically dependent, which was rarely the  case, and offered an individualist solution to what were complex environmental, social and economic problems.
The Family Economy
A FAMILY WAGE?
Policy makers and social investigators assumed that all married women would be dependent on their husbands for financial support.
The reasons for such an assumption were made quite clear during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Dr William Ogle explained to the Royal Statistical Society that,
There are men who toil because work is a pleasure to them and there are others who toil because work is a duty; but the great majority of men are only stimulated to labour that in amount or character is distasteful to them, by the hope that they may be able, in the first place, to maintain themselves, and secondly to marry and maintain a family…
If therefore, the well-being of a state consists in the mature well-being of the people, a country is then most flourishing when the largest proportion of its population is able to satisfy these two natural desires.
The bourgeois family model with its breadwinning husband and dependent wife and children was thus believed to secure male work incentives.
Moreover, preservation of this family model was seen as crucial to the stability of the state and throughout the period fears regarding family disintegration were repeatedly expressed.
As one social purity advocate put it in 1949: ‘the family is the yardstick to measure values by…and the stability of the family unit is of major importance to the health and welfare of the community’.
Ideally, the roles of husband and wife were to be complementary, the husband earning the wage and the wife acting as ‘chancellor of the family exchequer’ and spending it wisely.
Middle class commentators went to some pains to emphasise the importance of the wife's role.
As a result of his comparison of household budgets in 1893, Henry Higgs commented that good housekeeping was the crucial variable which could actually ‘turn the balance of comfort in favour of one workman whose wages are much below those of another’.
Higgs believed that the services of a working man's wife were more valuable economically when they were employed at home than in the labour market.
Both Charles Booth and Helen Bosanquet felt that the majority of working class wives were too ill-trained to command a decent wage outside the home and that they should stop struggling to do two jobs, thereby also reducing the amount of un-and under-employment among men.
Social investigators assumed that in the private sphere of the family altruism prevailed, and tended to ignore the possibility that resources within the family might not be shared equally.
Herbert Spencer, a leading nineteenth-century social theorist, crystallised this view when he wrote: ‘The  welfare of a society requires that the ethics of the Family and the ethics of the State shall be kept distinct.
Under the one the greatest benefits must be given where the merits are the smallest, under the other the benefits must be proportioned to the merits’.
However, middle class observers were sensitive to the possibility that the working class husband might not provide; after all, the bourgeois family model was favoured because of the work incentive it provided for working class men, which presupposed that such an incentive was necessary.
In general, the working class wife evinced more sympathy than the working class husband.
Lady Bell and Anna Martin both stressed the wisdom and foresight needed to plan the family budget.
Social investigators were also ready to criticise the management of the household economy and were particularly concerned to establish the degree to which thriftlessness on the part of the wife contributed to poverty.
Charles Booth included a category labelled ‘Drunken or thriftless wife’, quite separate from the general category of ‘Drink’, in his list of nine causes of poverty.
Similarly, during World War I, fears were expressed that servicemen's wives would spend their dependants' allowances on drink.
But generally it was felt that mothers could be relied upon to exert themselves on behalf of their children and that mismanagement resulted more from ignorance than from vice.
The behaviour of the working class husband was by no means as charitably assessed.
The belief that working class men would choose idleness if at all possible and that married women's work provided them with the opportunity was particularly strong during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
As the authors of a 1906 investigation of 6000 women workers in Birmingham put it, either ‘women are compelled to work because their husbands are unsteady, drunken or idle, or the husbands develop bad habits because their wives remove the burden of responsibility from them’.
Mass unemployment during the 1920s and 1930s modified opinion somewhat, although the economist F. Y. Edgeworth opposed the idea of family allowances in 1922 on the grounds that they would encourage male idleness and quoted approvingly the comment of a social worker in 1908, who said ‘if the husband got out of work the only thing that the wife should do is sit down and cry, because if she did anything else he would remain out of work’.
But by 1937, J. C. Pringle, the head of the Charity Organisation Society (COS), was prepared to admit that married women's paid employment did not necessarily have an adverse effect on the family economy, something that ‘could not have been said with anything like the same confidence 25 years ago’.
The possibility that husbands might fail to provide altogether caused some soul-searching during the late nineteenth century.
If the husband did not fulfil his obligation to maintain, then on balance it was considered preferable for the wife to go out and earn than for the whole family to become chargeable to the Poor Law.
Thus there was a certain ambivalence in attitudes towards wage-earning wives.
In 1870 the first Married Women's Property Act was  passed, primarily in order to give working class women control over any earnings they might make.
A factory owner, A. J. Mundella, viewed the legislation as part of the same protective impulse that prompted the Factory Acts, which placed restrictions on the place and hours of women's labour.
The assumption was that women would be working because of their husband's fecklessness and would therefore need legal protection for their earnings.
As the Rev. Septimus Hansard, the Rector of Bethnal Green, testified to the Select Committee on the issue: ‘I think that it [the Married Women's Property Bill]would raise the social condition of the wife considerably in the eyes of her husband; as she is, practically, the great educator of the working classes, I think it would do a great deal to raise her’.
Similarly, the National Association for the Promotion of Social Science considered that if legal protection was given to the married woman's earnings, she and her family would benefit: ‘is it likely that a wife and mother will be less solicitous for the well-being…of her household?
We think probably the reverse is the case, and we feel certain that if the industrious factory woman were able to deposit in the savings bank a portion of her earnings in her own name, the school pence for her children would be very seldom withheld’.
Suspicions regarding the character of the working class husband were fuelled during the 1870s by revelations concerning wife-beating and the propaganda campaign mounted by Frances Power Cobbe, a leading middle class feminist, over what she called ‘wife torture’.
It was in response to what Lord Penzance called ‘sensational cases of cruelty’ that the first law giving working class wives an opportunity to sue for separation and maintenance was passed in 1878.
Many more women sought separations after the passing of the 1886 Act, which allowed them to do so on grounds of the husband's unwillingness or inability to maintain, although in practice the legislation provided them with little material assistance.
Magistrates usually granted both a separation order and maintenance, yet as evidence to the 1912 Royal Commission on Divorce showed, between 50 and 80 per cent of couples were reconciled when the husband's financial position improved.
This suggested that the fundamental problem of many working class families was one of scarce resources.
In cases where the husband's finances did not improve, there was little hope of maintenance anyway and wives and children were usually forced onto the Poor Law.
As Claud Mullins, a London magistrate, commented on the plight of separated women in 1935: ‘Day by day as I watch the women who come into court on summonses for arrears — probably the least attractive of all Police Court work — I sometimes wonder whether after all many of them would not have done better to put up with the ills they had, rather than to have placed their faith in court orders’.
Middle class legislators failed to confront the fact that large numbers of industrious working class men did not earn enough to keep a wife and children.
Charles Booth's 1889 survey of London showed that 30 per cent of  the population were unable to rely on a man's wage alone.
Rowntree made a similar discovery in York some ten years later and also showed how poverty dogged the course of the individual life cycle, being most acute in infancy, at the point of family formation and again in old age.
He calculated the subsistence wage for a male breadwinner with a wife and three children to be 21/8d, and in 1908 Edward Cadbury calculated it to be 25/.
The 1906 Wages Census showed that in the cotton industry 27.2 per cent of male workers earned below 22/ per week and 41.6 per cent less than 25/.
In the metal, engineering and shipbuilding trades, which accounted for 12 per cent of the male workforce, 20 per cent of all men over the age of twenty earned less than 22/ and 30.6 per cent less than 25/, while the notoriously poorly paid male agricultural labourer received an average of 18/4d a week.
In 1921 Bowley estimated that only 41 per cent of working class families could depend on a man's wage and of the families drawing public assistance during the 1930s fewer than one half depended on only one wage earner.
Anna Martin vividly described the plight of the wives of low-paid men:
‘I've only just found out something’ said Mrs H., a tidy, respectable young woman with a husband in regular work, though with small wages.
‘Now the children are getting bigger I find they eat all the dinner and there is none left for me.
Looking back, I remember that we children never expected mother to have any dinner.
She always took a bit of bread.
Now it has come to my own turn and I don't like it.’
Nor did early twentieth-century state welfare provision do much to alleviate the position of working class wives because it too assumed the existence of the bourgeois family model and a family wage.
Married women found themselves either excluded entirely from, or treated very poorly by, a whole range of measures designed to work through the labour market.
The pillar of the British social security system was national insurance, introduced in 1911, but health insurance did not cover dependants, and married women could only join the scheme if they were insured workers in their own right.
As the Fabian Women's Group (FWG) pointed out, contributory insurance was bound to reflect the existing economic position of women and divide them into those living as their husbands’ dependants and those living as economically independent individuals.
The Women's Industrial Council (a group of primarily middle class women who devoted themselves to the investigation of working women's problems) went so far as to suggest that such a form of provision was inappropriate for women and merely intensified the ‘regrettable tendency to consider the work of a wife and mother in her home of no money value’.
But as was later made explicit, married women were considered too great an insurable risk if they were not themselves employed.
Beveridge aimed to correct this situation in the 1940s by refusing to call housewives dependants and by referring to marriage as an equal partnership.
He proposed to give wives a separate insurance status and spoke  of the recognition that was due to their ‘vital work in ensuring the adequate continuance of the British race and British ideals in the world’.
But in fact married women remained totally dependent on their husbands' contributions and the benefits husbands received on their behalf.
Women workers who were covered by national insurance found that they tended to be submitted to strict surveillance by national health insurance visitors because of the unexpectedly large number of sickness claims.
Alice Foley found this to be the one disagreeable aspect of her work as a sickness visitor.
She was expected to knock and enter the insured person's house without waiting for a reply, something that would not have been possible at the door of a middle class household.
Married women were thought to be particularly likely to abuse the system because of the temptation to stay at home to catch up with housework.
Pregnancy also posed difficulties to those administering health insurance, and this showed how difficult it was for state welfare policies to treat women as both workers and wives and mothers.
Because pregnancy was a natural physiological process and not a disease, many of the approved societies administering health insurance benefits felt that women ‘disabled’ by pregnancy alone were not entitled to sickness benefit.
Married women were always treated as a class apart for insurance purposes and in 1932 they found their health insurance benefits cut because of the high risk they represented, even though no other group with excessive claims (for example miners) was singled out for similar treatment.
Men, on the other hand, were granted dependants' benefits under national insurance in 1922, plus the married man's tax allowance from 1919, on the assumption that a man supporting a wife needed additional tax relief (in fact the allowance was paid to all men regardless of whether or not their wives worked).
The idea of a family wage was strongly promoted within the labour movement.
Even in Lancashire, where in Blackburn, Preston and Burnley as many as one-third of women continued to work after marriage, the Cotton Factory Times could print a piece of verse which to all intents and purposes ignored married women's double role: ‘How Sweet it is when toil is o'er/To sit upon the hearth once more/To whistle, sing and sweet converse/With the sweetest queen in universe/In homely way’.
By the 1890s the wives of skilled men did not usually work, for the ability to keep a wife had become a measure of working class male respectability.
An Independent Labour Party pamphlet of 1900 declared that true freedom for women lay in not having to earn ‘any wage under any conditions’.
Male trade unionists also felt that the employment of married women depressed their wages; and thus their struggle for a family wage also entailed opposition to married women as workers.
As a male chainworker commented to Commissioner on the Factory Acts in 1876: ‘I should advocate their [women's]time should be so limited as neither to interfere with their own health and morals or with our wages’.
The case of the chainmaking trade was particularly acute because of the large numbers of women who entered it during the late 1870s from nailmaking.
In 1889 a Select  Committee heard another plea from a male trade unionist for the restriction of married women's work on the grounds that ‘when the married women turn into the domestic workshops they become competitors against their own husbands and it requires a man and his wife to earn what the man alone would earn if she were not in the shop’.
He added for good measure: ‘During the time she is in the shop her domestic duties are being neglected’.
During the inter-war period what trade union support there was for family allowances (generally it was feared that allowances would lead to a wholesale reduction in wages and reduce the bargaining power of male workers), was based on the hope that they would lead to a withdrawal of married women from the workforce.
However, there may well have been other pressures on working class men as individuals, causing them to oppose the work of their wives.
In a piece she wrote in 1913, Ada Nield Chew constructed an imaginary discussion between a Cockney and a Lancashire couple on women's work and the vote, in which the London husband says: ‘It wouldn't do for a man in my position to have a wife going out to work.
I'm just a counterman, and if my boss knew my wife worked I should get the sack, because people would think he didn't pay me enough’.
Women in the labour movement also tended to favour the idea of a family wage.
Very few took the position of Ada Nield Chew, who saw clearly how the position of working wives was complicated by their reproductive function, and who believed that women's sole responsibility for home and children represented the chief impediment to self-fulfilment.
On the whole, women trade unionists agreed that the withdrawal of female labour would benefit male wages with the additional advantage that working class homes would be better ordered and managed.
In 1894 Gertrude Tuckwell (Secretary and later President of the Women's Trade Union League) advocated ‘the gradual extension of labour protection to the point where mothers will be prohibited from working until their children have reached an age at which they can care for themselves’, and the Women's Labour League agreed that mothers with children under five should not be employed.
Mary MacArthur spoke in defence of married women's high sickness claims to the Departmental Committee on National Health Insurance in 1914, but she still feared that any improvement respecting their position under the scheme would ‘discriminate in favour of the wage-earning woman as against her uninsured sister, whose need is often as great,[and]will result in a State premium on the industrial employment of married women’.
Most working women's groups accepted that the respectable woman's place was in the home, emphasising women's contribution as wives and mothers and the need to bring the ‘mother spirit into politics’.
The Women's Cooperative Guild (WCG) was founded in 1884 with a view to helping women become better housewives and cooperators and to take their role as consumers seriously.
At their first venture into the male Cooperative Congress in Edinburgh in 1884, it was decided that there should be ‘no  platform speaking, no advertising, no going out of women's place’.
Both the WCG and the Women's Labour League (WLL) continued to play a subordinate role to their ‘parent’ bodies.
The WCG mounted spirited campaigns on the issues of maternity and easier divorce — the latter in opposition to the Cooperative movement as a whole — but women continued to play only a minor role in the central decision-making bodies of the Cooperative Society and the Labour Party.
Nevertheless, the Guild succeeded in imbuing its members with a firm sense of self-worth and purpose.
Many leaders of working class women's groups agreed that women's paid work had a bad effect on the father's willingness to earn.
Mrs J. Ramsay MacDonald believed that while a prohibition on married women's work would cause distress in the short term, in the long run it would ensure that men provided for their families.
The Women's Labour League, of which Mrs MacDonald was a leading member, took the same view, seeing in paid work the additional disadvantage that a woman had less opportunity to ‘give thought and companionship to her husband’.
The WLL gave priority to the new Labour Party's Right to Work Bill, introduced into the House of Commons every year between 1906 and 1908, which they believed would provide a charter of the ‘Right to Leisure and Home Comfort’ for working men's wives.
There is limited evidence to suggest that working class women were also convinced of the danger their contributions to the family economy posed to their husbands' work incentives.
Among North Kensington laundresses, the local maxim was ‘the best ironer gets the worst husband’, although within the local community it would appear that husbands and wives adjusted to the often superior earning power of the wife, and in at least one suburban district the custom prevailed whereby husbands remained responsible only for a sum which covered rent, the baker's bill and boots for the family.
Other women, however, seem to have been anxious to maintain their husbands' position of economic dominance, even when they were not the chief breadwinners.
Thus one Nottingham woman, whose husband earned only 10/ a week as a framework knitter in the 1900s, gave him money so that he could continue to give the children their pocket money.
Anna Martin showed that some working class women also distrusted state intervention, not on principle, as was the case with middle class feminists, but because they feared its effects on their husbands' incentives to work and on their own pivotal position in the family.
However, leaders of working class women's groups showed no awareness of this anxiety regarding the role of the state.
Women active within the labour movement, particularly members of the Fabian Women's Group, were concerned that women's economic dependence had a detrimental effect on the status of the wife and mother and proposed the state endowment of motherhood, which was intended to give the married woman a degree of economic independence without undermining her role as a wife and mother.
Mrs Pember Reeves, a member of  the FWG, asserted that ‘the woman who shrinks from the feeling that her wifehood is a means of livelihood will proudly acknowledge that her motherhood is a service to the state’.
Anna Martin preferred the approach of feminists such as Clementina Black, a former President of the Women's Industrial Council and the head of its Investigation Committee, who argued that women should have a legal right to a certain portion of their husband's wage.
After World War I, Eleanor Rathbone, President of the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (NUSEC — formerly Millicent Garret Fawcett's constitutional suffrage society) campaigned for a family allowance that would provide a ‘wage’ for the mother as well as an allowance for the children, hoping that this proposal would unite women of all social classes.
Similarly, in an effort to reach an accommodation with women trade unionists, the NUSEC rejected the traditional nineteenth-century feminist opposition to protective legislation, pledging to work for the extension of such legislation to men rather than opposing it for women.
But when family allowances were finally introduced in 1945, it was with the primary intention of holding down wages and hence inflation.
By 1950 the idea of part-time work for married women had become a solution to the problem of married women's status for feminists such as Eva Hubback, for policy makers anxious to preserve male work incentives, and for trade unionists concerned about the right to bargain for a family wage.
Economic Strategies of Working Class Wives
The main strategy of the working class wife faced with the responsibility of managing the family economy and the problem of scarce resources was always to augment the family income by her own efforts, the most important of which was the sale of her own labour power.
Recourse was also made to kin and neighbours, to sources of credit and in the final event to charities and the Poor Law.
The range of income-supplementing strategies open to women was probably greater prior to World War I, as was the need, poverty being more widespread.
In such circumstances, as Jill Liddington and Jill Norris have remarked, the role of the domestic ‘chancellor of the exchequer’ became more exacting than exalted.
Small debts could rapidly mount up and begin to exert intolerable pressure on the relationship between husband and wife.
1.
Credit, Neighbours and Kin Many women made use of various forms of credit.
Magistrates and solicitors in the 1870s and 1880s painted a picture of working class wives falling prey to the tallyman or ‘scotch hawker’ selling inferior and expensive goods, and called for a law to limit the power of the married woman to pledge her husband's credit in such circumstances.
In an 1884 case, the Divisional Court held that an artisan whose wife had bought blankets at the door for 22/6d when he had given her permission to spend but 17/6d, could not be held liable for the extra sum.
Here protection was being offered to the husband, but also to the wife against her apparently uncontrollable consumerism.
In fact, credit systems were often used by wives without their husbands' knowledge as part of their routine management of the family economy.
The reasons why the poor resorted to credit did not go unrecognised.
Mrs Bosanquet remarked that some saw the pawnshop as ‘an efficient and legitimate way of equalising the [irregular]income and the claims made upon it’.
However, in the manner of all philanthropists, she believed thrift to be the more correct solution.
But in the fragile family economy of the poor, tallymen, pawnshops, goose clubs (to provide the Christmas dinner) and ticket clubs were an essential part of household management, some being more respectable than others.
Ticket clubs were often used to purchase boots: in  Middlesbrough a shilling a week was paid to a store on an 18/ ticket until the sum of 21/ had been paid back, the advantage being that the store offered more choice of goods than the tallyman.
One woman told Elizabeth Roberts that she had resorted to taking her wedding ring to the pawnbrokers' three times: ‘each time I was caught with babies’.
The depression of 1884 was marked by a large increase in the number of wedding rings pawned.
Many other families pawned a bundle regularly each Monday, retrieving it on Friday.
In 1907 George Sims, a journalist, wrote of women in London's East End: ‘From home to the pawnshop and from pawnshop to the public house is the conventional Monday morning trip of a vast number of poor married women…
The women meet their neighbours at the pawnshop and adjourn to the public house for a glass and a gossip’.
Least respectable of all was moneylending.
A World War I study found that those with a clean rent book would borrow a lump sum of about a pound from which between 1/6d and 5/ would be deducted in interest; the very poor might borrow one or two shillings on which they paid a penny in the shilling weekly interest.
The first loan was often sought to escape a pauper funeral, to keep the children off the school meals list, to pay for boots, or to tide the family over the illness of the breadwinner.
But the spiral of indebtedness then proved hard to check.
The 1927 Moneylenders Act provided that all moneylenders must possess a license costing £15 and that interest should not exceed 48 per cent a year.
But it appears that the law was often broken.
In the 1940s, the weekly interest rate for loans was still 1/8d in the pound or 1d in the shilling: 433 per cent a year.
By the late 1930s, hire purchase payments, a more respectable form of credit which increased twenty-fold between 1918 and 1938 often totalled 3/ a week in the budget of a labourer earning about £2.
And on the new council estates of the inter-war period, the isolated housewife tended to make much more use of door-to-door salesmen.
Forms of credit other than hire purchase were largely neighbourhood based.
Local women often acted as pawnbrokers' touts, collecting clothing and other items for 7.5 to 15 per cent of the takings.
The moneylender dealing in small sums was also often ‘a poor woman, who lets us have money when we needs it’; the 1917 survey found that these were sometimes soldiers' wives lending their separation allowances, bigger sums being lent by men.
The neighbourhood provided an important support network in ways other than those associated with the supply of credit.
Mrs Pember Reeves found that housewives in Lambeth were reluctant to move away and forego the help they knew to be available in times of need, for neighbourliness implied reciprocity.
When social investigators and philanthropists condemned women for gossiping and deplored the excitement of the street life, striving to bring order and a respect for quiet to the lives of the poor, they were in fact often attacking the sources of neighbourly communication and mutual aid.
Some needs were not met by neighbours.
In Barrow and Lancaster, for example, neighbours did not bring up orphans, or take in the old, although Bethnal Green residents would apparently adopt children.
Usually, however, the day-to-day care of the elderly in particular, was a matter for the kin group.
By the early twentieth century this was undoubtedly less of a calculative relationship than Michael Anderson has described for the middle decades of the nineteenth century.
Elizabeth Roberts found that sons and daughters helped because ‘it was the thing to do’ and because of the all-pervasive fear of the workhouse.
In her study of Chilvers Coton, a ribbon-making village, Jill Quadagno found more elderly men and women living with their children in 1901 than in 1851.
Elderly women were more likely to find a home with the children than were elderly men, doubtless because they were more useful as babysitters and in doing odd bits of sewing.
Indeed women's earning power in old age was as great or greater than men's, but women lacked the collateral resources possessed by men, in the form of savings and union or Friendly Society benefits.
Until 1948, the Poor Law required children to maintain their parents and the law was implemented with varying degrees of rigour from district to district.
In 1909, in Faversham, the old were permitted to live with their children in the summer, doing fieldwork and babysitting chores, but had to return to the workhouse in winter.
Charles Booth argued, probably correctly, that old age pensions would encourage children to take in elderly parents.
The 5/ a week given in 1908 to those aged over seventy would have made a significant contribution to the pre-war family economy, but the Standing Joint Committee of Industrial Women's Organisations and members of the Fabian Women's Group felt that this should be weighed against the increased friction caused by an old person coming into an already overcrowded home, pointing out that elderly people's ideas of hygiene and childrearing might not be desirable, an argument that appealed to the infant welfare movement.
During the 1930s the imposition of the household means test on those drawing public assistance benefits led to greater reluctance to take in elderly relatives.
The same household means test extended the liability of families to support the able-bodied unemployed.
Anyone resident in a house could be held liable for the support of other household members, which meant that a wage-earning son or daughter often moved out of the home in order not to diminish the unemployed parents' entitlement to benefit.
Leo Abse  commented on the effects this legislation had on kinship ties when he recorded the support given by people in South Wales to his efforts to reform the divorce law during the 1960s: ‘Welshmen who had endured the depression had no time for the unctuous pleas for the need at all costs to maintain the unity of family life’.
Just as the Depression, followed by the dislocation of World War II, broke up many families, so also were many working class neighbourhoods transformed.
For example, the experimental Peckham Health Centre (opened in 1926 in the London suburb of Peckham as a community centre dedicated to the study and maintenance of the conditions necessary for health) found that when it re-opened after the War only about half the original members' families remained in the area.
2.
Casual Work Many women found it necessary either to supplement the wages of their husbands or to become breadwinners themselves.
Full-time married women workers formed about 10 per cent of the labour force between 1911 and the outbreak of World War II, and the experience of these women will be considered in Part II.
A literally incalculable number of wives, ex-wives, widows and children were also engaged in casual work which is not recorded by the census, and it is this kind of employment, usually undertaken at the dictates of the family economy, that will be considered briefly here.
A substantial number of women in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were homeworkers engaged in a wide variety of tasks, including the making of matchboxes, shirts, artificial flowers, umbrellas, brushes, carding buttons, furpulling, bending safety pins and covering tennis balls.
Some of these trades, like boxmaking, would have been learned in factories before marriage and some, like sewing, were occupations women tended to turn to in old age.
Homeworkers also worked in what remained essentially family industries; many of the chainmakers in the Midlands fitted this description.
The 1908 Select Committee did not, however, include a discussion of these workers in its report on homework, classifying families working together at home under the category of domestic workshops.
Finally, women engaged in what Shelley Pennington has called ‘extended homework’: washing, charring, babysitting and lodging-house keeping.
An 1894 survey by the Women's Cooperative Guild showed that 50 per cent of working mothers left their children with grandmothers or other kin (whom they usually paid), while the remainder used neighbours as childminders.
The importance of these earnings to elderly kin and to neighbours was a major factor accounting for working class women's apparent lack of interest in crèches.
Children were expected to make a contribution to the family economy as soon as they were able.
Very young children of four or five were put to work making matchboxes; Lady Dilke, leader of the Women's Protective and Provident League (which became the Women's Trade Union League in 1889) reported hearing a mother in Shoreditch saying ‘Of course we cheat the School Board…
It's hard on the little ones, but then their fingers is so quick  they that has most of 'em is best off.
Girls of seven undertook babysitting chores, cleaned steps and ran errands, sometimes bringing in as much as 1/6d to 2/ a week.
A Women's Industrial Council investigation of 10,000 girls during the 1890s found that 5 per cent spent an hour at midday and between two and four hours after school, as well as Saturdays, thus employed.
A much larger number helped at home or in the homes of neighbours and kin: ‘At one school, where only twelve are returned as regular wage-earners, ‘nearly all’ are said to be employed…
‘. Girls of seven or eight could mind the baby, one of the most frequent excuses that parents offered to the school attendance officers for the absence of girl children.
The ‘baby difficulty’, as one attendance officer called it, led to many late nineteenth-century state elementary schools opening crèches.
Mrs Burgwin, headmistress of the Orange Street School in Southwark, told the Royal Commission which reported on elementary school education in 1888 that:
the girls of my school have to take the place entirely of the mother of the family; the families are generally large; the woman goes out in the morning, she works in a pickle house, if she is a better class woman she goes out charring, or she goes out step cleaning during the day and the little girl takes the place of the mother of the family.
We were obliged to open a crèche because we found girls staying at home to look after the babies.
Crèches were abandoned in the early twentieth century partly for reasons of economy and partly as a result of the pressure exerted by the infant welfare movement on mothers to stay at home with their children.
In agricultural districts school attendance registers showed poor attendance at harvest time when girls of ten or eleven were set to work picking up stones in the fields.
Rural girl children worked full-time in the fields or as servants by the age of 15.
Poor mothers were often anxious for their daughters ‘to get their feet under someone else's table’ as soon as possible.
In 1881 as many as one in three girls aged between fifteen and twenty had entered domestic service.
Flora Thompson described girls leaving a North Oxfordshire railway station for service, ‘the girl in her best, would-be fashionable clothes and the mother carrying the baby of the family, rolled in its shawl’.
These young girls, who often travelled long distances to their first position, frequently endured agonies of loneliness and bewilderment.
A member of the Women's Cooperative Guild remembered working as a nursemaid to a doctor's family at the age of nine in 1867, and being unable to read or write, could not let her parents know about the unkind treatment she received.
As late as the inter-war years, one young girl felt ‘cut in half’ on leaving her Gloucestershire village at fourteen.
Employed in a maisonette in a London suburb, she ate by herself and slept in the junk room, enduring agonies of loneliness and misery.
During the Depression years mothers often called at the better-off houses in  the neighbourhood to try and find places for their daughters and one woman recalled employing a succession of unemployed miners' daughters to whom she paid 5/ a week.
Young servant girls paid whatever they could out of their often scanty wages to their families.
Flora Thompson recalled one Oxfordshire girl leaving her new best dress behind for her sister after her visit home.
Girls in Lancashire, like their brothers, became half-timers in the mill rather than servants.
The minimum age for half-time attendance at school was ten in the 1880s and 1890s and twelve in the 1900s.
During the early 1890s one child in every two in the appropriate age group was a half-timer in Lancashire.
Alice Foley remembered that her family was able to move into a better house as soon as her sister started work in the mill.
Children could leave school entirely at thirteen on possession of the ‘labour certificate’, which required either a minimum attendance record or the passing of Standard VII, although it seems that the certificate was rarely if ever refused and 10 per cent of 10–15-year-old girls were fully employed as late as 1911.
Adult women could often turn their hand to more than one form of casual employment.
Lodging-house landladies regularly did their lodgers' washing for a small extra charge — Lady Bell found this to be a common practice among the one-third of Middlesbrough wives who took in lodgers.
Many London families went ‘hopping’ in the summer months; Margaret Wynne Nevinson recalled that when working as a rent collector (with Beatrice Webb) for the Dwellings Improvement Company in the East End, she found many flats empty in August and September for this reason.
Charles Booth also made reference to the large-scale absenteeism in London schools at the time of the hop harvest.
During the remainder of the year, the wife might turn to sewing, boxmaking or mangling, as required.
Much of the casual work women did at home was categorised as ‘sweated’.
Sweated workers were not necessarily homeworkers, but also included outworkers (usually engaged in contract work and employed mainly in unregulated workshops or hired workrooms), and some workers in unionised factory premises.
In all cases, a majority of sweated workers were female.
The main reason why women took up such work was undoubtedly poverty, resulting chiefly from either the low wages, sickness, unemployment or absence of the male breadwinner.
However, as Clementina Black pointed out at the end of her inquiry into married women's work for the Women's Industrial Council, some women worked when the family income was already adequate, because they prized their independence: ‘A shilling of your own is worth two that he gives you’.
An investigation of 300 boxmakers in 1915 (of whom 78 per cent were married women and 16 per cent widowed) found that one-third were totally dependent on their earnings, one-third partly dependent, and one-third worked only for ‘pin money’; but a much larger study of Birmingham workers in 1906 had found that 52 per cent of outworkers (a category including those employed in small workshops and  homeworkers) were married with husbands earning small or irregular wages, 46 per cent were widows or deserted wives and only 0.4 per cent worked for pocket money.
Large numbers of casual women workers were found in areas where men's wages were low (as in the Eastern counties) or irregular (as in dockland areas), or where there was little alternative work for women.
As R. H. Tawney remarked, homework did not exist in the northern textile towns where the largest percentages of married women were employed full-time in factories.
In a 1907 study of West Ham, 53 per cent of the 520 women homeworkers investigated were the wives of casual labourers, or men on short time.
One reason why women in London took up washing was that it tended to be a seasonal trade, the peaks in the availability of the work (during the London season) coinciding with the troughs in the male employment cycle in the gas and building trades.
The tendency in the historical literature has been to dismiss the number of homeworkers during the 1900s as insignificant, but the numbers of women employed in casual tasks are extremely difficult to estimate.
The Royal Commission on Labour reported in 1894 that much of the cheaper work for Bristol clothiers was done by a female labour force at home, and the 1901 Census returns recorded one-third of women employed in the clothing trade as homeworkers.
But much of the casual work done by women was probably never reported to census enumerators; the number of wives recorded as lodging-house keepers or washerwomen, for example, was probably very inaccurate, largely because of the difficulty census enumerators experienced in classifying women's domestic labour.
The Factory Acts of 1891 and 1895 made provision for the regulation of homework, but the numbers remained hard to calculate.
Employers were supposed to give a list of their homeworkers' addresses to local authorities, but in 1907 two investigators found that in West Ham only 520 homeworkers on a list of 1,786 could be successfully traced and concluded that the Acts (and therefore the inspection of homework premises) were a dead letter.
MPs were reluctant to pass legislation that would result in government officials inspecting homes and there was also the widespread belief that the home was perhaps the most appropriate place for women to work.
After the establishment in 1909 of a minimum wage in certain sweated trades, including tailoring and boxmaking, the number of homeworkers decreased.
Some employers introduced ‘speed-up’ for their factory hands, resulting in less work for homeworkers, while others gave the best paying work to their indoor hands and gave out only the inferior grades of work which required the most time spent on it to houses where the inspectors were unlikely to penetrate.
The 1911 National Insurance Act undoubtedly reduced the number of homeworkers still further.
The fourth report on homework in the series edited by Tawney estimated that in 1914 between 11 and 16 per cent of workers in the tailoring trade and 7 per cent of all boxmakers were homeworkers.
Sweated trades have traditionally been seen as a residual sector, and in  some traditional women's occupations this was undoubtedly the case.
The often elderly ‘dustwomen’, who sieved refuse at rubbish tips and sorted out rags, bottles and paper, were a diminishing group of workers, as were the strawplaiters and lacemakers.
But some forms of technological change resulted both in new forms of homework (the retailing revolution, for example, brought changes in the way goods were packaged, giving rise to the homework trade of boxmaking), and a greater demand for certain traditional tasks performed by homeworkers, for while parts of a particular trade might become subject to large scale organisation, other aspects of the same trade not uncommonly remained the province of homeworkers.
Thus as the Leeds tailoring business became more advanced, with up to forty sewing machines grouped together in workshops (compared to London's eight or ten), so the amount of work for the lowly ‘finisher’, usually a homeworker and often a widow, also increased.
Contemporaries often failed to realise that homework was thus an integral part of a trade or industry.
An exchange between a finisher and members of the 1888 House of Lords Select Committee on Sweating showed the difficulties of politicians and policy makers in understanding the nature of homework and their tendency to assume that such a worker did her work by hand only because she was too inefficient to do otherwise:
I forgot to ask you whether you use a sewing machine in your work?
—No
Why not?
—I do not use a sewing machine; I am a finisher.
Do you mean that a sewing machine could not be used in finishing?
—Of course it can be, but I am too old to do it now.
Other finishers use a machine?
-Oh yes, there are some that can finish and machine together.
The witness was subsequently recalled and it was established that her particular work (presumably some form of basting or binding) could not be accomplished by machine.
All homeworkers supplied their own heat, light and materials — glue or paste or thread — and sometimes also paid an initial premium for the supply of work: this was particularly common in dressmaking and did not die out until the growth of the ready-made trade in the 1920s.
Dressmakers also had to meet the cost of hiring a sewing machine at 1/6d to 2/6d a week.
Women usually had to call for their work and were often kept waiting in all weathers.
Some London women could not afford the appropriate clothing for a trip to the City, where the better paid work was to be found.
Moreover, when the home became a workshop, poor living conditions rapidly became worse.
Furpulling was among the most noxious occupations and one of the most injurious to health:
they are scantily clothed in rough, sacking-like dresses, open for the most part at the throat…
The women work and eat and sleep in an atmosphere thick with impalpable hairs and tainted with the sickly smell of the skins…the average daily earnings are 1/1d.
From this a deduction has to be made for knife sharpening and shields, about 4d a week…the women suffer greatly from chronic asthma…and by the acids with which the Colonial skins are cleaned.
The isolation of such workers was often intense.
In 1897, the social investigator E. F. Hogg reported the case of a furpuller who had not left home for weeks.
The monotony and laboriousness of the tasks women often performed day in, day out for a pittance was well-illustrated in Clementina Black's meticulous description of a matchbox-maker:
At first sight it is a pretty enough spectacle to see a matchbox made; one motion of the hands bends into shape the notched frame of the case, another surrounds it with the ready-pasted strip of painted wrapper, which, by long practice is fitted instinctively without a wrinkle, then the sandpaper or phosphorous paper, pasted ready beforehand, is applied and pressed on so that it sticks fast.
A pretty high average of neatness and finish is demanded by most employers, and readers who will pass their matchboxes in review will seldom find a wrinkle or a loose corner of paper.
The finished case is thrown upon the floor; the long narrow strip which is to form the frame of the drawer is laid upon the bright strip of ready-pasted paper, then bent together and joined by an overlapping bit of paper; the edges of paper below are bent flat, the ready-cut bottom is dropped in and pressed down and before the fingers are withdrawn they fold over the upper edges of the paper inside the top.
Now the drawer, too, is cast on the floor to dry.
All this, besides the preliminary pasting of the wrapper, coloured paper and sandpaper had to be done 144 times for 2¼d, and even this is not all, for every drawer and case have to be fitted together, and the packets tied up with hemp.
Women worked extremely long hours when the exigencies of the family economy demanded it.
Mrs Layton remembered washing until 4 am when her husband was temporarily unemployed, and this was physically arduous work.
Louise Jermy's health was permanently impaired by the long hours she spent helping her mother mangle clothes, and Kathleen Woodward recalled her mother's bitter complaints about washing: ‘Wash wash wash; it's like washing your guts away.
Stand stand stand.
I want six pairs of feet and then I'd have to stand on my head to give them a rest’.
Furpulling, matchboxmaking and washing ranked low in the status hierarchy of homework.
Other work was less messy, easier and sometimes better paid.
Women so engaged would therefore consider themselves rather more respectable.
One Birmingham woman was able to keep her button-carding work in her bedroom, which was important because she considered that it looked ‘so poverty’ to be seen doing it downstairs.
Women homeworkers' earnings were extremely low and there is some evidence that they were actually declining during the late nineteenth and  early twentieth centuries.
A woman with an ‘afflicted’ husband told the 1888 Select Committee on Sweating that she ‘finished’four pairs of trousers a day, for which she made at most 1/2d, that her wages were 4d per day less than four years previously, and that after paying her rent, she had 5/ a week on which to keep her three children, her husband and herself.
Finishing and matchbox-making were amongst the worst paid homework trades.
Clara Collet, by her own admission, differed from other observers in her belief that the number of ‘hard cases’ was small, accounting for perhaps 10 to 20 per cent of the total in her experience.
Differences in earnings depended on a wide variety of factors: wages varied from region to region, employers paid different amounts for the same work, and their practices regarding fines differed.
Many employers forced workers to buy damaged articles themselves.
Better quality work did not necessarily pay better; for instance, a worker generally earned more by making plain blouses than ones with collars, cuffs and tucks.
Some workers deliberately took less well-paid work because employers gave it out in the particular quantity they desired.
Informed observers generally agreed that, contrary to popular belief, the worst paid workers were those who needed the money most — widows and deserted wives, in particular— rather than the respectable married women earning ‘pin money’: in other words, the latter were not responsible for dragging down wages.
One investigator suggested that this was because women whose husbands were in work were better nourished, less strained and therefore more efficient workers.
Widows and deserted wives, on the other hand, may well have been forced to supplement their meagre earnings by resorting to the Poor Law.
Official sources were divided on this.
A survey carried out for the 1909 Royal Commission on the Poor Laws found that subsidised pauper wage-earners made up only 0.5 per cent of the female population in the sixteen areas investigated, though an 1898 report by a woman factory inspector in Glasgow had considered that a substantial amount of poor relief went in aid of wages.
Kathleen Woodward recalled that when the washing trade was slack her mother sought relief from the Guardians.
Ordinarily a ‘deserving’ widow might have sought the aid of various charities first, but apparently Mrs Woodward's lack of deference made this impossible.
Even after the passing of minimum-wage legislation in 1909, as many as 42 per cent of the homeworkers in the trades covered by the Acts found that they could not earn the statutory minimum.
Because women homeworkers' wages tended to be small and because it is not clear either how many ‘hard cases’ there were, or how large the homeworking sector was, historians have tended to regard this area of women's employment as being of slight importance.
However, in the context of the fragile family economy of the very poor in the years before World War I, it should be remembered that if a wife earned only 1/6d a week it meant that she could feed her family for two days.
The opportunities for women to pick up casual earnings, particularly  through homeworking, probably shrank during the inter-war period.
Investigations by factory inspectors in 1925 and 1932 reported that the number of homeworkers had diminished in all but tailoring, and that few women were entering homework.
The New Survey of London Life and Labour agreed with this assessment and reported that whereas in the 1880s homework had been done primarily to supplement wages, in the 1930s women tended to work in order to buy extras, reflecting the greater regularity of men's employment, together with a more efficient social security system for the families of the unemployed.
One sanitary inspector reported that ‘far from being carried on in the poorer types of dwelling, outwork was taken to supplement their resources by many people whose names one would never expect to find on an outworkers list’.
The inspector expressed his wish ‘that some of the poorer types would take on homework, as it would indicate some desire on their part to improve their circumstances’ and give him an opportunity of trying to improve the sanitary conditions of their dwellings.
Some forms of extended domestic work, particularly lodging-house keeping, also declined during the inter-war period.
Rising real wages made subletting as a means of supplementing income less essential and, among the unemployed, the household means test made letting rooms a more difficult proposition.
However, charring in both private homes and institutions probably increased: in his survey of Merseyside in 1934, Caradog-Jones found cases of hospital chars working 84–99 hours a week.
3.
Poor Relief When all else failed there was the Poor Law.
In particular, women who found themselves without a source of male economic support-widows, deserted wives and unmarried mothers — tended to end up drawing poor relief.
The 1834 Poor Law Amendment Act had said little about women.
Only the unmarried mother was given specific mention; for the rest it was assumed that women would follow their husbands.
During the 1900s feminists began to protest this assumption.
Margaret Wynne Nevinson's play In the Workhouse was prompted by the case of a woman detained with her children in the workhouse because her husband was a drunkard, despite her desire to earn her living as a dressmaker.
The ‘baffling problems’ of the widow, the deserted wife, the wife of the absentee soldier or sailor, the wife of a husband resident in another parish or county, in each case with or without children, were ignored altogether by the 1834 Act.
The Poor Law was intended to deter the able-bodied from seeking relief.
Widows, deserted wives and unmarried mothers were usually able-bodied, but were often responsible for the care of dependent children.
Thus the authorities faced a similar problem to the wife whose husband was unwilling or unable to provide: whether to treat the woman as a mother or worker.
Should a mother be encouraged to work, in which case her children might have to be taken into the workhouse, or should she and the children be given outdoor relief?
The latter course kept the family together, a consideration which became increasingly  important during the first half of the twentieth century, but which was believed to be open to abuse unless the state assumed the role of the male breadwinner and insisted on good household management and sexual fidelity.
In an effort to tighten up the administration of poor relief the Local Government Board issued a circular in 1871 to the effect that outdoor relief should not be granted to the able-bodied widow with one child.
In cases involving more than one child, the circular advised that it might be better for the local Board of Guardians to test the widow's need by offering to take the children into the workhouse rather than give her outdoor relief.
Deserted wives were regarded with even more suspicion than widows, and in their case the circular advised that outdoor relief should be denied for twelve months, to ensure that they were not colluding with their husbands to defraud the authorities.
In practice, the treatment of widows and deserted wives varied considerably from region to region.
The 1909 Royal Commission on the Poor Laws found that for widows the first recommendation of 1871 was generally observed, some Boards of Guardians going further and insisting that the widow maintain two children by herself before any relief was given, while others refused relief to healthy able-bodied widows no matter how many children they had.
But neither the second 1871 recommendation regarding widows, nor the order respecting deserted wives were generally implemented, as outdoor relief was found to be cheaper than taking children into the workhouse.
Nevertheless, the numbers of women receiving outdoor relief decreased from 166,407 on 1 January 1871 to 53,371 on 1 January 1892, and the numbers of widows in the same category fell from 53,502 on 1 January 1873 to 36,627 on 1 January 1892.
Rates of relief varied from 1/6d to 2/6d for the mother herself, with 1/6d usually added for each child.
Some relief was often given in kind, although as Eleanor Rathbone reported, most women resented the ignominy of ‘fetching the parish’ and the fatigue of a journey to claim the usually stale and monotonous food.
Deductions were often made if it was considered that the widow had overspent on her husband's funeral, or if mothers were not keeping their houses sufficiently clean.
If a widow had an illegitimate child, outdoor relief was likely to be stopped altogether.
There was considerable confusion as to whether the relief of widows was to be considered independently of either their late husbands' failure to provide for them, or of the needs of their children.
For example, the Chairman of the Board of Guardians for St Giles in  East London considered that widows must be held in part responsible for their own condition: ‘After the lapse of a certain number of years, when a widow has had the opportunity of showing providence on her own account, I think you may separate her from her late husband, but not immediately after his death’.
The Relieving Officer for East Greenwich, however, favoured giving relief to widows for the first few weeks after their husband's death, but after that he believed some of the children should be taken into the workhouse, because he considered that an  able-bodied widow should work.
The rules regarding outdoor relief for widows were significantly relaxed in 1911.
Nevertheless a 1914 government report cited the case of a woman found guilty of cruelty for locking her children up in one room while she went out to work for 10/ a week.
She had feared that if she made a claim for poor relief it would have meant the break-up of her family.
Acute hardship persisted until widows' pensions — granted in 1925 — ameliorated the problem, but even then ambivalent feelings on the part of the authorities about the proper place of the able-bodied widow persisted.
During the 1940s and 1950s, when the concept of ‘maternal deprivation’ was growing in popularity and links were being made between it and juvenile delinquency, Professor Zweig still found National Assistance officials ready to label the widow with school-age children who did not go out to work as an ‘inferior type’and a ‘professional’widow.
The problem of the unmarried mother was considered even more intractable because of the danger posed by her immoral behaviour.
The 1834 Act had made the mother wholly responsible for her illegitimate child so that the privileges of marriage would not be extended to the undeserving.
A proposal put forward by Mona Wilson, a feminist employed at the Ministry of Reconstruction during World War I, to make provision for all one-parent families outside the Poor Law, failed because, in the view of the Government Actuary, first it was too expensive and, secondly, by abandoning the principles of the 1834 Act, he feared that it would lead to an increase in illegitimacy.
The options for the single, pregnant woman were few.
Some women managed to keep their condition secret and in the late nineteenth century it was probably these women who were responsible for many of the infanticide cases.
In 1870, 264 dead infants were found in London's metropolitan and city police districts.
During the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries there was also the possibility of informal adoption.
Most local newspapers contained numerous advertisements for and by people wanting children to nurse.
Usually the mother offered and the prospective adoptive parents requested either a weekly sum or, more commonly, a premium or lump sum of anything between £5 and £100.
Many of these advertisements were undoubtedly genuine, but during the late nineteenth century attention was drawn to several court cases involving ‘baby-farming’ for profit, which had resulted in the death of the infants concerned.
Legislation requiring the registration of houses taking children for adoption followed, but respectable working class women resented this inspection, especially when it was carried out by the Poor Law Relieving Officer.
Middle class feminists also objected to this increasing ‘officialism, police interference and espionage’, just as they objected to other aspects of state intervention in the working class family and to protective legislation for women workers.
Adoption was not made a legal procedure until 1926.
The majority of unmarried mothers were forced to enter the workhouse hospital for their confinements, where they were virtually imprisoned for a two-week period.
Together with ‘fallen women’, unmarried mothers were more likely than other women to be employed on the unpleasant task of picking oakum, and were also more likely to be deprived of Sunday outings to church, despite the fact that previous behaviour was not supposed to influence the treatment meted out inside the workhouse.
Workhouse visiting committees composed of middle class ladies tried to place unmarried mothers as domestic servants and increasingly strove to keep mother and child together, but, as Mrs Hardie of the Manchester Ladies' Health Society commented, their task was difficult: a mistress usually feared the presence of a young woman of immoral character in her family.
During World War I, attitudes towards ‘war babies’ and their mothers briefly relaxed largely as a result of the efforts of the Council for the Unmarried Mother and her Child (founded in 1917), and greater concern was expressed about the high infant mortality rate amongst illegitimate children.
One Conservative MP was prepared to advocate temporary relaxation of the bastardy laws in order to ease the path of children of men fighting in the war.
Between the wars unmarried mothers were more rigorously classified.
Voluntary organisations took mainly ‘first offenders’ and tried to place them in domestic service.
The National Vigilance Association (NVA) played an active role in putting single pregnant girls in touch with charities.
For example, they arranged an adoption for Lily O'Connell, a nurse, in the mid-1920s.
The premium charged by the Roman Catholic church orphanage was nearly £50 and Lily was required to pay it back at 10/ a month until, in 1931, she was finally released from the burden of payment.
The NVA representative who wrote to tell her of the decision explained that although he must have ‘seemed unsympathetic in the past’, it had been for her own good.
Most of the voluntary organisations considered it their duty to inculcate a proper sense of shame in their charges, until World War II brought about the first intimation that unmarried mothers were beginning to avoid the hostels run by charitable institutions for that very reason.
The Poor Law authorities took ‘repeaters’ and from 1927 had sweeping powers to detain girls who were classified as mentally defective and who were in receipt of poor relief at the time of their child's birth.
(During the late nineteenth century, single pregnant women were sometimes assumed to be insane and were confined to the workhouse under the 1890 Lunacy Act.)
The 1927 powers of detention were conferred at a time of enormous concern about the high birth rate of mental defectives and the supposed decline in the ‘national intelligence’.
Present-day writers are generally in agreement that the position of the unmarried mother under the Poor Law showed remarkably little change before World War II.
It is hard to generalise about the quality of the family experience of  working class women.
Commentators throughout the period made much of the working class woman's limited horizons and passivity.
Lady Bell wrote of women in Middlesbrough in 1907 being ‘curiously devoid of public spirit or interest in outside affairs’, and some 40 years later, Slater and Woodside described their female respondents as looking out on the world from their homes ‘as from a  beleaguered fortress’.
Historians have commented on working women's fatalism in respect to childbirth and the material conditions of their lives.
No one has yet argued that the attitudes of nineteenth-century working class wives ‘modernised’, although such a case has been made for both young, single working class women and middle class wives.
Much of the discussion in this section has conveyed a picture of relentless toil, but this is not the whole story.
As Elizabeth Roberts has remarked, older women will refer to the hardness of their lot as young wives and in the same breath claim that ‘they were good times’.
The key to this paradox, she suggests, is that in general these women led lives of purpose.
The welfare of their families depended on their budgeting and management skills, and in the closely-knit working class communities the talents of skilful housewives were readily acknowledged.
Quite possibly this sense of self-worth was lost by the relatively isolated suburban wife of the regularly employed man during the inter-war period.
It is also difficult to assess the quality of husband/wife relationships.
Accounts which present a picture of brutal, sexually segregated relationships being gradually transformed into the ‘symmetrical’ family of the post-World War II years are certainly inadequate.
Relations between working class husbands and wives never lacked affection and it may well be that the poor, early twentieth century working class wife derived as great a satisfaction from the mix of activities she undertook to sustain her family as her modern counterpart does from, typically, a part-time job and the performance of less arduous domestic tasks (with varying degrees of help from her husband).
But what are we to make of the evidence which suggests that working class wives rarely knew what their husbands earned, or enjoyed sex, or of the probably greater incidence of violence between spouses?
Descriptions of late nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century working class family life as crude and brutal usually attribute the blame to the husband in a manner similar to that of the politicians and policy makers, who so mistrusted his commitment to work and hence to provide.
There is, however, plenty of evidence from contemporaries, as well as from historians, that not all husbands were drunken brutes and that many would willingly take a hand at quietening the baby for an hour or two after a long working day, or take tea up to their wives before leaving for work.
Research on East Anglian fishermen and on working class families in Barrow, Lancaster and London has revealed that a deeply homebased culture was established by the early twentieth century.
Yet the economic and sexual dependency of wives cannot be overlooked.
It has been argued that the sexual division of labour between husband and wife  may be interpreted as the best way of maximising the welfare of the working class family, and certainly the struggle for a family wage benefited working class families to the extent that it raised the wages of the male breadwinner.
However, the struggle was conducted at the expense of the woman worker and, within the family, the family wage system benefited men disproportionately, because they gained the full-time household services of their wives.
Eleanor Rathbone identified the power that husbands derived from their breadwinner status as the ‘Turk Complex’ which she described in a biting passage:
A man likes to feel that he has ‘dependants’.
He looks in the glass and sees himself as perhaps others see him — physically negligible, mentally ill-equipped, poor, unimportant, unsuccessful.
He looks in the mirror he keeps in his mind, and sees his wife clinging to his arm and the children clustered round her skirts; all looking up at him, as that giver of all good gifts, the wage-earner.
The picture is very alluring.
Moreover, to the extent that the family wage was never realised, women shouldered the double burden of household and paid employment and received little assistance from government welfare legislation, which assumed female economic dependency to be the norm.
Leonora Eyles characterised the position of working class wives during the 1920s as that of ‘privileged servants’.
Time and again the complaint from articulate working class women's groups about husbands was not of ill-treatment or economic neglect, but rather of lack of sympathy and understanding.
In the 1940s wives were still bitterly resentful of the fact that their husbands did not seem to realise that they needed leisure.
The Women's Cooperative Guild and other groups translated such feelings into a call for measures to improve the status of working class wives, whether through divorce law reform, health services or an assured income.
For individuals, it took immense determination, on the part of an Ada Nield Chew or Hannah Mitchell, for example, to change the pattern of their lives and make time for the political work they held dear.
In neither case did their husbands fully understand their aspirations and the nature of their difficulties which meant that the burdens of domestic work and childcare went largely unrelieved.
Chew and Mitchell paid for their awareness and involvement with the unresolved tension between their own ambitions and the constraints of poverty and male expectations.
Many working class women did, however, participate in Women's Cooperative Guild meetings and campaigns, and as Jill Liddington and Jill Norris have shown, large numbers of working class women in Lancashire actively supported the suffrage movement, albeit with ‘one hand tied behind them’, as for all these women any cause was something that had to be fitted in ‘between dinner and tea’.
3 Middle Class Women
Introduction
The separation of spheres was much more rigid for middle class women than for working class women, for although both were excluded from the public sector in terms of political citizenship and legal rights, working class women did engage in paid employment and there was a certain ambivalence on the part of politicians and policy makers as to their behaviour in this respect.
No such ambivalent feelings characterised the firm belief — sanctioned by Victorian science and medicine — that the place of the middle class woman was in the home.
Lydia Becker, a leading Victorian feminist, compared the position of middle class women unfavourably with that of working class women: ‘What I most desire, is to see married women of the middle classes stand on the same terms of equality as prevail in the working classes and the highest aristocracy.
A great lady or a factory woman are independent persons — personages — the women of the middle classes are nobodies, and if they act for themselves they lose caste!.’
The comparison was naive in its failure to recognise the burden borne by working class wives, but Becker was rebelling primarily against the idea that the middle class woman should be ‘kept’, if not by a husband then by a father, brother, or other male relative.
During the late nineteenth century considerable correspondence was conducted in the daily newspapers and periodical press on ‘the proper time to marry’, prudence and postponement being the key words in the discussion.
A prospective husband had to be able to afford a wife, children and their educational expenses, and the trappings of domestic life.
W. R. Greg, a statistician, suggested that one reason for the ‘surplus’ of women (which particularly afflicted the middle classes) was the ‘self indulgence of the bachelor's career’and Henry Fawcett, the political economist, agreed:
The majority of men are accustomed to some particular style of living, and they generally refrain from marriage, if the increased expenses of married life would compel them to live in a manner which would not give them what has been aptly termed their historical standard of comfort.
Throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, middle class women faced a choice between marriage and motherhood, and a career.
In the early part of the period there was little choice as it was unusual even for young, single women to engage in paid employment unless family circumstances demanded it.
In particular, the gradual decline of the small  private family business and the growing importance of jobs for men as managers in large companies, in government and in the professions wrought substantial changes in the position of many middle class women within the family.
(As will be seen in the second part of the book, the same changes opened up new jobs for working and lower middle class girls as shop assistants and teachers.)
Kinship networks in business became less important and by the end of the century, middle class wives and daughters no longer played an active role in the management of the small family business or shop.
Articulate women, anxious to lead purposeful lives, found it impossible to dismiss the idea, supported as it was by scientific theories of sexual difference, that their proper place was in the home.
They were, however successful in arguing that charitable endeavour represented an acceptable extension of women's domestic work, and many late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century middle class mothers and daughters became active voluntary social workers.
For a minority of educated, ambitious women the choice they were forced to make between marriage and work was an agonising one.
The young Beatrice Webb was convinced of the importance of family life for women and during the 1880s desperately desired an intimate relationship with the leading politician, Joseph Chamberlain, yet she knew that to marry him would cut her off for ever from the purposeful life of work that she also wanted.
In many ways the life of a great political hostess was very attractive to her, which only made her feel more guilty, but she knew that she could not tolerate a life of subordination and absolute dependency.
Her decision was extremely painful, for Beatrice believed (as it happened incorrectly) that she was committing herself to a celibate life for ever:
I must check those feelings which are the expression of physical instinct craving for satisfaction, but God knows celibacy is as painful to women (even from the physical standpoint) as it is to men — could not be more painful than it is to a woman.
She observed two of the leading women philanthropists of the day, Ella Pycroft and Octavia Hill, both of whom had remained single, and recorded her opinion that both ‘might have been more’ with a happy family life, which only served to increase her anguish.
During the whole period, a conscious decision to remain unmarried signified a revolt against the prescribed feminine role, but only sometimes was this revolt consciously feminist.
Often there was little sympathy with the position of women, but rather a strong commitment to a cause or an ideal; this was the case with Florence Nightingale and the leading women educationalists, Miss Beale and Miss Buss, both of whom turned down offers of marriage.
Many feminists also rejected the ‘scramble for husbands’, induced by the need of middle class women for someone to maintain them financially.
Andrew Rosen has shown that the overwhelming majority of the members of the leading suffragette organisation, the Women's Social and  Political Union, were single.
C. P. Gilman's (the American feminist) late nineteenth-century lament that ‘wealth, power, social distinction, fame…home and happiness, reputation, ease and pleasure, her bread and butter — all must come to her thro’ a small gold ring', was echoed by the English writer, Cicely Hamilton, in her book Marriage as a Trade (1909).
Margaret Wynne Nevinson, an active suffragist, rebelled against the way ‘marriage was dinned into me from morning till night…from a business and commercial standpoint’.
As a result she developed a ‘repulsion’ to men and to her mother's creed that ‘a bad husband is better than none’.
While marriage represented the only means to a livelihood for a majority of middle class women, most of whom were but poorly educated, it was nevertheless not ‘done’ for a young woman to solicit male attention.
In 1897 Mona Caird vividly outlined the social dilemma of the woman forced to marry for a living:
People think women who do not want to marry unfeminine, people think women who do want to marry immodest — people combine both opinions by regarding it as unfeminine for women not to look forward longingly to wifehood as the hope and purpose of their lives, and ridiculing and condemning any individual woman of their acquaintance whom they suspect of entertaining such a longing.
They must wish and not wish; they must by no means give and they must certainly not withhold encouragement — and so it goes on, each precept cancelling the last, and most of them negative.
Women who did not deliberately choose to remain single out of conviction or because they wished to pursue a career, but who nevertheless ‘got left on the shelf, were often made to feel that they were failures.
Beatrice Webb wrote feelingly that the position of the unmarried daughter at home was ‘an unhappy one even for a strong woman’.
By the early twentieth century this situation had improved slightly, due in part to an expansion in the range of occupations open to young middle class women.
Cicely Hamilton commented in the course of a debate with G. K. Chesterton at Queen's Hall in 1919: ‘Do you suppose that forty or fifty years ago a woman would have dared to stand up on a platform and say, without the slightest shame, that she was over thirty and unmarried?
She could not do it.
That is past’.
There was, however, little change in the rigid separation of spheres between the male world of work and the world of home and family experienced by adult women.
For after World War I, the ideology of separate spheres was substantially reinforced by the imposition of a ‘marriage bar’ on women pursuing professional careers.
Nevertheless, considerable changes did take place in regard to the nature of marriage.
The Victorian image of a woman as the ‘angel in the house’, passive, sexually innocent and dependent, gave way to the ideal of a companionate marriage.
As late as 1913, the anti-feminist surgeon, Sir  Almroth Wright, continued to applaud what was undoubtedly an extreme form of the traditional patriarchal marriage, whereby the husband promised to do his wife reverence, to protect and to serve her as long as she did not jettison personal refinement, act in an ungrateful manner or put an extravagantly high estimate on her intellectual powers.
As J. S. Mill recognised in his essay On the Subjection of Women (1869), this degree of inequality was by no means true of all Victorian marriages, but the idea of the wife as a ‘natural’ subordinate was widely accepted.
Such a view differed markedly from Beveridge's characterisation of marriage as a ‘partnership’ of equals with different but complementary talents.
This shift in the meaning of marriage was accompanied by changes in married women's property rights and in the grounds women could use to sue for divorce, both of which benefited primarily middle class women.
These legal advances must also be related to long-term changes in the nature of property-holding among the middle class and to changes in the ideology of domesticity.
As land gradually ceased to be the major source of middle class wealth, and as salaries became more important, so marriage ceased to be an essentially dynastic settlement between two kin groups and it became possible to grant women more freedom, both emotional (to marry whom they wished) and legal, within marriage.
The Married Women's Property Acts of the 1870s and 1880s permitted women to control their own property, although married women were not given the same capacity as single women to acquire, hold and dispose of property until 1935.
Nor did the Acts change the right of landed families to make settlements on their daughters in order to protect the family property from the rapacity of sons-in-law and from any action of the daughter herself which might prove contrary to the family interest.
The importance of these settlements died away only slowly.
The reform of both property and divorce law modernised and rationalised the institution of marriage and brought it into line with new kinds of family wealth and relationships.
The debate over the inequality in the divorce laws (men could divorce on a simple charge of adultery but women could not) also began during the late nineteenth century, and revision of the laws was recommended by the Royal Commission on Divorce in 1912.
Legislation was not brought in until 1923, however, largely because any attempt at reform was regarded as an attack on the sanctity of marriage, despite the Royal Commission's argument (repeated by all later proponents of divorce law reform) that relaxation would in fact strengthen rather than weaken it.
Extension of the grounds for divorce took even longer to enact and was not achieved until 1937.
By the inter-war years married women were no longer regarded primarily as ornamental and sexually innocent creatures; the ideal companionate marriage also involved an expectation of sexual harmony.
The sexes no longer led the uncommunicative, separate lives, which is perhaps the most striking characteristic of middle class Victorian autobiographies and popular  literature such as Mrs Henry Wood's East Lynne (1861).
However, the emphasis on companionship and sexual harmony was not altogether compatible with the sanctity of marriage, and the contradiction between the importance attached to the quality of the sexual act and the celebration of family life continued to deepen in the years following World War II.
From women's point of view, changes in the occupational structure which gave young women in the twentieth century more opportunity for a career also reduced the need to marry out of pure economic necessity, which in turn increased the importance of companionship within marriage.
The unanimous condemnation of marriage as a trade by the feminist movement may also have made a significant contribution to the new emphasis on marriage as a partnership.
However, none of these changes affected the sexual division of labour within the home, and the equality of tasks and responsibilities that began to be envisioned for husbands and wives after World War II was in practice often associated with subordinate and superior status.
‘Peterborough’, the Daily Telegraph's columnist, was probably not alone in ridiculing the 1942 Beveridge Report's idea of marriage as a partnership, which he referred to as ‘Cupid's team’.
Nor was the sense of isolation experienced by so many married middle class women in any way lessened.
Role Prescriptions and the Articulate Woman's Response
Literature giving women guidance as to their proper behaviour and place was more profuse and inflexible for middle than for working class women.
Women were told unequivocally that they should confine themselves to the sphere of home and family; the middle class husband unlike his working class counterpart, could be safely relied upon to provide.
The circumstances of women within the middle class varied widely.
Patricia Branca has reminded us that in the Victorian household where the man earned between £100 and £300 a year, an income range which excluded the highly skilled manual worker and included as many as 42 per cent of the middle class, there was only enough money available for the employment of one or at most two domestic servants and very little at all for the rest of the ‘paraphernalia of gentility’ desired by the aspiring middle class household.
While crucial to an assessment of the reality of middle class women's experience, these differences in income and status within the middle class did not affect the prescriptions meted out to middle class women, which were fundamentally rooted in theories of sexual difference and the idea of separate spheres.
While arguments regarding biologically-based sexual differences applied to all women, the Victorian scientists who developed them built up their theories on the basis of assumptions regarding the behaviour of women in their own class, and, as Elizabeth Fee has pointed out, there was therefore an essential circularity in their reasoning.
Scientists used their own society as the model from which they formulated their ideas, which in turn justified the position of women as they found it.
Having stopped women acquiring certain capacities, science provided the justification for refusing rights on the grounds that those capacities were ‘naturally’ absent.
Within an evolutionary framework it could be argued that the work working class women did outside the home was an anachronistic survival and that society was in fact progressing towards a position whereby all women would be able to stay at home.
(The argument was similar to the one used by economists when discussing homework.)
This view accorded with the idealisation of married love in the work of Ruskin, Coventry Patmore and a range of writers on the domestic duties of wives and mothers, who believed that women's fundamental task was to create a haven of peace, beauty and emotional security for their husbands and children.
The home was to be a sanctuary in which the wife reigned as guardian ‘angel’ in the words of Patmore, or as a ‘Queen’in Ruskin's imagery.
During the mid- and late nineteenth centuries, the wife and mother at home became doubly important as a moral force because evolutionary ideas had shaken the religious faith of so many.
The hearth itself became sacred, and the chief prop of a moral order no longer buttressed by belief.
Scientific theories of biologically-based sexual difference were important for as the status of scientific explanation increased, so the arguments became harder to refute.
By the late nineteenth century it was already necessary to demonstrate a scientific approach in order to gain full recognition: the Charity Organisation Society, for example, made much of its promise to organise charity on ‘scientific principles’.
The use of biological analogy, in particular, proved very popular in explaining all kinds of social problems.
Nineteenth century Liberals used the idea of society as a biological organism to draw attention to the need for competition (as between species), while twentieth century Liberals argued the reverse to justify greater collective provision, stressing not competition but the harmonious working of the organism as a whole.
Early twentieth-century sociologists also drew parallels between the workings of biological and social systems, some of which were extremely crude.
Above all, social Darwinistic ideas achieved enormous popularity.
For instance, in an 1897 novel, The Typewriter Girl, the heroine comments on finding a job: ‘I had justified myself before the impartial tribunal of political economy…
I had proved myself the fittest by the mere act of survival.
The sole remaining question was could I adapt myself to my environment?
If so I had fulfilled the whole gospel of Darwinism’.
The idea that there was a ‘natural’ basis for sexual difference, as opposed to patently artificial class differences, was powerful and long-lived.
As the eminent physician Henry Maudsley put it in 1874, ‘sex is fundamental, lies deeper than culture,[and]cannot be ignored or defied with impunity’.
Moreover, the nature of the evidence adduced and the tone of the argument shifted over time, serving to justify the changing nature of sexual divisions in society (the ‘typewriter girl’ was herself a product of changes in the occupational distribution of women workers).
The theme running through Victorian Darwinistic science was that women were merely vehicles for reproduction and were thus nearer nature (and the lower animals) than men, but towards the end of the century a more positive view of motherhood emerged, largely as a result of eugenic concern about the quality of the race.
The essential role prescription of wife and motherhood did not change, but, in theory at least, the importance of the work performed by mothers was recognised.
It was impossible for middle class feminists to attack theories of sexual difference directly because of their purported scientific authenticity.
Moreover, to those women long accustomed to playing a complementary role to their husbands in running a family business, the idea of natural sexual differences appeared both sensible and acceptable.
Thus the ideas formulated by scientists and mediated by the medical profession formed the framework within which all women, including active feminists (most of whom were middle class), had to work.
SEXUAL DIFFERENCE AND SEPARATE SPHERES IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
Darwinistic Victorian science derived psychological and cultural difference between men and women — such as women's stereotypically greater tenderness, generosity and intuition — from male and female biology.
The tone of Darwin's The Descent of Man, published in 1871, was mild.
He outlined a process of sexual selection whereby males competed for females, who initially remained passive, but eventually exercised power of choice; vigorous females preferring vigorous males.
Later, eugenicists stressed the importance of teaching women the criteria by which to choose a mate.
In the process of sexual selection, certain males were said to develop characteristics that gave them the edge over other males in the competition for females.
Over generations secondary sexual characteristics caused males in general to differ more and more from females.
The differences in male and female secondary characteristics listed by Darwin shaded into intellect; women were referred to as more intuitive and more ‘capable of rapid perception and perhaps of imitation’.
Darwin considered that male traits were strengthened by use and were transmitted in greater amounts to male offspring.
He thought it fortunate that improvements in male characteristics were passed on in some measure to women, otherwise the man would have become as superior in mental endowment to women as the peacock is in plumage to the peahen.
Women might be trained to exercise her reason and imagination to help reduce the inequality, but Darwin insisted that children of both sexes were more like adult women than men, and within an evolutionary doctrine, the implication was that women were less completely evolved.
This was also the independent conclusion of Herbert Spencer, perhaps the most influential late nineteenth-century writer on sexual difference on both sides of the Atlantic.
In his early writings, published between 1850 and 1861, Spencer echoed the opinion of the pro-feminist, J. S. Mill, in his belief that convention had stifled women's academic achievement, and while he believed that there would be ‘natural’ limits on women's achievements he saw no harm in educating them.
But his Principles of Biology (1867) and his Principles of Society (1876) showed the impact of evolutionary thought on his idea of sexual difference.
Spencer argued that sexual difference was a product of mankind's successful adaptation to social survival and that it should be understood in terms of women's individual evolution being arrested earlier than men's to permit the conservation of their energies for reproduction.
The more highly developed the society, the greater the differentiation in sex roles, and the more able women would be to produce superior offspring.
Spencer thus condemned any attempt to change women's position in society, just as he opposed any state intervention to safeguard the position of the poor and weak.
Both would interfere with the natural process of evolution and natural selection which ensured social progress.
In particular, he feared that higher  education would render women incapable of breast feeding their children and probably also infertile.
Thus when biological ideas were applied to society by Spencer and by social Darwinists, they were allied to the powerful notion of human progress, which was not a part of Darwin's evolutionary theory.
In Spencer's formulation, sexual divisions were a hallmark of social progress and a reflection of organic law.
Thus woman's sphere had to be limited for the sake of the race.
Karl Pearson, a leading social Darwinist, wrote in 1885: ‘If childbearing women be intellectually handicapped, then the penalty to be paid for race predominance is the subjection of women’.
The theory of women's arrested development was taken up in the debate over women's inferior mental ability.
George Romanes, the evolutionist, physiologist and early comparative psychologist, declared in 1887 that ‘we must look the fact in the face…it must take many centuries for heredity to produce the missing five ounces of the female brain’.
When it was realised that, in proportion to body weight, women's brains were in fact heavier than those of men, scientists began to search for other measures of difference.
(Nancy Stepan has documented similar shifts in the measurement of skulls designed to support the idea of racial difference.)
In the event, women's proportionately larger brain was taken as evidence of their childlike physiology, just as in a similar manner women's recognised capacity to read faster and remember more was interpreted as shallowness.
Ideas of sexual difference were mediated by medical doctors, whose female patients consisted largely of middle class women in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
As Frances Power Cobbe, a leading Victorian feminist, perceived, the medical profession occupied ‘with strangely close analogy the position of the priesthood of former times, it assumes the same airs of authority…and enters every family with a latch key of private information’.
Doctors concentrated on the best way of achieving the healthy development of women's reproductive systems and in so doing elevated women's capacity for reproduction into a moral and social duty.
‘The gigantic power and influence of the ovaries over the whole animal economy of woman’, as Dr Bliss put it in 1870, meant that women's constitutions were believed to be inherently unstable throughout the  life cycle .
Doctors believed that the development of girls' reproductive systems took place primarily at the time of menstruation and, in keeping with Spencer's belief in the need to conserve energy in order to ensure healthy reproductive development, advised rest for teenage girls.
Maudsley wrote graphically of the dangers facing a fifteen-year-old girl working hard to pass school examinations:
For a time all seems to go well with her studies; she triumphs over male and female competitors…
But in the long run nature, which cannot be ignored or defied with impunity, asserts its power;…health fails…[she]leaves college a good scholar but a delicate and ailing woman…the special functions which have relation to her future  offices as a woman, and the full and perfect accomplishment of which is essential to sexual completeness, have been deranged at a critical time.
Thus doctors agreed with scientists that for the sake of the welfare of the race, women's intellectual development and range of activities should be severely curtailed.
After adolescence, women faced the danger of puerperal insanity following childbirth and finally the ‘climacteric paroxysms’ of menopause.
Otto Weininger, gynaecologist and polemicist, wrote in 1906 that ‘man possesses sexual organs; her sexual organs possess woman’.
As a result, women were held to be psychologically unstable.
But whereas middle class women were described as physiologically weak and in need of treatment, working class women were considered physiologically strong and potentially polluting.
Such an analysis paralleled the belief that middle class women were more highly evolved and that working class women were nearer ‘nature’ and the lower animal passions and behaviour.
Medical diagnosis therefore tended to vary according to the social class of the patient.
Chlorosis, which was described as an anaemia and commonly referred to as the ‘green sickness’ because of the appearance of its victims, was regarded by doctors as a middle class ailment, contracted by women who led an idle, self-indulgent life.
In reality it was also very much a working woman's disease, but this fact was generally ignored by physicians.
Similarly, aberrant sexual behaviour was more likely to be treated as organic malfunction in middle class women and insanity in working class women.
In a period when a rigid separation of spheres prevailed between men and women, the physician's approach to female illness exemplified the strong influence of theories of sexual difference and the nature of their implications for the position of women in society.
By the 1880s nearly all female disorders were ascribed to uterine malfunction, in accordance with medical and scientific preoccupations with the over-riding importance of female biology.
Moreover, female well-being was defined in terms congruent with both women's reproductive function and ideal feminine behaviour.
Thus, ‘simple hysterical mania’ was frequently diagnosed in women exhibiting any uncommon behaviour.
One leading physician described such sufferers as becoming ‘rapidly less and less conventional.
Thus a lady will smoke, talk slang, or be extravagant in dress; and will declare her intention of doing as she likes’.
According to the obstetrician, Isaac Barker Brown, female insanity went through eight stages, beginning with hysteria, and was largely due to‘failure of nervous power…produced by peripheral irritation arising in the branches of the pudic nerve, more particularly the incident nerve supplying the clitoris’.
For Barker Brown and many other gynaecologists and obstetricians of the period, clitoridectomy was the solution.
Brown himself was expelled from the Obstetrical Society in 1867 for failing to obtain the consent  of his patients and their husbands to the operation, rather than for his methods per se.
The vote against him was taken after the Secretary of the Society explained that ‘we have constituted ourselves as it were the guardians of their [women's]interests and in many cases…the custodians of their honour…
We are in fact, the strong and they the weaker.
They are obliged to believe all that we tell them’.
It was therefore doubly important that the physician did not deceive his patients.
Like legislators, doctors set themselves up as women's protectors and the preoccupation with women's reproductive systems as the source of their illness and weakness led them to assume the role of moral guardian.
Female well-being was classically associated with passivity, a love of home, children and domestic duties and, in the mid- and late nineteenth century, sexual innocence and absence of sexual feelings.
Healthy development in women was thus signified by an attachment to their prescribed sphere and by the manifestation of moral virtue.
The female patient/doctor relationship is particularly difficult to interpret during the late nineteenth century.
As Frances Power Cobbe observed, the doctor assumed a position of great importance in the middle class household and was indeed one of the very few men of her own class that the married middle class woman dealt with directly; while to doctors, middle class female patients represented a lucrative source of income.
Moreover, because of their physical and mental weakness women were clearly incapable of qualifying as doctors themselves.
But it is not sufficient to characterise the relationship between doctors and their female middle class patients as one of simple economics or misogyny.
The extent to which the medical prescriptions regarding women's role were mediated and/or resisted by middle class women is difficult to assess, but it would be wrong to characterise women simply as victims either in their relationship with their physicians or in respect to theories of sexual difference generally.
Jacques Donzelot has argued that women actively colluded with doctors because of the new-found status that accrued to them within the family as educators of their children and as medical auxiliaries.
While it is true that by the turn of the century both middle and working class women were profoundly affected by the gospel of maternalism preached by the medical profession, imperialists and politicians, it is also possible to find examples of straightforward resistance to physicians both on the grounds that they encouraged middle class women to lead idle lives and that they posed a threat to female modesty.
Frances Power Cobbe deplored the approval doctors gave to what she considered to be an essentially unhealthy lifestyle; she had little faith in medical expertise and liked to recall the case of a women friend who, on deciding to stop seeing her doctor and carry on normally, promptly recovered.
It is nevertheless likely that more middle class women accepted than resisted the experts' view of their physiology and psychology, though they may also have passed those views through their own filter.
One feminist, Mrs Wolstenholme-Elmy (who as a young woman determined to follow Mary  Wollstonecraft's example and live with her lover, until on becoming pregnant she took the advice of fellow suffragists and married) accepted the idea that menstruation was essentially pathological, although she also argued that it was caused by men's brutality.
Josephine Butler, a feminist who led the fight against the Contagious Diseases Acts during the 1860s and 1870s, accepted the desirability of female moral purity and sexual innocence, but also registered her vehement objection to the medical profession.
She was appalled that women should be attended by male doctors, and of male attendance in childbirth she wrote:
Is it desirable that the finest and most sensitive part of a woman — that which God gave her, should on the one hand be wounded with such a wound as no proud and gentle nature ever recovers from, or else should on the other hand be deadened so that the woman becomes only half herself, and this is what the tyranny of the medical profession has accomplished.
Similar sentiments led Butler to label the use of the speculum by doctors inspecting prostitutes for venereal disease under the Contagious Diseases Acts as ‘instrumental rape’.
Such a stand was also shaped by the essentially libertarian ideas of the mainstream feminist movement, which included opposition to state intervention of all kinds (including protective legislation and the inspection of homes under the Infant Life Protection Acts), and by the more general movement for moral reform, which comprised an interlocking nexus of feminist, social purity, temperance, anti-vaccination, and animal welfare societies.
In the long run it may be correct to argue, as Patricia Branca has done, that doctors were ‘the logical answer to the middle class woman's increasing desire for self-improvement and self-control’, but evidence suggests that medical and scientific expertise set the basic framework for discussion and action within which women tended to respond — albeit not always in an anticipated manner — rather than initiate.
This was especially true of the late nineteenth century, when ideas of sexual difference condemned women to a position of inferiority, but the pattern remained substantially the same throughout the period.
For example, middle class women were as convinced as working class women by the medical profession's call for hospitalised childbirth, although just as working class women wanted what they regarded as the additional bonus of hospital rest, so middle class women also saw the availability of anaesthesia as a major reason for welcoming the trend to hospital births.
The complicated nature of women's response to doctors' views about their role also characterised the way in which women dealt with the whole area of sexual difference and its implications for their position in terms of both the separation of spheres and of female dependency within the private sphere of home and family.
The pervasive belief in the natural, biological difference  between male and female characteristics formed a framework within which feminists and non-feminists alike thought and lived.
Spencerian analysis not only assigned women a narrow and subordinate role, but also stressed that this was necessary if human progress was to be sustained.
In an 1879 article, the eminent lawyer, journalist and essayist Walter Bagehot agreed that any attempt by women to escape what he regarded as their biological destiny was anti-evolutionary.
Scientists and social theorists assumed that the ethics of family and state were entirely separate, and politicians of all persuasions felt justified in using familial language — in which men became benevolent protectors and women childlike — to describe the subordinate position of women (and ‘primitive’ peoples), for within the family subordination was considered legitimate.
Unlike the doctor's authority, scientific theories of sexual difference could not be directly challenged; rather, women found ways of circumventing or reinterpreting them.
In challenging the idea of a natural separation of spheres, the nineteenth century feminist movement took up two major positions: first, that women wishing to enter the public sphere should be able to do so on the same terms as men, and second, that women's domestic talents and virtues should be extended to the wider sphere beyond the home.
Feminists adopting the first position demanded equal rights to men in respect to property, education and employment opportunities, and the vote.
In so doing, they inevitably rejected the idea of innate sexual difference, laying much greater emphasis on what would today be called patterns of socialisation.
Thus J. S. Mill, the leading theoretician of liberal feminism, stressed that it was impossible to know what women's true capacities were because of their inferior education.
He nevertheless accepted the idea that there would probably be ‘natural’ limitations on their development, and envisaged that the vast majority of women would remain wives and mothers after legal emancipation.
Only a few exceptional women were likely to take advantage of equal education opportunities, though on grounds of utility alone, Mill argued that it was important for this small pool of female talent to be permitted free choice of occupation so that it might contribute to human development.
In this way, Spencer's argument about the conditions necessary for human progress was neatly turned on its head.
Yet feminists who made women's right to enter the public sphere a priority never really addressed the issue of women's role as wives and mothers, which late nineteenth-century doctors and scientists held to be the chief and necessary constraint on women's achievements.
They acknowledged the importance of motherhood: Mill wrote of wives ‘naturally’ running a household and teaching their children, and of women's ‘naturally’greater elegance and taste.
To all intents and purposes, however, they ignored the implications of their demand to enter the public sphere for the role of women in the private sphere of home and family, and chose not to confront the emphasis doctors and scientists placed on the latter.
Instead, they focused their  main arguments on the position of women who did not marry, using the individualistic framework of nineteenth-century liberalism and political economy to argue for a ‘fair field and no favour’ and the removal of all barriers that hindered single women from earning a decent living.
In particular, they supported their case by invoking the plight of the ‘surplus’ women, who, through no fault of their own, found themselves either reliant on the good offices of a male relative or obliged to earn their own living.
An increasing number of late nineteenth and early twentieth-century feminists, such as Theresa Billington Greig and Cicely Hamilton, advocated the deliberate choice of spinsterhood as the only means to intellectual fulfilment and a successful career.
The other main strand in nineteenth-century feminism accepted the idea of women as the natural guardians of the moral order.
It stressed the importance of women's domestic role and sought to expand it.
The language feminists used to make this appeal was steeped in the evangelical tradition, which in the early and mid-nineteenth century had proved as successful as science in containing women, but which in the later part of the century was used by feminists to argue for an extension of maternal influence beyond the home.
Thus Josephine Butler spoke of the home as the ‘nursery of all virtue’, and of the need to re-establish ideal family life, both by improving the position of women as wives and mothers and by extending domestic values to the world beyond the home.
In Butler's case this led to a radical campaign against the Contagious Diseases (CD) Acts of the 1860s (under which prostitutes were subject to compulsory medical inspection and detained if found to have venereal disease), which she saw as part of the double moral standard oppressing all women and debasing family life.
The two strands in feminist thought were by no means separate.
Elizabeth Wolstenholme-Elmy, for example, was associated with the suffrage movement, Butler's campaign against the CD Acts, and the campaign for the Married Women's Property Acts, while Millicent Fawcett, though withholding public support for Butler because she feared it would bring the suffrage movement into disrepute, in fact wholeheartedly approved of her work.
Women's domestic virtues comprised an important part of most feminists' argument for the vote.
Both Fawcett and Frances Power Cobbe argued that women's virtue, tenderness and eye for detail — in short the special qualities they developed as wives and mothers — were necessary to complete man-made legislation and male-supervised charitable endeavours.
As Rosalind Rosenberg has pointed out, arguments based on female uniqueness paradoxically ‘provided the biological affirmation that anti-feminists needed to oppose change and that feminists relied on to defuse the threat of change’.
Theresa Billington Greig, who broke away from the Pankhursts' suffragette organisation, the Women's Social and Political Union, over the issue of militant action, was virtually alone in criticising suffragists and  suffragettes who regarded the home ‘as an exemplar of what ought to be in the political world’.
Her condemnation of the home and family as the source of women's subjection and inferiority, and her assertion that ‘any woman who is really a rebel longs to destroy the conventions which bind her in the home as much as those which bind her in the state’, has a modern ring, although in practice her solution, like that of Florence Nightingale, amounted to a complete rejection of family life rather than a demand for its restructuring.
Most late nineteenth-century feminists saw feminism primarily as a movement for moral reform, which would of necessity bring in its wake desirable political and social change.
In accepting that the world occupied by a majority of adult women would be different from that of men, feminists distinguished themselves from the mainstream of opinion only by their refusal to accept that women's role was thereby rendered inferior.
The difficulties they experienced in arguing this are clearly visible in Emily Pfeiffer's attempt to counter the case made by doctors and scientists against more rigorous schooling for adolescent girls.
Pfeiffer's claim to equality was remarkably convoluted: ‘The equality I would claim is not as things at present stand, not de facto, but in original capacity, and even so , an equality in difference, and to some extent of compensation’.
Education provided a good example of the accommodation feminists had to make in regard to scientific theories of sexual difference and the ambivalence many of them felt about the whole issue.
Those who, like Emily Davies, wished to give middle class girls exactly the same educational opportunities as boys in terms of curriculum and examinations, had to deal with opposition arising from the view that adolescent girls needed to conserve their energies for reproduction.
Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, one of the few qualified women physicians, replied to Maudsley on this point, acknowledging that pubescent girls were severely taxed, but arguing that the quiet routine of school afforded them adequate protection.
She maintained that the reproductive organs were formed in girls at birth and not newly created in adolescence as Maudsley claimed, and while agreeing that women stored nutrient in reserve for childbearing, argued that it was not in finite supply and could safely be drawn upon in adolescence.
She did not deny female weakness and invalidism, merely suggesting that the physical condition of girls could be improved.
Many of the new middle class girls' schools sought to show that they took the problem of adolescent development seriously by appointing doctors to safeguard the welfare of their charges, and until well into the twentieth century pupils attending the Girls' Public Day School Trust schools, the first of which opened in 1872, went to school only in the mornings so that they should avoid strain and be allowed to be at home with their mothers in the afternoons.
Feminists were also considerably divided over what  constituted an appropriate curriculum for girls.
Many pioneers of women's education made it quite clear that they did not accept Emily Davies' view that girls might be  trained in the same way as boys, and argued that they should be given an opportunity, by way of, for example , domestic science classes, to prepare for the lives a majority of them would lead as wives and mothers.
Dorothea Beale, the Principal of the first proprietary girls' school in England, Cheltenham Ladies College, was firmly committed to a separate curriculum for girls and declared that her aim was to train ‘girls so that they may best perform that subordinate part in the world to which, I believe, they have been called’.
Just as working class girls were included in the state provision of elementary education in 1870 and provided with an education which emphasised the virtues of good housewifery and domestic management, so the increased attention paid to the education of middle class girls during the late Victorian period — by male bureaucrats as well as female pioneers — may be seen as being as much a result of the general educational reform initiative of the period as of feminist ambition.
Nevertheless, in terms of their effects, the new endowed and proprietary girls' schools, of which there were two hundred by 1894, provided girls with different role models, access to a peer group, and also succeeded in loosening family ties.
It was generally accepted that the role of wife and mother was incompatible with a career, not only because of the time and energy required, but also because of the very different qualities and characteristics it demanded.
It is interesting that both Mrs Pankhurst and Millicent Fawcett only entered public life as feminists after their husbands' deaths.
Emily Davies was one of the few to argue that housekeeping took up little time and that women could in fact combine work and marriage, and Elizabeth Garrett Anderson belonged to an even more select band who put this advice into practice.
Moreover, when nineteenth-century feminists demanded equal education and employment opportunities for single women, they did not ask for any special consideration to be extended to women on account of their reproductive role.
On the contrary, middle class feminists asked for the repeal of all protective legislation because they believed it to represent one of the barriers to female employment.
By the late 1880s, however, they found themselves in open conflict with the women's trade union movement on this point.
In 1890, Beatrice Webb referred caustically to ‘individualists, reinforced by a batch of excellent ladies (eager for the Right of Woman to work at all hours of the day and night with the minimum space and sanitation)’ who opposed any attempt to regulate conditions in workshops and the homework trades.
For mothers, feminists claimed only the right to extend their domestic influence beyond the home, and to practise what was later termed ‘social’ or ‘civic maternalism’.
Nineteenth-century feminists did not demand measures to improve the status and conditions of wives and mothers other than to campaign for the equal right of married women to control their own property.
A significant number of feminists concerned primarily with rights in the public sphere rejected the confines of the middle class family altogether, while promoters of maternal influence beyond the home did so on the basis of women's unique qualities as wives and mothers.
The problem of establishing the appropriate limits of social maternalism remained.
Public support was forthcoming for philanthropic work, such as visiting the homes of the poor, but not for permitting mothers to elect Members of Parliament.
Philanthropy provided women with an acceptable bridge to the public world of work and citizenship, even though, as Anne Summers has argued, it involved a fundamental contradiction, whereby women left their own homes in order to tell working class women to stay in theirs.
SOCIAL MATERNALISM
The majority of middle class women who engaged in philanthropic work, volunteering their services to tend the sick and children in institutions, and to visit the homes of the poor, were not feminists, though they too stressed the unique contribution that women could make by virtue of their particular qualities of caring and sympathy.
Thus while philanthropic work was for some integral to their feminist beliefs, for others it represented merely a diversion from household cares, a sublimation of other desires, or, and this was probably the most common motivation, a socially acceptable way for both married women and their daughters to engage in purposeful work.
Charitable work was also something that daughters could do without prejudicing their chances in the marriage market.
Beatrice Webb's admiration for the philanthropic work of Mary Booth rested on the way in which the latter expressed ‘gentle and loving contempt for any special work outside the ordinary sphere of a woman's life,[and]her high standard of excellence which should discourage any vain attempt to leave the beaten track of a woman's duty’.
Beatrice was anxious not to follow what she regarded as the purposeless social round of the society wife and felt that the ‘governing and guiding’ work performed by women philanthropists was much less likely to ‘unsex’women than academic work or the ‘push and severity’demanded of a professional woman such as the hospital matron.
Her notion of duty was perhaps the most important factor in her own decision to pursue voluntary social work.
Many women with no desire to reject the social round and daily duties expected of middle class wives, but who still deplored idleness as the antithesis of duty, often made an explicit link between their idea of duty and their spiritual responsibilities.
Women used their supposedly greater spirituality as a further justification for transcending the confines of the private sphere.
The retreat into  other-worldliness on the part of some women may be interpreted as a form of escapism by those who found their ideas unacceptable to society as a whole, not that this made their religious faith any less genuine or deep.
Both Josephine Butler, who was happily married and a strong feminist, and  Florence Nightingale, who decided to reject middle class family life entirely and was scornful of feminism, were convinced of the possibilities of women's spiritual leadership.
For Nightingale, self-giving and service provided the key to spiritual growth, while Butler couched her appeal on behalf of prostitutes as a call to the justice and equality announced by Christ.
It is clear that the latter found in her religious faith the strength necessary to undertake a public campaign on the taboo subjects of prostitution and venereal disease.
Both women stressed the idea of service, which Butler saw as an outgrowth of women's role in the home, while neither envisaged impinging on men's work.
Nightingale rejected Mill's criticism that her Notes on Nursing restricted women's opportunities in the medical world by saying that feminism urged ‘women to do all men do including the medical and other professions, merely because men do it, and without regard to whether this is the best women can do’.
Women who were inspired neither by feminism nor revulsion against the prescribed role of the middle class wife and mother, but who nevertheless found a sense of purpose in philanthropy, often wrote of their work with a cloying sentimentality and in terms that reveal a strange mixture of humility (expressed in religious terms); insecurity, class superiority and a grim determination to do God's will.
Marianne Farningham, who remained single, adopted an air of benevolent maternalism towards her girls' Bible class and her sense of complacency, like that of most middle class philanthropic women, could be punctured only from within.
Farningham described one of her most fearsome lessons in humility as follows:
One Sunday evening I went into the vestry to speak to a number of my girls who were about to take their first communion.
I was very happy; but I am sure that I needed a sharp lesson in humility and I received it.
As I walked through the chapel to my pew, a strange thick darkness came upon me, and encompassed my soul.
I was suddenly filled with fear and doubt.
Something whispered to me that I have never myself been converted!…
[I was]so oppressed by a sense of sin that I felt almost as if I should die!
Women who engaged in charitable work tended to confine themselves to particular activities; principally fund raising, and visiting the homes of the poor and institutions.
Men continued to run the executive committees of charitable societies and to fill the paid positions in workhouses and prisons.
Female visitors were cheap, a point in their favour which continued to be emphasised as late as 1920, when the Local Government Board considered the possibility of using them to inspect the homes of widows drawing poor relief.
When in 1861 Louisa Twining proposed to a government Select Committee that women should be allowed to stand for election as Poor Law Guardians, she agreed that they should not interfere in the male province of finance and administration, and should not have any say over the treatment of male paupers.
Philanthropic work, like workhouse visiting, inevitably raised the question of women's representation on public bodies at the local level.
The first female Poor Law Guardian was elected in Kensington in 1875 and immediately appointed to a district relief committee and to the workhouse visiting committee, having the special responsibility of supervising the female scrubbers and washers.
The first married female guardian was elected in 1881 and in 1908 a Women's Local Government Society survey of 837 female Guardians showed 405 to be married.
By 1910 there were 1,655 female Guardians, although there remained 234 boards with no female representatives.
Generally the social standing of female Guardians was higher than male Guardians.
Despite the fear that they would prove sentimental and spendthrift, women were inclined to favour the strict administration of outdoor relief, although they sought substantial improvements in matters such as diet and the provision of clean sheets and underclothing inside the workhouse.
Women also sat on school boards (which were responsible for state elementary schools prior to 1902), and the first generation of such women — elected during the 1870s — was particularly active.
They took a special interest in the girls' curriculum and, in keeping with the ‘equal but different’ philosophy, tended to promote the study of domestic subjects.
In London, Helen Taylor played a leading part in the fight to abolish school fees and provide school meals, and there is also some evidence that women school-board members took an interest in the pay and conditions of women teachers.
When the Boards were abolished in 1902, the Women's Local Government Society fought to have women elected to the County and Borough Councils, which became the new Local Education Authorities (LEAs).
They were partially successful in 1907, when unmarried women ratepayers were allowed to stand as candidates.
Women ratepayers, married or unmarried, had long been permitted to sit on urban and rural district councils and parish councils, so that during the late 1890s the number of women holding elected office in local government (including Poor Law and school board work) may well have exceeded the number holding office today.
Local politics were considered to be an extension of philanthropic work, and were seen as an extension of women's domestic sphere.
But the larger and more important the elected body, the more likely it was that women's suitability — and especially married women's suitability — would be called into question.
At the national level, women's political participation was confined to the ladies auxiliaries of the Conservative and Liberal parties, which were formed during the 1880s and 1890s as a means of making use of women's formidable political energies and of siphoning off potential protest
Marianne Farningham became a member of the Northampton School Board in the mid-1880s, but she declined to canvass or address meetings, preferring to send a printed letter round to electors, though this ladylike course of action did not prevent her heading the poll.
She found her male  colleagues courteous, although she was ‘not at all sure’ that they were all glad to have her there.
Margaret Wynne Nevinson, an active feminist, who was a member of a school management committee for twenty-five years and who also served as a Poor Law Guardian, found her fellow male Guardians actively hostile.
Many women, feminist, non-feminist and anti-feminist, who played a prominent part in public life between the Wars initially served in local government.
Mary Stocks, for example, helped her mother with her visiting for the Charity Organisation Society, and on leaving school became the honorary secretary of an elementary school care committee.
Similarly, Violet Markham served first on a school management committee and later as a member of Chesterfield LEA.
Women who entered voluntary work during the inter-war years did so largely because it provided them with a diversion from household routine.
This was particularly important in view of the fact that women were often forced to give up paid work on marriage.
Voluntary work was no longer seen as either a stepping stone to bigger and better things or as a part of a women ‘s mission, but rather as the exclusive province of married women.
Young, single middle class women were by this time engaging in paid work outside the home.
In the nineteenth century, many middle class women devoted considerable time to philanthropic work and local politics; a single woman such as Louisa Twining worked five days a week as a Poor Law Guardian between 1884 and 1890.
This level of activity stands in marked contrast to that of the very few working class women who qualified under local government franchises (although increasing numbers became Guardians after 1894, when the property qualification was abolished), who squeezed in two or three hours Poor Law work on a Saturday between household chores.
It was possible to argue for an infinite extension of social motherhood.
Josephine Butler, for example, argued that women's powers of guidance, their spiritual wisdom and maternal qualities should be represented in Parliament.
Similarly, in an 1894 speech, Millicent Fawcett pressed for the vote on the grounds that she ‘wished to strengthen true womanliness in women, and because I want to see the womanly and domestic side of things weigh more and count for more in all public concerns’.
She assured the women she addressed that suffragists did not want them to give up ‘one jot or tittle of your womanliness, your love for children, your care for the sick, your gentleness, your self-control, your obedience to conscience and duty’.
These were the very qualities required in the political arena.
While there was very little dispute about the incompatibility of marriage with a career (even at the end of the century only a very.few radical feminist theorists, such as Olive Schreiner, were prepared to argue that all adult women should be engaged in regular paid employment), the vote proved a much more contentious issue for feminists as well as non-feminists, because it required such a substantial redrawing of the boundaries between male and female spheres.
Married women's inability to hold property (the basis of the nineteenth-century  franchise) and lack of a legal personality made the task of achieving social citizenship additionally difficult.
Chiefly for tactical reasons, a clause was inserted in the women's suffrage bills of 1874 expressly excluding married women.
This manoeuvre caused dissension within feminist ranks, however, and in 1889 a small group of women, including Mrs Pankhurst and Josephine Butler, formed the Women's Franchise League, in reaction to what they perceived as a preoccupation with the cause of spinsters and widows.
The League emphasised the rights of married women to the vote and to equal divorce and inheritance laws.
The famous 1889 ‘Appeal’ against women's suffrage, signed by 104 women, viewed women's direct participation in national politics as impossible ‘either by the disabilities of sex, or by strong formations of custom and habit resting ultimately upon physical difference against which it is useless to contend’(my italics).
Pamphlets written by men who opposed the vote for women also stressed that sexual difference was fundamental to their argument.
A. V. Dicey, the prominent nineteenth-century jurist and by no means an extreme anti-feminist, considered that while distinctions of rights founded on sex often gave rise to injustice ‘they have this in their favour — they rest upon a difference not created by social conventions or by human prejudice and selfishness, or by accidental circumstances…which split society into classes, but by the nature of things’.
Sex difference unlike class difference was believed to be natural and immutable.
Francis Latham put the point yet more clearly: ‘women are physiologically disqualified from contention with men in the political arena, not by virtue of any tyrannical law of man's devising, but by reason of fixed and irrevocable decrees of nature which may not be violated with impunity’.
The argument that an imperial power needed physically strong and virile rulers convinced many female anti-suffragists.
Violet Markham, for example, recalled in her autobiography that her antagonism to the vote was closely associated with her imperialism, even though as a Liberal she often felt herself to be siding with a ‘hotbed of reactionaries’.
Some male anti-suffragists used a more hostile and demeaning picture of women's place reminiscent of Spencerian Darwinism to justify their arguments.
Harold Owen, a playwright, and Sir Almroth Wright, a surgeon, stressed that women's prime purpose was reproduction and emphasised the need for their proper dependence on men.
Owen saw as one of the chief evils of the suffrage movement its apparent disrespect for men.
A latent violence — which also surfaced in police treatment of suffragettes — pervaded the work of Belfort Bax, a leading socialist, who warned that suffragists had foregone the right to male protection and should be treated accordingly.
The signatories of the Appeal argued that women had adequate opportunity to make their influence felt in local government.
Florence Nightingale, for example, believed that the vote had no relevance to women's work.
As Brian Harrison has remarked, one of the main reasons for the  bitterness of the suffrage struggle was that so many on both sides had roots in the philanthropic world.
To be anti-suffrage was not necessarily to be anti-feminist; many opponents of the suffrage, men and women, campaigned for better educational opportunities for women and supported their work at the local level.
Beatrice Webb signed the Appeal, although as she recorded in her diary for 1889, she was impressed by a reply she received from a woman who complained that her lodger could vote but she could not, and that while she could vote for her parish council and her local Poor Law Guardians, she could not do so for an MP.
However, the diary makes it quite clear that Beatrice did not want to be associated with what she viewed as primarily a celibate woman's cause.
Underlying the suffrage struggle was a set of attitudes which dictated that women's natural sphere was the home, that their full development came only with motherhood and that a ‘womanly woman’ would not be interested in or want the vote.
It is interesting that when Asquith, the Liberal Prime Minister, eventually agreed to receive a suffrage deputation, he called in representatives of Sylvia Pankhurst's East London Federation, which was composed chiefly of working class women.
The separation of spheres was less rigidly prescribed for working class women and it appears that working class suffragists aroused less ire on the part of politicians than did middle class women.
When Beatrice Webb publicly renounced her stand against the suffrage in 1906, she explained in a letter to Millicent Garrett Fawcett that: ‘The raising of children, the advancement of learning and the promotion of the spiritual — which I regard as the particular obligations of women — are, it is clear, more and more becoming the main preoccupations of the community as a whole’.
Because of her involvement in politics and close knowledge of major social issues, Webb was among the first of those anti-suffragists who rested their case on the fact that local politics provided a sufficient outlet for maternal influence to recognise that the huge divide between local and national issues in politics was ceasing to exist.
But male opponents of women's suffrage, who based their case primarily on sexual difference, showed very little inclination to change their views.
The women's victory in 1918 was unspectacular and came about primarily because the government had to update the electoral register to include those serving in the armed forces.
The Parliamentary majority in favour of including women was still small and as Martin Pugh has commented, ‘when one remembers that the 1918 Act actually enfranchised boys of nineteen if they had served in the forces, the limit on women [to those of thirty years of age or over]was almost an insult’.
WOMAN'S SPHERE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
The turn of the century brought an important change in attitudes towards women's role as mothers: a strengthening ideology of motherhood, accompanied by changes in theories of sexual difference, resulted in a shift in emphasis away from the negative constraints imposed by female biology towards the importance of healthy and intelligent motherhood to an imperial nation.
After all, as Havelock Ellis remarked: ‘the breeding of men lies largely in the hands of women’.
The tenets of the evolutionary model of sexual difference also began to crumble, paralleling the movement in Liberal thought away from the brutal competition of Spencerian individualism towards the possibilities of harmonious cooperation.
The two major causes of this were first, increasing doubts about the validity of Darwin's ideas of natural and sexual selection (Darwin had failed to produce a satisfactory theory of heredity), and second, new empirical research findings and observable changes in the position of women, particularly the increasing numbers of single women in the labour force.
Some of the empirical research which demolished aspects of late nineteenth-century ideas regarding sexual difference was in fact performed by women.
Karl Pearson, for example, employed two unmarried women researchers at University College (largely because they were cheap).
They were Ethel Elderton (who conducted the study of the English birth rate), and Alice Lee, who investigated the relationship between skull capacity and intellectual ability in both men and women.
She recorded the cranial measurements of 35 male anatomists attending the Anatomical Society meeting in Dublin in 1898, 30 female students of Bedford College and 25 male staff of University College, and found that no such relationship existed.
Interestingly, while Lee rebelled against the notion of female inferiority, both she and Elderton were convinced of the importance of women's role as wives and mothers.
And both were influenced by social Darwinistic arguments concerning the relationship between the quality of motherhood and the future welfare of the race.
In its original nineteenth-century formulation, eugenic concern about the quality of the racial stock focused on the fertility behaviour of middle and upper class women.
As early as 1869, Francis Galton, who founded the Eugenics Laboratory (which in 1905 became a Department of University College under the direction of Karl Pearson), recommended a programme of what later became called positive and negative eugenics.
Births were to be encouraged among the genetically superior (crudely equated with the higher social classes), and reproduction prevented among the genetically inferior (the working class).
The major problem identified by eugenicists during the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-centuries was that the birth rate of the middle class — the eugenically fit — was falling much faster than that of the working class.
In the mid-1880s, Mr Lawson Tait, who as police surgeon in Birmingham during the 1890s exhibited a profoundly misogynist attitude in his treatment of rape victims, commented that ‘to leave only the inferior women to perpetuate the species will do more to deteriorate the human race than all the  individual victories at Girton will do to benefit it’.
Headmistresses and university teachers were anxious to show that their students proved as fertile as the average woman.
Mrs Henry Sidgwick conducted one such survey of women students at Oxford and Cambridge, published in 1890, and Dr Agnes Saville and Dr Major Greenwood another for the National Birth Rate Commission (a lay body composed chiefly of clergy, peers and doctors) in 1914.
Both concluded that the families of educated women were no smaller than the average.
The records of female social workers trained in early twentieth-century Birmingham, however, showed that only 22 per cent of educated women had married and that their average age at marriage was 34 years, some nine years older than the norm.
The low percentage marrying and the higher age at marriage probably reflected the fact that such women would have had to give up their careers on marriage.
The call to marriage and motherhood became more insistent during the 1890s, in response to the phenomenon of the ‘new woman’.
Mrs Lynn Linton, the ubiquitous writer on etiquette, roundly condemned such women for smoking in public, or after dinner with the men, and for repudiating motherhood.
Attacks on middle class women for ‘shirking’ their ‘racial duty’were common well into the twentieth century.
Grant Allen, writer and biologist, who also stressed the importance of women's sexual emancipation in a novel, The Woman Who Did (1895), took up a similar cry: ‘A woman ought to be ashamed to say she has no desire to become a wife and mother’.
In his view such behaviour showed a total lack of healthy instincts.
Havelock Ellis, who deplored the tendency of earlier Victorian scientific research to belittle women's intellectual capacities, nevertheless believed that there were essential advantages to women remaining in their ‘proper sphere’.
Ellis believed that the women's movement had taken a wrong turn in demanding equality with men in the public sphere and should rather have worked for the elevation of motherhood.
As Jeffrey Weeks has pointed out, for Ellis and his fellow socialist Edward Carpenter, sexual equality was above all an ethical concern, involving equal recognition for the work women did as wives and mothers.
Many feminists also saw the struggle for the vote in moral terms, but while they were prepared to use maternalist arguments in support of their campaign, they paid little attention to the individual needs of mothers.
In 1889 two biologists, Patrick Geddes and J. Arthur Thompson, published a treatise which significantly modified previous ideas on the origins of sexual difference.
They derived a theory which preserved the immutability of separate spheres, but stressed the complementarity of sex roles and cooperation between men and women.
The emphasis was no longer placed on male domination, but rather on women's equal but different attributes.
Psychological and cultural differences were still thought to be grounded in biology; indeed, Geddes and Thompson believed sex differences to be physiologically based, which held out even less possibility for change than did Spencer's explanation based on evolution.
However, the importance of such  womanly qualities as  nurturance and domesticity to society as a whole was now given full recognition, and Geddes and Thompson wrote fulsomely of the possibilities of civic or social motherhood, lauding woman ‘as eupsychic inspirer and eugenic mother, as instructive synthesist, as educationalist, as orderly home planner and citizen, and by her guidance of consumption, directing industry and skill, ennobling utility into art’.
Their work was still circulating in the 1940s when Simone de Beauvoir criticised it in The Second Sex (1949).
Like other writers at the turn of the century, Geddes and Thompson stressed the importance of women receiving an education that would fit them for motherhood, and of their choosing eugenically sound mates in order to ‘beget supermen, of either sex, of course’.
Geddes, Thompson and Ellis used the work of the Swedish feminist, Ellen Key in support of their ideas.
In 1912, Key wrote of the women's movement as ideally winning back ‘the wife to the husband, the mother to the children, and thereby the home to all’.
She argued strongly that nineteenth-century feminism had neglected women's need for love and a family life (although this was by no means wholly the case) and that sexual equality did not necessarily mean ‘sameness’.
Because Key believed that motherhood brought women their greatest fulfilment, her work was widely quoted with approval, although her defence of ‘bachelor motherhood’ for the unfortunate ‘surplus’women achieved a notoriety similar to Grant Allen's apparent advocacy of ‘free love’in The Woman Who Did.
Early twentieth-century male and female doctors used eugenic concern about the quality and quantity of the race to argue that the welfare of future generations depended on girls being protected from rigorous examination schedules and receiving adequate training in house and mothercraft.
More emphasis on domestic subjects in the curriculum of secondary school girls was now recommended on the grounds that ‘every girl should be looked upon as a potential wife and mother’, just as the Board of Education promoted the teaching of housewifery, laundry and cookery to working class girls.
The response by headmistresses of middle class girls' schools parallelled nineteenth-century divisions over the appropriate curriculum for girls.
Sara Burstall, the headmistress of Manchester High School, argued in 1907 that mathematics had a ‘hardening influence’ on femininity.
But only a few schools completely integrated the teaching of domestic subjects and science.
At Haberdasher's Aske's in London, the girls performed experiments on meat and eggs before cooking them.
Further education in domestic science was given at the Women's Department of King's College, which opened in 1909.
One feminist writer vehemently condemned the idea of ‘young women going to university to learn how to clean’, while Rebecca West tersely dismissed all housework as ‘rat poison’ which took the ‘intelligence of rabbits’to learn.
Differentiation between the education of girls and boys continued to be discussed throughout the period.
While the 1923 Report to the Board of Education by the Consultative Committee on differentiating the curriculum  for boys and girls in secondary schools was not convinced as to‘clear and ascertained differences between the sexes on which education policy may be readily based’, it stressed the danger of ‘over pressure’ in the education of girls.
It recommended that the pace of girls' education be slowed, that physical education reflect the need of girls for ‘smoothness and expressiveness’ and of boys for ‘strength and energy’, and that allowance be made for the effect of menstruation, which condemned many girls ‘to a recurring and temporary diminution of general mental efficiency’.
During the 1920s the discovery of hormones led to a new variant in the theory of sexual difference based on emotional instability.
Arabella Keneally, a strong anti-feminist and populariser of medical views on women (especially those of Geddes and Thompson), believed that higher education for women induced hormonal imbalance.
As late as 1948, John Newsom, in what R. A. Butler (the sponsor of the 1944 Education Act), described as ‘wise and humorous recommendations for girls’ schools', favoured as separate a curriculum for girls — grounded in domestic subjects — as any advocated by early twentieth-century eugenicists.
By the 1940s, government reports purported to consider the needs of the individual child, but as Ann Marie Wolpe has pointed out, prior assumptions were made as to the ‘natural’ interests of girls and boys and the destiny of girls as wives and mothers; indeed, Miriam David has suggested that the 1940s' curriculum was more differentiated than that of the 1930s.
It seems that femininity had always to be ‘cultivated, achieved and preserved, while masculinity could be left to look after itself’.
Adult women were urged by doctors such as Caleb W. Saleeby (whose writing Rebecca West described as ‘fluffy yet resistant’) to take more interest in mothercraft.
Elizabeth Sloane Chesser, a doctor who wrote many popular manuals on mothercraft, told her readers that motherhood combined the twin ideals of personal vocation and racial and national progress.
Above all, women who left infant-feeding to the care of a nurse were condemned for their selfishness.
During the inter-war years attention shifted from the physical development of both infant and potential mother to the psychological needs of the child, whose satisfaction immediately became part of the prescribed duties of mothers.
John Bowlby's theory of maternal deprivation, developed during World War II from the almost exclusive study of children completely separated from their families, proved additionally effective in persuading women to stay at home with their young children.
As Freudian ideas entered the popular discourse (which happened but slowly in Britain), they strengthened the view that biology was destiny and that women who did not find satisfaction in motherhood were in some way abnormal.
The crude use made of Freud was exemplified by Leo Abse's condemnation of women politicians as aberrant':
And since anatomy is destiny, is Freud correct in his deductive assertion that the discovery that she is ‘castrated’ is a turning point in a girl's growth?
Are many of our  women politicians the little girls who refused to recognise the unwelcome fact that they lacked a penis and, defiantly rebellious, exaggerated their masculinity…?
The tone and innuendo are strikingly similar to that of Sir Almroth Wright, who opposed women's suffrage in 1913 and who wrote within an entirely different scientific discourse.
During the early twentieth century and increasingly during the inter-war years the ideology of motherhood was reinforced legislatively by the marriage bar, which was applied chiefly to professional women and which served firmly to delineate the world of married women from that of men at a time when it was becoming widely acceptable for single middle class girls and women to go out to work.
In teaching, for example, married women were charged with being less efficient than men because of their higher absentee rates caused by pregnancy and by their need to stay at home to look after sick children, the fundamental assumption being that marriage and motherhood were incompatible with a career.
The TUC ignored this assumption when it denied that the marriage bar was a sex issue, insisting that it was an employment question, caused entirely by the pressures arising from male unemployment.
The 1912 Royal Commission on the Civil Service clearly stated that the responsibilities of married life were incompatible with ‘the devotion of a woman's whole time and unimpaired energy to the public service’.
This supposition made the marriage bar popular in the press, and accounted for the weakness of an occupational group such as married women teachers, whose position could not be accounted for in terms of lower levels of skill or poor unionisation.
In the course of a debate on a Bill to remove the marriage bar, introduced in 1927, MPs expressed feelings of revulsion at the ‘travesty of nature’ presented by the image of a working mother and in the last instance a father at home looking after the baby, but the same degree of indignation was never aroused by the work of married women of a lower social class.
Marriage bars were not formally dropped until the end of World War II.
Even during the war-time emergency itself, women with children under fourteen were never conscripted, and evidence from the Ministry of Labour files suggests that interviewing panels behaved with greater leniency towards those married women who had never worked than towards those (predominantly working class) women who had.
Feminists campaigned against the marriage bar on the grounds that marriage per se was not incompatible with work.
The 1927 Bill was sponsored by the National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship (NUSEC), the main organised feminist group of the inter-war years.l However, mainstream feminists continued to believe that paid employment was incompatible with motherhood.
What was new in the feminism of the inter-war years was the emphasis on the needs of mothers as individuals, rather than on social maternalism.
In many respects it seemed that feminist aims regarding women's rights in the public sphere had been achieved.
Women had the vote, and education and employment opportunities had increased significantly for single women.
Thus ‘new feminism’ as Eleanor Rathbone, President of the NUSEC called it, made a deliberate attempt to promote reforms to improve women's position in the home.
The NUSEC actively campaigned for family allowances and free access to birth control information through local authority clinics: measures designed to further women's economic and sexual autonomy.
New feminism stressed the importance of women's role in the home, not to argue the case of female uniqueness and social maternalism, but rather in order to demand reforms that would give the individual mother control over her ‘conditions of work’ and ‘her product’.
The only campaign undertaken by mainstream feminists in the late nineteenth century to improve the position of wives was in support of the Married Women's Property Acts, which aided only middle class women.
In pursuing the campaign for family allowances (initially intended to provide the mother with a wage as well as allowances for children), mainstream feminists of the inter-war years were picking up one of the major demands of labour women's groups prior to World War I and consciously taking on board social issues of importance to working class women.
Indeed, Eleanor Rathbone condemned what she viewed as the selfishness of middle class women who, having got ‘all they wanted for themselves out of the women's movement when it gave them the vote, the right to stand for Parliament and the local authorities, and to enter the learned professions’, then sat back.
Nineteenth century feminists had adhered too strongly to liberal individualism, and were too suspicious of experts and the state to make demands for an increase in the social wage.
For example, Miss Buss, the founder of the North London Collegiate School for girls, deplored women's economic dependency on brothers or a father, but saw no problem in a wife's dependency on her husband.
Similarly, while Clara Collet felt that all women should have the means to earn their own living, she did not anticipate that married women would use it.
Millicent Fawcett vehemently objected to family allowances becoming a feminist plank and clung to the typically nineteenth-century belief that allowances ‘would destroy the fabric of family life by wiping out the responsibility of parents for the maintenance of their children’.
(It is interesting to compare Fawcett's position to that of Ramsay MacDonald, whose adherence to patriarchal views within the family surpassed his faith in collectivism in the matter of family allowances; he declared that under socialism the mother and children's right to maintenance would be honoured by the male breadwinner, not the state.)
Mainstream nineteenth-century feminism fought for, and in large measure achieved, freedom from legal constraint, but this did nothing to rectify the structural inequalities suffered by women.
The attention new feminists paid to women's needs as mothers represented a shift of emphasis and by no means implied a rejection of the equal rights philosophy.
Vera Brittain was very much in sympathy with new feminism  and together with Eva Hubback set up fee-paying baby clubs for middle class mothers during the late 1920s, because she recognised the anxieties of women struggling to follow the impossible infant-feeding and training schedules advocated by specialists.
But she was also active in the Six Point Group, which continued the traditional campaign for a ‘fair field and no favour’ for women entering the public sphere.
The new priority given to the welfare of individual mothers led to major policy changes, for instance, in the matter of protective legislation.
Nineteenth-century feminists had viewed this as an impediment to women's employment and as an extension of a legal framework that denied adult women the freedom to contract.
Many feminists, including Millicent Fawcett, who continued to hold this view, left the NUSEC in 1926.
As Elizabeth Abbott explained: ‘New feminism reads a dictionary definition, equality — sameness; men and women are not the same and therefore are not equal’.
In reply, Rathbone argued that such feminists had overlooked the fact that ‘some aspects of our whole social fabric [are]man-made through generations to suit masculine interests and glorify masculine standards’.
Abbott became one of the founding members of the Open Door Council in 1926, dedicated to securing that ‘a woman shall be free to work and be protected as a worker on the same terms as a man…and to secure for a woman, irrespective of marriage or childbirth, the right at all times to decide whether or not she shall engage in paid work’.
The position of Rathbone and the NUSEC was potentially more radical than pre-War feminists because they were grappling with two new issues, first, the need to improve women's economic position in the family (earlier feminists had suggested celibacy as the only alternative to ‘marriage as a trade’), and second, the necessity to get away from defining equality for women on men's terms.
However, after 1918 feminist arguments became less and less distinct.
In part this was because feminist energy was increasingly channelled into anti-war and anti-fascist activity.
(The Women's World Committee against War and Fascism was formed in 1934.)
But more important still was that throughout the period feminists used the same analytical frameworks as anti-feminists.
Mainstream nineteenth-century feminists had argued within an individualist framework and had accommodated their ideas to scientific and medical notions of sexual difference.
Emily Pfeiffer's case for women's education, for example, was couched in language that would appease social Darwinists.
Even a radical writer like Olive Schreiner appealed for women's right to work, since it would in the end prove beneficial for the race, ‘parasitical mothers’, she argued, produced ‘softened sons’.
In the years following World War I, Eleanor Rathbone and Eva Hubback shared the general dismay at the decline in the birth rate.
(One of the most widely discussed population projections forecast that by the year 2033, the total population of England and Wales would be no larger than that of the County of London in 1934.)
Rathbone was happy to use population arguments in her campaign for family  allowances and thought it would be an advantage if, through the administration of allowances, the state could put its hand on ‘the tiller of maternity’.
In the inter-war campaign to improve the position of mothers, feminist arguments were particularly liable to become submerged.
On the whole, feminists throughout the period agreed that women were better suited by nature to home-related tasks than were men.
In the nineteenth century, they turned around the idea that women's place was in the home to argue that motherly values should be extended beyond it.
Similarly, twentieth-century feminists used the importance attached to motherhood to argue for an economic and sexual independence antithetical to the patriarchal attitudes that lay behind theories of sexual difference and maternalism.
It is often hard to discern how far feminist use of essentially anti-feminist arguments reflected their acceptance of them, or how far their use was merely strategic.
Even in the recent past, feminists combined support of causes which would today be considered incompatible.
For example, Stella Browne, a socialist-feminist of the inter-war period, was also an active eugenicist and supported the idea of compulsory sterilisation.
Nevertheless, running through all feminist writing is a fundamental regard for female dignity, development and autonomy.
Josephine Butler, who put so much emphasis on the importance of women's domestic virtues, deplored the idea that reproduction alone should be ‘the essential aim of [women's]existence’, and considered such a position to be contrary to‘the unity of moral law’.
Similarly, Eleanor Rathbone demanded reforms that women needed to fulfil the ‘potentialities of their own natures’.
Nevertheless, the strength of the separate spheres argument was such that late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century feminists never addressed the fundamental question of sexual divisions; Rathbone made it quite clear that she believed women to be ‘the natural custodians of childhood.
That at least is part of the traditional role assigned to us by men and one that we have never repudiated’.
William Beveridge showed more appreciation of the problems posed by the burden of women's household tasks when he stated that the ‘housewife's job, with a large family is frankly impossible and will remain so unless some of what has now to be done separately in every home can be done economically outside the home’(although he never failed to assume that the final responsibility for domestic work rested with women).
The few feminists who did consider the problem of women's domestic labour came up with a collectivist solution similar to that of Beveridge.
But someone like Vera Brittain was only just beginning to explore the problem of ‘how a married woman without being inordinately rich, can have children and yet maintain her intellectual and spiritual independence’ in the years following World War I. The small number of married women who pursued an active public life between the wars continued to assume that home and family were part of their natural responsibilities and solved the problem — as women with as diverse political views as Brittain and Violet Markham  recognised — through the employment of domestic servants.
With the decline of domestic service after World War II, the problem of the sexual division of labour in the home would become a much more acute problem in any reformulation of feminism.