

National Politics in Operation
Party Politics
Introduction
In this and the following chapter we discuss the two main types of organization that seek to influence or control national policy: political parties and organized groups (frequently referred to as pressure or interest groups).
Parties are usually distinguished from groups by their intention to seek control of the main offices of government.
They therefore put forward a wide spectrum of policies to cover all politically significant aspects of national life, as well as foreign affairs.
Organized groups, on the other hand, restrict their aims to those that will promote the interests of their members or further particular causes; they do not have a comprehensive political programme, nor do they seek to acquire control of the main offices of government.
Their purpose is to influence government to adopt policies favourable to them.
Some difficulties arise, however, from the generally accepted distinction.
Not all organizations that claim to be seeking control of the government can realistically be said to be doing so.
Parties such as Plaid Cymru or the Green Party in Great Britain have no chance of controlling the government, although they may get members of parliament (MPs) elected and, in certain circumstances, have some say in making the government's life easier or more difficult.
At the very most, they can hope for a modest share in a possible coalition government.
In other words, for practical purposes their aim must be to influence the government rather than to control it — which is what pressure groups are supposed to do.
There is nothing to stop pressure groups putting  up candidates at parliamentary elections on specific and limited programmes.
There are examples in some countries of such candidates being elected and of pressure-group members of parliament being sufficiently numerous and permanent to share in office and to be regarded as a permanent parliamentary group — in other words, to behave in many ways like a party.
The religious parties in Israel are an example of this type of group (the type of electoral system is crucial to this development — see chapter 26).
The position is further complicated by the fact that pressure groups can be closely or even officially associated with parties.
The obvious example in the British context is the Labour Party which was, to all intents and purposes, originally the creation of the trade unions.
Trade unions and other groups can be officially affiliated to the Labour Party.
But unofficial links can be just as significant as more overt official association, as in the close association of business and financial interests with the Conservative Party.
British and American Parties Contrasted
In comparing of the two liberal democratic party systems of Great Britain and the United States, let us first outline what it is that parties in liberal democracies are said to do.
This can be summarized in four main propositions.
First, parties facilitate the aggregation of the large number of group and sectional interests that arise and thus present the electorate with a clarified choice of issues; second, they organize and mobilize the electorate; third, they recruit leaders and provide governments; and fourth, they initiate and oversee the implementation of government policy.
That parties are coalitions of interests can be seen in both Britain and the United States and particularly in the latter.
The aggregation of interests is necessary due to the large variety and often mutually incompatible nature of the sectional interests that develop in modern industrialized societies.
No one interest can have maximum impact on government policies if it campaigns alone.
Combining with other interests of broadly similar aims in affiliation to, or support of, a political party significantly strengthens the political clout of a particular group.
The British Labour Party combines the interests of the trade unions and other, but not all, working-class, socialist and reforming groups.
The Conservative Party today represents the middle classes, small and large business, finance and agriculture.
That a large and heterogeneous  society like the United States has maintained just two parties for almost its entire history suggests that the job of aggregation has been performed admirably, but it must be remembered that in the United States these interests are really only aggregated once every four years, just long enough for the parties to select their presidential candidates and fight for their election.
For the rest of the time the parties are basically loose amalgamations of autonomous state parties.
However, liberal democracy requires a party — an aggregation of interests — to win the support of a mass electorate at frequent intervals.
In the sense that these parties have provided the electorate with a clear either-or choice in both countries for many years, they can be said to be doing their job.
It is less certain that, apart from the individual politicians standing for election, the choice was necessarily that clear-cut.
It has been argued, for example, that in two-party systems the choice, as far as proposed policies are concerned, is frequently blurred, sometimes to the extent that there is no real choice, particularly in the American case.
The reason for this is that each party can count on the votes of its committed supporters; what each wants to do is to capture the votes of those perceived as occupying the middle ground between the parties.
Therefore, in campaigns a party attempts less to attract these voters than to ensure that they are not repelled by what the party advocates.
As can be imagined, this tends to lead to the blurring of stances on issues rather than their clarification.
The organization and mobilization of the electorate in the United States to turn out to vote and to maximize the party's chances of success is probably not carried out as well as it used to be, as is evidenced by the decline in turnout since the 1960s (see table 26.2).
The even more rapid decline in the two-party vote in Britain is to some extent compensated for by the increased vote for the smaller parties since the 1970s, but in the United States the proportion of the electorate mobilized by the parties is almost certainly even smaller because of the growing number of single-issue pressure groups in recent years.
Their increased involvement in the electoral process has had as much or greater impact upon the mobilization of some small sections of people as has the more generalized appeal of the parties.
Another major factor in the apparent reduction of the parties' role here is the effect of television on campaigning.
Although there are important differences in the nature of television coverage between the two countries, television  provides politicians in both with a direct (but one-way) link to the voter and reduces the traditional role of the party as mediator.
On the face of it, the parties in the United States still perform the job of recruiting personnel for positions in the executive and the legislature, since presidents, senators and representatives are elected, almost without exception, on a Democratic or Republican ticket.
But closer examination of the electoral process reveals that party organizations are increasingly captured by outsiders whose party credentials have been, in some cases, rather slim.
Jimmy Carter was a prime example of a little-known person capturing the permanent party organization in 1976 for at least the duration of the election.
This is in sharp contrast to Britain where progress up the hierarchy of the party is very much a process of starting at the bottom and working up, first to a seat in Parliament and then, possibly, to ministerial office.
This process has been short-circuited on occasions by well-known public figures, but it is inconceivable that a person unknown as a national party figure could, within the space of two or three years, become that party's leader as Carter did in the United States.
The people recruited into official positions through the parties tend to be of high social status, predominantly male, white and middle-aged.
Although the United States Congress is dominated by lawyers, there is, in fact, a greater heterogeneity of background among congressmen compared to their counterparts in the House of Commons, but this simply reflects the greater cultural heterogeneity in the United States generally.
Internal party reforms in recent years have ensured that the delegates to American party conventions are more representative of the population as a whole, with increased numbers of young people, ethnic minorities and women participating.
There has been no similar move in the British parties, although Conservative party conferences have always had a high proportion of women delegates.
The majority of Conservative MPs are male, public-school educated businessmen or lawyers.
In the Labour Party MPs are likely to be male, university-educated and from middle-class professions like teaching or journalism, but with a working-class parental background.
The proportion of Labour MPs who are themselves ostensibly working-class has fallen steadily since 1945.
When we consider the attainment of higher political office, the trend is for the ‘typical’ MP to prevail more and more the higher one goes.
Thus a higher proportion of cabinet ministers are middle class and university-educated than is the case with backbench MPs.
In the formation of governments which then present a clear policy programme, the performances of British and American parties are quite different, owing to the significant differences between the British parliamentary system of government and the American presidential system.
Because of the distortions of the first-past-the-post voting system (which are discussed in chapter 26), elections in Britain have often provided one party with an overall majority in the House of Commons.
The leader of this party then chooses the Cabinet from senior members of the party.
Most of them will be MPs with seats in the House of Commons, where there is a premium on party loyalty and discipline to ensure that the measures proposed by the Cabinet can be passed into law with the minimum of amendment.
Control of Parliament by the executive has never been more complete than in the twentieth century, with compliant MPs loyally following party policy.
The nature of the disciplinary sanctions on which the system rests is that the modern MP is heavily reliant on the support of party activists and party finance in order to be elected.
It is not so much the whips as the local constituency activists who indirectly but effectively apply sanctions (such as not readopting him or her) to keep the overwhelming majority of MPs toeing the party line, and government control very tight.
Then, there is the simple point that MPs would prefer their party in power, no matter what it does, rather than in opposition.
We should also note that a contemporary British government relies, like its eighteenth-century predecessors, on patronage.
Over a hundred MPs in the House of Commons hold government posts at the present time and even the humblest of them — the parliamentary private secretaries — are almost always forced to resign if they vote against the government or even abstain.
Backbench protests and revolts have, however, tended to increase in recent years, reflecting the changing background of MPs, and growing divisions of opinion over policy issues within parties (see Norton, 1985, pp. 23–81).
The contemporary system of party discipline as a means of executive control over Parliament breaks down when the electoral system fails to produce absolute majorities.
In October 1974 Labour won only a small majority of seats but that majority had disappeared by 1976, because a number of minor nationalist parties were able to maximize their effect on the electoral system by virtue of their votes being concentrated into a limited number of constituencies, and because by-elections were lost.
The situation was exacerbated by two very important and highly contentious  issues — joining the European Community and devolution of some political authority to Scotland and Wales — which could not be contained within the rigid division of two-party adversarial politics.
These divisions were reflected in the constituencies and so there was a breakdown in party discipline and a resurgence of freedom of action among MPs.
What was remarkable about this state of affairs, however, was not the difficulties of parliamentary control that the executive experienced, but its ability, even in those difficult conditions, to get a great deal of legislation passed and to remain in office.
The reasons for this are essentially divide-and-rule and convenience.
The government, even in a minority, is more united than an opposition made up of one majority party and a number of minor parties which do not always act in concert.
The government, therefore, aims to avoid circumstances that are likely to unite all these opposition forces against it, and here it is helped by the practicalities of the situation.
The major opposition party hesitates to launch too many full-scale attacks on the government if they are likely to result in a series of defeats by however small a majority, since this would tend to demoralize their supporters.
Then, there is the real possibility that a serious defeat for the government could result in a general election and, under the British system, the opposition, just as much as the government, would prefer this to happen at a time favourable to themselves.
The upshot is that incumbent governments tend to remain incumbent even when they have not got things arranged as conveniently as they would like.
The House of Commons realizes that government must be carried on and this often mitigates any tendency to be disruptive.
It also shows, however, that the rigid system of party discipline, which Britain has become used to in this century, is by no means necessary and essential to effective government.
It is simply convenient for governments, which is not the same thing at all.
The presentation of issues and their translation into government policy has always been the blind spot of American parties.
Issues are rarely debated, other than superficially during campaigns, and what the President proposes once he is in office bears no necessary relation to the platform on which he and his party ostensibly fought the campaign.
The President and his advisers are in a completely different position vis-a-vis the legislature compared with the Cabinet in Britain.
First, they cannot (by a provision of the constitution) sit as members of the Congress and  therefore they lack the direct access that is available to the British Cabinet.
Second, the American parties have always seen their primary job as winning elections, and not as governing.
They do not have the degree of ideological and policy coherence normally found in British (and other European) parties, and display far less party loyalty in the legislature.
(See table 12.1) The Democrat President Carter had great difficulty in getting even his most basic requests through a Congress controlled during 1977–80 by 2:1 Democratic majorities, a failure that was put down to Carter's unwillingness and/or inability to bargain and deal with members of Congress.
Table 12.1 Party unity in the United States Congress, 1981–1990
Party loyalty is by no means an irrelevant factor in explaining and predicting the behaviour of congressmen, but on any issue that they perceive to be contentious within their districts nobody expects a member of Congress to put party before district.
Therefore, in order to get his legislative requests on to the statute-book, the President has to rely much more on ad hoc coalitions in support of each specific measure.
Clearly, in comparison with the British system, much greater energy and frustration will be expended by the President, for there is no guarantee that any proposal he makes will pass at all, let alone free of amendments that he does not want and does not like.
Although, in terms of campaigning, electoral turnout and party identification, it may be said that the two main parties in Britain are less important than they were, Britain still provides us with an example of party government resulting from a party system  having considerable independent influence on the political process.
But a combination of the characteristic features of American parties today raises the serious question of whether analysis of American politics from the perspective of a party system or party government is at all helpful.
In comparison to Europe in general, the Democrats and the Republicans may best be characterized as two among a large number of groups setting out to influence the course of the American political process (we shall examine such groups in chapter 13).
Party in the Soviet Union
The party system of the Soviet Union provided a striking contrast to both Great Britain and the United States.
One party was considered to be sufficient in the Soviet Union because the country officially had one ideology and one goal — communism.
No other parties were considered necessary until the advent of Gorbachev and the policies of glasnost and perestroika.
The CPSU could have been considered analogous to a liberal democratic party in some limited respects.
It did to some extent aggregate demands and turn them into viable policy issues, and it also acted as a downward channel of communication, explaining and rationalizing government policies in the hope of their greater acceptance by the citizens.
But the co-ordinating and overseeing role of the CPSU at all levels of Soviet society, and its bureaucratic control, went far beyond what would be expected in a liberal democracy.
The CPSU was, in most respects, a parallel bureaucracy alongside that of the government, and integrated with it (through party members in the government and vice versa).
It had no adversary or coalition relationship with similarly organized parties.
It was all-embracing and claimed that it alone spoke authoritatively for the people.
Its policies were not tested by debate in the open political arena, but by private discussion among officials, and by public elucidation and explanation throughout the party membership and beyond.
Its legitimacy was not based on electoral success but on its revolutionary principles and antecedents.
The effective supervision and guidance of the party was officially seen as the key to the ever-improving welfare of the Soviet people.
From the liberal democratic point of view, whatever was gained in this system of planned co-ordination and coherence was counterbalanced by the overbureaucratization and lack of incisive public  criticism.
Democracy in the Western sense was lacking.
The CPSU pervaded almost every aspect of political, economic and social life in the Soviet Union.
Its organization was hierarchical with, at the top, the General Secretary, the effective political leader of the country.
He was responsible to the Politburo, the main party committee which decided all major issues of policy.
Under the Politburo was the Central Committee, composed of over 300 of the party's secretaries and other leading figures.
Although the Central Committee could be the centre for major political decisions (as when Khrushchev ousted his rivals), it usually met too infrequently and was too unwieldy for major decision-making.
The Central Committee Secretariat (or Apparatus), however, had a major role in supplying data and policy options to the Politburo.
At intervals of a few years, party congresses were held at which major changes of policy would be announced and new directions set for the future.
This institutional framework was imitated at all but the lowest levels of the party hierarchy.
Each republic, region, city and district had its party secretary, its politburo, congresses and conferences.
At the bottom were the primary organizations (the primary party organizations, or PPOs), centred on cells in places of work or study, which were the main point of contact with the party for most of the party members — 19 million in the 1980s.
Certainly, the CPSU was the initiator and the final arbiter in the policy process.
It worked in close co-ordination with the government bureaucracy and with the soviets.
Essentially, it had a directing and supervisory role, ensuring that the policies laid down by the Politburo were known and vigorously pursued at all levels.
In addition, by the use of the nomenklatura (a list of important posts that could not be filled without party approval) it controlled appointments to all significant offices (Lane, 1985, pp. 141–72).
Of course, things did not always go so smoothly.
Party members did not always work enthusiastically or have entirely unselfish motives for joining the party — membership could be a great help to career advancement.
Corruption could occur or it could prove impossible to induce much positive interest in and enthusiasm for political matters among a population that had no tradition of political involvement and no overt disputation over policies to excite its interest.
Like all great bureaucratic organizations, inertia and conservatism could sap the genuine pursuit of the original ideals.
The party attempted to renew vigour from time to time by the ‘exchange of party cards’— an opportunity to  purge the party of unsatisfactory members — or by the replacement of officials.
During the Khrushchev era membership of the party was rapidly expanded, and many felt that there was a dilution in the quality of members.
His successor pursued a more cautious path but there was a danger that party membership would become too small to maintain satisfactory links with the bulk of the population.
In the 1980s membership rose again, until, with the upheaval and questioning created by Gorbachev, members left the party in large numbers.
The problems of political recruitment were also highlighted by the experience of the Soviet Union, where it was possible to categorize certain politically significant types within the Politburo, and the Supreme Soviet.
As in Great Britain, a model of the typical party member could be drawn up — male, middle-aged, hailing from a city rather than from the countryside and, increasingly, with advanced educational qualifications.
The authorities recognized the tendencies in the system to favour certain social categories, and steps were taken to try to redress the bias by, for example, laying down quotas for membership of certain groups, like women and young people.
It is not clear that this had a significant effect.
The party's fortunes varied over the years.
Before the 1980s its lowest ebb was probably during the last years of Stalin's life when his private office and the secret police seem to have had more influence than the party.
When its predominant position was restored, the party faced new challenges as the increasing interdependence of industrial society made influential groups realize that the party needed them as much as they needed it.
Although, officially, the supremacy of the party was firmly maintained, relationships with other significant sectors of society were slowly being realigned as the party realized the need to recognize and adjust to new social and political roles (Benvenuti, 1991, pp. 4664).
The reaction of the CPSU to Gorbachev's reforms highlighted its weaknesses.
He had great difficulty in getting party support for his reforms and, although he showed great political skills, he was never able to overcome the powerful opposition of party-vested interests.
In the summer of 1991 he proposed a new party programme which, in effect, would have brought it much closer into line with a social democratic party, competing with others on Western lines.
This, together with his proposed union treaty, which opponents saw as a breakup of the Soviet Union, drove  conservatives to try to take over control from him by declaring a state of emergency — in effect, a  coup d'état .
The failure of the coup, together with revelation of the party's close implication in it, led to its collapse and abolition.
Post-coup inquiries revealed widespread financial corruption.
Nevertheless, party personnel continue to retain control in many areas (such as Central Asia), in parties with changed names (Smith, 1992, pp. 94–128).
During and after the Gorbachev regime many political groups were formed.
Some of these, for example the popular fronts in the republics  , established themselves as significant features of the political scene.
Many others were small, limited in membership and appeal, and often short-lived.
Before the collapse of the Soviet Union, there was no sign of effective, nation-wide parties coming into existence.
The independent republics do not, for the most part, have firmly established systems of parties competing for office.
They have yet to learn the meaning and significance of constitutional political opposition.
The extreme social and economic difficulties they faced on independence meant that the emergence of recognizably democratic party politics was by no means certain.
Conclusion
Political parties are found in virtually all countries in the modern world and are regarded by most commentators as essential modern political organizations.
In effect, they are coalitions of interests necessary to create a viable governing group.
In the Western liberal democratic world various parties (frequently coalitions of interests) contest for periods of governmental power.
Sometimes a party will win a period of office outright; more commonly perhaps two or more parties will share power.
These public contests are firmly based on agreement as to the fundamental characteristics of the type of regime and economic system that is required for the country.
Thus Western parties are both focuses for unity and vehicles for public contest.
They formulate policies acceptable to their supporters and provide options for voters and those more directly involved in government to choose from.
As economic circumstances and social conditions change, the parties too must change if they are to retain the confidence of enough voters to achieve office.
They do not necessarily find such changes easy, and periods of considerable intra- and interparty uncertainty and  upheaval may follow periods of relative stability in the party system.
For example, the changes in the British Labour Party have been extensive, and continue, following the loss of four successive general elections between 1979 and 1992.
The CPSU had some characteristics and functions in common with those of Western parties.
The major difference was that it did not operate in a context of contest.
It had complete control of the Soviet government and of all other significant sectors of Soviet society.
Its prestige and pre-eminence were unchallenged until the period of glasnost and perestroika.
This meant that the public disputes and debates over policy that take place openly in the West were in the Soviet Union argued out within the party and in private.
To Western eyes this method seemed restricted and undemocratic, but to the Soviets it was considered an orderly method of proceeding compared to the apparent chaos of Western politics.
If Western parties, in spite of the need to win votes, can become inward-looking and out of touch with economic and social realities, the possibility was as great, if not greater, with a party like the CPSU whose hold on government was unchallenged.
The dominance of the CPSU appeared unassailable at the start of the 1980s, but by the end of the decade it was in serious trouble.
It reluctantly accepted many of Gorbachev's proposed reforms (it had no alternative to offer, apart from more of the policies of the past — and no effective alternative leader), but conservatives with vested interests tried to restore the status quo in the 1991 coup attempt.
The failure of the coup revealed how out of touch the party had become with Soviet political realities.
Its support had been visibly waning, and it now collapsed and found itself suspended or abolished in the republics.
It still retains control, under other names, in Central Asia and other localities, but is a shadow of its former dominant self.
The post-Soviet republics are experiencing difficulty in establishing recognizably democratic party systems in the face of severe social and economic crises with no well-established tradition (or memory) of democratic government behind them.
Questions for Discussion
1
Is the distinction between parties and pressure groups analytically useful?
2
How is the working of the party system likely to affect the shape of policy decisions?
3
Are political parties essential to democracy?
Group Politics
Introduction
As we saw in chapters 6 and 7, for pluralists the activities of groups are the central feature of the political process.
Whether or not we accept their view, it cannot be denied that groups are always an important part of any developed political system.
To begin with, we must distinguish between the terms ‘interest’,(discussed in chapter 4), and ‘group’.
Many sections of society have an identifiable ‘interest’ be it in jobs, profits, more roads or more nuclear power stations.
However, such sections (or their representatives) are groups in our sense only if they are organized to pursue that interest by lobbying government officials or seeking the election of particular candidates.
This is an important distinction because pluralist models suggest that we can draw conclusions about the influence of different interests only when groups can be observed at work on their behalf in the political process.
This is entirely consistent with their view that people's interests are what they say they are, and that interests are of political significance only when people organize to advance or defend them.
It may seem naive, for some interests will be better served than others in all societies regardless of overt group pressures.
Pluralists do not deny such a possibility, even probability; they simply say that theirs is the pragmatic solution to the difficult methodological problems involved in the analysis of power and interests (discussed in chapters 3 and 4 respectively).
The key aspects of political activity according to the pluralist group model are: all sections of society are capable of influencing policy, especially if they are formally organized; policy represents  the outcome of bargaining and compromise between groups, the role of the state being to act as arbitrator of disputes.
The process is democratic because in the long run no one group dominates, countervailing groups develop, and no group is denied access to advance its interest.
Some of the problems with this model were discussed in chapter 7.
We should also note that it is based on certain assumptions, for example it is assumed that those who have some reason to form a pressure group will, in an open society, do so, and that the degree of governmental response will depend on the degree of pressure the group is able to exert, and that this is directly related to the group's importance to the community.
Both assumptions have been questioned and much evidence adduced to show that group politics does not in fact work in this way.
First, those who have a political interest to pursue will not in fact always do so, for example consumers, who are numerous but widely distributed, generally have never organized themselves as effectively or as efficiently as producers, who are much fewer in number but already have a business organization able to be adapted for political purposes.
Another group often mentioned is agricultural workers, who are thinly scattered across the land and have had great difficulties in forming a union with political and industrial strength.
It has been argued by Mancur Olson (1965) that there is often no incentive to go to the expense and trouble of joining a group, especially when the group is large, because it may make no difference to that particular individual.
It is frequently not practicable to withhold benefits gained by the organization from non-joiners in the same area of activity (wage increases or better working conditions, for example).
With the benefits accruing to him or her whether he or she joins or not, there is no rational reason why any individual should join the pressure group.
The larger the group the greater this tendency, argues Olson, and thus it is not surprising that amorphous groups such as consumers, or even economic classes, do not unite in common action to pursue their interests.
However, it is evident that pressure groups are, in fact, often formed on a large scale and some explanation needs to be offered.
Olson suggests that these organizations are sometimes artificial creations required by governments to provide them with a representative body they can negotiate with.
Alternatively, they are organizations originally created for a non-political purpose (for example the British Medical Association was originally formed to circulate medical and scientific information to doctors) which have acquired political purposes over time.
Their political activities  may not be perceived as very significant and useful by the bulk of the membership.
In some cases, an established group will attempt to increase its influence and power by making membership compulsory for all those sharing the interest.
This is the idea behind the closed-shop principle as developed by such groups as lawyers and printers.
However, the explanation for joining a group depends on the narrow conception of ‘economic man’ maximizing the attainment of his self-interest.
As has been pointed out, the motivations of ‘political man’ are not the same and not necessarily as rational as those of ‘economic man’.
Clearly, more research needs to be done, but the main point is that the assumption that people with common political aims and grievances will definitely form pressure groups within the liberal democratic context is by no means borne out by the evidence.
The assumption that the degree of governmental response will depend on the degree of pressure that the group is able to exert, which is in turn directly related to the group's importance to the community, must also be questioned.
Pressure-group activity is only one factor that the government has to take into account in deciding policy, and the group's importance to the government and community is susceptible of various interpretations.
Some are important because they supply and service utilities such as gas, electricity and water; others, even though they are small in number, because their production keeps many thousands in employment; and still others, like doctors, nurses and paramedics, because they deal with human emergencies.
However, the importance of the group is often measured by the number or helplessness of the people dependent on such services and the degree to which they are affected, for example we can all fall ill and a strike of doctors would affect all classes, rich and poor, young and old alike.
A strike of social workers is not only much more limited in its impact, but affects mostly the poor and underprivileged section of the community whose political muscle is very weak and limited anyway, even though the effect of such a strike on particular individuals or families may be very grave indeed.
Protest and Direct Action
Another factor affecting the impact of political pressure is the degree to which groups are prepared to make their protest felt.
Those whose actions are most likely directly to involve human suffering or even death may hesitate to use their whole  industrial and political muscle for fear of the adverse reaction of public opinion and decision-makers should their action be the cause of some tragedy, such as death.
There is, however, a tendency for the public and the government to get used to industrial action and to adapt to it, so inducing groups to become more and more militant in order to sustain the same level of impact.
There is no guarantee that the degree of influence on governmental decision-making of a given pressure group will be in line with any particular interpretation of ‘importance’.
In the complex interlocking economies of the industrialized world, groups not necessarily engaged in traditionally prestigious occupations are, nevertheless, vital to the smooth running of society and the economy.
In these circumstances groups utilize what pressure they can, constrained only by the basic tradition of liberal democracy, for example they do not (usually) adopt violent tactics.
However, it would be wrong to measure the power of groups simply in terms of their ability to disrupt.
On the contrary, it may be argued that the groups that flex their muscles most forcefully and publicly thereby demonstrate their relative weakness.
The most influential groups are those with continuous and private relationships with the bureaucracy in which both sides — government and group — control factors (for example money or information) that are valued by the other.
The last thing either side wants is a public trial of strength which would probably succeed only in damaging the long-term interests of each.
This highlights a crucial tactical problem for new groups or those whose demands are seen as in some way unconventional.
As we shall see in chapter 27, in recent years there seems to have been a greater willingness in the Western liberal democracies to take action outside the normal channels of group and party politics.
One major example has been the rise in the number of groups some more organized than others — representing communities or neighbourhoods, mainly within the context of local politics.
There now exist community groups of a greater or lesser degree of militancy which have eschewed political parties as the main vehicle of their demands (although they often have to use them in the later stages of campaigns).
These groups are to some extent welcome to the authorities, as they provide obvious and organized bodies with which negotiations and discussions can be held.
In some cases, indeed, the authorities have provided the resources  for such groups to be formed, for example community councils in Britain.
However, the relationship between action groups of one sort or another and the local and central governmental authorities is by no means always smooth.
The difficulty lies in the fact that the governmental authorities, however highly principled and dedicated to the welfare of the citizenry, are essentially a vested interest running an organization which, to a greater or lesser degree, is designed to preserve and promote the continuing control of those same authorities.
Any group that acts in such a way as to threaten to disturb the smooth running of the governmental organization is likely to be seen (often rightly) as a challenge to the status quo.
Such a status quo includes not only officials in the bureaucracy but also most elected politicians, together with a variety of supporting organizations, such as the churches, professional bodies and the media.
Among such conventional bodies there is an understood set of principles and a mode of proceeding which are characterized as fair, balanced, reasonable and sensible — terms that cover, in reality, some very precise judgements as to policy priorities and the relative importance of some individuals and groups as against others.
Where contact with the organized public is necessary or unavoidable, steps are taken to retain the organizational initiative in the hands of the governmental authorities as far as possible, and to associate with people of like attitude rather than with those who are considered to be ‘uncooperative’, ‘militant’, ‘extremist’ for example.
From the point of view of more or less militant pressure groups, there are real problems as to what to do in these circumstances.
To adopt a militant, uncooperative or obstructive approach may gain publicity, not all of which will be good.
The organizers are often faced with the dilemma of whether they should adopt an all-out militant campaign with the risk that in the end all will be lost and nothing gained in spite of the expenditure of a great deal of energy, time and sometimes money; or come to some agreement with the authorities whereby something can be gained, even though it falls far short of the full objectives of the group and will not significantly affect the position of, and relationships between, vested interests.
It is perhaps this dilemma that causes most disagreement among protesters and it is therefore the one most effectively used by the governmental authorities to weaken their position.
Peace campaigners in the 1980s, and animal-rights and environmental groups in the 1990s, faced this dilemma.
The Focus of Group Activity
For the groups that eschew unconventional behaviour — and there may be tactical as well as principled reasons for doing so — the focus and target of pressure is likely to be the people who make the laws and policies and/or the people who implement them.
The particular emphasis placed on one or other of these depends on a variety of conditions, such as the ‘legitimacy’ of the group, the nature of the demand, the stage of the decision process reached and the nature of the political process itself.
For example, when should a group direct its attention to the legislature?
A comparison of the British and American policy-making processes reveals that the Congress is far more likely to amend or reject proposals coming from the executive than the House of Commons.
We would, therefore expect to see much greater lobbying in Congress than in the Commons, and so we do.
Indeed, it may be argued that a British group lobbying Parliament demonstrates mainly its lack of access to, or impact on, the core of the policy-making process (ministers and civil servants), unless the lobby is undertaken explicitly for symbolic purposes and in order to attract the attention of the media.
However, British members of parliament do have extensive outside interests and many are retained to act on behalf of groups.
In general, this reflects the group's belief that a member of parliament can intervene with the bureaucracy on the group's behalf.
In terms of legislative proposals, lobbying the assembly is more important in the United States, especially for groups wishing to exercise a negative or veto power to stop a proposal rather than have a new proposal passed.
But in both Britain and the United States the most significant activities of groups are those involving close and continuous relationships with the executive branch bureaucracy that is responsible for the detailed implementation of policy.
In Britain there are a multitude of consultative committees in which members of organized interests and officials of the bureaucracy discuss both what legislative changes may be made and how legislation can be implemented.
This government-group relationship is symbiotic.
Instead of resulting from a successful use of pressure by a group on a reluctant government, the relationship derives from the government's need for specialized information which the group possesses and its co-operation in the eventual implementation of policy.
From the group's perspective, it desires to be involved  where it can influence the final shape of a policy so that it maximizes the benefits and minimizes the losses to its members.
One of the manifestations of this relationship can be seen in the nature of the laws made when the state intervenes in a particular area of interest.
General ‘enabling’ laws are passed by Parliament on the prompting of the executive, which lay down certain principles but, even if they are detailed, leave ample room for bargaining when the drafting of regulations for the implementation of the law occurs.
The relevant groups in this bargaining are, of course, the permanent representatives of the state — civil servants — and the representatives of the interests affected.
What are essentially bilateral relationships between group and department in Britain have in the United States long become recognized as trilateral relationships of group, department and, because of its far greater role in the substance of legislation, Congress.
In practice, of course, a large number of these relationships rarely involve more than a few people.
These will be leaders of or permanent Washington-based lobbyists for the group, two or three members of the relevant congressional subcommittee and a few permanent officials in the relevant bureau of the department.
The resulting ‘subgovernments’(Cater, 1964, pp. 17–22) or ‘iron triangles’ have been seen as critical to an understanding of what governments actually do or do not do because of their permanence, the secrecy of their operations and the weak party system in the United States.
More recently, however, it has been suggested that these subgovernments have been increasingly complemented by the development of what are called ‘issue networks’.
These are defined by Heclo as ‘specialized subcultures composed of highly knowledgeable policy-watchers’(Heclo, 1978, p. 99).
They are larger and more diffuse than subgovernments and owe their development to a variety of factors: the rapid growth of federal spending, the growth in private and semi-private organizations which are used to administer many federally funded policies, the growth in ‘public interest’ organizations and the great increase in the ranks of professional administrators in all fields, for example planning, health, welfare, education and housing.
Thus these issue networks provide a kind of intellectual community in specific policy fields which to some extent transcends traditional political boundaries between Congress and the executive and between the layers of government in the American federal system (this is examined in more detail in chapter 16).
A major outstanding question in the relationship between groups  and government is, as was suggested in chapter 7, whether the interaction is best analysed by a model of pluralism or one of corporatism.
Clearly, neither reflects the totality of the situation in Britain or the United States, and therefore we would agree with Cawson (1978) that it is possible to discern sectors resembling corporatist relationships and sectors resembling pluralist relationships in both contemporary Britain and the United States.
Group Politics in the Soviet Union
On the face of it, given the dominant place of the CPSU in initiating policy and its penetration of the state administrative apparatus which implemented the policies, there was no room for any manifestation of group politics in the former Soviet Union.
But in such a modern industrialized state it was not long before many groups realized that their role in the social and economic system made their co-operation and support essential to the Communist Party.
This gave them potential political leverage were their sectional interests to be threatened.
The overall guiding role of the party was therefore likely to meet with resistance at some stage and there are signs that this indeed happened increasingly in the post-Stalinist period.
It is unwise, however, to give way to the temptation to apply the pluralist model to the Soviet Union on the grounds that ‘basically all industrial societies are alike’.
Group politics in the Soviet Union was by no means so clearly and permanently organized as in Great Britain or the United States.
Organized group politics would have been incompatible with the official position of the party.
Pressure-group activity, therefore, tended to occur on an ad hoc issue basis rather than be based on a system of permanently structured relationships.
This did not imply that interested groups acting in this context could not be effective, as, for example, the resistance to Khrushchev's proposed educational reforms showed.
It is clear that other groups, such as the military, scientists and intellectuals, could exercise influence over the party and modify policy.
In addition, there were informal groups based on general policy orientations within the party itself, which were usually divided by the distinction between conservative and liberal policy preferences.
But it would be unwise to assume that the advancing industrialization of the Soviet Union was increasingly leading to a form of politics in which organized groups took a more  significant part.
It has been suggested (White, 1978, p. 101) that if we look at the delivery of key speeches in the Supreme Soviet, for example, there was no evidence that prominent groups were gaining proportionately more influence vis-a-vis the party, which may demonstrate that there is no good reason to assume that industrialized societies necessarily develop similar political characteristics.
Nevertheless, in changing social and economic circumstances the role of the party vis-a-vis groups needed constant adjustment in reality if not officially.
The party developed various ploys to maintain its position, like acquiring its own experts and co-opting people with strong group links on to the Politburo.
That a form of group politics existed in the Soviet Union is, therefore, indisputable.
It was, however, looser, more flexible and far less permanent and structured than in the West.
There is no evidence to suggest that it would have developed more closely along Western lines.
The period of glasnost and perestroika under Gorbachev led to a great burgeoning of group activity throughout the republics.
Some of these groups, for example the popular fronts, soon developed overt political aims in opposition to the CPSU.
Signs of organized pressure-group activity among, for example, trade unions and environmentalists, became evident.
But the lack of a well-established party system in the republics, and the general economic and social crisis, suggested that it would be some time before institutionalized pressure-group systems were operating, if at all.
Some republics, like those in Central Asia, were still basically authoritarian systems.
In others, like the Baltic republics, democratic traditions had flimsy historical foundations.
Thus, the nature and scope of pressure-group politics in the former Soviet republics remain uncertain (Lane, 1992, pp. 107–44).
Conclusion
The existence of competition between organized groups of people sharing interests, and their peaceful mediation by neutral governments, has been the central argument of those who analyse liberal democracies in terms of the pluralist model.
We have suggested that, while competition of this sort does exist, there are serious problems with accepting all the assumptions and propositions associated with pluralism.
One important problem has always been the question of how groups operate and to what effect.
In  other words, why do some groups advancing certain interests enjoy access to centres of government policy where their case may be made peacefully and with apparently good chance of acceptance, while others advancing different interests find access to these forums extremely difficult, if not impossible?
The latter have to decide whether to stop trying or to resort to more unconventional methods in the hope that government will be sufficiently embarrassed by the ensuing mayhem to consult them.
Some commentators saw corporatist trends in both Britain and the United States in the 1960s and 1970s.
In the 1980s, in principle at least, government drew back from collusion with pressure groups and tried to leave economic market conditions to decide policy.
Whatever relationship exists between government and groups, we must raise the question of whether the advancing of organized interests enhances democracy or, at least, provides the only realistic chance of obtaining some democracy in industrialized societies, as the pluralists have argued.
On the one hand, does the integration of groups into the bureaucratic structure make them a threat to traditional democratic norms of accountable government?
On the other, does the policy of government to leave much decision-making to commercial factors or the market enhance or hinder democracy?
The dramatic change in the political structures of the former Soviet republics raises many questions about the development of group politics in these areas.
In the period of glasnost and perestroika incipient group politics could be observed, but its likely development and its characteristics following the breakup of the Soviet Union remain a matter for speculation.
It does not necessarily have to develop along Western lines to remain democratic.
New forms of group politics may emerge, depending on the types of democracy or other forms of government that become established.
Questions for Discussion
1
Is the domination of politics by organized groups inevitable in large industrialized societies?
2
What strategy would you recommend to a group who wanted (a) to defend a threatened economic interest and (b) to advance a moral cause?
3
In what sense are organized groups (a) a manifestation of and/or (b) a threat to democracy?
Executives
Introduction
We began our discussion of the policy-making process by considering the roles of parties and pressure groups as if they were on the outside looking in, so to speak.
Now we continue by looking at the inside workings of the process at the national level, beginning with a discussion of executives and assemblies.
In this and the following chapter we shall examine their basic workings as institutions in their own right, and in chapter 16 we shall examine their interaction.
There is a good deal of confusion over the use of concepts to analyse the institutions and processes of policy-making.
In the past, people have used models of particular institutions carrying out legislative, executive and judicial functions, that is law-making, law-implementation and law-adjudication.
This model reflects only certain aspects — some of them myths — of what happens in the world of political decision-making.
It is analytically more revealing and significant to identify actors by the roles they play, for example politicians and officials.
Then it becomes clear that politicians, for example, can be involved in processes of policy-making, implementation, evaluation and adjudication.
Similarly, officials (bureaucrats) can also be involved in all three areas.
It is the role people play in political processes, not the job they officially hold, that matters in our analysis.
The growing scale of the bureaucracy, the increasing complexity of its role and the intricacy of its relations with the politicians means that bureaucracy today needs to be studied as a separate  institution (see chapter 17).
We also prefer the term ‘assembly’ to ‘legislature’because legislation (making the law) is an inadequate definition of the role of modern elected assemblies.
Throughout this discussion, therefore, it is important to be aware of the gulf that frequently exists between out-of-date constitutional models and inappropriate concepts (although these are still sometimes invoked by politicians), and the actual practice of policy-making.
Chief Executives
A certain amount of confusion is often generated by the interchangeable use of such concepts as ‘the executive’, ‘the state’ and ‘the government’, because there are no universally accepted definitions of them.
It would, therefore, by helpful to distinguish clearly between them.
The state (otherwise often referred to as ‘the regime’) is the most inclusive of the terms and is usually understood to embrace all the main institutions of the political system, including the judiciary, police and the military (see chapters 18 and 19).
‘Government’ is often reserved to describe the actions of the ‘government of the day’.
It refers to a much smaller group of politicians who hold executive office temporarily (following a coup d'état, revolution, election or other succession process) as presidential appointees, or members of a majority party, coalition or military junta, and we shall use the concept in this sense.
What is the difference between the executive and the government?
For our purposes, the executive will be understood to refer to the body of government ministers together with permanent senior officials (bureaucrats) who are involved in the basic decisions over what policy proposals to initiate and pursue and the priority to give them.
Compared to states or executives, governments tend to be of short duration — state institutions often remain in existence for long periods and officials in the executive may have lifelong careers, while governments come and go (although some of their personnel may hold office in more than one government).
Executives, at their apex, may be single or collective.
This means that the final decision-making responsibility is either formally concentrated in one person or, alternatively, in a collective body — a committee — like the British Cabinet, or the Communist Party Politburo in the Soviet Union.
In reality, it is often much harder to classify actual systems unambiguously than this simple  dichotomy would suggest.
For example, the United States appears to provide a clear example of a single executive — the President.
But, after their experiences, as British colonies, with George III's government, the Americans were wary of putting too much power into the hands of one man and, in 1787, discussed the possibility of having two or three coequal presidents.
Ultimately, it was decided to provide checks in other ways.
The result is that the United States Congress shares in the performance of some executive tasks, for example the making of treaties and the appointment of federal judges.
The British Cabinet provides a good example of a collective executive in which all decisions must be agreed by the members.
A combination of government secrecy and collective responsibility (the notion that an individual member must not disagree publicly with a Cabinet decision) have made it difficult to discover the extent to which cabinets are genuinely collective decision-making bodies, but a succession of leaks and memoirs, such as Richard Crossman's (Crossman, 1975–7), has built up a picture of a committee in which genuine debate tends to be restricted to issues that come to assume major political importance for the government.
More typically, it sits to give the final yea or nay to policies generated within the bureaucracy and the network of cabinet committees.
The difficulties inherent in classifying systems according to this criterion are illustrated to some extent by the position of the British Prime Minister.
In the nineteenth century and well into the twentieth, the Prime Minister's position vis-a-vis the Cabinet was described as primus inter pares— the first among equals.
Particularly since the Second World War and the advent of television, with its concentration on individuals and the personalization of political issues, it has been argued that the system is becoming increasingly presidential.
It is said that the powers of the Prime Minister have developed to such an extent that the traditional constraints are ineffective.
Certainly, the collective nature of policy-making in Great Britain depends to some degree on the attitude and personality of the prime minister of the day.
While Winston Churchill (in his 1940–5 wartime government) and Margaret Thatcher (1979–90) were very dominant figures in the cabinets they presided over, prime ministers like Clement Attlee (1945–51) and John Major (1990 to date) seem to have run their cabinets on something closer to a collective-decision basis.
In the Soviet Union there was a pattern of swings between  single and collective leadership in the post-Second World War period.
When Stalin died in 1953 and his domination of the executive role ended, there was a struggle for power between leading party figures like Malenkov, Khrushchev and  Bulganin .
In October 1953 Khrushchev replaced Malenkov at the head of the party, and in 1955 Bulganin took over the chairmanship of the Council of Ministers.
Between 1955 and 1958 Khrushchev and Bulganin appeared to rule in tandem until Khrushchev replaced Bulganin as head of the Council of Ministers.
Thus single-man rule seemed to have returned, although officially the collective responsibility of the Politburo was proclaimed and the ‘cult of personality’ denounced (Westwood, 1987, pp. 379–90).
When Khrushchev was removed in 1964, he was replaced by Brezhnev as first secretary of the CPSU and by Kosygin as chairman of the Council of Ministers.
For a few years the two seemed more or less equal, but after 1968 Kosygin seemed to be losing authority.
Although he remained as chairman of the Council of Ministers his influence waned compared to that of Brezhnev, who eventually became formal head of state in addition to party secretary.
He was now easily the most influential person in policy-making.
Nevertheless, while Khrushchev, Brezhnev and their successors as general secretary of the Communist Party remained the most prominent figures in the Soviet political process, clearly they did not dominate the Politburo as Stalin did — they had to carry their colleagues with them.
Thus, in spite of the tendency of the Soviet leadership to pass into the hands of one man, the importance of the Politburo, especially since Stalin's time, must not be underestimated.
We know some details of the backgrounds of the twenty-two or so party members who made up the Politburo.
Increasingly, the career background of members was that of a party official, although in the 1970s major government officials with professional expertise, for example in foreign affairs and defence, were included.
All were, of course, party men, but they were not politicians in the British sense of having won a reputation as fighters in the party battle.
Essentially, they were administrators, who would have built up a following among other administrators who supported their attitudes and often owed their careers to them.
The reputation and prestige on which their position rested, therefore, was an intraparty one rather than one created in the public arena.
This again highlights the complexity of real situations which we  must bear in mind when applying our over-simple divisions of executive, bureaucracy and assembly.
Gorbachev undermined the position of the Politburo when he transferred executive power to the presidency, advised by the presidential councils.
The former Soviet republics have, for the most part, retained a single executive as their preference, based on the American or French model, rather than the collective type of executive found in parliamentary systems of the British model.
Such a choice accords with both the political traditions of the area and the perceived need for a strong, decisive executive in a time of economic, social and political turmoil.
Nevertheless, the presidents of the new republics have to deal with often volatile parliaments which do not have an established party system.
They can be more difficult to manage than even the United States Congress.
A considerable learning process is going on and the outcome — democracy, authoritarianism or prolonged instability — is uncertain (Sakwa, 1990, pp. 159–69; Smith, 1992, pp. 129–45).
What Do Executives Do?
What are the policy issues that executives discuss and decide?
In the main, these will be the great financial, economic and social questions, together with internal and external security and relations with other states or international bodies.
They will also be concerned with more immediate issues involving the well-being of the party or other organization providing their political base.
For example, the British Cabinet has to pay attention to the process of getting its proposed legislation through both houses of Parliament; this means considering the views and anxieties of its supporters in both houses.
In the United States the President often has to work hard to create a majority to support his proposed legislation in its passage through Congress.
Unlike the government in Britain, the President's party often does not have a majority in Congress.
The CPSU Politburo was concerned with both great policy issues (including the affairs of the separate republics) and party matters.
As with the British Cabinet, officials who were not members would sometimes be invited to sessions dealing with their particular interests.
We know little of how the Politburo reached its decisions-it did not produce a Richard Crossman — although some information has been provided by  members in the glasnost period (for example it appears that, as in the British Cabinet, formal votes were rarely taken).
In many of the successor republics tension and conflict between presidential government and assembly is frequent, as well as public disagreements within the government itself.
As we have seen, the policy process is dynamic and flexible, and it is not possible in the real world to draw a firm distinction between policy initiation and policy implementation.
The implementation or administrative process is far too important to be left to its own devices.
The executive has always been responsible for, and ultimately in control of, both initiation and implementation.
The growth of its domination of policy initiation has come about with growing state intervention in society and the increasing extent and complexity of the policy-making process.
Since the beginning of this century the executive has tended to extend its influence vis-a-vis the assembly (especially in parliamentary systems) by dominating the parliamentary timetable and making regulations subsidiary to major legislative measures.
But the comment (or complaint) that executives are becoming increasingly dominant is also heard in presidential systems.
In the United States, before 1921 each department was free to ask Congress for funds; in that year Congress passed the Budget and Accounting Act which centralized all such requests in the Bureau of the Budget (renamed the Office of Management and Budget in 1970).
In Roosevelt's New Deal administration the bureau was brought under closer presidential control and two main effects became apparent: the bureau assisted the President in the difficult job of controlling his own bureaucracy, and the President's programme, cleared and co-ordinated by the bureau, increasingly set the congressional agenda.
It is now reckoned that 80 per cent of laws enacted by Congress emanate from the executive — if one were to weight these laws in terms of importance, almost certainly that proportion would be higher.
As one House of Representatives committee chairman told the Eisenhower administration in 1953: ‘don't expect us to start from scratch on what you people want.
That's not the way we do things here — you draft the bills and we work them over’(Mullen, 1976, p. 60).
We shall look at the executive role in policy implementation when we examine the workings of bureaucracy later.
In the Soviet Union there was a very close association between party and government bureaucracies.
Members of the Soviet government (the Council of Ministers) were essentially administrative  heads of ministries, but at the same time they were party members, and a few of them may even have been members of the Politburo.
Other members of the Politburo were sometimes heads (secretaries) of sections of the Party Secretariat.
Thus in the Soviet system there was far less separation of position and responsibility between executive and bureaucracy than is found in liberal democratic systems.
During and following the Gorbachev era there were numerous complaints about the tendency of presidents to arrogate more power to themselves on the grounds that it was a temporary measure to deal with the extremely serious economic and social situation facing the republics.
For example, it is argued that former communist officials in the Russian provinces continue to wield much power and are in a position to render executive decisions ineffective.
Thus strong powers are needed by the centre to enforce decisions.
Opponents fear that ‘temporary’ powers all too easily become permanent and that the idea of renewing or rejecting governmental authority in regular elections is not fully understood.
The Replacement of Executives
One of the crucial questions to be discussed here concerns the way in which executives are replaced.
Generally speaking, there are three main ways in which governments are succeeded by others — election, elite (backstairs) intrigue and force — the last being both older and more prevalent.
In the Soviet Union before the advent of Gorbachev succession was a struggle within the ruling elite, for example there were prolonged struggles after the death of Lenin in 1924 and of Stalin in 1953, the main difference between the two episodes being that the losers in the 1950s escaped with their lives whereas those in the 1920s did not.
The period of succession in regimes with no constitutional provision for it often tends to be a time of unrest.
Sometimes elites succeed in confining the struggle; sometimes, as in China after the death of Mao Zedong, the masses may play a role by becoming mobilized on behalf of this or that elite faction.
In the Soviet Union successions to the general secretaryship after Stalin were achieved in a relatively orderly fashion but entirely as an internal party matter with no element of public choice.
The element of backstairs intrigue is, of course, also present to some extent in Western liberal democratic states, especially when the head of a parliamentary  executive (like the British one) is replaced between elections (for example John Major's succession of Margaret Thatcher in 1990)
Struggles between elites may be conducted in various ways.
One of the most common is the military method.
There has been a high incidence of political succession by means of military coups d'état.
Elites representing different religious, ethnic, tribal and ideological beliefs and different views on the desirability and pace of industrialization frequently seem to engage in a highly dangerous form of musical chairs.
Other forms of backstairs succession may be more peaceful but do not indicate much greater governmental stability.
Italy, for example, has avoided a military coup since 1945 but still has on average a new government every year.
Relatively few of these governments have been formed following elections; most have been created by means of negotiation between the main parties and personalities in order to establish the distribution of offices between parties.
Elections provide a more stable method of succession, especially in liberal democracies.
These may be fixed or variable.
In the old Soviet Union the timing of elections was fixed — but the elections under that system did not decide succession anyway.
The new republics are likely to settle for fixed times for elections, following the American model.
In the United States the President is elected every four years and, according to the constitution since President Eisenhower, no president is constitutionally eligible to remain in office for more than two successive four-year terms.
In Britain elections to the House of Commons, from which the government is formed, must be held at least every five years (until Parliament says otherwise) but may be held at any time during the five years, for example there were only eight months between elections in 1974 and the average length of a parliament is around four years.
Under conditions of a clear parliamentary majority, the choice of when to hold an election lies with the Prime Minister.
It has long been argued that this gives great advantage to the ruling party because of its ability to manipulate the economy for the desired results on election day.
During the 1970s, however, doubt was cast on this idea.
The miscalculations of Wilson in 1970, Heath in February 1974, Callaghan in 1978–9 and the patent inability of government to manipulate the flagging economy of the 1970s culminated in 1979 with the minority Labour government suffering the indignity of being forced to call an election  when defeated on a motion of ‘no confidence’ by the combination of all parties in opposition in the House of Commons — the first time this had happened since 1924.
The general election of 1992 also had to be called by a Conservative government at a time of unfavourable economic circumstances because of the approaching legal time-limit before which an election had to be called.
Nevertheless, the ability of a British prime minister to decide the timing of a general election must still be considered a significant political advantage over opponents.
Another form of executive succession, which has received little attention until recently, is impeachment.
In the American presidential system, with fixed elections the executive is virtually immune from removal by the legislature.
The exception is impeachment by which an official may be charged by the House of Representatives and tried by the Senate.
Such a procedure was well advanced against President Richard Nixon in 1974 for the variety of criminal offences known collectively as ‘Watergate’, when he pre-empted the process by resigning — the first American president to do so.
Conclusion
A full conclusion must await our further consideration of the interaction of executives and assemblies in chapter 16.
The major questions are how governments achieve executive power, what they do and how they may be removed.
It is clear that the relationships between executive, assembly and bureaucracy are crucial and these can be varied, from a separation of powers to close integration.
These relationships will be discussed in chapters 16 and 17.
Questions for Discussion
1
Is there a more useful distinction than that between single and collective executives, and if so what do you consider it to be?
2
Why has executive power tended to increase in the twentieth century?
3
Is a smooth, legitimate executive succession more desirable than a popular one, however it is achieved?
Assemblies
Introduction
Parliamentary assemblies are essentially meetings of elected representatives of the people whose purposes include considering the policy proposals put before them by the executive, sometimes (though to a much lesser extent) initiating policy proposals of their own, examining and calling to account those responsible for the initiation and implementation of policy, and giving approval and legitimacy to the actions of the executive and bureaucracy.
Assemblies in Western liberal democracies are either unicameral or bicameral, that is they consist of one chamber or two.
Even if there are two chambers, however, they are not necessarily equal in power.
Great Britain, for example, has two chambers — the House of Commons and the House of Lords, but the power of the House of Lords is restricted to the possibility of delaying legislation passed by the Commons for a short period and trying to make amendments to bills, if the government is prepared to accept them.
It is argued that the Lords provides an important opportunity for more careful consideration of legislation that has been steamrollered through the Commons, and that it provides high-class debates.
On the latter point it is possible for the public to judge since proceedings in both houses of Parliament are now televised.
It may however, be questioned, whether this role should be performed by a mixture of hereditary and life peers who make up the Lords' membership or, indeed, whether there  is an important role here at all.
Is it not the case, as was pointed out at the time of the French Revolution by the Abbé Sieyes, that if the second chamber agrees with the first it is superfluous and if it disagrees it is mischievous?
The countries that have only one chamber — for example New Zealand, Denmark and Finland are, indeed, quite small, but their twin features of cultural homogeneity and lack of federal structures suggest that the model could be adopted in Britain with little upset.
The United States provides a good example of a bicameral system in which the two chambers are more or less equal.
The Senate is smaller (100 senators, two elected from each of the fifty states), and generally more prestigious.
It has greater power in certain areas than the House of Representatives, for example the Senate can vet all major presidential appointments to the executive and the judiciary and must concur in any treaties negotiated by the President.
The House of Representatives is larger (435 representatives elected on the basis of population).
The most populous state, California, has nearly fifty representatives while the smallest states have only one.
Perhaps the single greatest function of the house concerns money: the house takes the initiative in dealing with the President's requests for appropriations and revenue-raising suggestions and the Senate acts on what the house produces.
The budget still represents one of the major sources of executive-assembly controversy.
Congress tried to reassert some control over the budget process in 1974, specifically to prevent President Nixon from refusing to spend (impounding) money appropriated by Congress.
Ten years later its concern had switched to the massive budget deficits being run up by the Reagan administration.
On taking office in 1980 Reagan promised to eliminate the deficit by 1984, but actually set new record deficits by increasing military spending while refusing to countenance tax increases.
The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act passed in 1985 mandated the federal government to balance the budget by 1991 and allowed for the sequestration of funds if President and Congress failed to reach agreement.
However, by making use of various creative accounting techniques, for example treating expenditure as ‘off-budget’, the Act failed and was replaced in 1990 by the Budget Enforcement Act which formalizes ‘zero-sum’ budgeting until 1995.
During the period, apart from emergencies, any additional funding must come from existing programmes (Collender, 1992, 280–93).
What Do Assemblies Do?
A brief comparison of British and American assemblies demonstrates the importance of the question: who or what do representatives represent and how do they set about it?
In Britain the traditional role of the MP was enunciated by Edmund Burke in the late eighteenth century: it is the duty of the MP, he said, to represent the national interest, not the interest of some section of the community.
In reality, in Britain today MPs represent primarily their party.
The extent of party unity in the Commons is very high and very rarely do any substantial number of MPs stray from the fold.
Of course, in a hung parliament (where no one party has an absolute majority), such as that dissolved in April 1979, even one or two defections can be critical.
In the United States Congress the picture is rather more complex.
The party affiliation of the member is still the best single indicator of how he or she is likely to vote on a given bill, but party unity is very much less than in the British House of Commons.
On a measure which, if applied to the Commons, would produce 100 per cent party unity, the figure for Congress fluctuates normally between 30 and 60 per cent(see table 12.1).
A major factor accounting for this difference is that American parties are much looser organizations than British ones, geared traditionally to winning elections rather than to implementing coherent policy programmes (see chapter 12).
If members of Congress wish to explain why they will not support their party's position on any given policy, they usually do so in terms of the interests of their state or district.
As table 12.1 shows, there has been an increase in party unity in the last ten years in the house, but not in Senate.
The major difference in the way the British and American assemblies operate concerns the role of committees.
To all intents and purposes, congressional committees are Congress.
The fate of any bill, whether initiated by the President or by a member, is effectively decided by the committee to which it is allocated on its introduction to Congress.
Most bills never re-emerge from committee; those that do may be altered beyond recognition, and during floor debate, on those lucky enough to get that far, changes are not usually made that go against the wishes of the relevant committee.
This whole process is carried on within the context  of the legislative norms of expertise and reciprocity.
Individual members gain influence by becoming acknowledged experts in a particular sphere of government and on other issues will tend to accept the cues provided by their colleagues who are experts in that particular policy area.
Recent efforts to increase the general policy expertise among members have resulted in more amending activity during floor debate (Bailey, 1992, p. 132).
In the late 1960s the House of Commons experimented with some special committees modelled very loosely on the American pattern but they did not last long.
Continuing frustration among backbench MPs at their treatment by the executive and the non-accountability of civil servants revived interest in the idea.
In December 1979 a new set of twelve select committees was introduced into the House of Commons, one to cover each major government spending department, and all with a majority of government party members reflecting the position in the house overall, although some of the chairs are opposition MPs.
They have achieved notable publicity in some areas, such as the issues of deaths occurring in police custody and government economic strategy, but there is no possibility that they could achieve a significance equal to that of the United States congressional committees.
British backbenchers may cast envious glances at their American counterparts who both have a greater impact on executive-initiated legislation and conduct more thorough investigations of the bureaucracy, but the problem remains of how to transfer political institutions from one political system to another.
As we can see, the British parliamentary and the American presidential systems work in very different ways.
In contrast to the United States, executive control of the House of Commons via party loyalty has become so thorough that such committees can operate only within a context defined by the executive.
Another, more specific, factor inhibiting the Commons committees concerns staff.
In Congress, in addition to large personal staffs of members, the senior Democratic and Republican members of each committee may hire their own committee staff, and the recruits tend to be bright and ambitious postgraduates, especially lawyers.
In the Commons, by contrast, committee members do not hire and fire committee staff and will not usually have more than one personal staff assistant.
The Supreme Soviet of the USSR was another Soviet institution that was often misleadingly dismissed as a meaningless formality by Western observers.
Such a conclusion was not entirely correct.
The Supreme Soviet was bicameral, consisting of the Council of the Union and the Council of the Nationalities, each consisting of 750 deputies elected for five years.
Two striking differences from British and American assemblies were noticeable: top government officials were not disbarred from being deputies, the deputies were all part-timers who held another full-time job.
The Supreme Soviet usually met for two sessions of a few days each year.
A high proportion of the deputies (over 40 per cent) were ordinary workers, but the membership also included all important party and government figures.
Sessions of the Supreme Soviet and of its standing commissions were dominated by these important figures, a domination reinforced by the fact that the more humble deputies were not usually elected for a second term.
This gave them little time to develop influence where it mattered, but also meant that the Supreme Soviet had a body of deputies holding important jobs who were in a position to be influential (Lane, 1985, pp. 177–81).
Although (until its last days) all votes in both houses of the Supreme Soviet were unanimously in favour of government proposals, both specific and general policy criticisms were made in speeches and it seems certain that these were sometimes seriously considered by party and government in formulating future policy.
While the Supreme Soviet was not sitting, its functions were carried out by the Praesidium, a committee of Supreme Soviet officials and other members.
More interestingly, where involvement in policy-making was concerned, was the activity of the standing commissions of the Supreme Soviet, on which over 70 per cent of the deputies served.
The standing commissions usually met twice a year to examine relevant sections of the Five Year Plan, the budget and any laws pertaining to their area of interest.
Before the formal meetings, preparatory groups examined in detail the matters before the standing commissions.
It is difficult to assess the real impact of these activities on actual policy formulation, but it seems clear that the activities of the preparatory committees at least were thorough and significant, and to some extent taken seriously by the party and government (Lane, 1985, pp. 188–90).
We may conclude that, as with other Soviet institutions, the public side of the old Supreme Soviet was used to display unbroken unity in a way uncharacteristic of Western assemblies.
However, the formality of its public proceedings — merely ratifying decisions taken elsewhere — was in effect analogous to much  activity in the British Parliament which is also usually effectively controlled by the executive.
In the Supreme Soviet standing commissions and their preparatory committees, however, limited serious examination of policies took place.
If there is a point of similarity and comparison between the assemblies of these three countries, it may be in the influence and growing importance of their committee systems.
Dramatic changes occurred under Gorbachev, who was anxious that genuine discussion of public issues should take place in the Soviet Union.
Even before his reforms the old Supreme Soviet had begun to assert itself.
His new parliament took into account the vast size of the Soviet Union.
A Congress of People's Deputies was elected from the whole country, but it contained too many deputies to be an effective parliamentary assembly.
It therefore elected a Supreme Soviet consisting of two smaller chambers from among its members (the Soviet of the Union and the Soviet of the Nationalities).
Deputies were elected both on a constituency basis and as representatives of official bodies like the Academy of Sciences, the trade unions and so on.
Powers were divided between the Congress of People's Deputies and the Supreme Soviet, but it was the Supreme Soviet that met and conducted business for about eight months of the year.
In most respects, it was a real parliament and often gave government ministers, collectively and individually, a hard time (Schneider, 1990, pp. 30–9; Smith, 1992, pp. 132–6).
As time went on, however, it became less assertive in the face of the growing political and economic crisis in the country.
President Gorbachev demanded and got more and more personal power, although he was hardly able to use it effectively.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Congress of People's Deputies and the Supreme Soviet ceased to function, but the newly independent republics have all inherited active parliaments from the Gorbachev period (only Russia — the largest — had a Congress of People's Deputies too).
It is now their individual responsibility to decide the constitutional powers of these assemblies and to see how democratic parliaments may be established in the presidential systems they have adopted.
There is little or no tradition of democratic government in these new states and the influence of Western liberal democratic traditions is not always likely to be great.
In many of them assertive political leaders are trying to enhance their power.
The grave social and political crises that they all face will prove a severe test for their new, untried assemblies.
Conclusion
We need to know who the members of assemblies actually represent and to what extent they are able to investigate and influence executive actions.
These issues will be discussed further in chapters 16 (executive-assembly relations) and 26 and 27 (representation and elections).
Questions for Discussion
1
Discuss the adequacy of assemblies as representative institutions.
How may they be improved?
2
Should assemblies be merely institutions reacting to the initiatives of the executive?
What other roles vis-a-vis the executive can they play?
3
Discuss the practical problems facing assemblies operating in a modern industrialized society.
Executive-Assembly Relations
Introduction
In the day-to-day operation of the political system the relationship between policy-making executive and elected assembly is of central importance.
The two dominant models in discussion of the relationship are the presidential and the parliamentary.
In the first there is a significant degree of independence between the assembly and the executive; basically, neither is able easily (if at all) to remove or dissolve the other.
In the second there is a high degree of mutual dependence between the assembly and the executive, and each is able to dismiss or dissolve the other.
Theoretically, in parliamentary systems the assembly embodies the sovereignty of the people and is therefore the source of authority for the executive.
In practice, the executive frequently comes to dominate the assembly, as in Britain.
The Soviet Union could not be easily categorized as either presidential or parliamentary.
Formally, it was parliamentary and the approval of the Supreme Soviet was needed for all significant laws and appointments.
In reality, the party and government leaders were in no way dependent on the assembly; parliamentary approval was formal and automatic.
The Supreme Soviet could at best exercise only a marginal influence on policy, laws and appointments since it was closely controlled by the executive (see chapter 15).
The successor republics have all adopted presidential-type systems, although the degree of power and authority inhering in the executive president varies from republic to republic and according to prevailing political conditions.
As an example of a presidential system, the American system is often said to embody the separation of powers.
(Subscribers to the ‘cock-up’ theory of history will be interested to learn that the framers of the American constitution were much impressed by Montesquieu's idea that it was the separation of powers in Britain that had enabled the British to maintain their freedom from tyranny.
On the contrary, it was the fusion of executive and legislative power that was at the heart of the eighteenth-century British constitution!)
In fact, the American constitution has been more accurately described as one of ‘separated institutions sharing powers’(Neustadt, 1976, p. 101).
This model reflects more clearly the fact that in the United States no person can be a member of both executive and assembly simultaneously while the executive and assembly share many powers, for example legislation (normally), treaties and many official appointments must be approved by both institutions.
There are, as always, certain complications to this simple dichotomy.
First, that a system is headed by a president does not mean that the system is presidential!
Often a president is simply a head of state with few, if any, powers (like the British monarch) and the system of government is, in fact, parliamentary.
Ireland and Germany are two examples among many of this type.
Second, France under the Fifth Republic, that is since 1958, has an amalgam of the two systems.
Compared to the Fourth Republic (1945–58), which was truly parliamentary, the President in the Fifth Republic has important powers in emergencies, foreign affairs and the appointment of governments, as well as being head of state.
But he must appoint a premier (prime minister) who is acceptable to the assembly and the assembly can, subject to restrictions, remove the government.
Third, in the old Soviet Union arrangements varied.
The position of formal head of state was sometimes, but not always, held by the politically most powerful figure — the Party Secretaries Brezhnev and Gorbachev did in fact hold both posts.
Among his many far-reaching reforms, Gorbachev effected a transfer of power from Communist Party to executive presidency.
Thus in its latter years the Soviet Union was constitutionally a mainstream presidential system.
One of the prime differences between the systems is in the practicalities of succession.
Elections in the United States take place every two years (more frequently if one includes state and local elections) and, as part of the checks and balances built into the process by the constitution, different institutions are elected  for different tenures.
The President is elected for four years, but members of the House of Representatives have to face election every two years, while a senator is elected for six years.
At each two-yearly election one-third of the Senate comes up for re-election.
In parliamentary systems the formal head of state may be a hereditary post (as in monarchies), or chosen by popular election or by a vote of members of the assembly.
Assemblies are usually elected — by popular election for both houses or by popular election for the lower house and restricted election (or appointment) for the upper house.
The British House of Lords is anomalous in that part of its membership is by government appointment and part hereditary.
Electing the executive and assembly for different periods and for different constituencies in a presidential system can have important consequences for the ability of the former to control the latter.
In the United States, because this system is aggravated by a relatively weak party system, there is no guarantee that the President will be of the same party as the majority in Congress.
Indeed, Eisenhower (Republican, 1953–60) for six of his eight years and Nixon (Republican, 1969–74) for all of his years faced Democratic majorities in Congress.
Reagan, elected in 1980, had a Republican-controlled Senate but a Democrat-controlled House of Representatives until 1986 when the Democrats recaptured the Senate.
President Bush (Republican) also had to deal with Democratic Party majorities in Congress.
(However, even a president with a majority of his own party in Congress — for example Clinton — is by no means guaranteed an easy ride.)
While the CPSU dominated Soviet politics it did not have to worry about majorities in the Supreme Soviet.
All deputies were either party members or carefully vetted non-party people.
In the last years of the Soviet Union Gorbachev usually had the clear, if anxious, support of the assembly, but on occasion he still had to use considerable political skill to deflect criticism.
Likewise, the presidents of at least some of the successor republics cannot rely on firm support from their assemblies on all issues.
Since the composition of the government in parliamentary systems is determined by the composition of the legislature, such a situation could not last for long.
If there is a party with an absolute majority in the lower house it will form the government.
Complications arise as soon as there is no clear majority party in the lower house.
In such cases the composition of the government will rest as much on negotiations conducted between the parties  as on the elections per se.
The governments that result, either a minority party governing with the consent of other parties, or a coalition of two or more parties, tend to last for a shorter period than one-party governments but the difference disappears if reshuffles of ministerial posts within single-party governments are taken into account (Blondel, 1990, p. 271).
The Cabinet
The ‘cabinet’ is a term whose meaning differs according to the political system being considered.
It is not used in the Soviet or post-Soviet systems, where the term ‘council’ is more usually employed.
An important indicator of the difference in executive-assembly relations between the American and post-Soviet presidential and the British parliamentary systems is the position of the respective cabinets or councils.
The British Cabinet is chosen by the leader of the majority party subject to constraints imposed by factionalism within the party.
Its members will be drawn mainly from the Commons (the lower elected house), a few will be from the same party in the Lords (the non-elected upper house) and, although they remain in Parliament as MPs or peers, their role is very much as members of the executive, aiming to steer their programme through the assembly with as few complications or delays as possible.
The people chosen will be acknowledged generally as the senior members of the party and there will be few surprises when the Cabinet is announced.
If a coalition government is necessary, Cabinet and lesser government posts will be allocated after negotiation with coalition partners.
The Cabinet in the American system is quite different.
It used to be the case that a successful president would choose some of his Cabinet members from his party's ranks in Congress; this still happens, but relatively infrequently.
Many of his cabinet members will have been nominal party people rather than loyal servants over many years, as would be the case in Britain.
The biggest single difference between the two Cabinets is that the American version is not a collective policy-making body of any significance.
Although most presidents promise, on taking office, that they intend to re-establish the cabinet as a decision-making body, few seriously try.
Carter made greater use of it than most but Reagan went even further.
In 1981 there were thirty-seven meetings of his Cabinet and during the first term the flow of  routine domestic-policy business was routed through seven cabinet committees.
During his second term changes in key advisers, the Iran-Contra scandal and Reagan's growing inattention to his job all contributed to a less coherent administration.
Bush retained similar formal structures, but his greater personal involvement in decisions and preference for informal meetings with advisers resulted in a less structured and sometimes indecisive White House (Campbell, 1992, pp. 93–113).
Heads of United States government departments usually end up playing one of two roles.
They may act as presidential emissaries to the largely autonomous empires of the bureaucracy and try to instil some loyalty to the programme of the President in their department.
Alternatively, their loyalty may be captured by the career staff in their departments so that they become primarily spokespersons for, and defenders of, department policies against encroachments from elsewhere.
Something of this split may also be observed in Britain but to a lesser extent because of the collective responsibility of the Cabinet and party control of the assembly.
Interestingly, something similar seems to have occurred in the Soviet Union after the death of Stalin.
It has been argued that the demise of rule by terror led the leaders of sectional elites to become more assertive and supportive of the interests they represented even against those to whom they owed their appointment (Ross, 1980, pp. 262–3).
Nevertheless, overall, the party Politburo acted in effect as a cabinet — that is as a committee type of government, with the Party Secretary as chairman.
The Party Secretary, like a British prime minister, could have great influence and authority, but in the last resort he was essentially primus inter pares— first among equals — and had to carry his colleagues with him.
Various arrangements were tried when Gorbachev established a presidential system in the late 1980s.
At first he was advised by a Presidential Council, consisting of representatives of the government and community, and a Council of the Federation, representing the major nationalities.
Later, the Presidential Council (which was politically ineffective) was replaced by a Security Council (responsible for internal law and order and external security), while the Federation Council was given enhanced powers to meet the demands of the republics.
In the face of growing crisis, Gorbachev tried to get more and more power transferred to himself in order to rule by decree.
But as the system disintegrated his decrees were increasingly ignored.
The successor republics have systems analogous to the American system, with government  ministers and committees of advisers.
The Russian Federation for a time revived the old tsarist name of ‘State Council’ for the main advisory body to the President (Rahr, 1991, pp. 9–12).
The Power of the Executive
If executive-assembly relations are seen as basically a struggle for influence over the policy-making process, what are the weapons available to each side in the struggle?
The essential condition of executive dominance in the British system is party loyalty.
It is not the case that high degrees of party unity are displayed in the House of Commons because the whips (those members of the government responsible for the passage of government legislation through both houses) mercilessly compel members to betray their consciences and constituencies in the cause of party dogma.
A member is more likely to be in trouble with his constituency if he fails to support his party on all (or most) occasions.
Moreover, members believe that having their party in office, whatever betrayals it may perpetrate on its supporters in the country, is better than having the opposition take over.
From this basic fact arise the other manifestations of executive dominance, for example their control over the agenda of the chamber, membership of committees and the time to be allowed for committee deliberation and floor debate.
The force of party loyalty is not nearly so strong in the American Congress but it does exist (see table 12.1).
The difference boils down to the fact that the Member of Parliament in Britain is expected by all concerned — his leaders, whips and colleagues to owe his primary loyalty to the party.
In the United States that is not so; it is acknowledged that the multitude of pressures (some real, some imagined) that converge on a member from his constituents and from vested interests may make the call of the party electorally disastrous.
Another weapon of considerable strength that resides in the hands of the executive is information because ‘information is power’.
Executives tend to monopolize the information that assemblies need to do their job.
An inevitable by-product of all that the executive branch as a whole does is a vast amount of information, which assemblies need if they are to carry out their roles of law ratification and oversight of the bureaucracy.
A combination of tradition, statute and powerlessness on the part of the assembly  ensures that the control of information in Britain is almost entirely in executive hands.
Apart from anything else, this gives the executive enormous power in determining what is and what is not debatable — and therefore over the limits of the assembly's power.
There has been modest improvement in this situation as a result of the establishment of select committees but secrecy is still a significant feature of the British executive, especially compared to the American.
In 1992 the Prime Minister, John Major, indicated that his government would release more information, but it is still the executive that decides what is and is not released.
Again, in the United States executive dominance is less strong.
There is a constant battle over the question of access to information that is generated primarily by the executive, but the Congress can point to some significant successes in recent years.
These have been mainly the result of executive excesses, for example in the field of intelligence-gathering and the operation of such bodies as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
For many years these agencies operated free of any congressional oversight and, while many members of Congress clearly preferred not to know what they were doing, any attempts that were made to find out were firmly rebuffed.
But the death of J. Edgar Hoover in 1972, the subsequent involvement of the FBI in the Watergate scandal which led to President Nixon's resignation, and the revelation of CIA plots to assassinate foreign  leaders culminated in 1975–6 with unprecedentedly thorough congressional investigations of these institutions.
To date, the only remote equivalent to this in Britain has been the inquiry carried out by the House of Commons Select Committee on Home Affairs into police special branches in 1984–5.
However, the committee, which eventually divided on party lines, defined its terms of reference at the outset so narrowly that it effectively ruled out any possibility of discovering the truth or otherwise of the allegations of malpractice that had been made against the police.
In general, the Commons has had less success than the Congress in either developing its own sources of information or in forcing information out of the executive.
In the Soviet Union executive power was virtually supreme until Gorbachev came into office.
The confusion of constitutional change amid economic and social crisis left the executive and assembly struggling to establish their range of control and influence  vis-a-vis each other.
In the first flush of glasnost much information was made available and deputies often asserted themselves aggressively.
As time went on, however, the executive began to gain more control over the situation.
This came about partly because of the executive's inherent advantages, as outlined above, and partly because tradition and crisis seemed to point to the need for a strong executive.
Similar struggles have gone on in many of the successor republics (some are still firmly authoritarian) and the nature of the executive-assembly relations that will finally be established is uncertain.
The Power of the Assembly
These main weapons that an assembly may have against the executive are: involvement in appointment or recall of personnel, investigation and approval of policy proposals by the executive (especially of the government's taxing and spending proposals), and rights of investigation and oversight of executive and government activity.
Theoretically, the British Parliament freely approves the Cabinet chosen by the Prime Minister, but in practice support is maintained by party discipline and loyalty.
Again, constitutional theory maintains that ministers are both collectively and individually responsible to Parliament for their actions.
It is now over thirty years since an individual minister was forced by the House of Commons to resign.
More commonly, the minister under attack is shielded by collective responsibility and the decision as to whether he or she goes or stays is one for the Prime Minister, based on the criteria of the extent to which he or she has become a liability to the government.
The United States Congress retains more power over executive personnel.
Those nominated by the President to high executive and judicial office must be accepted by the Senate.
As a general rule, the belief that a president is entitled to pick his own team overrides criticisms of the nominee, but presidential choices are subject to more scrutiny by the legislature than are British prime-ministerial ones.
Similarly, in the Soviet Union assembly approval for presidential appointments was required under Gorbachev's presidential system and is still required in some of the successor republics.
As in the United States, although criticism of proposed appointments may sometimes be vigorously expressed, presidents usually get the appointees they want.
As we have seen, in the case of both policies and budgets, the initiative has passed to the executive.
In terms of the disposition of the executive's programmes, however, the Congress retains great influence over whether a president gets the legislation he is after and in what form it will become law.
In the post-Soviet republics strong figures like Boris Yeltsin in Russia have a firm hold on the assembly but not one that is unchallenged.
Often, conservative ex-communists, impatient radicals or politicians seeking to capitalize on popular discontent can give presidents a hard ride.
Examples of resignations of prime ministers have occurred (for example in Lithuania and Estonia) when their policy proposals have been rejected by majorities in their assemblies.
Until 1974 the British House of Commons had virtually given up all but the slightest influence in the disposition of executive proposals.
The only amendments to government proposals that would pass in the house could be those that the government could be persuaded to accept: nothing would be passed against their will.
Between 1974 and 1979, however, backbench power enjoyed something of a resurgence.
With the Labour government unable to control a majority of seats in the Commons, it was occasionally vulnerable to policy defeats on the occasions when the other parties were able to unite or when its own backbenchers staged guerilla attacks.
Even under the firmly established Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, backbenchers showed a degree of independence that would have seemed remarkable thirty years earlier.
Some argue that a large government majority (such as Thatcher's government had) can also encourage backbenchers to assert themselves, confident that they will not be endangering the government by doing so.
As assemblies have in general diminished in influence and executives have asserted more control, it has been argued by some that assemblies must change their role and become much more concerned with overseeing the work of the ever-growing bureaucracy.
The committee system, the greater resources of staff and money available to members, and the relatively weak calls of party loyalty have combined to suggest that this role can most successfully be performed by the United States Congress.
Indeed, one can point to notable successes such as the investigations of the intelligence agencies (see above), but the sheer size of the federal bureaucracy means that oversight can at best be random and episodic.
Still, that is more than is managed by the House of Commons in Britain.
The twelve select committees established by the Commons in December 1979 seem to have attracted enough  criticism from the executive to suggest that they have been asking some pertinent questions, but their overall impact on policy has so far been slight.
However, pressure for more effective investigatory powers by the committees of the Commons and Lords continue.
The former Soviet republics are still trying to sort out the relative powers of executive and assembly.
Conclusion
In the twentieth century there has been a steady drift of power from assemblies to executives in Western liberal democracies, and this is as true of Britain as of the United States, although to different extents.
There are many reasons for this, two important ones being the generally greater degree of government intervention in society and the increased predominance of foreign and military affairs in a century that has seen two world wars and the development of nuclear weapons.
As a result, much of the work of contemporary assemblies should be viewed in the context of institutions struggling to adapt to massively changed social and world conditions and to impose some check upon the burgeoning executive bureaucracies.
However, it would be wrong to view assemblies as no more than talking-shops.
The United States Congress, in particular, may exercise very real political power if only because, were its formal weapons against the executive to be blunted there would be the important so-called ‘law of anticipated reactions’ to consider.
This means simply that there are actions that the executive will not take because it knows that the assembly will make a huge fuss.
This is clearly one of those exercises of power that take place very subtly, but it is no less real for that.
Of course, a critical factor in this ‘law’ becoming a real check on executives is the extent to which they can operate in secrecy.
It is far easier for the British than for the American executive to do this.
Under the old Soviet system executive power was as strong as it is ever likely to be.
The new presidential system established by Gorbachev was never able to consolidate its authority and relationships with the assembly effectively.
There was too little time and too great a crisis.
Attempts to establish such relations firmly in the successor republics are still going on, but the crisis inherent in contemporary political conditions is likely to result in strong executives.
Thus an important question in analysing executive-assembly  relations is: does the assembly have the ability and/or the political will to oversee the executive branch effectively?
This in turn raises subsidiary questions such as the recruitment and length of tenure of members of the executive and the assembly, their formal and informal sources of power with respect to each other, and wider issues such as political traditions, especially those of the party system.
In an essentially two-party system like the British one, for example, the main opposition party contending for office may not wish to fight too hard to curtail the power of an executive they may soon have control of themselves.
In weak party systems politicians may have to give considerable weight to popular opinion and pressures from vested interest.
Perhaps the fundamental question is: can assemblies in contemporary politics convincingly fulfil their traditional role of representing the people?
Questions for Discussion
1
Is the control of information the key to executive power?
2
Discuss the pros and cons of separation rather than fusion of powers in the policy-making process.
3
What can the ex-Soviet republics learn from Western liberal democracies as they try to establish effective executive-assembly relations?
Bureaucracies
Introduction
As we have seen, the formal liberal democratic theory of bureaucracies was that officials (sometimes called bureaucrats or civil servants) simply implement the policies that their political masters — the representatives of the people — present to them in the form of laws and regulations.
This view of bureaucracy is based primarily on a model of nineteenth-century developments, one important aspect of which was the growing scandal over the inefficiencies of administration.
The situation in many systems was typified by the American slogan ‘To the victor the spoils’.
In other words, the party in power was expected to reward its supporters with paid government positions, many of which were relatively undemanding.
Reformers came to believe that many of the problems of government could be solved by the application to public administration of management techniques being developed in the private sector by large firms.
In addition, they were convinced that if only administration could be removed from the hands of often corrupt politicians and given a semi-autonomous status, social improvements could be made.
The notion of bureaucracy as a neutral technical instrument with which industrialized nations must be administered received its clearest statement by Max Weber, the German political sociologist.
Weber's name tends to be most commonly associated with the ‘ideal type’ bureaucracy which is neutral, hierarchically organized, efficient and inevitable in contemporary society.
In fact, Weber argued that bureaucracies were seldom so in practice.
Bureaucracies do not simply enter the policy-making process at the stage of implementation.
The policy process is dynamic, with inputs, conversion, outputs and feedback forming a continuous chain.
Bureaucracies are involved to some extent in the input and conversion processes as they are in the output phase.
The bureaucracy, at least at its lower levels, is the part of the government that comes into most frequent contact with the public and thus receives feedback — positive and negative — on the policies being pursued by government.
In the nature of things, much of this feedback will go no further than the local office, but senior bureaucrats are much involved in the preparation of new policies for politicians and it would be strange indeed if such feedback never featured in new recommendations.
Relatively ignorant, inexperienced and amateur politicians may find themselves at the mercy of the bureaucracies, which possess knowledge, experience and technical expertise.
Frequently, all that they will have to guide them through the recommendations of officials will be their own political common sense; this may well be adequate for a strong minister, but others may find it hard to change the bureaucracy's course.
Even in the implementation of policy the bureaucracy maintains its own preferences and there are infinite opportunities at this stage for manipulation.
Indeed, it would be wrong to distinguish too sharply between policy formulation and policy implementation.
The implementation of any policy requires the official to exercise discretion — even if it were possible to prepare a rule-book catering for every eventuality it would probably be undesirable — and on each of these occasions he or she is ‘making’ policy.
Nor is this unimportant compared to the ‘major’ policy decisions made by the Cabinet or an assembly.
‘What people get from government is what administrators do about their problems rather than the promise of statutes, constitutions or oratory’(Edelman, 1964, p. 193).
The Responsiveness of Bureaucracy
One way of examining bureaucracies is to ask the question: to whom are they responsive?
Liberal democratic theory would answer that, of course, the bureaucracy should be responsive to the elected politicians and, through them, to the people.
However, it is important to examine the realities more closely.
The first possibility is that the bureaucracy is responsive primarily to  itself — that is to its own interests and priorities.
Certainly this is likely to be the case in all bureaucracies to some extent.
If there is any iron law of bureaucracy it must be that such organizations will not willingly do anything that may be against the organization's perceived long-term interests and that, on occasions, this will lead the organization to ignore its nominal masters.
But, apart from the basic concern of the bureaucracy for its own interests as an organization, it is also likely to develop specific policy interests of its own.
As the administration of industrialized societies becomes more complex and the number of technicians required increases, bureaucracy is bound to develop very sophisticated views on how things must be done, and indeed, what, if anything, should be done.
Furthermore, there is the possibility that a bureaucracy will be more responsive to the needs of a particular social or economic class than to those of the government.
According to the Marxist view of bureaucracy, this is indeed the case in capitalist systems.
If the state is perceived as an instrument of class rule, so are the ‘servants of the state’.
But it is not only Marxists who argue that bureaucracies may owe their primary allegiance to a particular class.
Weber's criticism of the Prussian bureaucracy, for example, was that it acted as an instrument for the preservation of the dominance of the Junker, or aristocratic, class (Beetham, 1974, p. 66).
This may become an especially acute problem for a newly installed revolutionary regime, for example the Soviet Union.
Five years after the revolution Lenin complained that the Communist Party had good political control only over the top echelons of the vast bureaucracy: ‘Down below, however, there are hundreds of thousands of old officials who came to us from the Tsar and from bourgeois society and who, sometimes consciously and sometimes unconsciously, work against us’(quoted in Merkl, 1977, pp. 166–7).
This was clearly another example of prior loyalty to a class, but problems of loyalty may also afflict systems in which the change is between party governments, not regimes.
When Nixon was forced to resign from the American presidency in 1974, his administration was embarked on an attempt to improve the responsiveness of the American bureaucracy which, while not illegal, led to cries of outrage from his liberal enemies.
The greatest periods of peacetime growth in the American bureaucracy were the New Deal in the 1930s and the Great Society programme of the 1960s.
They were both periods when  the presidency was in the hands of the Democrats and the programmes necessitating large growth in the bureaucracy were social-welfare policies of the type embraced by liberals.
Therefore, the sort of person attracted to work in the bureaucracy on the implementation of such programmes was likely to be sympathetic to them and their commitment to the programmes was likely to grow rather than diminish with time.
Nixon entered the White House in 1969 committed to budgetary restraint and reducing spending on welfare programmes.
While all presidents have testified to the difficulty of shifting the course of the bureaucracy, the task was made even more difficult for Nixon by the direct clash between the political philosophy of his administration and that prevailing in the bureaucracy, particularly the social-services agencies.
Throughout his first term in office there was a series of battles between his political appointees and career bureaucrats.
At the beginning of his second term he started to deal with the problem by introducing people loyal to the administration at strategic levels throughout the departments.
What enraged the liberals was that this involved placing political appointees at much lower levels of the hierarchies than had been usual, to increase the positive responsiveness of the bureaucracy to his policies.
Similar complaints about party bias have been heard in Britain, especially from Labour ministers, for example Richard Crossman (1975–7).
Such actions are harder to prove in Britain, partly because of the notorious secrecy maintained by the Civil Service, but civil servants are certainly not political eunuchs, whatever the impression they may like to encourage.
One aspect of the argument concerns the process of recruitment to the top policy-making positions within the Civil Service.
Criticism of the recruitment policies of the Civil Service, institutionalized in the division of the Civil Service into different grades, each with its own entry requirements, came to a head in the Report of the Fulton Committee in 1969.
It strongly condemned, among other things, the narrowness of the social and educational background of those recruited, and the neglect of qualified specialists as opposed to generalist administrators educated in the humanities.
In spite of official acceptance of the suggested reforms by both government and the Civil Service, various examinations into the implementation of the proposals suggest that they have had very little real effect.
This is due not so much to positive resistance on the part of the incumbent civil servants, as to their preconceptions of what makes a suitable candidate for the higher Civil Service.
It is  to be expected that the criteria by which those in authority decide between the various candidates will be those that they see and most approve of in themselves.
In this way the self-perpetuating mechanisms work in order to supply ‘suitable’ occupants of Civil Service posts, that is similar in outlook and qualities to the existing incumbents.
Attempts to attract candidates without this bias are very difficult to make successfully, especially as much of the self-selection process will have taken place by social conditioning in homes, schools and colleges, long before the Civil Service Commission enters into the reckoning.
The second aspect of the argument concerns the attitude taken by senior civil servants to the policy-making process.
Whether individual civil servants have party preferences is not the crucial issue, as Tony Benn observes: ‘The issue is not their personal political views nor their preferences for particular government.
The problem arises from the fact that the Civil Service sees itself as being above the party battle, with a political position of its own to defend’(Benn, 1980, p. 9).
The Civil Service view is that what is best for the country is a continuation of the centrist and consensual policies that have been developed and sold to party politicians over many years.
Responsibility for the replacement of parliamentary rule by bureaucratic dominance, Benn argues further, must be shared by the successive prime ministers; they encouraged it in order to maximize their personal power within their administrations.
He also criticizes other ministers and Parliament in general who failed to speak out against these developments.
Needless to say, his views are not shared by all observers of the policy-making process and, given the strong tradition of secrecy in Britain, obtaining evidence one way or the other is difficult.
The ability of Margaret Thatcher's government to carry through the radical departure from ‘consensus’ economic policies in the 1980s was not inhibited by civil service power, although there were titanic struggles and some officials were replaced by others more sympathetic to the government's policies.
In both the United States and Great Britain during this time the New Right provided its own answer to the problem of bureaucratic responsiveness, or lack of it — the market.
Processes of hiving-off, privatization and contracting out are all based on the belief that ‘public’ services will be provided more efficiently if those providing them have control of their own budgets and compete for contracts.
Actual organizational changes along these lines went further under  Thatcher in Great Britain than they did under Reagan in the United States, but both constituted a significant attack on the status of public bureaucracies.
If the position regarding bureaucratic independence versus party control is uncertain in Britain, it was less so in the Soviet Union.
No secret was made of the fact that the government bureaucracy was guided in everything it did by the CPSU bureaucracy, the Secretariat: ‘The CPSU, and particularly its full time staff, monopolizes the processes of generating and controlling political power in the USSR, transmitting its binding decisions to elites in state and public organizations through its territorial party committees and primary organizations’(Barghoorn and Remington, 1986, p. 305).
Bodies with an ostensibly overseeing role, like the People's Control Commissions, were half-hearted in operation and often effectively controlled by the people they were supposed to be investigating.
As Barghoorn and Remington go on to point out, however, this did not mean that the government bureaucrats could not influence decisions and occasionally obstruct their implementation.
There was bound to be some tension between the governmental bureaucracy and that of the CPSU.
The period of perestroika under Gorbachev revealed widespread criticism of the lack of control and supervision over the party and government bureaucracies, together with resentment at their ostentatious privileges.
Boris Yeltsin built his early popular reputation on his castigating of bureaucratic privilege while he was secretary of the Communist Party in Moscow (Jozsa, 1990, pp. 23–9).
Whatever system we are discussing, it is neither necessary nor helpful to subscribe to conspiracy theories of the behind-the-scenes influence exercised by civil servants.
It is more important to study the structural relationships maintained by bureaucrats, and the potential power coming to them from their control over much of the information required for the administration of a modern state.
How, with respect to what, and for and against whom they use that power are what we should be investigating.
One important structural relationship is that between bureaucracies and groups that represent particular interests.
This essentially symbiotic relationship has already been discussed in chapter 13.
But what of the responsiveness of bureaucracies to people in general?
In the Soviet Union criticism of the bureaucracy was voiced primarily through letters to the press, especially to Pravda, then the newspaper of the CPSU.
It is difficult to assess how effective such channels were, but the publicizing of grievances  can be enough to lead to some bureaucratic adjustments.
Clearly, such adjustments were likely to be restricted to relatively low levels of the bureaucracy because of the greater centralization of control at the upper echelons, but this probably applies to other systems as well.
In Britain, while the ability of an MP to gain access to the bureaucracy and publicity for a cause may amount to some protection for the public, it is hardly adequate, given the size of the bureaucracy and the number of MPs.
Partly to overcome such problems, the office of ombudsman (Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration) was instituted in the 1960s.
Similar offices were established for other bodies, such as the National Health Service.
While the ombudsman has revealed the occasional bureaucratic horror story, he or she lacks some of the powers of his or her opposite number in other systems.
Perhaps the greatest restrictions are that he or she can act only on the request of an MP and the only weapon available is to publicize the misdeeds.
The ombudsman has no power to order compensation for example.
Essentially, the prospects for court action against the administration in Britain are limited to allegations of actions taken that are ultra vires, that is beyond the powers delegated to the institution by Parliament, or where a minister acts ‘unreasonably’.
In the United States a number of factors have combined to render the bureaucracy more open to public scrutiny.
First, the Freedom of Information Acts give an individual a right to information possessed by the government about him or her and the government may have to justify non-disclosure in court.
This is in sharp contrast to Britain's Official Secrets Act, and the one-sided relationship between citizen and bureaucrat in the Soviet Union.
Second, having obtained the information, the American citizen has greater possibilities for action, inasmuch as the existence of the constitution and the Bill of Rights enables government action to be tested in the courts against that standard (see chapter 18).
By such methods, considerable progress has been made in certain respects by women's, environmental and minority groups.
Conclusion
As we have seen, Max Weber himself appreciated the large gulf existing between the ideal position of permanent bureaucratic officials and their real position vis-a-vis party politicians.
Clearly, modern officials in the higher echelons of bureaucracy are involved in all stages of the policy-making process rather than just that of implementation.
But even if they were involved only with implementation, they would still be extremely powerful because of the importance of administration in determining exactly what people get from government.
It has been suggested that most of the major problems in the analysis of modern bureaucracies  concern the degree of responsiveness they display in adjusting their behaviour to the wants of the public they are supposed to serve.
First, there is the possibility that restrictive recruitment policies provide the context for the development over time of a separate bureaucratic ‘view’.
This may consist either of views as to the proper policy-making procedures — the way things are to be done — or of particular sets of policies that are perceived to be in the best interests of the nation.
Second, there is the possibility  (which, according to the Marxist model of capitalist liberal democracies, will become a certainty) that the bureaucracy will be responsive primarily to the interests of a particular class in society.
The third possibility, and one more in tune with an elitist model of the process, is that bureaucrats will see their accountability as being primarily towards the organized interests in society that succeed by one means or another in obtaining regular access to the policy-making process.
Lastly, there is the question of the extent to which the bureaucracy is responsive to citizens in general.
Acceptance of any of the patterns of responsiveness outlined above will suggest that the bureaucracy is not likely to be particularly responsive to a largely unorganized ‘general public’ and, in most contemporary forms of democracy much will depend on the ability of the people's representatives to publicize their grievances.
Whether citizens' charters on the model of those introduced in Great Britain from 1991 onwards amount to more than a symbolic empowerment of consumer-citizens remains to be seen.
The ability of any group to hold decision-makers accountable must depend on their access to information as to what and how decisions are being made.
While information is not exactly power itself, it is always a condition of the exercise of power.
Certainly, it is important to study bureaucracies as institutions in their own right, even if we would not go as far as the poet Alexander Pope who wrote:
For forms of government let fools contest;
Whate'er is best administer'd is best.
Questions for Discussion
1
Is it fair to argue, as Edelman (1964) does, that what administrators do is more important than other aspects of the policy process?
2
What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of placing a substantial number of political appointees at the head of each department when a new government assumes power?
3
What are likely to be the most effective methods by which bureaucracies can be made democratically responsible?
Law, Courts and Judges
Introduction
In this chapter we propose to consider the political relevance of the law, the courts and the judges within the context of the making and implementation of policy in the political process.
It is important to do this explicitly since there were, at one time, frequent assertions to the effect that the law is quite distinct from or, indeed, above politics.
While not wishing to deny that there are differences in the ways executives, bureaucracies and assemblies operate compared with law courts, we suggest that the politics of any system cannot be understood without some awareness of the crucial part played by law in its operations.
At the outset, let us distinguish the different types of disputes, dealt with by the courts that have greater or lesser political relevance.
First, there are disputes between private individuals or organizations.
The rights and duties of individuals towards each other are together known as private law which in Anglo-Saxon countries, such as Britain and the United States, tends to derive from custom as incorporated by judges through time in what is known in Britain as the common law.
Nowadays such law is increasingly replaced or augmented by statutes (parliament-made laws).
Second, there are disputes between the individual and the state.
Some of the law will also originate in customs but is more likely to be statutory.
The main manifestation of this is, of course, the criminal law in which the state (since Norman times in Britain) takes the initiative in enforcing certain standards of behaviour on the people.
Also in this category is the area of administrative law  that deals with the mass of relationships involved in the administration of the interventionist state.
Generally, the area concerned with administration is known as public or administrative law.
A third type of dispute that is likely to be of particular interest to students of politics is that between separate branches of government.
This is part of public law but tends to go under the name of constitutional law.
How are these disputes settled?
In essence, they are settled by the application of legal principles and rules to the particular facts of the case as it is presented to the judge (and, in some cases, a jury).
Legal principles tend to reflect the basic values that the legal system is committed to uphold.
In most countries these are enshrined in a written constitution, as in the United States and the Soviet Union, and now its successor republics, while in Britain, unusually, they are not; rather, they are found in a variety of sources — custom, statutes and conventions.
In addition, other legal principles are laid down by the decisions of judges over time, or proclaimed in legislation.
In the Soviet Union there was a code of legal principles in line with the European (Napoleonic) codes, augmented and supplemented by laws and decrees (of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet) and decrees (of the Council of Ministers); the new republics have adopted similar systems.
However, even when legal principles are committed to one constitutional document, set out in legal codes or reiterated by judges over time, they tend to remain highly ambiguous and not worth the paper they are printed on until somebody — the judiciary — interprets and defers to them in their judgments, and somebody else — the executive — enforces those judgments.
Legal rules are the more detailed regulations applicable in practice, and derive from a variety of sources.
In Britain parliamentary statutes and the subsequent mass of secondary legislation called statutory instruments (or the equivalent in the United States) are the main source of rules today.
In the Soviet Union the party and government bureaucracies issued a mass of rules and regulations — so many, in fact, that sometimes ways had to be found to circumvent them so that the system would not grind to a halt.
The process by which legal principles are established is pre-eminently political.
The particular set of values that comes to be enshrined in a constitution or code reflects the preferences of the groups in power at the time of their drawing up.
This can be seen most clearly in a comparison of the attitudes towards private property enshrined in the United States constitution  with those in the constitution of the old Soviet Union.
The Fifth Amendment to the United States constitution provides a clear echo of the words of John Locke quoted above: ‘No person shall be…deprived of life, liberty or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.’
On the other hand, Article 10 of the 1977 Soviet constitution stated: ‘The foundation of the economic system of the USSR is socialist ownership of the means of the production in the form of state property (belonging to all the people) and collective farm and cooperative property.’
The clash in underlying values between Britain and the United States on the one hand and the former Soviet Union on the other, is illustrated by the fact that an act of financial speculation — which has not only led to the accumulation of great wealth but has also occasionally received public honour in Britain and the United States — might have earned the perpetrator the death sentence in the Soviet Union.
But, of course, writing something into a constitution does not necessarily mean that it will be honoured in practice.
For example, Article 25 of the Soviet constitution not only guaranteed citizens freedom of speech, press, assembly and demonstration, but also stated that printing-presses, paper, buildings, streets and communications facilities would be put at the disposal of the people for the exercise of these rights.
Whether control of these facilities by the CPSU fulfilled this requirement is debatable, but before we jump to the conclusion that we could not have expected anything else from the Soviet system, consider the chequered history of the First Amendment to the United States constitution, which reads inter alia: ‘congress shall make no law…abridging the freedom of speech.’
Now that sounds fairly unambiguous, but in 1940 Congress passed the Smith Act which, at a time of fear of subversion, made it an offence ‘to advocate the overthrow of the United States Government’.
After the Second World War, as the Cold War was approaching its height, Eugene Dennis, a member of the American Communist Party, was indicted and convicted under the Smith Act.
His appeal to the Supreme Court that the Smith Act was unconstitutional because of the First Amendment was rejected.
The court was quite prepared to introduce its own qualifications to the First Amendment.
The lack of a single authoritative constitutional document means that it is relatively difficult to point to breaches of the constitution by British governments, although it is by no means impossible, as  we shall see below in cases involving national security.
But, of course, executive control of Parliament and Parliament's supremacy over the courts mean that the constitution may become simply what Her Majesty's Government says it is.
There will be great political problems for any government tampering with the more fundamental principles or institutions of the constitution, but the extent of such tampering will depend entirely on the political condition of the time.
However, political issues of a constitutional character — like joining the European Community, devolving power to a Scottish assembly and reform of the voting system — are usually given extended consideration (and possibly even a referendum) in recognition of their special nature (Norton, 1991, pp. 475–98).
The Dennis case in the United States provides us with a hint as to how departures from constitutional principle may be explained.
In the first and last resort, the law, and therefore all courts and judges, are committed to upholding the prevailing social, economic and political order and they will not countenance activities that threaten that order.
This applies equally to the United States, Britain and the old Soviet Union and its successor republics.
However, within the context of their common aim of legitimating and preserving the political system, there are significant differences between these systems.
In the Soviet Union the gulf between constitutional principle and political practice was explained by the central role of the CPSU.
This central role was not made explicit in the 1936 constitution but is in Article 6 of that promulgated in 1977: ‘the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is the leading and guiding force of Soviet society and the nucleus of its political system, of all state and public organizations’(our emphasis).
Thus the courts were clearly subservient to the commands of the Communist Party, although it should be noted that the degree of independence available to the courts has varied over time: in the 1930s it was minimal, but after 1956 it became greater.
Nevertheless, the idea of judicial independence in the sense of politicians not directly interfering with the activities of the courts was not a principle upheld in the Soviet Union.
In the West the principle of the priority of the individual is emphasized.
In the Soviet Union the emphasis on ‘socialist legality’ meant that the interests of particular individuals had to give way to the interests of society as a whole as interpreted by the party and government.
Still, it should be pointed out that the average Soviet citizen's contact with the courts was likely to be as unpolitical as  that of his or her Western counterpart, and he or she was no more likely to be dealt with unjustly in the run-of-the-mill case (Lane, 1985, pp. 192–7).
In the United States the courts exercise a good deal of influence quite independently of the other branches of government.
At certain times the Supreme Court, in deciding the constitutionality of cases brought before it, has pursued policies directly at odds with those of the President and the Congress.
Between 1934 and 1937 it invalidated a string of measures initiated by President Roosevelt and passed by Congress to attempt to deal with the economic depression, while between 1954 and 1963 it made a series of decisions regarding the rights of blacks far in advance of anything that could obtain strong presidential and congressional support.
It is at such times that the independence of the Supreme Court is at its greatest, but they are rather untypical.
More often, the court is in step with the other branches and, in emergencies such as war, will quite explicitly defer to them, particularly to the executive.
On a scale of judicial independence the British courts would be somewhere between those of the United States and the former Soviet Union, but rather closer to the former than the latter.
The highest court in Britain is the House of Lords, but when they sit as a court the Lords consist only of a panel of members who have long judicial experience and who have been appointed as Law Lords.
Parliamentary supremacy means that in Britain the courts cannot invalidate legislation (except when it conflicts with European Community legislation, when EC law prevails).
In the United States the obvious involvement in the political process of the Supreme Court is due to the court having laid claim early in the nineteenth century to the power of judicial review, that is the right to review the constitutionality of executive and legislative acts.
The House of Lords has no such power.
However, the British courts are not even now totally subservient to the executive and Parliament.
As we have seen elsewhere, the wording of statutes tends to be general and is therefore frequently ambiguous; thus when a case revolves around what a statute actually says, judges have a good deal of discretion which they will exercise according to their view of what the law requires.
There are rules of interpretation which judges are said to follow and which prevent arbitrariness in the process, but in fact there are so many conflicting rules that judges are effectively free to choose which to follow.
Growth in the interventionism of British  judges has been noted since the 1960s and is now encapsulated in specific procedures for judicial review.
However, this is only on procedural grounds and not, as in the United States, on the merits of the decision, that is on whether it conforms to the judicial view of what the constitution requires.
Thus in Britain the grounds for review are summarized as illegality, irrationality or procedural impropriety by the public agency being challenged.
In practice, the difference between procedure and substance can be very narrow; for example, in Bromley v. Greater London Council (1981) the House of Lords decided that the council's ‘Fares fair’ policy for public transport was in breach of its ‘fiduciary duty’to ratepayers and London Transport's duty to run its operations on ordinary business principles.
This decision depended on highly loaded definitions of contested terms such as‘economic’ and appeared to substitute judicial for electoral decisions as to the proper balance between the interests of ratepayers and public-transport users (Griffith, 1991, pp. 128–36).
‘The independence of the judiciary’ is a much used phrase in the United States and Britain, but there are strict limits on this independence.
In matters of ‘national security’— a phrase that can cover a multitude of sins — the judiciary in Britain is very reluctant to question executive action.
In a number of cases since the 1960s, which have involved a variety of circumstances (demonstrations, deportations and publications), judges in the United Kingdom have refused to accept that ‘national security’ can mean anything other than what the government of the day says it means.
Such judicial deference to the executive can be contrasted to the recent grilling on the subject experienced by Sir Robert Armstrong, head of the British Civil Service, in an Australian courtroom at the end of 1986 during the Spycatcher trial over the alleged revelation of state secrets.
Judicial Recruitment
Generally speaking, there are two main patterns of judicial recruitment — the European and the Anglo-Saxon.
In the former, becoming a judge is a matter of electing one career path over another; having trained as a lawyer, one may select the path of the judge or that of the advocate.
This is also the pattern in the republics of the former Soviet Union.
In Britain and the United States judges are selected from lawyers, usually only after many  years in practice, in Britain as an advocate, and in the United States as an advocate or in a legal post within the government.
There are several modes of appointment.
In the United States state judges (that is judges sitting in state courts and administering, in the main, state laws) may be recruited via election or appointment by the Governor.
In recent years an increasing number of states have been attempting to remove the appointment of the judges from the partisan political process and to ensure minimum standards of efficiency and ability on the part of judges.
Their success has, on the whole, been variable to date.
The federal judiciary in the United States is nominated by the President and appointed with the consent of the Senate.
Presidents usually nominate persons of the same political party as themselves, but at the lower levels of the federal judiciary a critical factor in the President's choice is the views of the senators of the state in which the appointee is to serve.
The President is most concerned with nominations to fill vacancies on the Supreme Court, since it is the Supreme Court's decisions that are most likely to affect the policies of his administration.
Therefore, he is likely to nominate those whose views seem most in line with his own, although there is no way a president can guarantee the direction of a justice's decision and it is estimated that the President's choices have backfired in a quarter of appointments.
The Senate's discussion of the nomination frequently depends as much on wider political concerns as on the suitability of the nominee himself or herself.
Generally, senators assume that the President has the right to make the nominations and they will block them only if they feel that the nominees are particularly weak and the President needs teaching a lesson.
This occurred when two successive nominations by President Reagan failed in 1987: the first was rejected by the Senate for his extremely conservative views, the second withdrew his nomination when he admitted to having smoked ‘pot’ years earlier.
Partisan nomination of senior judges used to be the rule in Britain but has not really been so since the 1920s.
Technically, appointments are made by the Prime Minister but, in practice, they are recommended by the Lord Chancellor after discussions with the senior judiciary.
The Lord Chancellor's position is significant.
He is head of the judiciary, but he is also a politician and a member of the Cabinet.
There are other law officers who are politicians and members of the government, all of whom are expected to act impartially in their legal functions, but there is  obviously scope for ambiguity and interpretation here.
But if direct partisan considerations are largely absent from the process, wider concerns of suitability are not.
For example, in 1975 a man was appointed to the High Court at the relatively late age of 62.
It was suggested that one of the reasons for this was that his main work as an advocate had been on behalf of trade unions, and on one occasion he had walked out of the National Industrial Relations Court in protest at the judge.
Such behaviour would not normally be a recommendation to the High Court bench, but it was less of a problem for the Labour Lord Chancellor who appointed him in 1975.
At the lower levels of the British judicial system are the magistrates' courts which deal with the overwhelming majority of criminal cases.
Magistrates are not trained lawyers, although they do have available the advice of legally trained clerks, and are appointed with a specific political criterion in mind.
Specially, appointment to the bench should achieve some overall balance as between the nominees of the main political parties in the area.
Some of the main urban areas also have stipendiary (professional, paid) magistrates.
What senior British and American judges have in common is their high social status.
In both systems the vast majority of professional judges come from upper-class and upper-middle-class backgrounds; the United States Supreme Court has one black member and one woman; the British Law Lords in the House of Lords have had neither.
At lower levels in Britain and the United States, however, a few women can now be found.
The elite educational background of the British judiciary is often cited as a major factor in their apparent ignorance of affairs in the world outside the courtroom.
About three-quarters of the judges are educated at public schools and Oxford or Cambridge, but there are also other factors that reinforce their exclusiveness: their socialization into the legal life via their training as barristers (that is those entitled to appear in the higher courts) and the need to demonstrate professional competence in order to ‘take silk’, that is become a Queen's Counsel and thus gain themselves a place among the elite of barristers from whom judges are chosen.
This is further compounded by the peculiarities of the judges' work situation: they live almost exclusively among other judges and senior barristers and, as one new judge put it, ‘you have to watch your invitations’(Sunday Times, 5 October 1975).
The important question at this stage is, of course, how this affects their decision-making.
Judicial Decision-Making
It has traditionally been argued, particularly by judges, that they do not make decisions, but, instead, they simply apply the known law to new facts or declare what the law is in cases of uncertainty.
Such an argument bears little examination, however, when one considers the role, particularly, of appeal courts.
That the view of the judge's role as declaratory is inadequate can be seen if one considers that the reason many cases come to court (which are only a minority of the cases that are actually started) is because there is genuine doubt as to what the law is.
This may be because the facts of the dispute are unique or that statutes and previous decisions are capable of more than one interpretation as to their meaning; Some of the words that pepper these documents, for example‘reasonable’, are inherently ambiguous and judges must decide between the competitive interpretations of what the law is as argued by lawyers.
Social scientists proceed differently from lawyers in explaining why particular decisions are made.
Lawyers rely primarily on close analysis of the wording contained within the judgment to seek out the ratio decidendi (reason for deciding).
We would argue that this does not give a clear explanation of the decision because the judgment is an after-the-event rationalization of the decision and does not necessarily give the real reasons for it.
A judge or judges may reach a decision for a variety of reasons but the judgment must be presented in a form that is acceptable to the legal profession and thus it is cast in the form of a discussion of previous similar cases and relevant statutes.
Part of the problem we have in the analysis of the British judiciary, however, is the shortage of hard evidence on the intrusion of the other, hidden, decision-making variables into the process.
This is due partly to the great unwillingness of the legal profession to submit itself to scrutiny and a general lack of scholarly interest in the subject until recently.
Therefore, much of what follows may more accurately be characterized as hypotheses of British judicial behaviour derived deductively from research into decision-making in other judiciaries and/or in non-judicial settings.
First, the class, religious and ethnic backgrounds of judges are likely to have an impact on their general attitudes, which in turn may be translated into particular views on certain legal issues.
Data on the class background of both British and senior American  judges show clearly the dominance of the upper classes.
The differences between judges will decline to some extent as they share a common socialization within the legal profession.
In Britain this is reinforced by such practices as attending a number of dinners a term in the Inns of Court while they are students for the Bar; in both Britain and the United States there is the shared experience of dealing with problems from a legal perspective and extensive contact with other lawyers.
Second, there is the question of the extent to which the personal values and attitudes of judges intrude on their making of legal decisions.
In the United States it has been clearly demonstrated that they do.
A variety of statistical techniques have been employed to relate the attitudes of judges on general political issues, such as the desirability of government intervention and the importance of individual as opposed to governmental rights, to their decisions in substantive cases.
It this way the decisions of courts may frequently be predicted.
This has not been demonstrated in Britain; first, because of the lack of judicial review of statutes in Britain, policy issues (politics) are often not as self-evidently present as they are in the United States and, second, in the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords where more than one judge sits, panels of judges change, whereas in the United States Supreme Court the same panel of nine judges hears all cases.
Thus the British courts are less amenable to the study techniques applied in the United States.
It has further been argued that in Britain one finds less variety of opinion among judges than in the United States.
Certainly, Supreme Court judges are likely to have had a much wider variety of governmental and legal experience than their counterparts in Britain where the rather narrow process of socialization into the law and recruitment process seems to ensure less variation.
It has been argued that in Britain, on every major social issue  that has come before the courts during the last thirty years, the judges have supported ‘the conventional, established and settled interest [and]have reacted strongly against challenges to those interests’(Griffith, 1991, p. 325).
Another factor in judicial decisions is the interaction within the court itself.
This can have two main dimensions: first, that between the judge and the other participants in the process — lawyers, witnesses, police, juries; second, in the courts where more than one judge sits, that among the judges themselves.
Clearly, a large part of the job of a person making a submission to the court is  to ‘know’ the judge, to try to predict what the judge does and does not want to hear and so on.
Interaction between judges is probably more significant in the United States with the stable membership on the Supreme Court, but even in Britain the phenomenon of ‘opinion deference’, whereby one or more judges defers to the opinion of another because he or she is acknowledged to be an expert or to have seniority, is not unknown.
Finally, there is the highly significant question of the relation between the court itself and other political institutions, especially executives and assemblies.
In Britain and the United States this relationship is described by the phrase ‘the independence of the judiciary’ which, as we have seen, fails to convey the complexity of the relations between courts, executives and assemblies.
Overall, the most fruitful way to examine the interaction of courts, executives and assemblies is to see them all as engaged in a continuous process by which the law and rights are constantly being defined and redefined.
This may be seen even in Britain, where the courts are formally subordinate to Parliament but are not powerless to affect the intention of Parliament by means of legal definitions because of the inevitable ambiguity of statutes.
The clearest example in Britain concerns trade union rights in which this process of redefinition has continued for about 150 years and shows no signs of abating.
In the United States a most dramatic contemporary example of this process is the abortion issue.
Although it is not stated explicitly in the constitution, in 1965 the Supreme Court decided that there was a constitutional right to personal privacy, and in Roe v. Wade (1973) it ruled that this included a woman's decision regarding abortion.
The decision was opposed by many, including some who were pro-choice (in favour of women deciding for themselves), on the grounds that the court's decision was apparently based more on a balancing of policy interests than on specifically legal argument, and it had the effect of stimulating the anti-abortion movement which in turn became a major part of the New Right.
The effect of the decision was to give women the choice of an abortion during the first six months of pregnancy if they could find a doctor to carry it out, and it came to have enormous symbolic importance for feminists.
The pro-life (anti-abortion) campaign, which has attempted to overthrow Roe, has included proposals for constitutional amendments, none of which has succeeded, and proposals for new state and congressional laws to challenge Roe, many of which have been passed  and have become subject to subsequent decision by the Supreme Court.
The campaign has also sought to influence the appointment of federal judges opposed to Roe, a highly successful tactic during the Reagan and Bush presidencies, and to present stronger arguments to the courts via amicus curiae (‘friend of the court') briefs.
Finally, there has been a great deal of direct action, from the blockading of clinics by groups like Operation Rescue to prevent women from gaining access, to the bombings of clinics in the mid-1980s by groups like the Army of God.
In cases considered since Roe, the Supreme Court has generally shown more deference to congressional restrictions than to the states' attempts to overturn Roe, for example it ruled that public funds may not be used for abortions whether therapeutic or non-therapeutic (Harris v. McRae 1980).
The appointment of new and conservative judges in the later 1980s was seen as posing a threat to the basic rights enunciated in Roe, yet in Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (1989) and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (1992) the court condoned further restrictions being placed by the states on the circumstances under which women could obtain abortions, while refusing to decide directly to reverse the principles in Roe.
So the process continues: pro-choice members of Congress hoped to pass legislation incorporating clearer statutory rights to abortion.
In part this was intended to embarrass President Bush into having to choose whether or not to veto the legislation before the 1992 election, since abortion is an issue on which he was seen as vulnerable among women who would otherwise vote Republican.
Other state legislation is set to come before the Supreme Court in 1992–3, including measures that outlaw abortion except where the woman's life is endangered, which would make it very difficult for the justices to avoid considering the continuing validity of the Roe decision (McKeever, 1993, pp. 82–127; Guardian, 30 June 1992, p. 24).
In the Soviet Union the judicial process developed along European lines.
In contrast to the Western system, there was no power in the Supreme Court to question or set aside legislation passed or decreed by the government.
There also tended to be a strong presumption that a person brought before the court was guilty.
Thus there was less pressure on the prosecution to have to prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt and, although acquittals did occur, they were comparatively few in number.
Some lawyers in the Soviet Union advocated the adoption of the Western principle  that the accused is presumed innocent until proved guilty, but met with little success until the Gorbachev period.
Of course, it can be argued that the theoretical presumption of innocence in the West is frequently negated by the pressure, particularly in the lower courts, to ‘plea bargain', that is agree to plead guilty to a relatively minor charge and receive a relatively light sentence, rather than plead not guilty, endure a long wait for a trial (possibly in custody) and, if found guilty, receive a heavier sentence, although there always remains the chance of acquittal.
It is said that in the United States the overload of cases and the dominance of the system by plea bargaining mean that the theoretical presumption of innocence is replaced by an actual presumption of guilt in which the costs to the defendant of contesting his or her innocence are frequently overpowering.
The system in Britain is not as dominated by plea bargaining, but it is certainly present.
Soviet cases with political implications were given a great deal of publicity in the West, but there is little reason to believe that the great majority of cases in the Soviet Union were dealt with any less fairly than elsewhere.
Since the death of Stalin there seems to have been a conscious attempt to ensure that legal principles are adhered to and even the KGB appeared to make efforts to observe legality (Hough and Fainsod, 1979, pp. 278–84).
For example, their practice of reiterated warnings to an individual of the wrongfulness of his or her words or actions may have been to ensure that he or she did not plead ignorance of wrongdoing, which could have been an acceptable defence in the courts.
All in all, the Soviet people came, through bitter experience of arbitrary justice in Stalin's time, to appreciate the value of an impartial, consistent and reliable judicial system.
This became evident in their attitude to the comrades’ courts.
There had developed since Khrushchev's time policies to involve the populace more in low-level administrative activities on a voluntary basis.
One manifestation of this was the comrades' courts.
As described by Friedgut (1979, pp. 249–56), these were an attempt to give social norms the force of law and to make citizens accountable to each other.
Their role became educational, preventative and mediatory, although they could impose minor sanctions and deal with lesser cases.
Such courts continued to function under the supervision of a volunteer council made up largely of lawyers, which could review their decisions.
But they were not always popular among  the citizens because they were suspected of arbitrariness and personal bias.
People preferred the more formalized and anonymous procedures of the law courts.
Where political cases were concerned, the Soviet courts were not subject to the Western principle of legality — of the supremacy of the law.
Instead, they observed the principle of socialist legality — the idea that the best interests of a socialist society must override even the principle and letter of the law.
The guardian and interpreter of socialist legality was the CPSU and it was in this role that the party justified its intervention in the course of justice in cases where the interest and security of the state were thought to be involved.
As we have seen, the area of ‘national security’ is also where British and American courts have demonstrated their independence least.
One of the potentially most significant developments in the period of glasnost and perestroika was the setting up of a constitutional review committee which could comment on the constitutional legality of legislation passed by the Congress of People's Deputies or the Supreme Soviet and decrees issued by the President.
They certainly exercised this power, but their ability to enforce their decisions appeared to be weak.
Although this was a far cry from the power and authority of a body like the United States Supreme Court, it nevertheless could be seen as the beginning of a practical appreciation of the concept of constitutionality as understood in the West.
A similar committee now exists in the Russian Federation (Smith, 1992, pp. 202–32; Schmid, 1990, pp. 54–60).
Conclusion
We have argued that the law must be studied as part of the political process.
This is particularly evident at the time of the establishment of new constitutions.
Frequently, after a revolution a new set of politico-legal principles have to be established reflecting the interests and ideals of the new power-holders.
Thus a major feature of the 1787 American Constitution was to maximize the freedom of (property-owning) individuals and to disperse the power of governmental institutions (checks and balances) to minimize the chances of a new tyranny developing.
Equally, the basic legal principles enshrined in various Soviet constitutions since 1917 reflected the dominance of the principles  of Marxism-Leninism.
The constitutions of the post-Soviet republics are likely to be notable for the absence of Marxist-Leninist principles and rhetoric.
It is, of course, one of the aims of a new regime to have its preferred political principles regarded as ‘the law’, that is seen to be self-evidently ‘right’, in a similar fashion to the way in which ideology is assimilated by the new nation (see chapter 4).
Thus, if what were yesterday hot political disputes can today be channelled into the ‘legal process’, operating with new principles and procedures, and an apparent indifference to ‘political’ questions, then so much the better for those in power.
But even if we accept that there is a significant difference between the ‘legal’ and ‘political’processes in the way in which decisions are reached, they would both still come firmly within the definition of power we adopted in part I, that is the ability to get others to do what you want them to, assuming this is different from what they would have done anyway, with the use or threat of sanctions if necessary.
Clearly, this idea of modifying the behaviour of others is central to the operation of law, both private and public, as is the existence of sanctions.
The study of the legal process of any society can reveal much about the distribution of power in that society, for example how and by whom any Bill of Rights is interpreted and enforced, how and from which groups and classes in society judges are recruited, and how decisions are reached.
All these questions are a matter of judgement, priorities and vested interest in the exercise of power.
The overt intrusion of politics into the courtroom varies widely from one system to another, but at root the legal process is a major way in which the ‘who gets what’ choices are made in any society, however different the process by which these choices are made appears to be.
An individual's attitude to the question of the political context in which the legal system operates will depend on whether he or she takes a supportive attitude to the political status quo or wishes to challenge it.
Questions for Discussion
1
Discuss the relevance of politics to the different types of legal conflicts.
2
In what senses is the ‘judicial’ method of making decisions different from the ‘political’method?
3
Discuss the arguments for and against the adoption of a Bill of Rights in Great Britain.
The Police and the Military
The Police
The term ‘police’ here refers to the organization employed by the state on a day-to-day basis to enforce its laws, with coercion if necessary.
The most usual sense in which the police has previously been discussed in the context of politics is as a secret force repressing dissent in totalitarian societies.
Thus ‘the Soviet police’ tended to conjure up the KGB.
However, all societies make use of such security police and we shall consider it later.
Most of this chapter is concerned with the activities and political relevance of the ordinary police, and with the associated question of the significance of the intervention of the military in politics.
We believe that this is important because a study of police forces and the way in which they make decisions is essential to an understanding of the role of the law and rights and thus of the distribution of power in societies.
For many years the official view of the position of the police in liberal democracies like Britain was that it acted merely as an administrative agent to enforce the law.
The police should not, the argument continued, be permitted to exercise discretionary power because it would amount to an unconstitutional delegation of authority and would, in any case, increase the possibilities of discrimination and corruption.
A moment's reflection will reveal just how unreal this model of police behaviour is.
It implies that the police fully enforces every law against the citizen.
Whether such a policy would be desirable is debatable, but certainly no society has been willing to divert the necessary resources to the police in order to come anywhere near such a policy.
Thus the use of discretionary authority is inherent in police activity.
In one sense this means that police organizations are comparable to bureaucracies in general, but there are important differences.
The police bureaucracy is also organized hierarchically, but the paramilitary aspect of its role means that the hierarchy is far more disciplined and rigid than in a civilian bureaucracy.
Discretionary power and the opportunity to exercise it exist at all levels of police organizations.
At the highest level, decisions must be made as to the allocation of resources to the different areas of crime and, indeed, can be based on quite contrary notions of policing.
In Britain, for example, since the late 1960s policing, rather like the National Health Service, has fallen prey to the belief in the ‘technological fix’.
At a time of poor recruitment, the introduction of personal radios, computerized command-and-control systems and the increased use of vehicles produced, by the late 1970s, police forces whose main tactic was rapid response to incidents, known as ‘reactive’ or ‘fire brigade’policing.
One major lesson drawn from the 1981 riots in Britain by the authorities was that this style of policing had led to a growing gulf between the police and the communities in which it worked.
Therefore, efforts have been made since 1981 to put more police officers back in touch with their communities, for example by increasing foot patrols.
Nevertheless, these efforts have not obviously reversed the dominant thrust of reactive policing.
Currently, the other police strategy aimed at preventing crime is ‘multi-agency’ policing, in which the police combines with social welfare and other local authority agencies to co-ordinate measures against crime, measures that are both physical (for example designing housing estates) and social (for example deciding the appropriate regime for offenders).
Another important area of discretionary power arises in the setting up of special squads — fraud, obscene publications, robbery and so on— to concentrate on particular crimes.
Generally, arrests are not made by such squads for conduct that is deemed less serious than that in which they are mainly interested.
Such a generalization is likely to apply to all police concentrating on a particular crime.
The most extensive area of discretion, however, is that with which we are most likely to come into contact: police officers on the beat.
In dealing with drivers, domestic disputes, drunks and juveniles, whether or not informal cautions are delivered, or arrests made, depends a great deal more on the negotiation between police and citizen, and ultimately on the  exercise of discretion by the police, than on any objective notion of the law.
The use of police resources, and the relations of the police with the community, raise profound political questions, even though they are not always immediately identifiable as such.
In another area, however, the political importance of the role of the police is clearer, that is in dealing with public disorder.
The United States and most European countries have a specialized riot police force, sometimes referred to as a ‘third force’, which takes over when the ordinary police cannot cope, and provides the state with another option before calling in the military.
In Great Britain there is no such force, and the gap has been filled in recent years by a militarization of the police force.
In the past twenty years the planning, organization and equipment of order-maintenance has been steadily updated and centralized, so that the police now has the potential to mobilize thousands of riot-trained and equipped police officers.
This was seen most recently during the miners' strike in 1984–5.
While there were enough differences between police tactics in separate areas to demonstrate that individual police officers retained some control over police operations, the strong overall impression was of a police force subject to central direction by senior chief constables and Home Office officials along lines determined by the Cabinet.
It is very difficult to generalize about the American police because, with the exception of the nationally organized FBI, there are 40,000 police departments at state, county and municipal levels.
Moreover, almost everyone already has a firm mental picture of the American police that has been acquired from a lifetime's film- and television-viewing.
The quality of state police forces varies widely and, although attempts have been made to nationalize standards and training in the past fifteen years or so, the differences may still be considerable.
Historically, the American police has almost certainly been more violent and corrupt than its British counterpart.
The violence largely reflects the fact that American society has in general been more violent than British society.
The lingering of the ‘frontier’ myth and the easy availability of firearms have led the police often to shoot first and make enquiries second.
The most negative aspects of American policing — its violence and racism — came together in the beating of Rodney King in Los Angeles in 1991, which was followed by rioting when the white policemen responsible were acquitted in April 1992.
The corruption also indicates the degree to which the  American political process itself has been more prone to corruption.
Traditionally, the connection between the police and the party in power locally has been very close, and the susceptibility of the former to the wishes of the latter has been much greater than in Britain.
In the former Soviet Union the duties of the ordinary police (called the militia) were similar to those in Britain or the United States, for example.
It was supplemented to some extent by the druzhinii (volunteer popular detachments), formed in 1959.
This was part of the policy of attempting to involve the people in minor administrative activities which was implemented after the death of Stalin.
They were more than the part-time special constables in the British tradition, in that they were seen as having a social role in the context of an individual's responsibility to his or her community.
They patrolled the streets and aimed to prevent, by their presence, the committing of petty offences or minor disorder.
Thus social order was apparently being maintained by one's fellow citizens within one's own community.
It was hoped by this means to produce an acceptable social order without the overt use of force.
Community policing in Britain is inspired by similar hopes.
Such initiatives tended to be overcome in time by inertia and indifference.
The general demoralization of Soviet society during the Brezhnev period affected the militia also and by the 1980s widespread corruption was reported.
In the last years of the Soviet Union and in the new republics the militia found itself dealing with a level of public demonstration — and sometimes disorder — of which it had no previous experience, and it did not always deal efficiently with them.
The situation was complicated by the existence of armed troops of the Interior Ministry (MVD) and of the KGB which were also used to maintain internal order.
In both Britain and the United States there has been a great deal of debate on the question of police accountability.
The debate arises from the obvious difficulty of avoiding two types of police relationships in the community, each of which is undesirable for different reasons.
The first is the position found in most large American cities for much of their history, where the police was highly accountable to the community in the sense that it was controlled directly by the mayor via the police commissioner and acted primarily in the interests of the party in power.
The second is the position apparently preferred by the police itself: where it is not subject to the whims of party politics and can develop  what it considers to be the best safeguard for the community — the professionalization of the police force, in other words, it wants to be regarded as a profession and, like the medical and legal professions, to be left to do its job according to its own discretion.
As the police in both countries in recent years have relied increasingly on notions of professionalism to defend themselves against political attack, so police organizations have asserted themselves more publicly to promote not only their own organization, but also particular policies regarding law and order which they deem to be necessary.
Thus in Britain, for example, each of the police organizations — Police Federation, Superintendents' Association and Association of Chief Police Officers — will ‘go on record’ not only on matters relating directly to the police, but also on more general questions of law and order in society.
Political Police
There are, clearly, contradictory elements in the relationship of the ordinary police to politics.
Many of its tasks — such as the directing of traffic and acting as emergency social services — have only the slightest political connotations, but at other times it is involved in politics in its role as defender of public order.
The importance of this role is likely to be greater in times of economic decline.
There is in many police forces a group or section whose role is entirely and explicitly political.
In Britain this is the Special Branch, which is formally part of the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) but actually has considerable independence.
There are 1,250 officers in the branch in England and Wales, 30 per cent of them in the Metropolitan Police in London.
All forces have at least some officers in the branch but the largest contingents are in the urban forces and, because of potential ‘terrorist’ activity, those with ports serving Ireland, for example Merseyside.
Their duties are various: guarding foreign embassies, protecting prominent public figures, carrying out immigration and nationality enquiries, and dealing with Official Secrets Act and election-law infringements.
In addition, and more controversially, it is the job of the branch to ‘gather information about threats to public order’ and to assist the Security Service in protecting the state against ‘terrorism’and ‘subversion’(Home Office, 1984).
The first of these has meant that systematic surveillance is carried out by the branch over  organizations that regularly organize demonstrations and marches or are involved in industrial disputes.
Since what the police regards as an entirely proper task of ‘threat assessment’ means the surveillance of what is entirely legitimate political activity by peace or trade union organizations, it is not surprising that such actions have given rise to concern.
With respect to the second of these jobs, terms like ‘subversion’ often have such elastic definitions that, again, they can frequently provide the pretext for the surveillance of legitimate political activity.
In Britain ‘subversive activities’ are defined as ‘those which threaten the safety or well being of the State, and which are intended to undermine or overthrow Parliamentary democracy by political, industrial or violent means’(Home Office, 1984).
Such a definition, or a public-order-threat assessment, provides the justification for wide-ranging and controversial police practices.
Electronic surveillance (bugging), telephone tapping, infiltration of political organizations and squats, photographing demonstrations, the maintenance of files on perhaps 2 million political activists and (in London) the systematic recording of all public meetings and demonstrations, including the names and addresses of speakers and chairpersons, are all practices that have been admitted by the police or have emerged in the course of court hearings.
The House of Commons Select Committee on Home Affairs carried out an inquiry into the branch during 1984–5 and concluded: ‘We are satisfied, on the basis of the evidence which we have received, that the special branches of the police service in England and Wales do not justify public anxiety’(House of Commons, 1985, p. x; our emphasis).
The minority of Labour members on the committee did not agree with this and issued their own minority report, but the most significant point about the conclusion is that the majority on the committee excluded at the outset the possibility of obtaining the evidence they would need to judge properly whether there was any abuse of power.
They refused to examine particular complaints or cases, did not examine branch files and did not interview rank-and-file officers; in other words, they did none of the things that would have had to be done to get at the truth.
In Australia, Canada and the United States during the 1970s inquiries into the political police and internal-security agencies demonstrated clearly that reliance on interviews with chief constables and general assertions of good faith by all concerned would be inadequate.
After 1986 parliamentary concern shifted  towards the security service or MI5, particularly because of allegations that it had been involved in attempts to smear elected politicians during the 1970s.
If some oversight were to be established there, then much greater attention would need to be paid to foreign experience.
Clearly, the work of such agencies cannot be conducted in the full glare of the political process, but there are enormous risks also in leaving such agencies uncontrolled and unaccountable, as is graphically illustrated by reference to the recent history of the FBI.
After the Second World War, the FBI built a position of bureaucratic autonomy which lasted until the death in 1972 of J. Edgar Hoover, its director for almost fifty years.
Then the bureau became embroiled in the Watergate affair and between 1973 and 1976 it was subjected to unprecedented investigation which revealed the full extent of its post-war activities and the dangers inherent in unchecked police bureaucracies.
The illegal activities of the bureau included counter-intelligence programmes which were designed to ‘disrupt’ groups and ‘neutralize’individuals deemed to be threats to national security.
This involved the opening of mail, bugging and telephone-tapping subject only occasionally to external check, the dissemination of information thus obtained to favoured politicians and break-ins to install bugs or obtain documents.
Hoover's consummate skill as an exponent of the art of bureaucratic politics reinforced the impregnability of the bureau, but its initial immunity was based essentially on its role vis-a-vis internal security.
The bureau's reputation in the 1920s and 1930s was based on its exploits during and after prohibition, much advanced by Hoover's keen nose for public relations.
During the 1940s internal security — first against Nazism and then against communism — became its dominant concern.
The strength of the bureau then became founded on two basic propositions: first, that communism posed a serious threat to the United States and, secondly, that the FBI afforded the United States unique protection against that threat.
This enabled all attempts at inquiry into the FBI to be squashed, on the ground that they would inhibit or endanger the vital operations of the bureau.
Any persistent critics could be dismissed as, at best, dupes of communists or, at worst , communists themselves.
It is interesting to note that, the exposure and greater control of FBI activities do not appear to have placed the United States at the mercy of subversives.
A major factor which underlies much of this discussion, and explains why such legislative investigations of the police as occurred  between 1973 and 1976 in the United States are still resisted in Britain, is the different attitudes in the two political systems to the dissemination of official information.
The assumptions in the two systems are almost diametrically opposed.
In Britain the assumption is that citizens have no right to official information, and receive only what the government chooses to tell them.
In the United States it is assumed that citizens have the right to know and it is up to the government to prove in court that certain types of information should not be disclosed.
Of course, this reflects the very different role of the American courts vis-a-vis other governmental institutions but, as we saw in the discussion of courts and rights (chapter 18), if one has no right to information it becomes extremely difficult to exercise all manner of other rights.
The political police in the Soviet Union had a long history stretching back to tsarist times.
It was an important vehicle of terror in the Stalinist period and, by the time of Stalin's death, had come to occupy a place in the state machinery which in some ways undermined the position of the Communist Party itself; everyone came under suspicion.
Stalin's successors were determined to reduce this role and one of their first acts was to have the head of the KGB, Beria, arrested and executed (it was the last execution of a major political figure in the Soviet Union).
The KGB was now much more firmly under party control and there was evidence to suggest that it was required, outwardly at least, to abide by the legal rules.
As with security and intelligence organizations in other countries, the KGB was involved in widespread operations abroad, but a major part of its concern was with Soviet citizens themselves.
It saw itself in a paternalistic role in relation to them, seeking to persuade wrongdoers of the error of their ways and guiding them back to the right paths.
Soviet citizens, however, retained a healthy dislike and suspicion of being involved with the KGB in any way.
It was a large organization, estimated by some to involve 40,000 personnel, and relied additionally on a vast network of informers.
In the days of glasnost and perestroika the KGB came under public scrutiny for the first time, much of it hostile.
It tried to improve its image (even to the extent of holding a ‘Miss KGB’ contest!).
There was growing evidence of a split in the KGB between those who supported reform and those who did not.
Up to the end, the KGB had under its surveillance even Yeltsin and Gorbachev.
Its downfall came with the failed coup d'état of August  1991 when it was clear that its head, Vladimir Kryuchkov, was one of the instigators of the coup.
Its weakness was revealed when middle-ranking officers defied orders to attack the Russian Parliament Building (the ‘White House’) because of the likelihood of many civilian casualties.
The refusal ensured the collapse of the coup.
Russia and the other republics seem to be developing security organizations more analogous to those in the West, with a clear distinction between internal and external security.
It is too early to say how much the experience of the past will influence future developments (von Borcke, 1990, pp. 61–6).
It may be questioned whether such elaborate surveillance (engaged in not only by the KGB but to a greater or lesser extent by other security organizations) is really necessary or produces results commensurate with the time, energy and expense involved in the operations.
There seems to be a tendency to build up security organizations on the basis of ‘worst-case’ arguments (such as the possible increase in terrorism), which leads to serious encroachment on the liberties of citizens and to increasing paranoia.
The Military
The military consists of the armed forces (land, sea and air) whose primary function is to defend the state against external enemies or to enforce the will of the state against other states.
They can sometimes be used internally, where the police cannot handle a situation.
Any political activity by the military tends to be discussed in terms of‘intervention’ because of the widespread belief in liberal democracies that the military should remain outside politics.
There is, in fact, a wider spectrum along which political activity by the military may range.
At the very least, political action by a military organization will include acting as a pressure group within the policy-making process on questions of weapons procurement; at the other end of the spectrum there is full-scale military intervention as manifested in a coup d'état, in which the military, or a part of it, overthrows the government and assumes governing power itself.
Blondel (1973, pp. 142–4) suggests that there are four main variables affecting the propensity of a military organization to intervene in the political process.
First, there is the degree to which the military is isolated from the rest of society.
The greater the isolation the greater the military's aversion to civilian ways of  life is likely to be and its willingness to attempt to supplant them.
Clearly, in modern times a volunteer army is likely to be more isolated than a conscript army, and any process of ‘professionalization’ is likely to remove the norms and values of soldiers further from their civilian origins.
Contemporary attempts by the military in liberal democracies to see itself as professionalized, like similar movements among police forces, may be explained by the military's desire, on the one hand, to avoid attacks on its competence or political attitudes and, on the other, to provide a basis from which to claim superiority for its expert views on policy matters from weapons procurement to military strategy.
Second, there is the question of the legitimacy of the political process.
Military involvement is likely to increase as legitimacy decreases.
The political legitimacy of military regimes is frequently suspect and originates in their exclusiveness and monopoly of force.
Having achieved power in certain situations, the military has great difficulty in maintaining it without the support of other important groups in society.
Support can be coerced for only so long, after which an acceptable degree of legitimacy must be developed in some form.
Thus the question of legitimacy is crucial, and particularly the levels of support enjoyed by the civil political process as a whole compared with those enjoyed by the military.
Third, there is the question of the military's political attitude.
The military is frequently characterized as conservative if not reactionary, and certainly on a majority of occasions it is seen to support stability and the status quo.
To the extent that it benefits from the status quo, this is hardly surprising.
There are cases, however, where the military has seen itself as a force for modernization, particularly in societies perceived to be ruled by traditional elites, and where the military may become imbued with the norms of Western processes of industrialization to the extent that it seeks to impose them on society.
Fourth, there is the question of the political, social and economic complexity of a society.
As a general rule, the more complex a society becomes the less often military intervention is likely to occur.
In other words, there have been more military coups in underdeveloped than in developed countries.
This may be so, but the employment of the ultimate form of intervention — the coup — as the yardstick may be rather misleading.
It would be more helpful to consider various types of intervention, and the contexts in which they are most likely to occur.
For example, military  pressure-group activity and other involvement in policy-making in liberal democracies may well seem less drastic than mounting a coup, but the implications of less overt forms of military intervention may sometimes be almost as great as a coup for the political process.
In the United States the economic impact of the size of the post-war military establishment and budget has been tremendous.
The Defense Department employs nearly 80 per cent of the civilian and military personnel who work for the federal government and, in 1978, was paying over 5 million incomes to military personnel and civilian employees past and present.
Many of the largest United States corporations, such as Boeing, depend almost entirely for their existence on federal military contracts.
In other words, the military budget in the United States is of enormous significance for any government's economic policy and this gives the military tremendous leverage in terms of obtaining new weapons in an age of high technology, especially in conjunction with fears of the enemy's growing strength.
It has been argued that the American economy is dependent for its survival on the maintenance of high levels of military spending.
Whether or not this is so, the importance of the military is clear and so is the reason for its close consultation on policy for both strategic and economic reasons.
For C. Wright Mills, the dominant group among the three that made up the ‘power elite’ which, he argued, dominated the American political process after the Second World War was that of the new military leaders (Mills, 1956, pp. 198–224).
These ‘warlords’ were the new leaders who, with the ‘corporate rich’and the ‘political directorate’, provided the postwar American power elite.
How this structure will react to the end of the Cold War remains unclear.
If the centrality of the military is clear in the relatively open policy-making process of the United States, it is less so in Britain and the old Soviet Union (and now Russia), whose continued high spending levels on the military make it clear that the military will be no less active if and when it perceives its interests threatened.
Certainly, in the Soviet Union the military-industrial complex (that is the massive defence industry and military organization) was a major opponent of many of the reforms of perestroika.
The army, in particular, was very aggrieved by the failure of the war in Afghanistan and the wholesale withdrawal from Eastern Europe.
In addition, it found itself not only with inadequate facilities and accommodation at home but also facing strong public  criticism, which it was unused to.
Refusal to do military service was rife, especially among non-Russian nationalities.
The Defence Chief, Dimitri Yazov, and others connected with the military-industrial complex were, not surprisingly, heavily involved in the coup attempt.
In addition to the role of the military in the policy-making process, we should also consider its importance as an executor of policy.
Obviously, this occurs mainly in times of war between nations, but the military is also sometimes employed in the maintenance of public order within nations.
In general, this role is usually performed by the police or, failing that, by some third force such as the United States National Guard or the French CRS.
However, there have been situations in which troops have been used, the most frequent being industrial disputes and antistate violence beyond the powers of the police to control.
Troops have been used fairly regularly in Britain in the course of industrial disputes, in the years before 1914, in the General Strike of 1926 and, more recently, during the Glasgow dustmen's strike in April 1975 and the firemen's strike in the winter of 1977–8.
It is not clear that military involvement in such disputes is always undertaken willingly and, indeed, the military's own attitude in any given situation may crucially affect the ability of the government to pursue its policy.
For example, in May 1974 the Protestant Ulster Workers' Council called a successful strike in protest at the Sunningdale proposals for power-sharing between Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland.
A major reason for its success was the extreme reluctance of the army to run the power stations, largely because it did not believe that it could break the strike (Ackroyd et al., 1977, pp. 64–6).
With the recent growth of political violence directed against the state in the United Kingdom and elsewhere, the military has assumed greater prominence as enforcer of public order.
The police is still seen as the first line of defence, but in recent years there has been increased co-operation between the police and the military, as in the joint exercises conducted at Heathrow in preparation for possible terrorist incidents.
There has also been direct military involvement, in Northern Ireland since 1969 and in London in 1980 with the spectacular lifting of the siege at the Iranian embassy by the Special Air Service (SAS).
The military in the Soviet Union tended to be shrouded in even more secrecy than most other Soviet institutions.
Like the military in other countries, it was of political importance because of extremely heavy defence expenditure and also because, in the last resort, the survival of the regime depended on its loyalty, for it had control of the nation's weaponry.
Clearly, the military could and did act as a very powerful interest group and had the support of the heavy industrial interest, which was dependent on the manufacture of armaments.
There were various features of the role of the military in Soviet politics that are striking to the Western observer.
One was its involvement in politics in a direct sense which would be frowned on in the West.
Most military personnel were members of the CPSU or Komsomol, and military figures appeared at high levels in party organizations.
In this sense, the military was seen as simply part of the nation's organizational structure under party control and direction, like everyone else.
There was evidence to suggest that party (civilian) control was real in policy decisions and appointments, in spite of the significant influence the military must have had.
The Ministry of Defence was a typical government ministry in the Soviet Union, except that it was much larger than most.
Another striking feature was the existence of the Main Political Administration which was responsible for the political education and consciousness of the military.
Political officers would be attached to units who worked in close co-operation with line officers.
Evidence does not suggest much tension between them, and the line officers invariably had higher status (and usually higher rank) than the political officers.
Thus there was much more overt politico-military co-operation and integration in the Soviet Union than in the West.
The military did not always get its own way but it was in a strong position.
It had expertise, powerful allies in the heavy-industry complex and could play on powerful emotions and fears within the Soviet Union.
The Gorbachev reforms caused much tension in the military over the question of internal order and security.
Another feature of the Soviet situation unusual from a Western point of view was that, in addition to the Soviet army, both the Interior Ministry and the KGB maintained armed troops, which were most likely to be used in maintaining internal law and order.
The use of the Soviet army for this purpose (for example in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan) gave rise to much dissatisfaction among the troops themselves, who did not see action against Soviet citizens as part of their role.
At first, there was an attempt to maintain the unity of the Soviet army after the collapse of the Soviet Union, but differences between the republics (especially  Russia and Ukraine) in the Commonwealth of Independent States has meant that only nuclear weapons remain under joint control.
The future defence and security arrangements for the region are uncertain (Smith, 1992, pp. 318–23).
Conclusion
In this chapter we have been concerned with the sharp end of the political process — with the institutions on which rests the job of maintaining order and of enforcing the decisions of the political process, however reached, on any citizens or foreign persons who do not voluntarily accept them.
This may seem a strange way of looking at it, since we are used to viewing the police and the military as our protectors; but we cannot avoid the conclusion that, ultimately, the police and the military maintain sufficient force to implement the decisions of the state.
Of course, both police and military prefer to achieve their ends without the use of coercion, and some succeed in this far more than others.
Thus, the policing of a community by means of a consensus is always easier and therefore more desirable than a policy of coercion, which relies simply on greater strength.
But this is where important questions are raised concerning the police in society.
How is the force organized and how extensive is its discretionary power?
Given that there is no universal consensus on the ideal police-community relationship, what sort of policing policies does a community need, and who is to decide this?
Then there is probably the thorniest problem of all: does the community trust in the professionalism of the police or does it insist on some greater say in its actions?
One sort of policing which, almost by definition, is likely to remain beyond any form of democratic control is that concerned with the survival of the state itself.
Every state — whether it is liberal democratic or socialist — employs some form of political police whose sole job is to protect the state against its ‘enemies’.
Who are defined as enemies and what action is taken against them varies from country to country and from time to time.
With regard to the military and the political process, we should ask, not when it intervenes, but rather how it intervenes, since all military organizations can be observed to intervene in politics at some point.
What is important is whether the intervention is in support of or against the state, how it is manifested and what its  impact is.
In Britain, the United States and the old Soviet Union the most significant intervention has been relatively undramatic but highly significant in terms of its impact on the economic systems of all three countries, not to mention its impact on international politics, which is discussed in part IV.
If history is any guide, then future military involvement in the domestic politics of these countries will depend to a large extent on their economic fortunes and the ability of police and other paramilitary forces to maintain order.
Questions for Discussion
1
What is meant by political control of the police in a liberal democracy?
2
Does the ‘political police’ defend or threaten democracy?
3
Why does the military often intervene in some political systems and not in others?
Supranational and Subnational Politics
Global Politics (1): Approaches to Analysis
Introduction
Politics at the global level has traditionally been regarded as separate from, and only intermittently of concern to, the domestic politics of states.
Unless war threatened, or there was a dramatic increase in the price of petrol, the national level remained the principal focus of political attention for both public and elites.
While this remains largely true, there is growing awareness, not confined to elite groups, that decision-makers at the national level are unable to solve pressing domestic problems.
This is particularly the case in relation to economic policy.
The domestic economies of the CIS, Great Britain and the United States are, to differing degrees, experiencing problems whose solution is widely acknowledged to lie beyond national competence.
Environmental issues, too, promote public awareness of the need for global solutions, both to the immediate dangers arising from atmospheric ozone depletion and to the longer-term threats associated with global warming.
The often passionate commitment of small children to the protection of distant forests attests to the widespread awareness of the global scope of this issue.
Less evident, however, is extensive consciousness of its essentially political nature, involving conflict over control of scarce resources between North and South, that is between affluent and less developed regions of the world.
The issue of the tropical rain forests illustrates some of the central debates of global politics today.
The relationship between the sources of pollution, primarily in affluent, developed regions, and the ‘sinks’ for absorption of pollutants, provided by the rain forests, demonstrates essential interconnections — between disparate regions and between domestic and global issues.
It also highlights concerns about the continuing ability of individual nation-states, however affluent or powerful they may be, to provide for the well-being of their citizens.
Despite the importance of economic and environmental issues, however, the continuing prominence of military security cannot be denied.
For many political scientists involved in the study of global politics, issues of peace and war remain the principal focus of analysis, a priority with which the peoples of war-torn former Yugoslavia or the post-Soviet Caucasus may well concur.
These debates are associated with different approaches to the analysis of global politics.
As in the study of domestic politics, political scientists use models as aids to understanding.
Indeed, the vast scope and complexity of politics at the global level makes the use of models essential.
Nevertheless, the degree of abstraction required in their formulation, in order to reduce the global to the manageable, leaves considerable scope for criticism.
Criticism and debate are to be welcomed, however, and should not be confined to academic circles.
Perhaps even more than is usual in the social sciences, theory is closely related to practice.
The world-view of politicians, who address the same complex issues, shares many common features with the models developed by political scientists.
Whether we choose to focus on military security or protection of the environment, the policy relevance of our research is evident.
In order to give an indication of the range of models applied to global politics, the two dominant approaches to analysis will be outlined and a critique of each advanced.
These approaches, political realism and liberal pluralism, will be examined in relation to the following four questions about the nature of global politics:
1
Should nation-states be regarded as the principal actors in the global political system?
2
To what extent can global politics be separated from domestic politics?
3
!
How can order be maintained in the global political system?
4
Are issues of war and peace the central concerns of global politics?
Political Realism
Political realism is the oldest, and potentially the most influential, approach to global politics, having its origins in the wars between the city-states of ancient Greece and claiming among its antecedents the writings of Machiavelli and Thomas Hobbes.
Philosophically, realism is related to conservatism, and is thus founded on a pessimistic view of human nature and of the potential for social progress.
Indeed, the term ‘realism’ reflects its self-proclaimed basis of historical ‘reality’, which is seen as demonstrating the inevitability of conflict between states.
Above all else, realism privileges the role of the state, both as central actor and as the source of virtue.
In domestic society the authority of the state guarantees order in the face of the human potential for evil.
The supreme jurisdiction, or sovereignty, of the state means that no higher authority can exist.
Hence, for realists, global politics essentially comprises the interaction of sovereign states in a situation of anarchy — the global system approximating the ‘state of nature’ of the Hobbesian parable.
The state has a duty to protect its citizens from external enemies, and this can best be achieved by maximizing its power vis-a-vis other states.
Indeed, this is the principal imperative of state action and should be energetically yet pragmatically pursued, based on rational calculation of the policies most likely to enhance or protect power and prestige internationally.
This conduct is considered to be common to all states, irrespective of their domestic political arrangements.
Foreign policy is, or should be, entirely distinct from the domestic political process — a distinction justifying, in practice, particularly high levels of secrecy concerning its conduct.
The moral or ideological considerations that inform domestic politics provide an inappropriate basis for action, whether in relation to Vietnam in the 1960s and 1970s or Yugoslavia in the 1990s — particularly when a positive outcome in terms of power and prestige cannot be assured.
Conversely, British action over the Falkland Islands in 1982 was, for realists, very much a matter of international prestige, while the Gulf War of 1991 involved control of oil resources essential to the security of the participants.
Reduced to its simplest form, political realism has been characterized as the ‘billiard ball’ model.
This analogy represents the global political system as a vast billiard-table on which the actors, the nation-states, are the billiard-balls: self-contained sealed units whose interaction is limited to superficial clashes.
This representation, while pleasingly graphic, and certainly economical, requires elaboration if the central concepts of realism are to be understood.
Two of these — the concepts of state power and national security — are briefly examined here.
Despite the centrality of state power to the realist model, its conceptualization is surprisingly unsophisticated.
One of the most influential twentieth-century exponents of realism, Hans J. Morgenthau, provides extensive discussion of the ‘elements of state power’, cautioning against the reduction of power to a single factor.
Nevertheless, Morgenthau's various ‘elements’ essentially comprise the physical and psychological resources deemed necessary to the successful prosecution of warfare (Morgenthau, 1978).
For realists, power is ultimately reducible to coercion.
The realist view of power has been particularly influential in the United States among theorists and foreign-policy practitioners alike.
Hence the confusion evident in situations where superior military might has little utility — the economic challenge of Japan, the European Community's recalcitrance in negotiations over the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) or attempts to agree global policy on environmental issues at the June 1992 Earth Summit.
The concept of power is closely related, in realist analysis, to the concept of national security.
Here the separation of domestic and foreign policy allows realists to avoid consideration of conflicts arising from a lack of compatibility between state and nation, that is a people identified with a territory seeking political self-determination.
For realists, nation and state are deemed to be synonymous, and national security is a matter of protecting the state's core values from the depredations of other states.
In a situation of international anarchy, constant war is avoided by maintenance of a balance of power, based on a system of military alliances whose purpose is to prevent the domination of a single-power.
Contemporary realists, however, have countenanced single-power domination, or hegemony, by the United States, whose role, when appropriately exercised, is to maintain global stability.
States cannot entirely depend on such measures, however, and must make provision for their own defence.
Herein lies a central dilemma.
Investment in the military by a state enhances its security only at the expense of its neighbours.
According to the conflictual, realist world-view, national security is unattainable.
This dilemma has been exacerbated as a result of the development of thermonuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and is associated with the nuclear arms race between the Soviet Union and the United States during the Cold War from the 1940s to the 1980s.
Since the end of the Cold War, there have been attempts to reassess the concept of national security, for example by Barry Buzan, whose analysis addresses the contradictions frequently existing between state security and the security of individuals and groups within the state.
In addition, he seeks to broaden the notion of threat to encompass political, economic and environmental, as well as military, threats (Buzan, 1991).
While this is an interesting and productive attempt to reformulate realist conceptualizations, it does not answer fundamental criticisms originating outside the realist tradition.
The Feminist Critique of Realism
While realism is criticized from a number of perspectives, and feminist theorists are critical of all the traditional approaches to global politics, the feminist critique of realism is particularly challenging.
The Hobbesian analogy is considered to be partial and gender-biased.
Just as women are excluded from the ‘state of nature’, so they are ignored by the precepts of political realism.
Thus the conflictual, state-centric model, with its privileging of military security issues, is an essentially masculine representation, in which the separation of domestic and global politics precludes acknowledgement of the social processes constitutive of gender divisions, analysis of which is essential to understanding the role of the state — in particular its military capacity.
An interesting discussion of the social manipulations of gender in the promotion of military values is provided by Cynthia Enloe (1988).
The realist privileging of the military is challenged both in the approach to security and in the conceptualization of state power.
Thus the notion of security requires reformulation in terms of satisfaction of human needs: weapons cannot meet the threat of starvation.
The realist approach to power, in terms of coercion or domination, is essentially masculine.
Female conceptualizations of power emphasize its co-operative aspects in terms of alliance-building and problem-solving — that is power as ‘energy, capacity, potential…the ability to act in concert’(Tickner, 1991).
Thus gender bias is built into the principles of realism, providing  a partial and distorted world-view and having considerable implications for the practice of politics at the global level.
Here it is appropriate to note the singular absence of women from foreign-policy elites, the higher ranks of the military and senior positions within international organizations such as the United Nations.
At the same time, the ‘high politics’ focus of realist analysis excludes issues that fundamentally, and often disproportionately, affect women's lives.
These include global inequality, human-rights abuses and environmental degradation.
Liberal Pluralism
Unlike realism, liberal pluralism is not based on a single set of ideas developed over time, but embraces a variety of approaches.
The first of these is idealism.
Idealism has its roots in the writings of the eighteenth-century philosopher Immanuel Kant, who saw in universal adherence to the rule of law the possibility of global peace.
Contemporary idealism, however, dates from the period following the First World War when, partly as a reaction to the horrors of the war, it briefly achieved prominence as an approach to global politics, influencing academics and politicians.
The American President Woodrow Wilson was a prominent exponent of idealism.
The establishment and maintenance of peace was the primary aim of idealists, and this was to be achieved through the spread of liberal democracy and through international law, administered by a newly created international organization, the League of Nations.
The league was charged also with responsibility for collective security, so that individual states could embark on a programme of disarmament.
Idealism, then, is an optimistic approach, based on belief in the essential rationality of human nature and the potential for progress.
It is also a liberal view, emphasizing the significance of individual participation to the conduct of global politics, and hence the links between domestic and global systems.
Thus wars result from authoritarian government, while the peaceful conduct of foreign affairs is a function of liberal democracy — for if the people are properly informed on foreign-policy issues they will choose peace over war.
The liberalism of idealists extended also to economic policy.
States should abandon national economic protectionism in favour of international free trade, for unimpeded operation of the market, it was  claimed, was the key to global prosperity and hence conducive to peace.
Idealism was deeply discredited by the failure to prevent the outbreak of the Second World War.
The lack of military preparedness of the European democracies and the policy of appeasement left a legacy which has frequently been invoked — for example following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
Nevertheless, the ending of the Cold War gave new impetus to idealism.
The rhetoric of politicians was littered with idealistic assumptions, from the ‘new thinking’ of President Gorbachev to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's assertion that ‘democracies don't go to war with each other’.
Meanwhile, policy-orientated academics in the United States began to discuss ‘Idealpolitik’ on the grounds that idealism had become realistic (Kober, 1990).
While the Cold War period was dominated by realism, liberal approaches continued to be developed.
The ‘world society’ perspective of John Burton built on the rationalist assumptions of idealism to develop a highly pluralistic model of the global political system.
The world-society model emphasized the linkages between vast numbers of international and transnational actors.
It included religious and social movements (like the Catholic Church and the international women's movement), large business corporations (like Coca-Cola, Ford, McDonald's), communications and media links, and even individuals holidaying abroad.
The complex pattern of linkages that emerged was labelled by Burton the ‘cobweb model’.
This model de-emphasized geographical boundaries in general, and the role of the state in particular , and was deliberately juxtaposed against the realist billiard-ball model (Burton, 1972).
While it has the virtue of indicating vast new areas worthy of study, this model suffers from a failure to identify the relative significance of its many components.
The problem is, to some extent, addressed by models of interdependence.
Models of interdependence focus on interstate relations but challenge the realist view of states as independent actors.
Interdependence refers to the situation of mutual vulnerability that exists between states (and societies) linked by complex economic and other ties.
The vagaries of currency exchange rates provide a good example of interdependence — given the tendency for changes in value of the American dollar or the German mark to provoke a sterling crisis in Great Britain.
A useful feature of models of interdependence is their ability to encompass new forms of co-operation between  states, such as the development of the European Community.
Here the ‘complex interdependence’ model of Keohane and Nye (1977) is particularly useful.
Complex interdependence has the following three principal characteristics:
1
States and societies are linked by multiple channels of communication, both governmental and non-governmental.
2
The agenda of interstate relations is increasingly complex and is not necessarily dominated by security issues.
According to circumstances, other issues, from agricultural policy to international crime, may predominate.
3
In conditions of complex interdependence, military force will have no utility.
The Structuralist Critique of Liberal Pluralism
As with the realist model, it is possible to identify a number of criticisms of liberal pluralism.
This model, too, is silent on gender issues, although it leaves more space for their inclusion.
Perhaps the most fundamental critique is that provided by theorists emphasizing the global structure of economic and political power.
While realists see liberal pluralism as naive in de-emphasizing the role of military might, neo-Marxists and dependency theorists regard it as insidious in obscuring the role of economic power.
For them, international free trade and reliance on market mechanisms for resource allocation are not conducive to global prosperity, as liberals claim, but lead to increased economic inequality.
Moreover, in their view, this inequality is not random, but is structured by the needs of international capital.
Dependency theory provides a ‘Southern perspective’ which tends to be overlooked in other theoretical explanations.
It employs a core-periphery model which emphasizes the persistence of ties of domination and dependence linking the developed, capitalist states (the core) and their former colonies (the periphery).
These ties have had the effect, not only of ensuring that the peripheral economies serve the needs of the core — principally through provision of cheap raw materials — but also of impeding and distorting political, social and cultural developments at the periphery.
Hence dependence, not interdependence, characterizes the relationship of the South to the North.
In recent years, however, there has been rapid economic development in parts of the South, notably in South-East Asia, while core economies, including  those of the United States and Great Britain, have suffered recession.
Increasingly, the core-periphery model fails to capture the diversity, in terms of economic performance, of both the periphery and the core.
Consequently, it has largely been supplanted by neo-Marxist analysis.
Neo-Marxists emphasize the globalization of capitalist production and the associated creation of a global division of labour.
This is a result of the operations of huge, transnational (that is operating across national boundaries) business corporations, the scale and scope of whose organization is such that they are able to transcend or defy the jurisdiction of states.
According to this perspective, interdependence between states is less significant than the dependence of all states, to a greater or lesser extent, on the investment decisions of transnational capital.
In Great Britain, for example, the future production strategies of the Ford Motor Company are a matter of national concern.
Conclusion
This chapter has examined a variety of approaches to analysing global politics, in order to demonstrate the diversity of approaches to analysis and to highlight some of their limitations.
The complexity and scope of the subject-matter makes such limitations inevitable but they are, nevertheless, significant, because of the close links between theory and policy and the salience of the issues under discussion.
Questions of peace and war, global distributive justice, gender and racial inequality, and environmental degradation concern us all.
We need to understand the assumptions and models that inform the world-view of those, from politicians to United Nations officials, who attempt to address them.
Returning to the four questions posed in the introduction to this chapter, the answers provided by the two dominant models of global politics are summarized as follows:
In assessing the relative merits of realist and liberal pluralist analyses, the criticisms of feminists and neo-Marxists should not be overlooked, since they highlight important omissions.
They also remind us that models are associated with ideologies, and hence with interests and, ultimately, with the exercise of power.
Questions for Discussion
1
Does the ending of the Cold War cast doubt on the continuing relevance of the realist perspective?
2
How may inclusion of gender analysis affect the subject-matter of global politics?
3
Is it true that liberal democracies ‘don't go to war with one another’?
Can you give reasons for your answer?
4
How widely can the concept of interdependence be applied?
Does it have relevance beyond the interaction of developed capitalist states?
Global Politics (2): Processes of Change
Introduction
Political scientists attempting to understand and analyse the processes of change in global politics in the post-Cold War era are having to reassess the utility of conceptual frameworks developed in the past.
In particular, we need to assess the relevance of realism and liberal pluralism (outlined in chapter 20) to three key processes identifiable in contemporary global politics — globalization, integration and fragmentation.
Globalization is the overarching process, linked in different ways to both integration and fragmentation.
All three have different implications for the central question addressed by this chapter: to what extent will the nation-state remain the principal unit of political organization and focus of allegiance in the twenty-first century?
Analysis of contemporary processes, however, necessitates consideration of the past, in particular the Cold War era.
The end of the Second World War heralded major changes in the conduct of politics at the global level.
Much of the post-war period was dominated by two highly significant sets of events, the Cold War between East and West and the dissolution of the European colonial empires.
To a lesser extent, the creation and development of the European Community generated considerable interest as a unique experiment in regional economic and political integration.
Nevertheless, the defining characteristic of this period was undoubtedly the Cold War.
In the early post-war years the consolidation of Soviet power in Eastern Europe stimulated fears of communist expansion and generated support, in the United States, for the maintenance of a high level of military preparedness.
Despite the significance of the nuclear arms race, the mutual hostility and rivalry that developed between the superpowers (the Soviet Union and the United States) and their allies was not primarily a military conflict, but was founded on the mutual incompatibility of socialist and capitalist economic systems.
The Cold War was also a global phenomenon, involving the consolidation of military alliances in Europe — NATO and the Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO)— and attempts by the superpowers to influence the policies, and gain the allegiance of, states world-wide.
The Cold War was thus complex and multifaceted.
Avoiding direct superpower military confrontation, it was fought through intense propaganda, which deeply penetrated the domestic societies of both the United States and the Soviet Union, and through proxy wars in South-East Asia, Central and South America, and Afghanistan.
Decolonization was associated with independence movements invoking strongly nationalistic, anti-imperialist sentiments, and the subsequent creation of a number of new, formally sovereign and independent states.
The rapid increase in the number and diversity of states has had long-term consequences for global politics.
Membership of the United Nations has more than quadrupled since 1945, greatly complicating international negotiations, while a fundamental conflict of interest between developed and less developed states introduced a North-South dimension to global politics.
The coincidence of the decolonization process with the development of Cold War antagonism ensured, however, that the immediate impact was experienced primarily in terms of superpower competition for influence in the newly independent states.
Frequently, this competition involved provision of military equipment to potential allies — an aspect of Cold War rivalry that has contributed to conflict in Ethiopia, Somalia and the Middle East.
The creation of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1961 represented an attempt to co-ordinate the responses of less powerful states to superpower pressure through the establishment of a ‘third way’— an independent posture aligned to neither the capitalist West nor the communist East.
Together with the Group of Seventy-seven (G-77) economically less developed states (now numbering more than 120), the non-aligned lobby continues to promote the interests of its members at international forums, as was demonstrated at the June 1992 Earth Summit in Brazil.
Thus this period saw the division of the global system into  three ‘worlds’: the first world of developed capitalist states; the communist bloc, or second world; and the less developed third-world states of the southern hemisphere.
The image of three distinct worlds dominated thinking about global politics for almost forty years (see chapter 7).
Such a conflictual, yet relatively stable, world-view has been shattered by events since the late 1980s.
The end of the Cold War has invalidated the three-world image, although ‘third-worldism’ retains relevance as an ideological position supportive of third-world interests.
Of more immediate significance to the practice of global politics, however, was that the end of the three-world view also heralded the end of the duopoly of superpower domination of the global system.
Initial optimism that the end of the Cold War would lead to a more harmonious world order was rapidly dissipated.
Global politics now appears less ordered, the future more uncertain (at least from a European perspective) than during the years of Cold War confrontation.
Nevertheless, the processes identified at the start of this chapter — globalization, integration and fragmentation — are longer-term phenomena.
These processes must be analysed if we are to gain understanding of global politics and to assess the relationship between global and domestic political systems.
Globalization
The concept of globalization has been the subject of considerable debate (for example Luard, 1990; McGrew, Lewis et al., 1992).
Globalization refers to the increasingly global scope of a range of phenomena and issues, some aspects of which have already been discussed above.
The logic of the globalization thesis suggests a consequential reduction in the autonomy of individual states — nation-states will become increasingly ineffective in dealing with issues affecting the welfare of their citizens, and therefore their significance as separate political organizations will decline.
Decolonization was associated with the spread of ideologies of national self-determination and ultimately the near-universality of the sovereign nation-state.
More recently, the ending of the Cold War and the introduction of measures of democratization in Russia, Eastern Europe and elsewhere has generated debate about the possible spread of liberal democratic forms of government (for example Held, 1992).
The Cold War itself was a  globalizing influence.
The effects of superpower rivalry and associated ideological conflict were global in scope, while penetrating deeply into domestic societies and essentially linking domestic political issues with global processes.
Today, external links with, and influences on, domestic societies are extensive, although unevenly distributed within and between states.
While such links proliferate in affluent countries, the global scope of drugs-related crime, political violence and AIDS reminds us that poor countries are far from immune.
Technological developments have been essential to the growth of transnational links, especially in the areas of transport and communications.
Individuals as well as groups, business corporations and government officials have access to high-speed travel, micro-technology and fax machines, and almost instant information about events world-wide via the news media.
While problems of partiality and bias in news-reporting are, rightly, matters of concern, various issues that have attracted Western media attention have excited public opinion in the United States and Europe to the extent that governments have been obliged to respond.
Recent examples include the plight of the Iraqi Kurds at the end of the Gulf War and the suffering of civilians in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The obverse of this phenomenon is, of course, the global influence of the technologically advanced Western news media — and hence of Western concerns, representations and ideas.
The dissemination of ideas, particularly Western ideas, is a central aspect of globalization.
Of great significance has been the influence of ideologies of modernization, both liberal and Marxist, which essentially equate progress with Western conceptions of social, political and economic development.
Thus modernization implies commercialization of agricultural production, urbanization, industrialization and the development of political institutions based on secular, rational-legal authority.
Ideologies of modernization are divisive, ascribing values to ‘development’ and ‘underdevelopment’of societies.
They are also both gender- and culturally biased, representing an essentially male Western view of progress which has marginalized women and disregarded their interests.
Development agencies, for example, have persistently involved men in agricultural-development projects in regions, particularly in Africa, where farming is the responsibility of women.
The resulting harm, both to the status of women and to the production of food, is well documented (Sontheimer (ed.), 1991).
Liberal approaches to modernization are closely linked to economic globalization.
The ‘global’ economy is essentially capitalist, but is not yet fully global in scope.
The international economic institutions established after the Second World War (GATT, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank) were based on liberal premises unacceptable to the Soviet bloc, which remained, until recently, economically almost completely isolated.
As this isolation ends the possibility arises of a fully global economy.
Economic globalization implies a great deal more than the development of extensive trade links.
It implies the existence of a unified global economy that has a dynamic beyond simply the interaction of separate domestic economies.
The principal agents of economic globalization are transnational business corporations (TNCs).
Business corporations such as Unilever, ICI and Shell were operating transnationally in the nineteenth century, but their proliferation and freedom of operation has been greatly facilitated, since the Second World War, by technological development.
Much discussion of the influence of TNCs has focused on their size, both in terms of the scale and scope of their operations and the fact that the turnover of the largest, notably the giant oil corporations, exceeds the gross national product of all but the richest states.
The mobility of vast sums of transnational capital means that the investment strategies of TNCs are crucial to, but largely beyond the control of, domestic economic policy, and hence that state autonomy is reduced.
While there are notorious cases of overt interference in domestic politics by TNCs — for example the role of ITT in the overthrow of President Allende of Chile in 1973 — fear of disinvestment is a more pervasive influence on government policy.
Perhaps even more significant for the globalization thesis have been changes in the operational strategy of many of the larger TNCs, involving both production and exchange.
Production has been increasingly globalized, with processes located where it is most advantageous in terms of profit maximization.
This has resulted in regional specialization and, effectively, the creation of a global division of labour.
Examples of this include the separation of production and assembly in the motor industry and the location of low-technology, labour-intensive manufacturing processes in regions where labour is cheap and non-unionized (and frequently female).
Goods and services produced according to global strategies now comprise more than half the total output, while by 1985 between a quarter and half of world trade (varying  according to economic sector) was intrafirm, that is between buyer and seller within a single enterprise (Strange, 1991).
Clearly, the operations of TNCs contribute significantly to globalization and also reduce the autonomy of states in terms of economic policy.
Nevertheless, the relations between states and firms is complex and varied.
While even the richest states are anxious to attract or retain TNC investment, they are more likely to be successful in imposing conditions on their operations than less developed states.
The poorest states, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, attract little TNC investment and are linked only tenuously to the global economy.
A further set of issues contributing significantly to globalization concerns the environment.
Environmental degradation, whether resulting from pollution or from overuse of natural resources, does not respect the boundaries of states.
The 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster in Ukraine provides a dramatic example of the transboundary impact of pollution, seriously affecting human and animal population over a wide area.
The proliferation of disputes over scarce water resources, particularly between states bordering the Nile, Euphrates and Jordan rivers, attests to the impact of resource depletion, as does the relationship between deforestation and desertification.
Despite their transboundary effects, however, these problems are not necessarily global in impact, although they may ultimately require global solutions.
Nevertheless, two environmental issues are clearly global in scope — ozone depletion and climate change.
Depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer through the accumulation of chloro-fluorocarbons (CFCs), halons and a variety of other substances leaves the earth's surface increasingly exposed to harmful radiation from the sun.
The discovery of a seasonal ozone ‘hole’ over the Antarctic in 1985 gave urgency to this issue, leading to a series of international agreements restricting the emission of ozone-depleting substances.
The ozone-negotiations, conducted under the aegis of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), marked an important stage in the globalization of issues and of policy-making.
It involved not only states but also TNCs and environment pressure groups.
Additionally, although production of ozone-depleting substances was largely confined to Northern, developed states, the essentially global nature of the issue was recognized by the inclusion of special provisions and (modest) funding to assist non-producers in the South to develop safer alternatives to CFCs.
The issues associated with climate change present a much greater, but apparently less immediate, challenge to global management, and the inconclusive outcome of the 1992 Earth Summit suggests that this challenge will not easily be met.
There are, as yet, no adequate alternatives to the fossil fuels whose consumption is largely responsible for global warming, while the impact is likely to be delayed and unevenly experienced.
Discussion of these issues is also complicated by the link between global warming and deforestation, which reduces the capacity for absorption of excess carbon dioxide.
The essentially global scope of this issue is captured by a remark reputed to have been made by the Netherlands Foreign Minister to the Foreign Minister of Brazil: ‘If you don't stop cutting down your forests my country will disappear.’
The extent of linkage between issue-areas, and the global scope of contemporary problems such as environmental degradation, suggest the need for more effective global management.
They demonstrate, too, the limitations of individual state action.
Reduction of carbon dioxide emissions in the Netherlands would have little effect in preventing the submergence of that country.
Integration
Increased co-operation between states has been a significant feature of the post-1945 world order, reflecting the reduced ability of states to act autonomously in the global arena.
There has been a proliferation of regional organizations such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Organization of American States (OAS), economic groupings such as the G-7 (most economically developed countries) and G-77 (less economically developed countries), and military alliances such as NATO.
Despite the end of the Cold War, military alliances seem likely to continue in some form — the Gulf War demonstrated the inability even of the United States to fund a medium-scale war unaided, and illustrated, again, the limitations to state autonomy.
While it is significant as a response to globalization, increased co-operation ,is not necessarily indicative of integration.
Integration implies a process whereby the economies and decision-making procedures of participating states become progressively linked, to the point of fusion, and to the development of institutions whose powers, in transcending those of the individual member states, become supranational.
Despite plans for market integration in Latin America and between the United States, Mexico and Canada, it is only in relation to the European Community that integration can properly be discussed at present.
The creation of the European Community was a response to the changed economic and strategic situation of Western Europe after 1945 — the devastation of war, the loss of empire and the apparent threat of the Soviet bloc.
European reconstruction, in the face of new global realities, was to involve an ‘ever closer union’ of its peoples.
Great Britain, however, chose initially to pursue closer links with the United States rather than support the European initiative.
Since it eventually joined the Community in 1973, Britain has remained an ‘awkward partner’, supporting completion of the single market but opposing closer political, monetary and social integration (George, 1990).
Despite differences between the member states, the development of the community clearly demonstrates a process of integration.
The successful creation of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 was followed by formation of the European Economic Community and Euratom in 1957, and the introduction of a customs union and the Common Agricultural Policy in 1968.
The early years were, nevertheless, characterized by excessive preoccupation with ‘harmonization’— involving standardization of tractor — tyre dimensions and the noise emissions of domestic lawnmowers — and the progress of political integration was limited.
Direct elections to the European Parliament added a measure of democratic legitimacy, while creating a significant source of pressure for further integration, but it was not until the passing of the 1987 Single European Act that real impetus was given to the integration process.
The Single European Act provided for completion of much of the single-market process by the end of 1992 and introduced cautious moves towards political union.
It also generated pressure from the European Parliament, and several member states, for the single market to be accompanied by closer political and monetary union and a more fully developed social policy.
Such measures were included in the December 1991 Maastricht draft treaty.
Also included were proposals for the development of a common foreign and security policy and, ultimately, common defence.
The inclusion of these areas of ‘high politics’ challenges even the traditional security role of the member states.
The controversy that followed the publication of the Maastricht  Treaty highlighted significant differences between and within member states over the extent to which the process of integration should proceed, and over whether the proposed union rather than individual member states should be the principal location for decision-making in the future.
The issues raised are fundamental, casting doubt on the continued existence of member states in their present form.
Reactions to the Maastricht Treaty demonstrated that, despite the pressures from above emanating from the processes of globalization and integration, there is continued vitality in the nation-state.
Fragmentation
Fragmentation is a process involving the disintegration of existing states and the formation of new states in an attempt to produce conformity between the boundaries of peoples and territories — to create ‘genuinely’ national states.
Within the European Community the threats to the nation-state from above are accompanied by disintegrative pressures from below.
The reduced autonomy and effectiveness of individual states resulting from globalization has undermined their authority in regions where the claims of minority ‘stateless nations’ provide an alternative focus for allegiance.
Demands for national self-determination, from Scotland to Catalonia, have been stimulated by the development of the European Community, which has both exacerbated perceptions of distance from the decision-making process and provided a familiar and supportive framework within which the newly independent states could operate.
Thus, in Scotland, for example, implementation of the Scottish National Party's policy of ‘independence in Europe’ would mean that decisions on Scottish affairs, which are increasingly taken in Brussels, would no longer be made in collaboration with British government ministers without direct Scottish representation.
Instead, Scotland, in common with other small member states, would be fully represented at all community institutions and have direct access to the Court of Justice.
Nationalist movements within the European Community have not yet succeeded in fragmenting the states within which they operate.
Elsewhere, however, the process of fragmentation is advanced.
In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe the ending of  the Cold War and the subsequent loss of central government authority have generated support for the claims of ethno-cultural nationalist movements.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union, of Yugoslavia and of Czechoslovakia have been the most obvious results, but serious intercommunal tensions are also evident in Bulgaria, Romania and elsewhere.
Unlike the integration process, which threatens the concept of the sovereign state, fragmentation threatens the integrity of existing states but is strongly supportive of the idea of statehood.
Fragmentation also opposes the process of globalization: its emphasis on ethnic and cultural particularism, and traditional, religious values reacts against the globalizing, secular ideologies of modernization.
Conclusion
The ending of the Cold War initiated a period of rapid change, instability and uncertainty in the global political system.
It did not, however, initiate the longer-term processes discussed above, although it affected them in different ways — contributing to the globalization of liberal political ideas and economic policies, posing new challenges to the European integration process as the East European states seek to participate therein, and stimulating the process of fragmentation.
How, then, are we to conceptualize the three distinct, yet interrelated, processes apparent in contemporary global politics?
To what extent can the traditional models of global politics, outlined in chapter 20, help us to understand these processes?
And what are the implications for the future viability of the nation-state as the principal unit of political organization?
Fragmentation is the process most supportive of the concept of sovereign, independent statehood which is central to realist analysis.
Nevertheless, the processes of fragmentation are, for realists, internal to states and hence matters of domestic security.
The power-politics model conceptualizes rather poorly the fragmentation of large states and the ensuing proliferation of small states.
Integration poses a fundamental challenge to the nation-state and to the traditional models of global politics.
The liberal pluralist model of complex interdependence is useful, but fails to capture  the dynamism of integration as a process.
Failures in this process, however, are explicable in realist terms as the protection of national sovereignty.
British policy towards the European Community could be said to involve careful application of realist principles — the pursuit of national self-interest, narrowly defined, through participation in the single market but opting out of the social chapter.
Globalization has been characterized as the overarching global political process.
While integration in Europe can be seen as a response to this process, globalization does not necessarily promote co-operation.
Its impact is partial and uneven, exacerbating global inequalities and potentially generating conflict.
It is associated with the dissemination of Western ideas of progress, and involves a multiplicity of links between societies, across state boundaries, such that the impact of events reverberates globally and the distinction between domestic and foreign policy is blurred.
Above all, globalization is a political process, involving issues that demand decision and action at a level higher than the individual nation-state.
The development of a global economy dominated by the operation of transnational corporate capital, and the complex issues associated with global environmental change, suggest the need for management at the global level.
This necessitates the strengthening of existing international institutions, such as the United Nations, or the creation of new institutions capable of meeting the challenge of globalization.
While liberal pluralist models best conceptualize the globalization process, no model is adequate.
The cobweb model highlights the complexity of global interconnections, but globalization involves more than the proliferation of links.
Models of interdependence deal with mutual vulnerability between states rather than shared vulnerability to global processes.
As the feminist and structuralist critiques remind us, liberal pluralist models also fail adequately to conceptualize political and economic power, and the patterns of inequality that result from its operation.
The realist state-centric model may seem least appropriate to analysis of contemporary political processes.
Nevertheless, national security issues and the incidence of military conflict remain highly significant.
Apart from the agreements on ozone depletion, which reflected the urgency of the issue, there has been little progress towards global management of global issues.
The ‘great powers’, led by the United States (which retains pretensions to superpower status despite serious domestic problems), continue to dominate international institutions, from the Security Council of the United  Nations to the World Bank, and seem unlikely to countenance a change in this situation in the foreseeable future.
Recent decisions in Japan and Germany permitting deployment of their armed forces outside their national territories appear to support the realist view that, in the conduct of global politics, economic status must be backed by military capacity.
Each of our models continues to provide some insights, although none is wholly adequate.
In practice, a variety of perspectives is likely to be employed in analysis of global politics, although the need for refinement of existing models and development of alternatives is evident.
Similarly, the practice of global politics requires reform.
States remain important global actors but their struggle to retain independent status precludes solutions to global problems.
In the words of the Brundtland Report, Our Common Future: ‘The earth is one but the world is not.
We all depend on one biosphere for sustaining our lives.
Yet each community, each country, strives for survival and prosperity with little regard for its impact on others’(World Commission, 1987, p. 27).
Questions for Discussion
1
Which factors are most likely to limit the spread of liberal democracy following the end of the Cold War?
2
Do the operations of TNCs bring benefits to the communities where they are located?
3
Why may environmental degradation be an issue of particular concern to women?
4
How could the United Nations be reformed to facilitate global management of global problems?