

ANGEL OF DEATH
ONE
The time difference between London and Mexico City is six hours, and because we had been travelling with the sun, it was still quite high in the sky as we descended into the sepia haze that hung over the whole flat expanse of what had once been a great lake.
Dust!
That was my first impression of a city whose disastrous birth rate has made it the largest in the world, a vast expanse of concentrated housing broken only by open spaces of baked earth where the wind-blown dust swirled, and far away to port the snow-capped volcanic hulks of Popocatépetl and Iztaccihuatl towering huge through the burnt brown atmosphere.
‘We'll dump our things at the hotel,’ Ward said, ‘and if there's time we'll have a look round.’
The landing was a smooth one, but once we were inside the terminal building everything moved at a snail's pace, the queue at immigration long and slow moving.
When it was our turn I found he had been right about the word antiquarian giving the immigration officers something to think about.
They were a good ten minutes arguing over what it meant, even calling in the senior officer on duty, who spoke a little English.
‘Old books?
Why you want old books?
You are tourist, no?
In transit.’
‘Aye, Ah'm booked out on the flight to Lima in the mornin'.’
Ward was smiling a bright, happy, almost drunken smile, playing the innocent Scot and putting on his broadest accent.
‘Dae ye no' like books yersel'?
Books are me most prized possessions, ye ken.
There's the binding now.
An' inside ye'll find all the truth about the world in which we live.
An' auld books, the woodcuts, the drawin's — dae ye no' ken the drawin's o' Leonardo da Vinci?— the beautiful illustrations, the illuminations o' the monks an'  priests — it's a fabulous world, an' all there inside o' the gold-lettered covers.’
He went on like that until the chief officer nodded him through with a glazed look in his eyes.
He never glanced at the visas, never looked at my passport.
just as I said,’ Ward murmured, no trace of an accent as we collected our baggage.
‘Covers a multitude of sins.’
As soon as we had cleared customs he made for a bank of telephones, and when he rejoined me he was smiling.
‘That's all fixed.
He got my cable and he'll meet us fur dinner.’
‘Who?’
I asked as we picked up our overnight bags and moved towards the exit.
‘The author of that book, ‘Luiz Rodriguez.
He lives here.’
At the hotel he told the taxi to wait, and after checking in and having a quick clean-up in our rooms, we drove out to Teotihuacan.
‘Ah'd have liked to take a look around the Archaeological Museum, but Ah fear we'd never make it in time through the rush-hour traffic.
It's the other side of the city, whereas Teotihuacan is relatively handy.’
He passed me a map and a brochure he had picked up at the hotel.
‘At least we shall be able to say we've seen the Temple of Quetzalcoatl, the Street of the Dead, and the great Pyramids of the Sun and the Moon.’
Teotihuacan was some twenty kilometres north-east of the centre of Mexico City and I thought I had probably glimpsed those pyramids through the dust haze as we flew in.
The brochure said that the Pyramid of the Sun was over sixty metres high, larger than the Great Pyramid of Egypt, and the Street of the Dead more than three kilometres long, but even though it contained a plan, as well as photographs, I was still not prepared for the colossal dimensions of the place.
We had barely forty minutes there, but we still managed to walk the whole huge complex, even climbing to the top of the smaller Pyramid of the Moon.
Ward had his camera with him, and though he led me round at a breathless pace, talking all the time about the terrible religious cult of the Aztecs, he also took quite a few pictures, usually with myself or some other human in the foreground to give an indication of the scale of the place.
In addition to Quetzalcoatl, the feathered serpent god of learning, he talked of Tezcatlipoca, the sky god, Tlaloc, the rain god, and the name I have most difficulty in pronouncing or even spelling, and the most terrible god of all — Huitzilopochtli.
I have a picture in my mind still of endless queues of captives waiting under guard to mount the steps of the Aztec temples where the priests of Huitzilopochtli stood waiting with obsidian stone knives, hands and faces black with caked blood, their robes stiff with it, as they worked industriously to open up each human chest, extract the still-palpitating heart, offering it to their filthy god, then tossing the torn-open body back down the steps to the waiting warriors below, who hacked it into joints for the ritual cannibalism that ensured both the pleasures of the flesh and added prowess from the absorption of the captive joint into their own live bodies.
It is a picture indelibly imprinted, Ward's voice painting it in quiet words, neither excited nor repelled by the horror of it, but simply repeating information he had obtained from one of the books he had borrowed from his Glasgow library as soon as he knew the route he would be taking to Punta Arenas and the Antarctic.
I have referred to it here because, to me, Mexico was a curtain-raiser to the horrors we were to uncover later.
The sun was setting in a red blaze as we drove into the centre of Mexico City, the long geometrically laid-out streets already darkening into canyons filled with the lights of cars.
There were men half-hidden by piled-up mountains of coloured balloons at some of the street corners, a relic, Ward said, of the magnificent feathered headdresses of the Aztecs, and with the stillness of evening the dust haze had gone, so that the huge square of the Zócalo had a brooding sense of peace, the cathedral's twin towers still touched with the sunset's warmth and the great mass of it dominating the presidential palace.
The restaurant Rodriguez had chosen was in one of the streets behind the cathedral, a small, sombre place which served only Mexican food.
He was tucked away in a corner, the only man on his own, a solitary candle illuminating his face as he pored over the paper on which he was writing.
It was an unusual face, the skin stretched tight across high cheekbones and of a yellowish-ochre  colour like old parchment, the features themselves almost patrician with their high forehead and prominent nose.
He didn't look up as we crossed the room, his head bent and the pen moving swiftly across pages held in a clipboard.
I had the sense of a withdrawn person, a loner.
‘Rodriguez?’
There was no warmth in Ward's voice.
The man raised his eyes, nodded, then closed the clipboard and got to his feet.
‘Señor Vord, eh?’
They shook hands, eyeing each other warily.
Ward introduced me and we sat down.
‘What's that you're drinking?’
Ward asked, leaning forward and putting his big nose down to sniff the pale liquid.
‘Tequila.’
‘Ah yes, made from the Agave tequilana, the sisal tree plant.’
Rodriguez nodded.
‘You like some tequila?’
Ward nodded.
‘I suppose so.
You going to have one?’ he asked me.
‘It's pretty fiery stuff.’
And when I nodded, he flicked his fingers at a passing waiter.
‘Dos tequilas.
What about you, Señor Rodriguez?’
‘Gracia.’
He ordered three, then sat back, staring at the man we had come to see.
‘You writing another book?’
‘No.
An article for an American magazine.’
‘About the Desaparecidos?’
‘No.
It concern the drug traffic on the Mexican-US border.
Cocaine.
It come mainly overland from Colombia and Ecuador.’
There was a short silence.
‘You want to see me about something?’
It was a question, not a statement, and the man was nervous.
‘What is it you want to see me about?’
Ward didn't answer.
He just sat there, staring at the man.
‘You say it is urgent, a matter of life or death for me.’
Rodriguez spoke softly, his voice so low it was almost a whisper.
‘What is it about then?’
Ward hesitated, then shook his head.
‘Later.’
He picked up the menu.
‘We'll talk about it later, after we've fed.’
But Rodriguez wanted to know right away.
He still had his biro gripped in his right hand and he was fiddling with it tensely, his brown, slightly almond-slitted eyes fallen to the table, unable to meet the directness of Ward's gaze.
syrupy liquid, rather like mead, but with a sharper, more aromatic flavour, and as Ward had said, very fiery.
He ordered sopa de mariscos, which was crab, mussels and shrimps with cilantro, onions and rice, followed by guacamole and chile salteados with a tortilla.
Rodriguez had already ordered for himself.
I followed Ward's lead as he seemed to know what the dishes were.
Rodriguez was part Indian, a short man with lank black hair.
‘I have a touch of the Quechua in me.’
He announced this in English, an explanation of something he had said that Ward had not understood.
They had been talking in Spanish.
‘You must excuse,’ he said.
‘I am not speaking altogether correctly.
My Spanish is of the Argentine.
There are many variations all through South America, and of course here in Central America it is different again, particularly in Mexico.’
He pronounced it Mehico.
Ward's excuse for talking in Spanish had been that he was accustoming himself to using it freely.
The soup came and with it the three bottles of beer he had ordered.
Rodriguez was starting with prawns wrapped in bacon.
At this point the conversation, still in Spanish, seemed to be about politics and the Mexican economy, but when Ward had finished his soup, he suddenly reverted to English.
‘Mario Ángel Gómez.’
He pushed his plate away and stared at Rodriguez.
‘When did you last see him?’
There was silence, the writer's eyes gone suddenly blank.
Like an animal sliding away from an unwelcome confrontation, he took refuge in a displacement activity, taking the last of the little pastries hot with spice that had come with the drinks and waving the empty plate at a passing waiter.
‘Well?’
‘When I am finishing the book.
You say you have read it.
It is all in my book, everything about Gómez that I know.’
‘He went to Peru, didn't he?’
‘He was going to Peru.
That's what he told me when I interviewed him that second time in Buenos Aires.’
‘And you didn't visit him there?’
‘No, I don't visit him.’
‘You mean you haven't seen him in Peru?
You haven't talked to him after he took up residence there?’
The man shook his head.
But before he did so there had been a fractional hesitation.
‘He is in Peru, isn't he?’
Again a shake of the head, and when Ward pressed him, repeating the question, Rodriguez said, ‘Maybe.
But I don't know for sure.’
The waiter arrived with the next course and they reverted to politics, talking Spanish again, Ward's tone, his whole manner softened.
He was trying to put Rodriguez at his ease.
But then he suddenly asked, ‘Why did he leave Argentina?’
He was a fast eater and now he was leaning forward across his empty plate, his English sharp and abrupt.
‘Why?’
Rodriguez shrugged.
And when Ward persisted, he said almost reluctantly, ‘Why does any man leave?
There were rumours.
I have said that in my book.’
‘Rumours concerning the Desaparecidos?’
‘Per'aps.’
‘But nothing ever proved?’
‘No.
It was just stories in one or two of the papers, the Peronista journals mainly.’
‘And that's why you interviewed him?’
‘Yes.’
‘You wrote that you caught him at his flat just at the time he was leaving the country.’
‘The second time, yes.
That's right.
He was already packing.’
‘Because he was afraid if he stayed he would be arrested?’
Rodriguez shook his head.
‘When Alfonsin came to power was there never any talk of arrestin' him?’
‘I tell you nobody ever accuse him of anything.
After the Malvinas war he is something of a hero.
In Puerto Argentina his plane is destroyed on the ground.
All the aermacchis are destroyed, so he takes some marines to make a reconnaissance across the island, his objective Goose Green.
Shortly after he is flown back to the mainland, to the most south naval base of Rio Grande in Tierra del Fuego.
From there he fly a Learjet, acting  as pathfinder for the Skyhawks, and I believe once for the Super Etendards.
At that time they have one Exocet left.’
‘Yes, but what about before the Falklands war, when he was a youngster, before he was commissioned?
Was he a member of the Triple A?’
‘The Triple A?’
‘Aye, the right-wing Peronistas who destroyed the Montoneros back in ‘73 -June 20, wasn't it, at Ezeiza Airport?
You mention that in your book, too.’
Rodriguez's eyes were fixed on his plate, his short dark fingers crumbling the remains of his tortilla.
Ward leaned forward across the table, his eyes fixed on the man's face, his tone aggressive as he said, ‘The Triple A was based on the ESMA, the Navy Mechanics’ School.’
He reminded me of a barrister I had once watched interrogating a hostile witness and I was sure his switch to English was not for my benefit, it was done to put Rodriguez at a disadvantage.
‘Your book doesn't say whether or not he was at the Escuela Mecánica de ia Armada, but the implication —’
Rodriguez was shaking his head angrily.
‘What you read into my book is more what you want, I think.
There was some talk, but nothing proved, no accusations.’
He emptied his glass and poured himself some more beer.
‘All I know is that he is with the naval air forces.
At the start of the Malvinas war he is with the Escuadrilla de Ataque based at Punta Indio, flying Aermacclu-339As and he is sent to Puerto Argentina —’
‘You mean Port Stanley.
But that was much later.
The time that interests me is before he was posted to the aircraft carrier Veinticinco de Mayo, before he became a flier.
Also Why he has now left Argentina.
You don't say why in your book, so perhaps you tell me now.’
Ward leaned quickly forward again.
‘Come on, man — why?’
And when Rodriguez did not answer him he said very quietly, ‘Was it because of anything that happened when he was at the Escuela Mecánica de la Armada?’
A pause, and then, ‘Ángel de Muerte, that was his nickname, wasn't it?
And he was proud of it.
He had it painted on his aircraft, that's what you say.
There was a long silence, Rodriguez sitting there, dumb.
‘Well, just tell me where he is now.
Surely ye can do that.
Where dae Ah find him — in Peru, where?’
‘Te digo, no sé.’
Rodriguez said it in Spanish, in an obstinate tone of voice that suggested finality.
‘I don't care to talk about him — not to you, not to nobody.’
He slapped his hands flat on the table and got to his feet.
Then, leaning down, staring into Ward's face, he said nervously, ‘Who are you?
Why do you ask me all these questions about him?
He is not important.
Not any more.’
He was scared.
It showed in his eyes, and in the way his voice had become increasingly sharp, almost strident.
‘Sit down.’
Ward's tone made it a command, but his voice was quiet.
Rodriguez shook his head.
‘I cannot answer any more questions.’
And he added, ‘I don't know who you are, why you want to ask me —’
‘Please!’
Ward raised his left hand, a placating gesture.
‘Por favor.
As your host I have perhaps been a little too brusque.
Please sit down again.
And please try to give me some indication of where this man can be found.’
‘Why you want to know?’
His voice was high-pitched, his English slipping.
His short, stout body was very still as he stared down into Ward's face.
Silence then, the two of them facing each other.
I could hear the talk at the next table, the staccato clatter of Mexican, and behind me the piercing voice of an American woman.
‘All right, I'll tell you why I'm interested in the man.’
Ward waved him back to his seat and called to the waiter to bring the coffee.
‘Y tres más tequilas,’ he added.
And to Rodriguez —‘Come on.
Sit down, fur God's sake.
Ah'm not goin' to shop ye!’
‘What is shop?’
Ward frowned.
He had used the word quite automatically.
It expressed his intention exactly, but to explain it…
‘Let's say that Ah'm not going to the police or anybody in authority.
This is a purely personal enquiry.
Now sit down and Ah will explain just why I am interested in this Mario Ángel Gómez.’
There was a further moment of hesitation, then Rodriguez suddenly made up his mind, and with a brief nod of his head, resumed his seat.
‘Okay, señor.
Why is it, then, that you are so interested?’
Ward began to explain, about Iris Sunderby and the boat waiting for us in Punta Arenas.
The coffee came and with it three more glasses of tequila.
‘Señora Sunderby should have flown straight to Punta Arenas, but instead she stopped off in Lima.
Her name before she married Charles Sunderby, an English glaciologist, was Iris Madalena Connor-Gómez.
My information is that Mario Ángel Gómez sometimes uses the double name Connor-Cómez and that they are related.
In fact, they both have the same father.
Is that right?’
Rodriguez shook his head.
‘I never meet this woman you speak of.’
They stared at each other for a moment, then Ward said, ‘All right.
What about Carlos then?
She told my friend here that he was some sort of cousin.
do you know who his mother is?’
Rodriguez shook his head again.
‘The boy was in London, a student at the university, and according to our immigration people he gave his name as Borgalini, his address care of a bank in Lima.
Why Lima?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Is it because Ángel Connor-Gómez is in Lima?’
Rodriguez shook his head violently.
‘I tell you, he is packing up to leave Buenos Aires the last time I saw him.
He don't say where he is going.’
‘Did you ask him?’
‘No.’
A pause then as the waiter brought the coffee and refilled our cups.
Rodriguez leaned forward.
‘Sometimes, you understand, is not very safe to ask questions.’
‘So you did regard him as dangerous?’
‘No, I don’ say that.
It is just that one learns to be careful, particularly if one is a writer.
Look what happened to that Indian chap of yours who wrote about the Koran.’
‘There is nothing blasphemous in your book.
Nobody has issued a fatwa or put out a contract.
So why are you scared?’
There was a silence then, an uneasy stillness between the two of  them as they sat facing each other.
‘Is it because he was called Ángel de Muerte?’
‘No, no.’
Rodriguez shook his head emphatically.
‘That is something that come out of his reconnaissance to Goose Green.
It became a last stand, all very dramatic.
His marines, suddenly faced with the British paras, took up a defensive position in some abandoned trenches and under Gómez's leadership fought very last ditch, full of courage.
They were killed almost to the man.
That is probably when they give him that name — the Ángel of Death.’
He said it in English, slowly, as though enjoying the sound of the words, and he added with a secret little smile, ‘That happened just before he was recalled at the request of Lami Dozo himself.
His navigational skills were required at Rió Grande and it was then he painted his Learjet with the name Ángel de Muerte, on both sides, so that on the radio beamed to the English they could say the Ángel of Death was coming with his French missiles loaded to kill.’
‘Then the nom de guerre was nothing to do with the Disappeareds?’
Rodriguez hesitated, then shrugged his shoulders.
‘Who can tell?
As I have said, there were rumours.
That is all.’
‘You questioned him about it?’
‘Not directly.
I tell you, it is dangerous to ask questions like that.
But I make enquiries.
Nobody can tell me anything that is certain.
There is no record.’
‘But he was at the Escuela Mecánica de la Armada?’
‘Si.’
And then Ward asked him what had happened to Iris Sunderby's father, Juan Connor-Gómez.
‘He kill himself.
I say that in my book.
He is Chairman and Managing Director of the Gómez Emporium, a big store in the centre of Buenos Aires.
When it is burn down he lose everything, so…’
He shrugged.
‘You wrote that he was arrested.’
‘Yes.
The company was in difficulty.
This is at the beginning of the Malvinas trouble.
It was thought he may have set a match to it himself.
For the insurance, you see.
But nothing is proved, so he is released.
That was about a year before he commit suicide.
The insurance people are still fighting the claim in the courts.’
‘And his other son?
What happened to Eduardo?
You don't mention him, except to say that he was a biologist and that he went to England to work for two years at the chemical weapons experimental establishment at Porton Down.
You don't say what happened to him.’
More tequila arrived and Rodriguez sat there staring down at the yellow-green liquid in his glass.
‘Well?’
He shrugged.
‘I don't know.
I don't know what happen to him.’
‘Is he one of the Desaparecidos?’
‘Could be.
I don't know.
A few months after he return from England he bought a flight ticket to Montevideo in Uruguay.
That is the last anybody hear of him.’
Ward switched then to the Gómez family background.
They were talking in Spanish again so that I couldn't follow what was said, only the gist of it, and that largely from the names they referred to: Iris Sunderby's, of course, her grandfather, too, and the Connors, Sheila Connor in particular , and there was constant repetition of the name Rosalli Gabrielli.
Suddenly Rodriguez's eyes widened.
‘*Me acusás a mi? *Por que me acusás?
No escondo nada.’
His eyes darted to the door.
‘Och, relax, man.
Ah'm not accusin' ye of anythin'.’
Ward was leaning forward, his gaze fixed on the Argentinian's face.
‘All Ah'm askin' from ye is the man's present whereabouts.’
‘I tell you, I don't know.’
Ward's left hand crashed down on the table, spilling coffee from the cup he had just filled.
‘Ye're lyin'.
Tell me his address —’
Rodriguez jumped to his feet.
‘You do not speak to me like that.
You have no right.
If I tell you I don't know, then you must accept —’
‘Balls!’
Ward's hand slammed the table again, his voice gone quiet, almost menacing, as he said, ‘He's in Peru.
Ye just tell me where —’
‘No.
I am leaving you now.’
Ward was on his feet in a flash, his gloved right hand reaching  out for the other's arm.
‘Sit down!
Ye haven't finished yer drink yet.’
‘No, no.
I go now.’
Rodriguez's face was screwed up with pain as the grip of that dummy hand on his arm forced his body slowly sideways towards his seat.
‘]Dejame ir!’
It was almost a squeal.
‘Ah'll let ye go when ye give me his address.
Now sit down.’
Ward pushed him back into his chair.
‘Got a pen?’ he asked me.
His hand was still gripping the man's arm, holding him there, and when I nodded he said, ‘Give it to him.
And pass him one of those paper napkins; he can write the address down on that.’
Rodriguez was still struggling and out of the corner of my eye I could see the patron watching us uneasily.
I thought he might phone the police at any moment.
Ward was leaning forward again, his weight dragging at the arm he was still holding.
Rodriguez hesitated, his eyes shifting from Ward to the silent faces of the other diners, all watching us.
Then suddenly he seemed to sag back into his seat, his hand reaching slowly for the pen I was still holding out to him.
It shook slightly as he scribbled an address, then pushed the serviette across the table, his body slowly relaxing as Ward let go of him and picked up the serviette.
‘Cajamarca?’
He passed the serviette to me, his eyes fixed on the man.
‘Why Cajamarca?’
‘It is where he lives.’
‘Yes, but why?
Why there?
Why not in Lima or Trujillo or Cuzco?’
The other shook his head, shrugging his padded shoulders.
‘He has a hacienda there.
The Hacienda Lucinda.’
‘At Cajamarca.
Where's that?’
Rodriguez's face looked blank.
‘All right, you haven't been there, you say.
But you must have been sufficiently curious to check it out on a map.
So where is it?’
There was a pause, then Rodriguez said, ‘Cajamarca is in the north of Pem.’
He pronounced it Cahamarca.
‘It is inland from the coast, behind the Cordillera do los Andes.’
Ward nodded.
‘Ah remember now.
It's where Pizarro ambushed the Inca army, right?’
He was suddenly smiling.
‘Very  appropriate.’
He seemed to wait for his words to sink in, then added, slowly and with emphasis, ‘Pizarro was a thug.
An avaricious, cruel bastard.’
‘He was a brave man,’ Rodriguez muttered.
They might have been referring to somebody they knew.
‘Oh yes, he was brave all right.’
He turned to me.
‘If ye read Prescott ye'll get the impression Pizarro crossed the Andes and destroyed the great empire of the Incas with just forty horse and sixty foot.
But it wasn't quite like that, was it?’
He had turned back to Rodriguez.
‘He had guns and armour, and the God of the Catholics behind him, and a whole army of dissident Indian auxiliaries in support.
Still, Ah grant ye, an incredible feat.’
And he added, his voice quietly emphatic, ‘A brave, very determined, very obstinate man.
Not a gentleman like Cortés, but a peasant, with a peasant's cunning and greed.
The Mafia would have loved him.’
Rodriguez was getting to his feet again, the uneasy look back on his face.
He seemed to find something disturbing in what Ward had said.
‘Sit down, man.
There's a little matter we haven't touched on yet.’
Ward pointed to the chair.
‘Sit down, for God's sake.’
He leaned back.
‘Here in Mexico the Spaniards topped every Aztec temple to Huitzilopochtli, every pyramid, either with a church or a statue of the Virgin Mary.
Ye're a Roman Catholic, Ah take it?’
Rodriguez nodded slowly.
‘A very pragmatic church.
A lot of glitz.’
He seemed to be talking to himself.
‘Ah wonder what Christ makes of all the horrors done in his name.
And now we have fanatical variations of the Muslim faith breathin' hate and venom all over the Near East.’
I didn't follow the relevance of his religious digression.
Nor I think did Rodriguez, who had subsided into his seat again, a sad, dazed look on his face.
‘]Salud!’
Ward raised his glass.
‘]Salud!’
‘Tell me —.’
His tone was mild, almost conversational —‘how much did he pay you?’
The man's eyes slid sideways to the street door.
‘No comprendo.’
The door was open and he started to rise.
‘You understand perfectly well.’
Ward was very much the old Etonian now, his manner still mild, but with something in the voice that held Rodriguez riveted, both hands on the table and his bottom half out of his seat.
‘You went to Peru.’
‘No.’
‘You went to Pem,’ he repeated, ‘and you saw Gómez.
He still uses his service rank, does he?’
‘Yes, he is Capitán now.’
‘So you saw him.’
The other didn't answer.
‘How much?’
Ward's voice had hardened.
‘I don't go to Peru.
I come here to Mexico City where it is not too far by airplane to visit my publishers in San Francisco.’
‘You went to Peru.’
Ward said it very quietly this time, but with an emphasis that made it sound like a threat.
‘You cannot prove anything.’
‘No?’
Ward left his enquiry hanging there, smiling quietly.
Then he said, ‘What I need from you is not so much what he paid you, but why.
You went to Pem —’ He pulled a diary out of his breast pocket and checked some notes at the end —‘on March 5 this year.
That is just two months before your book came out.
What were you going to write into the book if he didn't pay you?’
‘Nothing.
Nothing, I tell you.
He pay me nothing.’
Ward glanced at his diary again.
‘According to my information your book has sold some eight thousand copies in the English language and the print figure in the Spanish edition was twenty-five thousand.
You have two wives to keep, the one you are living with here, who is really your mistress, and I believe rather expensive, particularly as she already has a daughter, and your wife proper who will not divorce you and is living in the Argentine with your two children, a boy and a girl.
You also run a big Chrysler and have two addresses, one here in Mexico City, the other in Cuernavaca.
In other words, you live an expensive life, more expensive than you could possibly afford on the basis of the royalties from your two books and the articles you periodically write for newspapers and magazines in the States.
So — what is it you haven't told me about this man?’
Rodriguez didn't answer.
He subsided back into his seat, staring down at his drink, while Ward watched him, waiting.
Their eyes met.
Then Rodriguez glanced at the door again as though seeking escape, but it was shut now.
His eyes flickered round the restaurant.
There were still several people watching us, conversation muted.
‘Well?’
He shook his head, suddenly reaching for his drink and swallowing it in one quick gulp.
He stared at the empty glass for a moment.
I think he would have liked another, but instead he pulled himself slowly to his feet.
Ward had also risen, the two of them facing each other.
‘You mention in your book that some time after the capitulation at Port Stanley, Gómez was given the job of testing an aircraft for its long-range capabilities, flying it out of that Argentine base at the bottom of Tierra del Fuego.
You suggest he was secretly testing it for work on the Antarctic land mass, flying it south over the pack ice.
How far south?
Do you know where?’
‘No.’
‘As far as the Ice Shelf?’
‘No sé.’
‘It couldn't have been entirely secret since you say it was reported in the papers.
You even have a picture of him taken on his return.
It was a German plane, a Fokker I believe?’
‘Si.’
There was a moment's silence, the two of them standing there and the restaurant quite still now.
‘We'll be stopping off in Lima,’ Ward said.
‘If Gómez is not at the address you have given me I shall presume it is because you've been in touch with him, so don't phone him.
Okay?’
And he added, ‘I will not, of course, mention our meeting here in Mexico City.’
The other nodded and turned towards the door.
But then he paused, a look almost of malice.
‘If you go to Cajamarca you should know el Niño is running.’
‘So?’
‘El Niño is the counter-equatorial current.’
‘I know that.’
‘Every six or seven years it overruns the Humboldt.’
‘And then?’
‘And then…per'aps you will see.’
He smiled, adding, ‘When el Niño run the fishermen don't earn nothing because fish like the cold of the north-flowing Humboldt, not the warmth of the Equatorial, and with no fish, the birds die.’
‘How do you know what's happening down there in Peru?
Have you been there again?’
‘No.
It is in the papers.
The birds are dying.’
‘And how's that concern us?’
‘I am never on the Pacific coast in el Niño year,’ Rodriguez said, still smiling, ‘but if the rains of the Amazon slip across the Cordilleras you will maybe have a bad flight to Cajamarca.
]Buen viaje!’ he added, not bothering now to hid his malice as he turned quickly to the door and made his escape.
Ward knocked back the rest of his tequila and called for the cuenta.
‘Time we got some sleep.
The next few days could be a wee bit hectic.’
All the way back to the hotel he sat hunched and silent in the rear of the taxi, his eyes closed.
He only spoke once, and then he was merely voicing his thoughts aloud.
‘That aircraft was fitted with long-range tanks.
He could have got to the South Pole and back.
Or he could have flown it around in the wastes of ice where Shackleton lost the Endurance.
Nobody would see him there.’
And he added, ‘Ah wonder how much Iris knows?’
I failed to follow his train of thought, my mind still on the meeting with Rodriguez.
‘You really think he was blackmailing the man?’
He looked at me then, a quick flick of the eyes.
‘Of course.
And not just Gómez.
A book like that, it's a great temptation fur a journalist who knows so much he's scared to go on livin' in his own country.’
I said something about the political climate in the Argentine having changed since the Falklands War.
I thought I knew that much about the country.
I suppose I had read it somewhere.
But he laughed and shook his head.
‘That's a very naïve assessment.
Nothin' has changed.
Not  really.
The Argentines are still ethnically the same, the population still predominantly Italian, most of them havin' their roots in the south of Italy and in Sicily.
The Camorra and the Mafia are part of their heritage, violence in their blood.’
I started to argue with him, but all he said was, ‘Leopards don't change their spots just because the fashion in political leadership alters.
And remember, the Junta that decided on the invasion of the Malvinas, at least tae of them, were of Italian extraction.
They're finished, of course, now, but there will be others — others that are lyin' low fur the moment.
Rodriguez knows that.
Probably knows who they are.
That's why he's scared to remain in Buenos Aires.’
He relapsed into silence then, and because my mind was still trying to grapple with the politics of a country I knew very little about, I failed to ask him whether Gómez had made that flight on his own or if he had had a crew with him.
It was only later, when I was lying in my bed, with the neon lights of a bar across the road flickering on the curtains and music blaring, that I remembered Ward standing in the saloon of the Cutty Sark and asking Iris Sunderby who she had in mind as navigator, who the man was who had convinced her he had also seen a ship locked in the ice of the Weddell Sea.
I had thought at the time she had been referring to an officer on some survey vessel, the British Antarctic Survey's supply ship perhaps, or else a pelagic fisherman or whaler, even an Antarctic explorer.
But now it came back to me.
She had said, A man I'm convinced has actually seen what my husband saw.
Those had been her words, and if she was being exact, they would mean that he had seen the icebound vessel from the air, exactly as Sunderby had seen it.
I lay there for a long time thinking about that, the loud insistence of the Mexican music from across the way drumming in my ears and gradually merging into the crashing ice of layering floes as my mind drifted into a fantasy of trekking with Iris Sunderby towards the dim outline of an icicle-festooned ghost of a ship, the man at the helm towering like a giant question mark over my jet-lagged brain.
Had Charles Sunderby imagined it, or had he really seen the figure of a man standing frozen at the wheel?
I woke in a daze, the music replaced by the roar of traffic and the sunrise showing like a great red orange through a gap in the buildings opposite.
There was no wind, the air crystal clear.
I was too excited at being in such a strange city on the other side of the world for there to be any question of going back to sleep again.
I got up, dressed and went for a walk, my limbs lethargic with the altitude, my brain sluggish after the disturbed night.
The shops were opening and I browsed for a while in one that sold books as well as newspapers and magazines, but I failed to find the American edition of Rodriguez's book.
Instead, I came away with an old copy of Prescott's Conquest of Peru.
It was dusty and the spine was broken, but at least it was in English.
Even so, it cost me rather more of my American dollars than I expected.
By then the sun was risen above the tops of the buildings and it was hot.
I walked slowly back to the hotel.
No sign of Ward, so I had breakfast, then rang his room.
First time I tried his phone was engaged.
When I finally got through to him he said very brusquely, ‘Don't phone again.
Order a taxi fur ten-forty-five and hold it till Ah come down.
Ah'm waitin' fur a call.’
‘It's getting late,’ I said.
‘Ah know, but this call is important.
Anyway, they'll not take off on time.’
It was almost eleven before he appeared, looking as though he hadn't slept at all.
‘Taxi there?
Good.
Make sure it doesn't go off.’
He dumped his overnight bag with mine and I went out to tell the driver we were just coming.
When I got back he was at the cashier's desk settling the bill.
It was in US dollars, not Mexican pesetas.
‘And there is also’, the clerk said, ‘two hundred and seventy-nine dollars owing for your calls, señor.’
Ward paid with American traveller's cheques and we hurried out to the taxi.
‘Aeropuerto.’
He flopped into his seat.
‘That was quite a telephone bill,’ I said as we moved off.
‘International calls are expensive.’
He closed his eyes.
‘London?
Or were you phoning Lima?’
I don't know whether he was asleep or not, but he didn't answer.
He was equally uncommunicative when we reached the airport.
His guess that the flight would be delayed proved correct.
Security, they said.
Apparently there had been a bomb scare recently.
The transit baggage had not been loaded and customs officials and police were insisting on all cases being opened and everything laid out on the floor.
It all took time and it was past midday before we finally got away.
Ward ordered vodka, drank it straight and went to sleep with *Muerto O Vivo? open on his lap.
The meal came.
He waved it away and went back to sleep.
We had just passed over a gaggle of eighteen-thousand-foot volcanoes, great slag heaps of ash with gaping vents pointed at the clear blue bowl of the heavens, when he finally shifted in his seat and leaned across me to look out of the window, blinking his eyes.
‘Know where Ah'd like to be goin'?
The Galapagos.’
He nodded his head towards a white line of distant cloud far out over the starb'd wing tip.
‘Out there.
Can't be more than a thousand miles.
Mebbe Ah'll dae that when Ah've extricated mesel’ from the Southern Ocean an' all that ice.’
He picked up his book again, opened it at the marker and settled himself in his seat.
He was back, playing the Glasgow boy and wearing his tourist hat like a hired costume.
The stewardess came down the aisle, a big-breasted young woman exuding a strong odour of perspiration.
He ordered another vodka and turned to me.
‘What about ye?
Horse's Neck?’
I nodded.
He gave the order and we returned to our books.
I had become totally absorbed in William Prescott's account of the Inca civilisation, which had been destroyed by the greed of Pizarro's Conquistadores.
It was a fascinating glimpse of a people who in the sixteenth century had never seen a wheel or a sea-going ship, had never faced an armoured knight on horseback or the fire power of crossbows and guns, but whose roads and lines of communication through the incredible terrain of the Andes, whose methods of agriculture by irrigation and whose whole political set-up, so close to what we know as Communism, was in some ways more advanced than that of their conquerors.
The drinks came and Ward sat back, watching me out of the corner of his eye.
‘When ye've finished absorbin' Prescott Ah guess ye'll know as much about Peru as most Peruvians.
Probably  more.’
And he added, ‘This will be the first time Ah've visited the country, but havin' read Prescott myself Ah don't think Ah'm goin' to like the Spaniards and what they and the mestizos have done to it.’
And then he said suddenly, ‘That phone call Ah was waitin' fur — it was from the hotel Iris had given me as her address in Lima.
They say she pulled out three days ago.’
‘Then why are we stopping off in Lima?’
I asked him.
‘You don't have to.
You can go straight on to Punta Arenas if you'd prefer.’
‘But you're stopping off?’
‘Yes.
She didn't fly on into Chile.
Ah checked with both Lan Chile and UC Ladeco.
Also Aero Peru.
In any case, she had a hire car delivered to the hotel.
The assistant manager said when she left she was drivin' it herself.’
My thoughts of the night came back to me.
‘You think she's gone up to Cajamarca?’
‘Well, she's certainly not drivin' herself all the way down through Chile to Punta Arenas.
That's well over three thousand miles and God knows what the roads are like south of Valparaíso, if there are any.
It's all mountains and deep-cut fjords.’
He smiled at me.
‘So ye've reached the same conclusion as Ah have, that Mario Ángel Gómez is the navigator she referred to as the man who can lead her to that icebound ship.
Ah doubt there's anybody else has had the sort of opportunity he's had for flyin' around at will in that part of the Antarctic.’
‘There are bases,’ I said.
‘Half a dozen countries have survey and exploration establishments around the fringes of the Antarctic land mass.’
He nodded.
‘But they fly set pattern routes on direct lines from their southern supply points to their Antarctic bases.
Ah had a look at the Royal Geographical Society's latest maps, some of the charts, too.
None of the supply routes go close to the point where Sunderby's aircraft ditched.
And Ah had a word on the phone with a Cambridge don they put me on to— he was somethin' to dae with the Scott Polar Institute, and he confirmed that supply aircraft would not normally be overflying the area we're interested in.’
The fact that Sunderby's plane was en route for the American base at McMurdo made no difference except that the operational word was ‘normally’.
‘There were tae things that were not normal about that flight.
In the first place, the plane made an emergency landin' at Port Stanley to have an electrical fault put right.
That's how Sunderby came to be on the flight.
Secondly, he was a glaciologist and it may well be that he persuaded the pilot to swin' away to the east.
It would only call fur a small diversion from the direct route from Stanley to McMurdo Sound to give him a glimpse of the Ice Shelf and the area where Shackleton's Endurance was beset and finally sunk.’
His point was that the Americans did not normally fly supplies out of the Falklands.
I asked him what Gómez's point of departure had been and he replied, ‘Ushuaia, accordin' to Rodriguez.
That's the Argentine base in the south-west of Tierra del Fuego, on the Beagle Channel.
Not ideal, Ah'm told, but that may have been part of the test.’
‘You say he was refuelled.
He must have had some sort of a flight plan.’
Ward was silent for a moment.
‘He was testin' a plane.
It had probably been modified fur work in Antarctica.
The Argentinians have a short strip airbase in the north of the Antarctic Peninsula.
Visecomodorio Marambio Ah think it's called.’
He spoke hesitantly as though trying to work it out for himself.
‘Maybe he flew the final stage from there.
And he must have been testin' in part fur flight refuellin' because Rodriguez says in his book he was refuelled somewhere over the Bellingshausen Sea, which is a long way west of the area where Sunderby lost his life.’
‘What are you suggesting?’
I asked.
‘That as soon as he was refuelled he took the opportunity of seeing if he could locate the remains of that American plane?’
‘No.
The plane's sunk.
Ah don't think there's any doubt about that.’
‘Then what?’
‘Ah don't know.’
His voice had slowed again, little more than a murmur.
‘Ah'm just thinkin' aloud.’
He turned his head towards me.
‘And Ah saw an angel come down from Heaven, havin' the key  of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.
D'ye recognise that?’ he asked.
I shook my head.
‘You're quoting from the Bible, are you?’
‘The Revelation of St John.’
He smiled.
‘Wonderful stuff.
Ye should read it.’
And then, suddenly practical, he said, ‘When ye've finished yer drink Ah suggest ye put Prescott away, turn yer light out and try and get some sleep.
There should be a car waitin' fur us at the airport when we get in to Lima.
Ye've got your international driving licence?’
I nodded.
‘Good.
Ye'll be drivin' when we take it over.
It'll save time.
There's always the chance they'll query the validity of my own licence —’ He tapped the steel forearm and gloved hand resting on his lap.
‘Foreigners can be a wee bit difficult about it sometimes.’
Somewhat pointedly he closed his own book and tipped his seat right back, preparing himself for sleep.
‘We'll go to the hotel first.
Ah'd like a word with the doorman if they've got one.
Then we'll head fur the coast and the Pan-Am Highway, drive right through the night.
Okay?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘We'll drive and sleep in turn.
With luck we should be in Cajamarca in time for breakfast.’
And then he switched abruptly from practicalities, quoting in a stage whisper: ‘And I saw a new Heaven and a new earth; for the first Heaven and the first earth were passed away: and there was no more sea.’
He spoke it without a trace of a Scot's accent.
‘Patmos,’ he murmured.
‘I was there very briefly a couple of years back.
There's a great white fortress of a monastery crowning the top of the island.
It was once full of treasures, but all I could think about as I stood on the battlemented roof, looking out over the Aegean, was that a disciple of Christ's had sat in his cell in a little monastery half-way up the hill recording the extraordinary revelations he had been vouchsafed.
Was he mad?
The Emperor Domitian condemned him, so he had evidently seemed so, to a Roman.
But it's great reading.’
He settled himself more deeply in his seat.
‘Och well, we'll see whether those lines fit when we reach the top of the pass  over the Andes.’
He switched out his overhead light, closed his eyes, and instantly, it seemed, he was asleep.
When we arrived in Lima it took time to go through the formalities.
Again the immigration people questioned him about his occupation, even going so far as to check the word antiquarian in an English-Spanish dictionary.
‘Useful, ye see,’ Ward said as we went through to the baggage claim area.
‘He was so busy worryin' over what ‘antiquarian’ meant that he hardly glanced at our visas.
And yer occupation of wood preservation consultant is not exactly a description he comes across every day.’
He was smiling as we took our place by the baggage conveyor belt.
When we had finally retrieved all his excess baggage, it took us even longer than in Mexico to clear customs because he insisted on unrolling a big holdall right there on the bench to get at his oilskins.
‘We'll almost certainly need them at Punta Arenas.
Iris said it blows and rains like hell just about every day in the Strait of Magellan.
Better get yers out, too.
It's rainin' up in the mountains accordin' to that nice immigration laddie.
He said he'd heard it on the radio this mornin'.
There's floodin' too, in places.
The Niño factor.
Rodriguez was right.’
We checked all but our oilies, hand baggage and briefcases into the airport lock-ups, and after what he had said about the weather, I was glad to see, when we got to the car desk, that he had laid on a four-wheel-drive land-cruiser.
While he was signing the hire and insurance papers, the girl produced a parcel from a cubby-hole at the back.
‘Ees left for you this morning, señor.
A courier from the Librerío Universal bring it.
There is some extra to pay, plees.’
He nodded without looking up as she placed it on the counter.
‘Books,’ he said.
She nodded, asked for our driving licences, then took us outside to where the vehicle was parked in the shade of a tree.
‘It may not be as comfortable as an ordinary saloon,’ Ward said on a note of apology, ‘but buggered if Ah was takin' any chances in a country like this.’
He pulled open the rear door and tossed the package of books on to the back seat, together with his gear.
‘Ye check the vehicle over while Ah see that we've got a manual and all the necessary papers.’
The girl was already producing the car's documents from a compartment below the instrument panel.
‘What are the roads like?
Bad I suppose.’
I was walking round the vehicle, peering underneath to check the state of the tyres and the exhaust line.
‘The coastal road is fine, macadam all the way.
The turn-off to Cajamarca is north of Trujillo, so we've got about six hundred kilometres of fast drivin'.’
The speedometer read 62805, but that was kilometres, not miles.
The vehicle was dusty and there was some rust.
I lifted the bonnet.
‘What about the mountain road?’
I asked.
‘We have to cross the first of the cordilleras according to the map you showed me.’
‘Rodriguez said it was okay.
Macadam until we run out of the coastal plain and start to climb.
After that it's a dirt road, but fairly new.
It seems heavy trucks use it every day, so it can't be too bad.’
I finished checking the leads and cooling pipes.
‘Nothing to worry about then.’
And I closed the bonnet.
He nodded, paid the deposit, again in US dollars, and passed me the keys.
‘Ye're drivin'.
Okay?’
‘]Buen viaje!’
The girl flashed us a brilliant smile and took her brightly uniformed efficiency off to deal with another customer, a big American with a broad-brimmed stetson shading his leathery features.
The hotel we were headed for was in the centre of the city, a nightmare ride with everybody driving like crazy and blaring their horns.
And it was hot, the humidity very high with a miasma hanging over the buildings as though the clouds were so heavy with moisture they needed to rest themselves on terra firma.
There was no doorman at the hotel where Iris Sunderby had stayed, but the woman at reception confirmed that she had left by car shortly after eight on Sunday morning.
She remembered because she had seen her drive off and it was unusual for ‘a señora of her quality’ to be driving herself with no companion.
All the time Ward had been talking to the receptionist his head had been half turned to the street doors, which were wide open, framing an incessant movement of people in an iridescent haze of hot sunlight.
His eyes darted from door to lift, watchful  and alert, as though he were expecting somebody.
It had been the same at the airport and I had thought then that perhaps he half expected Iris Sunderby to materialise out of the crowd.
Now it worried me, but you can't ask a man like Ward if he's scared.
I felt he was as tensed-up as that.
It was the same as we drove off, but my attention was then concentrated on the traffic.
‘Turn right at the corner here.’
He said it abruptly, his body twisted round so that he could look back at the hotel.
‘It's straight on,’ I said.
I had looked up the directions for the Pan-Am Highway at the hotel.
‘Ah know it is, but turn right.
Turn right, damn ye — here!’
A horn screamed from behind us as I swung the wheel over without indicating.
‘And right again.’
He wanted me to go round the block and park the car about fifty metres short of the hotel.
‘Why?’
There was a car close behind me.
‘Just do as Ah say.’
The car was still with us as I slid into the kerb just short of the hotel entrance.
It passed us then, a very battered American car with a young Indian at the wheel.
He gave us a hard stare as he passed, very slowly.
A moment later he also parked, right outside the hotel entrance.
‘Quick!
Pull up close behind him!’
Ward had his door open and was out in a flash before we had even stopped.
The Indian had got out too and was coming round the back of his car.
Ward's left hand shot out, grabbing him by the arm and dragging him past me.
‘Drive on!’
The door behind me was flung open, the man bundled in.
‘Go on — drive!’
Torrents of Spanish as I backed away and pulled out into the traffic.
I didn't know what to do.
I didn't understand Ward's behaviour, so I just concentrated on getting out of the city as fast as I could.
‘We'll dump him somewhere up the Pan-Am.’
Ward's voice was close against my left ear.
‘What's it all about?’
I could hear the Indian struggling in the back.
‘For God's sake!
You can't do this sort of thing…’
A main intersection was coming up, the traffic lights not working and a policeman on duty.
He waved me through so that I didn't even have to slow.
‘Let him go,’ I yelled.
But Ward didn't answer.
He was talking to the Indian, sharp, barked questions in Spanish.
It went on like that all the way out of Lima, Ward's voice sometimes hard and accusing, sometimes dangerously quiet, and the Indian mumbling his replies, and sometimes answering in his own tongue.
‘He's from Puno,’ Ward said at one stage.
‘Thirteen thousand feet up on the shores of Lake Titicaca.
Says he has a woman and two boys to keep and needs money.’
And he added, ‘Can't blame him.
If Ah lived in a clapped-out city like this with inflation at two hundred per cent, or whatever it is, Ah'd dae just about anythin' fur payment in solid US dollars.’
It occurred to me that Ward's early background couldn't have been all that different.
‘What's he got in his mouth?’
I had caught a glimpse of the Indian's face in the rear mirror, a flat, rather moon-shaped face with high cheekbones, blackened teeth and dark eyes that were so slitted he had a Mongol look.
His hair was lank and very black and his right cheek bulged where he had something wadded behind his teeth.
‘There's a smell, too,’ I said.
Ward laughed.
‘Nothin' to the way ye probably smell to him.
But it's coke.
That's what he's chewin'.
The coca leaf.
They all chew it.
Keeps hunger at bay.’
And he added, ‘Ah wish Ah'd known about coke when Ah was a kid.’
‘Why, have you used it?’
‘Of course Ah have.
But Ah was out where the poppy grows so Ah started on hashish and stuff like that.
Not good.
But cocaine —; no, let's say the coca leaf…
Hell, if ye know how to use the stuff it can dae ye a power of good.
There was a man way back at the beginnin' of this century made an elixir of it, sent it to all the crowned heads of Europe, the Pope, too.
They all loved it, thought it was the greatest thing they'd ever drunk.’
We crossed the Rimac river, which was swollen, running brown and very fast.
I knew the way then, for we were back-tracking the route we had taken from the airport.
‘He was following us, wasn't he?’
I asked.
‘Aye.’
‘Why?
Has he told you why?’
‘To earn some money.’
‘Yes, of course.
But who paid him to follow us?’
‘The other one, the man he was with.
He doesn't know where he got his orders from.’
Directions for the great north-south coastal highway came up and suddenly we were on a dual carriageway that cut through the remains of a giant sand slide.
I was doing over a hundred k.p.h. then through a miasma of mist, the Pacific glimmering opaquely away to our left and the light fading.
‘Stop at some nice convenient pull-in and we'll take leave of our friend.’
I pulled over and Ward and the Indian got out.
There was a hot, wet wind, but no dust blowing.
It was too damp.
‘*El Niño?’
Ward said, and the Indian nodded.
‘Si, si.
El Niño.’
‘His name is Palca.’
Ward handed him a ten-dollar note.
‘]Buen viaje!’
He laughed and clapped him on the back.
The Indian looked at the note, then at Ward.
His face was impassive.
It showed neither surprise nor pleasure.
‘Momento.’
He jerked his poncho up, felt about in the pocket of his filthy jeans and produced a screwed-up bit of paper which he handed to Ward with a few muttered words.
Then he turned, and with a little gesture of farewell crossed the highway and headed back towards Lima, a small, shambling figure glancing back every now and then in search of a truck that would give him a lift.
Ward opened up the paper to reveal two tiny clay figures interlocked, the woman with her head bent over the man's huge phallic erection.
‘What is it?’
I asked him.
‘Some sort of votive offerin', Ah imagine.
Ah've seen this sort of thin' in the Mediterranean, but not as erotic.’
He held it out to me.
‘Look at the self-satisfied smirk on the man's face.
Good, isn't it?
He said it was Mochica, from a grave south of Lima.
It's typical of Mochica pottery — a lot of it is highly erotic.
Ah've seen pictures of drinkin' vessels where the only way of gettin' at the liquor is through the penis, but Ah've never seen fellatio depicted or pictures of miniatures like this…
Maybe it's just a copy.
but if so, it's remarkably well done.’
He was staring at it almost lovingly.
Then he turned and stood for a while gazing out at the Pacific.
‘Ah feel like stout Cortés, silent upon a peak in Darien.’
‘That's a long way further north,’ I said.
‘And anyway it was Balboa.’
‘Ah know.’
He got back into the front seat and we started up the coast.
‘Ah don't like it,’ he said at length.
There was a long silence, night closing in fast.
I switched the headlights on.
‘What don't you like?’
I said at last.
‘He was just a driver.
Ah should have grabbed the other one.
Ye didn't notice him, did ye?
He was waitin' fur us at the airport, a mean-faced little mestizo dressed in a pale blue suit.
Ah didn't see him at first.
He was standin' half-hidden among a group of American tourists.’
‘Where was this?’
‘In the baggage claim area.
He watched us go through customs, followed us to the lock-up, then out to the parkin' lot.
Remember Ah asked ye to go slowly at the start?
He was running then to that old heap the Indian was drivin'.
They were behind us all the way to the hotel.’
‘If he was following us,’ I said, ‘why didn't he stay in the car?’
Ward shrugged.
‘Wanted to make certain we weren't bookin' in fur the night, Ah suppose, find out what our plans were.
He was lurkin' in a doorway while Ah was grabbin' the driver.’
‘But why?
Is there something you haven't told me?’
‘Such as?’
I hesitated.
But what the hell, better have it out with him now.
‘Are you something to do with Intelligence?’
I would like to have been watching the expression on his face, having put the question to him so bluntly, but just at that moment I had to slam on my brakes for two gaudily painted trucks, one of them with La Resurrección elaborately painted in red.
They loomed up ahead of me, travelling side-by-side at just over 80 k.p.h. and completely blocking the highway.
I flashed my headlights and the one on the left gradually pulled ahead.
I heard Ward laugh.
‘Whatever gave ye that idea?’
He brushed the question aside and I realised it had been silly of me to ask it.
If he were Intelligence he certainly wouldn't tell me.
‘Ye have too vivid an imagination,’ he said.
By then the faster truck, La Resurrección, had pulled over and I had a blurred impression of brilliantly painted pictures of Bethlehem, the birth and the Virgin Mary as I passed it.
‘It must cost them a fortune.
Ward was changing the subject and l let it go at that.
Time would probably answer my question.
Meanwhile, there was the more urgent matter of why we had been followed.
‘Who sicked those two on to us?’
I asked.
‘Aye, who did?
Yer guess is as good as mine, Pete.’
‘Gómez?
‘Ah'd imagine, yes.’
‘But why?’
‘That's what Ah don't know.’
He leaned forward and pulled the map from the dashboard shelf, flashing his torch on it.
‘The first town we go through is Huacho.’
He spelled it out for me.
‘About a hundred kilometres.
There's a hotel marked.
We'll stop there.
Ah could do with a drink.’
‘Maybe we could get something to eat.’
I slowed as headlights blazed, dazzling, out of the mist.
A great mammoth of an American truck went thundering past, forcing me on to the dirt shoulder.
‘Pisco sour,’ he murmured, settling himself on his seat and closing his eyes.
‘Ah'm sure lookin' forward to my first pisco sour.’
The sea mist was thicker now, the road worsening with pot-holes in places.
Roadworks came and went, unlighted piles of debris looming suddenly.
‘What is pisco sour?’
I asked him, but he was already asleep and I drove on to Huacho, wondering what sort of a man Gómez would turn out to be and why Iris Sunderby had broken her journey at Lima and driven up to Cajamarca.
Was he really going to join ship as navigator?
And if so, why had he paid those two to watch for us at the airport?
What was the point of their following us?
I was still worrying about this when I pulled into the hotel at Huacho, the mist thicker than ever and my eyes so tired they felt as though they had been sand-blasted.
TWO
Pisco sour proved to be a local brandy whisked up with white of egg and the juice of fresh limes with a few drops of angostura bitters lying like dark bloodstains on the white bed of foam.
I can't remember how many I had in the course of that meal, or what I ate.
Ward was due to take over the driving and at the end of it I slumped into the seat beside him in a happy daze which insulated me from all sense of reality.
I didn't care where I was going or what was going to happen to me.
I just drifted away to the sound of the engine as we hammered our way up the Pan-Americana.
The rain hit us somewhere north of Huarmey, a solid wall of water lit by flashes of lightning.
We were in desert country, the thick, cloying smell of fish oil from the port of Huarmey lingering in the car.
There were oleanders and an untidy tumble of bamboo dwellings.
The cloudburst switched itself off as abruptly as it had started, and the moon, peering momentarily out from an ink-black cloudscape, showed a coastal desert of pure white sand backed by low hills of chemical-green and violent reds, cactus everywhere and trucks parked on the dirt verge, most of them painted in livid crimson on white — Optimista, Primero de Mayo, La Virgen.
We rolled into Casma just after three in the morning, the stink of fish oil hanging over the port and an old adobe fort peering at us out of mist.
The ugliness and poverty of the place is all I remember of it, and Ward saying, ‘Ah'll drive as far as Chimbote, then ye take over.’
He sounded half asleep and an approaching truck was flashing its lights.
The green of sugar cane showed above dry yellow stalks as we crossed another river bed, the sound of rushing water drowning the engine.
‘Light me a cigarette, will ye?’
He fumbled a packet from the pocket of his anorak and I lit one for him with the dashboard lighter.
‘We'll need to get gas somewhere.’
He drew on the cigarette as though his life depended on it.
‘Tmjillo,’ I said.
‘Are we all right till then?’
‘That's another hundred and twenty to thirty kilometres.’
He was peering at the petrol gauge.
‘Should just about make it.’
Chimbote was a dreadful place, litter everywhere and smelling to hell of oil.
Miles of poverty with modern adobe dwellings either being built or falling into ruin.
I took over and we lost our way where a blackened adobe town sprawled over a hill above a steelworks.
Corrugated iron, cardboard, paper and sand were in constant motion as a wind came in gusts off the Pacific.
We found a solitary gasolene pump and got the owner of it up from his couch of rags in a kennel-like shelter of tin and packing cases that rattled and moaned in the fitful wind.
Fish oil chimneys and workers' shacks, fish boats lying at the quays, trucks and oil tankers as dirty as the town; only the central square showed a glimmer of respectability, with a hotel and flowers; but still the all-pervading stink, and there were pelicans scavenging in the blackened sand between the shacks.
Dawn broke as we reached Trujillo, the only decent-looking town we had seen since leaving Lima.
There was a good hotel, too, but when I braked to a halt in front of it and suggested stopping there, Ward shook his head, muttering something about our still having two hundred miles to go and the coastal cordillera of the Andes to cross.
‘What's the hurry?’
I asked him.
‘Iris,’ he mumbled.
I was tired by then.
We both were.
‘Why the hell don't we stop here and get some sleep?’
I think we were also suffering from jet-lag.
He sat up, rubbing his eyes and staring out at the mist that hung over the grey stone building.
‘Drive on,’ he said.
‘We've got gas.
No point in stoppin' now.’
But I'd had enough.
‘I'm stopping here,’ I told him, switching off the engine and opening my door.
I was just getting out when his left hand closed like a clamp on my arm.
‘Shut that door!’
He had swung his head round, glaring at me, his eyes hard as glass.
‘What's the matter with ye?
Ye haven't done a hundred miles yet.
Now get movin'.’
‘I'm staying here,’ I repeated, my voice sounding obstinate, almost petulant.
I don't know what it was, the mist, the way it hung, hot and heavy like a blanket, the weirdness and the exhaustion of the long night drive up the coast, but I suddenly realised I was scared.
Scared of the country, scared of Ward.
Most of all of Ward.
I think it was then, with his powerful fingers digging like claws into my arm, that I realised how formidable the man was.
I turned away, no longer able to face the eyes that looked at me so coldly in the gleam of the dashboard light.
He let go of my arm.
‘All right, Pete.’
His voice was quiet, almost relaxed.
‘Off ye go.’
He made a noise that was something like a laugh.
‘Got yer passport?’
And when I nodded, he said, ‘Good!
But ye'll need money.
Quite a lot of money to get yerself back to England, if that's where ye're thinkin' of goin'.’
He let me think about that, a long, tense silence between us.
He reached into his door pocket and pulled out the map.
‘Pacasmayo,’ he said quietly.
‘No, San Pedro de Lloc.
That's about another eighty miles.
The Cajamarca road joins the Pan-Am a mile or so further on, at San José.’
He looked at me, then nodded.
‘Ah'll take over then.’
He returned the map to the shelf in front of him and leaned back in his seat.
‘Now fur fuck's sake drive on.’
Slowly I reached out to my open door and pulled it shut.
I had no alternative.
Maybe I could have had the hotel ring the British Embassy in Lima, but I was too exhausted, physically and mentally — particularly mentally — to face all the complications.
We should have been over the pass by now and starting to look for the Hacienda Lucinda.
Instead, we had only reached Trujillo and the mist had clamped down thicker than ever.
I glanced once more at the hotel, thinking of the comfort of  sheets, the softness of a bed.
Then I started the engine and drove back to where I had seen the Pan-Am Norte sign.
I suppose we were in that meteorological horror that is called an inversion, heat and humidity pressing down on us, numbing the brain and starting the sweat from every pore of the body.
I didn't see the great walled city of Chanchán, only the mist and rain, the blur of the headlights and the windscreen wipers clicking endlessly across my vision.
I had the strange feeling I was driving back in time, groping my way into a world of Inca and Chimú people, a world of great empires that built roads and temples and forts of mud on the coast and of cut stone in the Andes, stone that was dove-tailed to resist the trembling of its foundations when the earth quaked.
Finally the rain stopped.
Miles of sugar cane, followed by miles of flat desert country, all seen through a damp haze so that nothing seemed real.
Rice, too, in river outlets to the Pacific that were like oases of green in the waste of sand that fringed the coast.
For a few minutes the sun glimmered through the mist to my right, a red ball just risen above the mountain.
Then the mist closed in again thicker than ever.
Ward stirred and asked me the time in a voice heavy with sleep.
No play-acting now, no switching of accents.
He was still barely conscious and hadn't the energy to be anything but himself.
I glanced at my watch, found I had forgotten to adjust it and read the time for him from the digital clock at the base of the instrument panel.
It was 08.07.
And then, more for the comfort of hearing my own voice than with any certainty, I said, ‘We should get in to Cajamarca some time between ten and eleven.’
He gave a snort.
‘We'll be lucky.
It depends what conditions are like when we start climbin' up to the pass.’
He reached for a cigarette and lit it.
‘Want one?’
He seemed to have forgotten I had tried to walk out on him fifty kilometres or so back.
I shook my head.
The mist was now so dense it was more like a sea fog, the humidity very high and the sweat dripping from my forehead as I leaned forward, my eyes straining to see through the murk.
I had the windscreen wipers on again and our speed was down to less than 30 k.p.h.
Neither of us spoke after that, Ward smoking in silence, and then, when he had finished his cigarette, he seemed to drift off to sleep again.
Only the sound of the engine, and my eyes shifting from the mist and the road to take covert glances at his face; I knew no more about him now than when I first met him, except what he had told me on the flight down from Mexico.
But that, unusual though it was, had been only the outline, the skeletal framework of the man.
What his real nature was, what made him tick, I had no idea.
It is difficult to explain my state of mind.
Fear, real fear, is something I had only experienced once in my life, and that, strangely enough, was not on the round-the-world race, but in my own little boat, and in my own waters off Blakeney.
I had been following some seals in bright sunshine, stripped to the waist and taking photographs.
I had no VHF then, only a transistor, and I was so preoccupied I missed the weather forecast.
Suddenly I was enveloped in one of those bitter North Sea murks and it was blowing quite strong from an easterly direction.
I was off Cley at the time, so I lowered the main and ran for home.
I never saw Kelling or Salthouse churches, or any sign of the coast at all, and I landed up sailing right over the ridge called Blakeney Overfalls, wind over tide, a filthy sea and virtually nil visibility.
That was the only time I had known real fear.
Like most of my generation, I had never known a war, had never had fear rammed down my throat time and time again like the older generation.
I was thinking particularly of my great-uncle George, the stories he had told, men pulled out of the sea half burned alive, the sudden explosions as another slow cargo vessel slid to the bottom, nobody stopping for survivors and the feeling of terror as the U-boats gradually picked the ships off until the one he was on was alone in the pattern.
He had been a gunner on three different merchantmen, first on Atlantic convoys, then on the Murmansk run.
Twice he had been torpedoed, and each time he had finally been picked up; then on PQ 17, when the destroyers left and they had been ordered to scatter…
He is dead now, but I've never forgotten his description of  how he had felt as the German bombers came in from Norway, picking the scattered merchant ships off, the sound of the bombs, and the cold, always the cold.
Cold and fear.
It crippled your guts before you were even hit.
And all the time telling us about it in that slow, unemotional Norfolk voice of his.
Maybe my imagination was running out of control, but the weather, Gómez, the pass ahead, everything became distorted and magnified in my mind.
Gómez in particular.
Ángel de Muerte.
By the time I was through San Pedro de Lloc and had reached the turn-off to Cajamarca at San José my mind had built the man up into some sort of a monster.
I didn't believe what Rodriguez had said about the reason for that soubriquet.
No man gets to be called the Ángel of Death just because he tells his men to stand fast and fight.
There had to be some more deadly reason than that.
Ward was still asleep when I turned right and headed eastwards towards the Andes, the mist a white vapour, the rice fields, the cacti, the occasional trees, all having a weirdness about them that matched my mood and added to my growing fear of what lay ahead, beyond the mountains I could not see.
There were moments when the sun almost burst through the mist and I kept on driving, waiting and hoping for a first glimpse of the cordillera, my mind groping for some answer to the enigma of Iris Sunderby's behaviour.
I think it was then I tried to work out her relationship to Gómez, but the complexity of it made it difficult to grasp.
He was the son of a woman who had been a nightclub singer and briefly married to Juan Gómez, that was all my tired mind seemed able to grasp.
That and the fact that Juan Gómez was her father, too.
He had owned a big department store that had burned down, and he had then hanged himself.
So why had she gone rushing north from Lima to see this half-brother of hers?
Why?
Why?
Why?
Was he really coming with us as navigator?
Winter in the Antarctic.
Pack ice grinding.
Bergs towering over us, thrashing through the pack, and that ghost ship seen by a frightened glaciologist…
‘Look out!’
Ward's voice smashed into my consciousness and I slammed  on the brakes.
A man had suddenly emerged out of the blinding iridescence of the mist, a vague figure standing in the middle of the road with his back towards us.
I only just stopped in time.
Even then he didn't turn round, just remained there, motionless, staring straight ahead at the road, and there was a roaring that filled the inside of our vehicle with the solid, continuous sound of water on the move.
The road ran straight ahead of us until it disappeared in the mist, except that at the man's feet it was gone and there was a gap some fifty metres or so wide through which a brown torrent ran so high and in such furious waves that it almost lipped the broken macadam where the road had been swept away.
The man himself was small, with a brown and red poncho hung from his shoulders and a wide-brimmed hat of brown felt rammed tight on the lank black hair that covered his bullet head.
He took no notice of us, just standing there, gazing at the swirling brown tide of water almost lapping his sandals as though lost in the wonder of such a happening.
‘He is in the presence of his God,’ Ward whispered to me.
And when I asked him what he meant, he said irritably, ‘Oh, don't be more stupid than you need be.
He's lookin' at something too big for him to understand.
And so am Ah,’ he added, slapping me on the back as he got out of the car.
‘Buenos dias.’
He had to repeat his greeting twice before the Indian came out of his trance-like reverie and turned to face us.
‘Buenos dias, señores.’
He had a broad, high-cheekboned face, a straight beak of a nose, and dark eyes that stared at us without expression.
In fact, the whole face was expressionless, the only feature with mobility being the mouth, which was broad and thick, always seeming to be on the point of making a statement without actually saying anything.
Having greeted us, he just stood there, gazing at us totally without curiosity or any sign of interest.
‘What's the river?’
I asked Ward.
‘How the hell dae Ah know?’
‘You had the map.
I was driving, remember?’
I heard him question the Indian and I reached into the cat for  the map which he had left on his seat.
The word ‘Hecketypecky’ passed between them, and when I eventually found it — the Rio Jequetepeque — I could hardly believe the spelling.
‘Well, that's that,’ I said.
‘That mad flood of a torrent runs beside the road all the way up to the top of the cordillera.’
‘Of course it does.
That's why there's a pass.’
He turned to the Indian again, asking questions in Spanish and getting nowhere.
The man just stood and stared at him blankly.
‘Why don't you phone Gómez if you want to find out whether Mrs Sunderby has arrived safely in Cajamarca?’
He should have done that before instead of insisting on our groping our way up the Pan-Am Highway in darkness and bad visibility.
‘Have you got his phone number?’
‘No.’
‘Then I suggest we go back to the hotel in Trujillo, get hold of his number and phone him from there.’
‘Why?’
Why?
I stared at him, wondering what was going on in that complex mind of his, what his real motive was in pushing north by car when we could have had a good night's sleep and flown up in daylight.
The Indian had turned away, ignoring his questions and gazing across the swollen waters of that ridiculously named river.
A wind had risen, the mist swirling and vague shapes of mountains looming through ragged gaps.
‘If you're worried about Iris Sunderby surely the quickest way…’
But he had swung round at the sound of a vehicle approaching.
The ghost of what looked like a Land Rover took shape in the billowing curtain of the mist, emerging as a Japanese four-wheel drive rather like our own, with two people in it.
A woman was driving and she parked beside our land-cruiser, nodding to us briefly as she stepped out onto the road and flung a series of questions at the Indian, half in Spanish and half in a more guttural tongue, which I took to be Quechua.
She was a startling sight in that setting, for she was immaculately dressed in riding clothes, her breeches almost white, boots black and so highly polished I could see the flood waters reflected in them.
But it was the face that held me.
It was a strange, very  beautiful face, the mouth a broad gash of red, heavily made-up, the nose finely pointed with delicately arched nostrils, the eyebrows black like two thin pencil lines, and she wore a broad, flat-brimmed hat.
Her manner, the way she stood, everything about her suggested breeding.
I couldn't help thinking she was like a racehorse, and when Ward started questioning her, she answered him with such haughty condescension, such arrogance, that his face went white and I swear he'd have play-acted the Gorbals slum kid and thrown a lot of four-letter words at her if he'd known how to do it in Spanish.
She said the word Chepén several times, as though she was speaking to a particularly stupid servant, Tolambo, too, the Hacienda Tolambo, and at the same time she made a circling motion with her hand, ending up with her finger pointed at the road ahead and the jagged peaks of the cordillera disembodied in a ragged mist hole.
She said something to the man who was with her, a thickset, dark-featured fellow, who stood with his hands in the pockets of his anorak frowning at the flood water.
He nodded, and then they were both moving back to their vehicle, the Indian drifting light-footed into the back.
The woman paused before getting into the driving seat and said to Ward in near-perfect English, ‘I think you're a bloody fool, but if you're determined to press on, I suggest you have a word with Alberto Fernandez when you get to Tolambo.
He's the manager.
He may be able to give you some idea what the road is like further on.’
She suddenly smiled, a glimmer of warmth.
‘Good luck, señor!’
‘One more question,’ Ward said quickly.
‘There's a man named Gómez lives at Cajamarca.
The Hacienda Lucinda.’
Her face froze and he hesitated.
‘D'ye know him?’
‘I have heard speak of him.’
She climbed in and slammed the door, the sound of the starter drowning Ward's next question.
He watched as she backed and turned, then drove off, the grey curtain of the mist suddenly swallowing her up.
‘Bugger the woman,’ he  grumbled .
‘I have heard speak of him.’
He was mimicking her English.
‘What did she mean by that, d'ye think?’
He took the wheel after that and drove at a furious speed back to San José, where he turned right on to the Pan-Am.
‘Chepén,’ he said.
‘How far?’
‘You're going on then?’
‘Of course Ah'm goin' on.
Ah've not come this far just to put my tail between my legs…
How far is it?’
‘I don't know,’ I said, wondering what I could do to stop him.
‘Well, look at the map, man.’
It seemed so pointless, the mist thicker than ever now.
No sign of the cordillera, no glimmer of sun, and the Pacific invisible somewhere away to our left.
‘Look at the map, damn ye!’
‘All right.’
My voice was taut with anger as I pulled it out of the shelf in front of me and opened it on my knees.
Chepén.
We were driving north and I saw it at once.
‘It's the next town up the Highway.’
‘How far?’
I told him I was trying to work it out.
‘About thirty kilometres I would guess.’
And I added, ‘There's a minor road runs up over the cordillera via San Miguel and Llata to Hualgayoc where you can turn south to Cajamarca.
It's a good deal longer, but there's no river marked, and it might be sensible —’
‘No, we'll follow the woman's instructions.
She lives here.
She knows the country.’
He drove in silence after that and I fell asleep until the roughness of the road made me open my eyes.
We were bumping our way between pale yellow walls of sugar cane.
‘Where are we?’
I mumbled.
‘Tolambo,’ he said.
‘Sorry to spoil yer beauty sleep.’
My eyes were heavy-lidded with fatigue, and despite the jolting, I must have drifted off again, for suddenly we were stopped, everything quiet, only the sound of voices — Ward talking to a tall, dark man wearing dungarees and a sombrero.
There was a narrow-gauge rail track stretching away through acres of cut cane, and in the distance a little tank engine panting wisps of smoke as a gang of men loaded its trailer wagons.
They were talking in Spanish and I was only half awake.
‘Adiós.’
‘Adiós, señor.’
The sun was burning up the mist as we drove on.
‘Did he tell you what the road was like over the pass?’
Ward's reply was lost in the sound of the engine, and when I opened my eyes again we were bumping along the bank of what looked like an old Inca canal.
The sun was blazing hot, the skin of my bare arm beginning to burn.
Away to the left, black menacing clouds of cu-nim were piled up over mountains dimly seen through a haze of humidity.
‘When do we hit the road again?’
‘Soon.’
Ward peered at the control panel.
‘Another kilometre to go, according to the foreman back at Tolambo.’
He was holding the bucking steering wheel with his artificial hand while he felt under the dashboard for his cigarettes.
‘What about the pass?’
‘He thought it might be a bit peligroso.
Nobody has been through fur twenty-four hours and the telephone to Chilete, the last village before the summit, is out of action.
So's the railway, of course.’
‘And Cajamarca?’
‘He talked to Cajamarca yesterday.’
Everything about us, the rocks, the yellow earth, the patches of vivid green in the valley, sparkled with moisture, the old irrigation canal half-full of stagnant brown water.
Thunder rolled through the mountains, jagged forks of lightning splitting the black folds of the cu-nim.
‘I think we should turn back.’
He didn't answer, lighting his cigarette one-handed, and I didn't press him.
I was too tired, only vaguely conscious that we had come off the canal bank and were angling down across a steep slope of stony ground to the rice-green flatness of the valley floor.
Finally we climbed a bank and were on the road again, the smoothness of it lulling me into such a deep sleep that I never saw the barrier at the railway crossing, did not even hear them telling Ward the Jequetepeque had broken its banks a little further on.
It was the violent jolting of our wheels on the sleepers that finally woke me to the realisation that Ward had switched  from the road to the railway line itself and was bumping his way along the track towards the gaping mouth of a tunnel.
I sat up then, suddenly wide awake.
‘What the hell?’
‘River's cut the road again.
They say we'll see the break When we cross the bridge.’
‘The bridge?’
‘Aye.
It's just beyond the tunnel.
A girder bridge.’
‘Anybody else taken this route today?’
‘No.’
I was staring at him, at the set, aquiline face, the great beak of a nose and the hard line of the jaw, his features in silhouette.
‘You're mad,’ I said.
He nodded, smiling.
‘Maybe, but right now Ah think the wind is southerly.’
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
The tunnel entrance had grown big, the stone arch of it rearing up ahead of us like the open jaws of some petrified monster.
‘Hamlet, Ah think — Ah am mad north-north-west, but when the wind is southerly…
Most times with me ye'll find the wind is southerly.’
A curtain of dripping water spat at the bonnet as the darkness of the tunnel engulfed us, the sound of the engine louder now and a sense of finality as the rock walls closed about us.
It was like being in the adit of a mine, and I was driving into the bowels of the earth with a man who seemed hell bent on risking our lives for no apparent reason.
I thought of the Weddell Sea, the ice and the ghost of that Flying Dutchman, visualising the friction that could develop in the close confines of a yacht.
My God!
I thought, the chances of coming out of that alive with this madman as the owner and driving force…
It was crazy.
Absolutely crazy.
The dark of the tunnel hammered the engine noise back at us, water drumming on the roof above my head.
Ward switched on the headlights, glancing at me quickly, a tight little smile.
‘Ye got to take a positive attitude.
Ah enjoy this sort of thin'.
Ah like excitement, the unexpected, shovin' against the closed door of the unknown.’
He nodded ahead of us to where the tunnel showed an  arched embrasure of light.
‘Darkness is only fur ever when ye're dead.’
He dipped the headlights and the far end of the tunnel seemed to leap towards us, bouncing up and down to the thump of our tyres on the sleepers.
Suddenly we were into daylight and right ahead of us the waters of the Jequetepeque ran brown and white, the river's level close under the rails of the girder bridge as it flowed, deep and very fast, through the gorge.
The sound of our wheels changed to a hollow banging of wooden boards as we drove across.
But then the stupid bastard stopped right in the middle of the bridge.
‘What's the matter?’
‘Nothing.’
He switched the engine off.
‘Just admirin' the view.’
He was pulling the sun roof open and thrusting himself to his feet.
The sound of the river increased to a roar.
There was wind, too, funnelling through the gorge, whining through the girders and causing the whole structure to tremble.
The sun came and went, thunder clouds growling and swirling up the valley.
I didn't like it.
Twice the road had been cut and we hadn't even started the climb up to the pass.
I could hear boulders grinding on the river bed and the grumble of thunder was like the sound of distant gunfire.
Ward slipped down into the driving seat again and slammed the roof shut.
‘You're turning back, are you?’
‘Of course not.’
And then, as he started the engine again, he turned to me and said, ‘If the sight of a storm in the Andes scares ye, what's yer reaction goin' to be when we're headed into the pack with a Southern Ocean gale up our backsides?’
He stared at me very hard for a moment.
‘Think about it, laddie.’
This with a grin on a lighter note.
‘There's no room fur cold feet on the sort of expedition we're embarkin' on.’
He reached for the gear lever and we began to move slowly off the bridge.
I sat back, wide awake now and cursing the man for goading me so unpleasantly.
But at least I had the sense to keep my mouth shut, and shortly afterwards we were able to leave the railway and get back on to the road.
The surface was dirt, but despite all the water the going was good.
It looked as though a grader had  been over it just before the Amazonian rains had spilled over the Andes.
‘Last night two Indians in a pick-up came down from Chilete.’
I didn't say anything, though the way he had said it made it clear he expected some comment.
‘They went as far as the railway crossin' on the other side of the tunnel, talked to the man on duty at the halt there, then turned back.
That was before the road was cut.
They said things were bad up at Chilete with several houses already fallen into the river.’
He looked at me, obviously annoyed by my silence.
‘Well, say somethin', can't ye?
Don't just sit there, sulkin'.’
‘I'm tired,’ I said.
‘And I just don't see the point of pressing on through that muck.’
I nodded towards the black murk of cloud that blocked off the valley and all but the lower slopes of the mountains.
‘Apart from the storm, we don't know what the road is like, how bad it will be when we reach the pass.’
‘It's not the road that worries me.
It's those two men.’
We were climbing now, the lower slopes of the mountains patched with the terraced green of small rice fields.
We passed through Tembladera, a scattering of houses clinging to the mountain side.
‘They knew about us, the type of vehicle we were drivin', and they instructed the keeper of that crossin' to tell us the road over the pass was open, that it was okay.’
‘Why?’
The question was wrung out of me by the absurdity of it.
‘Why should they do that?
How did they know about us?’
‘Telephone.
From our friend in Lima.
They were both of them from Chimbote.’
That was the filthy coastal town smelling of fish oil where I'd taken over the driving.
‘All the more reason why we should turn back.’
He snorted.
‘All the more reason why we should go on.’
And he added, ‘Ah'd like to have a wee chat with those two, find out a bit more about them.
Reach into the back, will ye, and open up that parcel of books.
There's a knife in the pocket of my anorak.’
It was one of those all-purpose knives with a flick blade sharp as a razor.
I slit along the seam of the cardboard wrapper where  it had been taped over.
Inside were three fat volumes of Mark Twain tied together with gold tape and a card with Complemento de Librerío Universal on which had been written in green ink primera edición.
‘How ever did these get to Peru?’
He glanced at me sideways, smiling.
‘Ah told ye it was useful when travelling to enter antiquarian as one's occupation.’
‘First editions of Mark Twain!
They must be worth quite a bit— in America.’
But what was he going to do with them in this economically bankrupt country?
‘Cut the gold tape and pull them apart.
They're not quite what they seem.’
I didn't need to pull them apart.
As soon as I had cut the tape the bottom volume dropped into my lap.
The centre of it was a plastic mould in which the metal of an automatic gleamed snugly, The upper volume I had to prise loose from the middle one.
It contained ammunition in three spare magazines, also a very light plastic armpit holster.
Ward glanced in the rear-view mirror, then all round, finally pulling up in the middle of the road.
‘Ye'll have to give me a hand.’
He opened his door and got out, leaving the engine running.
I didn't move.
I just sat there, my brain numb.
He was taking off his anorak.
‘Well, come on, man.
It's damp out here.’
He was in his shirt sleeves staring through the side window at me.
‘Come on, damn ye.
Move it!’
I looked at him, feeling I had reached the end of the road.
‘If you want to play cops and robbers,’ I said, choosing my words carefully, ‘you'll have to do it without me.’
He reached in and wrenched the little bundle of plastic bands out of my hands, and I sat there, silent, watching as he fumbled the bands into position with the little cup to hold the weapon under his right armpit.
It took him a little while, but he got it fixed in the end, then held out his dummy hand for the gun.
I should have told him to go to hell.
I should have flung the damned thing out of his open door so that it would bounce down the mountainside up which the road was climbing.
Instead, I handed it over to him.
I don't know why.
Thunder rumbled high  above us, the clouds reaching down towards us, wisps of mist sweeping down the valley.
He had put his anorak on again, no sign of the gun, no bulge as he climbed in and we started on up the mountain road, windscreen wipers slashing back and forth.
‘Getting quite chill out there.’
I didn't say anything.
‘How far up d'ye reckon we are, a thousand feet?’
He was trying to ease my mind, to make me feel it was all right and quite normal for a man to have a gun in an armpit holster in Peru.
‘Just in case.’
I could have said it for him.
In case of what?
‘Are you going to use it?’
The words seemed dragged out of me, my voice subdued.
A pause, then very gently, ‘Only if Ah have to.’
‘And what constitutes have to?’
‘Ah'll know when the time comes.
Let's leave it at that, shall we?’
He drove in silence then and I closed my eyes, pretending I was asleep, my head nodding, and all the time my mind reaching forward to the future, trying to visualise what it would be like on the boat.
That he'd use the gun if he had to I was quite certain.
But why did he feel the need of a gun?
What gave him the right to have it?
And the way it was delivered to him, so neat, so innocent-seeming a package.
Somebody had acquired it.
On his instructions?
Somebody had gone to considerable trouble and expense to acquire the books and have them hollowed out, then delivered to the car hire people just before our plane arrived.
It all added up to an organisation, but what organisation?
Who did they represent — a government, the Mafia, some drug ring?
Cocaine?
Was he mixed up in cocaine smuggling?
We never saw Chilete until suddenly we were in among the grey ghosts of houses, the road rutted now and full of mud.
The sound of water, when Ward rolled down his window, was a solid roar that overlaid everything.
He pulled up and we could look down through the grey cloud-mist to the centre of the village where an old stone bridge and several houses were crumbling into the river.
There was a  little group of men gathered outside what looked like a café, Indians some of them, their faces dark and sombre as they stood arguing over the ruins of their village.
‘Maybe they'll know if there's been any traffic over the road.’
Ward got out and strode down the mud-sodden road to join them.
I stayed by the vehicle, wondering what to do.
But I knew the answer to that.
There wasn't anything I could do and, knowing that, I was conscious of my own  inadequacy , weighed down by a sense of helplessness.
Perhaps it was the village.
There was something about Chilete and the cloud-mist drizzle of that dreadful morning that was utterly depressing.
The last point of habitation before the pass and every dwelling a-gleam with water as though the whole place was deluge-cursed and waiting to fall into the river.
I felt not only miserable, but strangely scared, as though the pass above me was in itself a terrifying manifestation of dark imaginings, like the entrance gate to the place where the dead wait in limbo.
‘Two of them came in yesterday evenin'.’
Ward was back, climbing into the driving seat.
‘The word is that five or six miles further on we'll find the new road washed out.
Apparently it's entirely blocked with mud and rocks.’
He started the engine.
‘But the old road is still passable.
They've put stone markers at the intersection.’
‘Who were they?
The same two Indians who talked to the railway crossing keeper?’
‘I guess so.
The laddies back there had never seen them before.
They thought they were probably road maintenance men from the Cajamarca region.’
The tumbled ruin that was Chilete disappeared almost immediately, swallowed up by the mist, as we drove out along the broad, freshly graded road, the walls of a valley gorge closing in.
‘How far to the pass?’
I asked him, but he didn't answer, peering into the grey void as the road doubled back on itself, climbing steeply.
There were hairpin bends and soon we were lipping the edge of a two-thousand-foot drop, the river below occasionally glimpsed through ragged wind-torn holes in the cloud.
It was like that all the way to the intersection where the new  road swung away to the right, the way blocked by stones placed in a line across it.
They were not large stones, merely a warning.
The old road ran straight on along the gorge edge.
As far as surface was concerned, and even width, there was little to choose between them.
Ward checked, a momentary lift of his foot on the accelerator, then he was powering straight on.
‘Shorter this way,’ he said.
‘That's what they told me, anyway.’
‘But less convenient,’ I muttered.
‘How long before we get back to the proper road?’
More frequent glimpses now, through swirling cloud, of the river far below.
Half a dozen parrots cut a brilliant green streak across our bonnet before disappearing into the looming darkness ahead.
Lightning flashed, followed almost instantaneously by the sharp crack of thunder.
‘What do we do if this road is blocked?’
He didn't answer and shortly afterwards he slowed for a right-hand bend, his body bent forward, the dummy hand clamped tight on the steering wheel.
He took it slowly in four-wheel drive, the road much narrower here, the outer edge of it crumbling away.
Round the bend it broadened out again with just room for two vehicles to pass, but ahead was the deep V of a side gorge with water pouring down it, spilling a flood across the road.
He braked then, bringing the vehicle to a stop and sitting there, the engine ticking over.
He wiped his face with one end of the brightly coloured sweat rag he wore round his neck, staring at the problem ahead.
‘Know what Ah'd like right now?
Ah'd like a nice cool pint of that Southwold brew.’
‘Adnams?’
‘Aye.
Yer part of the world and one of the best bitters —’ His words were cut short by a clap of thunder very close.
But it wasn't thunder.
It was something else, more like a cannon, and before the echo of it had died away, there was a rumbling sound, growing to a roar.
In the same instant Ward had revved the engine and rammed the gear lever home.
The vehicle shot forward, and as it did so the first rocks from above came hurtling down onto the track just behind us.
Leaning forward I had a view of it in the side mirror, the bend we had just rounded obliterated by a great mass of avalanching  rock and mud that went spilling down over the edge to disappear into the cloud vapour below.
‘Christ!’
My voice was barely audible above the noise of the slide and the sound of our engine.
My eyes were on the far side of the valley where the track was clear and unbroken to the next turn above the main gorge.
If we could make it through the torrent to the bend ahead…
‘What is it?’
Ward had jammed on the brakes.
‘Ye take her.
See ye on the other side of the bend, if ye make it.’
He was out in a flash, scrabbling for a foothold on the steep side of the track.
Above him was a path of sorts trailing along the mountainside.
‘What is it?’
I asked him again, shouting to make myself heard above the grumble of thunder and the sound of water.
‘Where are you going?’
His only answer was a wave of the arm, signalling me to drive on.
He was climbing like a goat, moving with extraordinary speed.
And then I lost him among the boulders and small trees that marked the course of the torrent.
By then the noise of the avalanche had died away, only the echoes of it reverberating across the valley, and when I shifted into the driving seat and looked back, the road behind us had ceased to exist.
Where the bend had been there was now nothing but a piled-up, slithering mass of wet glistening rubble.
I looked up the line of the torrent.
No sign of Ward.
He had disappeared entirely, leaving me to wonder what the hell he was playing at.
I was on my own now, faced with that half-obliterated turn at the V-point of the side gorge where water pouring over the track was eating away at the surface.
There had been a bridge there once, or perhaps a culvert.
I could just make out part of the stonework, though most of it was under water.
I checked the four-wheel drive lever, eased off the brake and started forward.
No good putting it off.
At any moment the whole track might go.
When I reached the turn I found half of it gone already.
The roar of the water coming down the gully drummed at my ears as I inched the Toyota into the bend.
It was virtually a hundred-and-eighty-degree turn and very sharp, the culvert blocked with  stone and the remains of a small tree, so that the full volume of the water coming down the gully was swirling across the track to disappear over the edge, thundering down into the main gorge of the Jequetepeque.
There was only just room to scrape through between the roots of the tree and the edge.
I inched forward.
Did I take it slow or fast?
How deep was the water?
Was it deep enough to sweep the vehicle over the edge?
The nearer I got to it, the deeper it looked.
And what was the track like underneath?
Would it hold up for the half-minute or so it would take me to drive across?
The devil of it was the vehicle was a left-hand drive, so that I was on the side that would go over the edge first.
I hesitated, and as I did so a big stone that marked the outer edge of the track began to move.
I didn't wait.
I let in the clutch and gripped the wheel, taking it gently, not using too much power and just willing the tyres to maintain a grip on the rotten surface below the water.
I was about half-way across when I felt the rear begin to swing sideways under the weight of the torrent.
I gunned the engine then, slipping the clutch slightly, clawing for a hold.
That way I had the power ready to hand and as the front wheels began to grip a solid surface and the snout of the Toyota reared up, I banged the clutch in with my foot hard down.
Something clanged by the back axle, a rock presumably, and then, with the back still slithering sideways and the rear left wheel beginning to race as it fell off into space, the vehicle gave a sort of shudder and we were out, clear of water and on a hard surface again.
That was when I saw it, right in front of me, a large lump of rock bang in the middle of the track.
I stopped, the roar of the torrent drumming in my ears.
The rear of the Toyota was only just clear of the water as I jumped out, checking to see if it would be possible using the low gear to push the rock over the edge.
The inner side of the track was almost sheer at this point, brown broken rock glistening with water, and I could see at a glance where the rock had come from, a gaping hole oozing mud as though a giant molar had been extracted.
Lightning forked across the black belly of the clouds, and the  rock that had moved as I was negotiating the bend had disappeared into the gorge below, the torrent running smooth as it lipped the broken edge of the old roadway.
Still no sign of Ward, the cloud-mist hanging grey over the mountainside above.
I felt very alone at that moment, stuck there on that track somewhere in the Andes, my body chill with sweat and my hands still trembling with the nervous tension of getting safely through the rutted mud of the bend.
I was just getting back into the driving seat when there was a shout and a figure emerged from the gully about fifty metres above me.
It wasn't Ward.
This was a much slighter man with a broad-brimmed hat and a poncho over his shoulders.
He was moving fast down the side of the gully, Ward appearing suddenly behind him.
‘Hold him!’
The shout echoed in the rocks and at the same moment the man saw me.
He checked, but only momentarily, then he had jumped down onto the track a knife in his hand.
There was only one thing for me to do and I dodged behind the Toyota.
He went past me, running.
But then he stopped.
Ward was angling across the slope above to cut him off.
I reached into the door pocket and pulled out the heavy wheel nut spanner.
By then Ward was coming down onto the track, his false arm and dummy hand hanging limp at his side.
I think it was the realisation of his disability that decided the man to go for him first.
He was already advancing up the truck as Ward slithered down onto the flat surface of it.
The knife flashed, a steely glitter as lightning struck again across the far side of the gorge, the crackle of it hitting the rocks and followed almost instantaneously by a single shattering crash of thunder.
He went for Ward in a crouching run, and Ward just stood there, as though transfixed.
‘Get out of his way,’ I yelled and started forward.
But Ward didn't move and I was still several yards away when the two of them met.
I saw the knife flash, a cold gleam as the man swung his arm back to strike at Ward's belly.
Then, as the knife slammed forward, driving upwards for the heart, Ward's  right arm extension came up, the glove-covered steel fingers of his hand open like claws.
They closed on the knife blade, twisted it out of the man's hand, and then he was using the whole false arm as a metal club slamming down on the upraised arms, jabbing for the face, forcing the man back step by step until the edge of the track was only one more step away.
I think I called a warring, but Ward ignored it.
I saw the man give a terrified glance over his shoulder, then that metal flail slammed into the side of his head.
He was off-balance, his defences down as Ward drew back his right arm and slammed that gloved hand straight into the sallow face.
I can still see the blood starting from the man's nose, the way his arms reached out as his feet rocked back on to nothing, and still hear the dreadful high-pitched rabbit cry as his body disappeared over the edge.
For all of a minute, it seemed, we could hear the sound of his body falling, the rattle of the stones it dislodged.
But when I looked over the edge there was no sign of him, or of the river — only the mist swirling.
I turned to Ward.
‘You killed him.’
My voice sounded strange in my ears.
‘You did it deliberately.’
His only answer was to pick up the knife and hand it to me.
Then he was climbing back up the bank he had slithered down and I watched as he walked in a leisurely fashion across the slope of the mountain to the gully.
He seemed totally relaxed, and I felt the prickle of my fear.
I had never seen a man deliberately killed before and I was more scared even than I had been before.
When he came back he was carrying something in his left hand.
‘Ye seen one of these before?’
He dumped it on the bonnet of the Toyota.
‘Only in films.’
It was one of those plungers that generate the electric spark for setting off blasting charges.
‘Where did you find it?’
‘Up there, where Ah expected.’
He nodded to the mountainside beyond the gully and walked over to the rock that was blocking the road.
‘Ye didn't think that fall behind us was an accident, did ye?
But he then had to get across the gully and  connect up the wires to brin' this lot down on top of us.’
He waved his dummy hand towards the sheer rock above us.
‘You didn't have to kill him,’ I said.
‘No?’
He looked up at me, a quizzical lift of his eyebrows.
‘Are ye happy with the thought of being buried alive under tons of rock?’
He straightened up and moved to the driving seat.
‘Well if ye are, Ah'm not.
With luck they'll never know what happened to him.
And that may worry them.’
‘Who?’
But he had started the engine and he didn't hear me as he inched the vehicle forward in low gear.
The wheels churned, the engine labouring, and slowly the rock that was blocking our way shifted.
He forced it close enough to the edge to allow the Toyota to creep past on the inside.
I got in, and as he drove on I was watching his face, fascinated.
I had never been with a killer before.
Round the bend ahead the road ran fairly straight, a narrow ledge cut out of the mountainside.
The clouds hung like a grey-black roof over the valley.
He slowed at a view point, leaning out and examining the wet stone surface.
‘There were tae of them,’ he said as he drove on.
‘Looks like his mate went off with the car.
Ah couldn't see the little bugger clearly enough to be sure, but Ah think he was Indian.
The guy who did the blastin' was a mestizo.’
‘Why?’
That's what I didn't understand.
Why should we have been followed on our arrival in Peru?
And now this crude attempt to kill us.
The strong features, the massive head — the man radiated an extraordinary sense of inner strength.
‘Why?’
I asked again, and he said, ‘That's what we're goin' to find out.’
‘We?’
He looked at me, smiling.
‘We,’ he said.
He drove in silence after that, leaving me alone with my chaotic thoughts, and at the end of the long straight slash across the side of the cloud-hidden mountain, we picked up the new road again, swinging right, away from the Jequetepeque.
We were in cloud then, feeling our way again through a grey void.
We had almost half an hour of this, then  brown, wet walls of rock closed us in, the sound of the engine grinding upwards reverberating in a deep cut, the foglights accentuating the macabre theatricality of our struggle up the path through which Pizarro and his four hundred armoured hidalgoes had climbed to destroy the Inca Empire half a millennium ago.
Ward must have been thinking along the same lines, for as the road flattened out and the mist began to glimmer with a strange brightness, he said something about the Promised Land.
The road dipped and we picked up speed.
‘That's it,’ he said with grim satisfaction.
‘We made it,’ and he slapped the gloved hand twice against the steering wheel.
‘There was a moment, Ah'll admit…
Look!’
The thinning veil of cloud eddied in a gust of wind, and suddenly we were below it, looking down on to the flat roofs of a town spread out in a broad valley of rain-washed green.
‘Cajamarca.’
‘And the Hacienda Lucinda.
Do you know where it is?’
‘Past the Baños del Inca, out by a hill that's honeycombed with grave apertures.
We'll have to ask.’
We seemed a million miles from the Weddell Sea and that ice-encrusted vessel, but I had a feeling now that this was all a part of the voyage to come.
‘What are you going to say to Gómez?’
He smiled and shook his head.
‘Nothin'.
Ah think he'll dae the talkin'.’
‘And Iris Sunderby?’
‘We'll see.’
THREE
When you have travelled half across the world, with the background of the man you are going to meet gradually being filled in for you, a picture of him inevitably forms in the mind.
There was the suspicion, too, that it was he who had arranged for us to be followed on our arrival in Lima, may even have planned our death by that gully on the old road up to the pass.
Twice I asked Ward about this, the first time just after we had come out of the cloud on the eastern slope of the pass and had caught our first glimpse of Cajamarca far away in the valley below, and then again when we stopped at the Baños del Inca to ask our way, the hot springs steaming beside the public baths.
Each time he had given a little shrug, as though to say, ‘We'll see’, and left it at that.
But even if he had given me a direct answer, I don't know that I would have believed him.
He had such a talent for self-dramatisation that I wouldn't have put it past him, on finding that plunger, to have invented the whole thing — except that I had watched in horror as he deliberately forced the wretched mestizo over the edge, thrusting at his face with that dummy hand until he had disappeared into the gorge below.
I couldn't make up my mind about him, regarding him at times as some grotesque theatrical maniac, at other times as no more than a pleasant, if somewhat mysterious, travelling companion.
There was no such dichotomy in my mind when picturing Gómez.
By the time we were enquiring for the Hacienda Lucinda he was growing in my mind as something wholly evil, as deformed and monstrous as Victor Hugo's hunchback of Notre Dame without the saving grace of simplicity.
This view of him  had been built up gradually, partly as a result of that interview with Rodriguez back in Mexico City, and partly from the bits and pieces of information Ward had let fall.
There were some Indians camped by a stream in a meadow of coarse grass below the sepulchre hill with its rows of necropolistic apertures.
The whole hill had the appearance almost of a skull, the apertures like teeth exposed in a grin and black with decay.
Ward got out and walked across to the Indians.
They had been drinking chica and swayed as they stood up.
A lorry rolled past us along the road, its crumbling body bright with painted pictures plastered over with dust.
And behind it were two Indians riding a mule, brown ponchos draped over their shoulders, straw hats jammed on their heads and held with leather thongs under the chin.
‘Straight on,’ Ward said as he got back into the driving seat.
‘Just over a kilometre there's a track to the left with an arched entrance gate.’
We were almost there and I wondered how he would behave when he was face-to-face with Gómez, what he would say.
And Iris Sunderby, was she really with him in the Hacienda Lucinda?
We reached the gateway and turned in under the adobe arch with the name Hda LUCINDA plaster-embossed in large letters.
A long driveway, with a lake on one side and flat, flowered meadows on the other, the dark shapes of cattle grazing.
‘He's part Sicilian, part Irish,’ Ward reminded me.
‘Just remember that.
And part God knows what else,’ he muttered.
His words emphasised the racial element in the picture my imagination had formed of him.
Ángel of Death.
The Disappeareds.
A killer who was the son of an Argentinian playboy and a nightclub singer from somewhere near Catania.
Christ!
What sort of monster would he prove to be?
A few minutes and I was shaking his hand, completely dumbfounded by the physical perfection of the man, his elegance, his charm.
There was a virility about him that showed in his every movement.
He was like a Greek god, except that his hair was black and the nose had a slight curve to it that gave his broad, open features a somewhat predatory look.
He met us in the hacienda courtyard dressed in white shirt, white jodhpurs and black riding boots.
He had a riding crop in one hand and a clipboard in the other.
He didn't ask us our names.
He just stood there, a moment of shocked surprise as we got out of the Toyota.
‘Yes?’
He seemed at a loss for words, and Ward made no attempt to help him.
Then he was smiling, coming towards us with the charm turned on.
‘What can I do for you?’
He spoke in English with only the trace of an accent.
‘You are Mario Ángel Gómez?’
Ward's voice was flat as though he were carrying out an official enquiry.
‘Connor-Gómez.
Yes.
What do you want?’
‘Señora Sunderby.’
There was a momentary hesitation, so that I half expected him to say she wasn't there.
‘You wish to see her?’
‘No.
Ah've come to collect her.’
‘You have come to collect her?’
He was staring at Ward, his eyes gone hard, almost black in the sunlight.
‘Why?’
The broad, open face was no longer smiling.
‘Who are you?’
‘Ah think ye know that already.
Ye know who we are, when we arrived in Lima, also that we left the capital drivin' north up the Pan-Americana.’
‘You have come up from the coast then?
How was the road?’
Ward told him about the two diversions below Chilete and the need to switch to the old road that ran along the lip of the gorge.
He said nothing about the road being blocked behind us, or the man he had flushed out of the mist-shrouded mountainside and forced over the edge into the gorge below.
‘Your name is Ward.
Correct?’
‘Iain Ward.’
He nodded.
‘And you are here about the boat, is it?
The boat for this expedition.
Are you the man who put up the money to buy it?’
‘Ye know damn well Ah am.’
Nobody said anything for a moment, the two of them standing there, summing each other up.
The silence was broken by the clip-clop of hooves as a horse was led from its stable at the far side of the courtyard by an Indian.
‘And your name?’
Gómez had turned to me, and when I told him, he nodded.
‘You're the wood expert, right?
So now we have all the crew of the boat gathered  here, except for the Norwegian, and I believe there is an Australian expected.
Also we need a cook.’
‘Ye have agreed then?’
‘Agreed?’
‘To act as navigator.’
Gómez hesitated.
‘Per'aps.’
‘So ye know the exact location of this vessel her husband saw.
And ye have seen it yerself, from the air?’
He didn't answer that.
Instead he said, ‘How did you know where to find me?’
‘Look, laddie, Ah'm askin' the questions.
Just ye tell me now, have ye seen that old wooden ship down there in the ice, or no,?’
‘And I asked you a question, Mr Ward.’
It was said with studied politeness.
‘How did you know where to find me?’
There was a moment of silence, the two of them facing up to each other, a clash of wills.
To my surprise it was Ward who backed off.
‘Rodriguez,’ he said.
‘Ah yes.’
Gómez hesitated.
‘You have met him, of course.’
Aye.
In Mexico City.
Ah'm sure he will have told ye that on the phone.’
‘And you have read his book, I suppose?’
‘Of course.’
Silence again.
Horse and Indian had now stopped close behind Gómez.
‘There are many inaccuracies.’
He shrugged.
‘But what can you expect from a man like Rodriguez.
It is sad to have to make a living by grubbing around in the dirt of a national calamity.’
He gave another shrug.
‘It is all —’ he hesitated —‘what I think you call water under the bridge, eh?
It is a long time ago and what matters now is the future.
Always one must look to the future.’
‘Aye.
So let us talk about that old ship.’
Ward glanced at the house, a low, one-storey building sprawled across the end of the rectangular courtyard.
‘Can we go in?’
He nodded towards the open door.
‘We could dae with a clean-up.
It's been a long drive.
A little tiresome at times, too.’
‘There was no need for you to come.’
Gómez looked at his wristwatch, which was of heavy gold.
The watch, and a gold  signet ring on his little finger, glinted in the sun.
‘This is the time I normally ride round the hacienda.
We produce alfalfa, rice, cattle, and with mainly Indian labour it is necessary to oversee everything.’
Ward waited, saying nothing, and in the end Gómez said, ‘Very well, come into the house.’
The tone of his voice was distinctly unwelcoming.
‘But when you have had a wash I must ask you to leave.’
‘No harm in yer askin', laddie.’
They stared at each other, and I wondered why Ward had thickened his native Glaswegian accent.
‘The normal courtesy would have been to phone ahead for an appointment.’
Ward nodded.
‘O’ course.
Then ye could have prepared yersel'.’
And he added, ‘Now we are here, perhaps ye will send someone to inform Señora Sunderby.’
‘No.’
The frostiness of his tone had hardened.
‘She is my guest here.
And at the moment she is resting.’
There was a pause, and then he said, ‘I have no doubt she will be joining you at Punta Arenas, as arranged — when she is ready.
Alors.’
He gestured towards the front entrance to the house.
‘The cloakroom is the first door on the right.’
And he added, as he led the way, ‘You both look as though you could do with some sleep, so while you are refreshing yourselves I will telephone to a hotel in Cajamarca where I know the owner will look after you very well.’
Ward thanked him, but said it would not be necessary.
‘As soon as Ah've talked wi’ Iris Sunderby we'll be on our way.’
He was moving towards the house then, but suddenly he checked.
‘Och, Ah almost forgot.
Ah've a wee present fur ye.’
And he turned back to the Toyota, reaching in to the rear seat and coming out with the blasting plunger.
He held it out to Gómez.
‘Well, take it, man.
It's yers.’
For a second, it seemed, Gómez's eyes changed, a glimmer of some wild emotion mirrored in his features.
But it was so fleeting I couldn't be sure.
‘Not mine,’ he said, staring hard at Ward.
‘No, no, o’ course not.
A present.
Ah told ye.’
There was a long, awkward silence.
Finally Ward said, so quietly I hardly heard him, ‘Ah think we understan’ each other now.’
He chuckled softly to himself.
‘Call it a souvenir, shall we?’
He thrust it into the man's hands and strode past him, making for the open doorway set in the centre of the long white portico that ran the length of the house.
Gómez said something to the Indian, then hurried after him.
A moment later the two of them had disappeared into the house, leaving me standing there in the sunshine, feeling suddenly weak at the knees.
God!
I was tired.
The horse was led back to its stable and I walked to the far end of the house, where there was a lawn of coarse-bladed grass, brown with the heat, some exotic-looking flowers in a stony border, and cushioned garden chairs standing bright in the dappled shade of what looked like a cherry tree.
I adjusted one of them to the reclining position, lay back in it and closed my eyes.
I must have fallen asleep, for I dreamed that a girl was kissing me open-mouthed, the touch of her tongue light as a butterfly, and her hand caressing, and I woke suddenly to find I was thoroughly roused.
There was a figure sitting in the chair beside me.
Her face was in shadow against a shaft of sunlight, framed by hair that gleamed a brilliant black.
I sat up and she withdrew her hand.
It was Iris Sunderby.
I could see her now that my eyes were in the shadow of a branch.
Her lips were parted and her breath was coming in quick gasps as though she had been running, the breasts, looking naked under the light silk wrap, rising and falling.
But it was her eyes that startled me.
They were wide and very intent, the pupils dilated, and an expression of most extraordinary expectancy on her face.
She wasn't looking at me.
She was staring straight past me, sitting very still, as though waiting for somebody to come out of the house.
‘What is it?’
I asked.
But she didn't seem to hear me.
I repeated the question, louder this time.
There was still no response, no change of expression.
It was as though she were in some sort of a trance, a pallid undertone to the sun-dark skin, the nostrils of that straight nose slightly flared; even the jaw seemed to have lost some of its determined thrust.
‘Are you all right?’
I asked.
‘Yes.’
She said it in a long, sighing breath, still staring, almost avidly, at the side of the house.
I turned then, for I could hear voices.
There were open sliding glass windows at the side of the house and in the dim interior I could just make out two figures standing.
Ward's voice was saying something about long distance aircraft, Gómez answering him more audibly, ‘It's not possible.
Not now.’
They had moved towards the windows.
‘Things are not the same.
I am no longer a serving officer in the Fuerza Aérea.
Why don't you get your people…’
I could see them quite clearly now.
They were not looking at us.
They were facing each other, Ward saying, ‘We have nothin, that could make it there and back.’
‘The Hercules.
You have the Hercules at your Mount Pleasant base on the Malvinas.’
And when Ward said it hadn't the range, Gómez replied sharply, ‘But I think it has.
It flies regularly to South Georgia and back for a mail drop to your garrison there.
That is eighteen hundred miles the round flight.
It is slightly less than that from the Malvinas to the region of the Weddell Sea where this ship is locked in the ice.
So no problem.
That cargo plane of yours has a range of three thousand, six hundred sea miles.
That is with minimum payload.’
‘They would need a bigger margin than that to mount a search down there at the bottom of the world.
It's not exactly a Mediterranean climate.’
‘Then why not refuel in the air?
That is how I arrange it.’
‘Aye.’
There was silence then and I thought I saw him shake his head.
‘No, we'll do it my way.’
He turned to face the glass of the sliding windows and his mouth suddenly opened with surprise.
‘Ah thought ye said she was restin' in her room.’
‘*Qué?’
Gómez showed clearly then, peering over his shoulder, staring straight at us.
Then he moved, brushing past Ward, and at that moment Iris Sunderby reached out, seizing me by the shoulder and letting out a scream as she fell to the ground, pulling me down on top of her.
I finished up with a hand on her breast and my face within inches of hers.
Her eyes still had that dazed, almost glazed look, but beginning to focus now, though not on me, on Gómez, and she was screaming all the time.
Suddenly she stopped, and there was a look on her face…
I can only describe it as naked lust.
It was as though she were in a sexual frenzy, completely transported by the excitement of her passion.
Her lips stretched in a rictus smile, a satisfied look on her face, like that of a child who's got at the strawberries and cream, and Gómez was the cause of it.
A hand fastened like an iron clamp on my shoulder and I was flung off her, Ward bending down and shouting at her, ‘Ye silly, stupid bitch!’
His voice was thick with fury.
And then he slapped her, twice on the face.
‘Come on!
Pull yersel’ together, fur Christ's sake!’
I was lying on the grass, seeing it all from a low angle, Gómez moving in and Ward turning on him.
‘Ye fuckin' shit!
What is it?
What have ye doped her with?
Coke, I suppose.’
He stretched out his dummy hand, and the metal fingers clawed at the man's arm.
‘How did she take it — orally, or did she snort it?’
The fingers were clamped tight and he was shaking Gómez back and forth, his features livid with anger.
‘Or did ye inject it?’
He was jabbing at the man with the clenched fist of his other hand, and Gómez, taken by surprise, was trying to hold him off.
‘If it's crack Ah'll fuckin' kill ye, man.’
Gómez shook his head violently.
‘Is not crack.
I don't have any crack.
I think perhaps it is the cocaine I keep for medical purposes, pure, straight cocaine.
The best.
I don't mix it with anything.’
‘How did ye give it to her?’
‘No, I don't give it to her.
She must have got it from the room where I keep my guns.
There is a box with all the things necessary in case of accidents.
Cocaine is for anaesthetising against pain.’
Iris had got to her feet.
‘Let him go.’
Her voice sounded slurred and she was tugging at Ward's arm.
She made an effort and pulled herself together, drawing away from them and saying with great dignity and a careful enunciation of her words, ‘You must not q-quarrel, you two.
We shall be a long time in Isvik.
We will be living together in a very small space.
You must be friends.’
‘He's comin' with us then?’
Ward was looking, not at her, but at Gómez again.
‘Is that right?
Ye're comin' with us?’
And when Gómez did not answer, he swung round on her and said, ‘Does that mean he knows where the ship is?’
She stared at him, her eyes gone vacant again.
‘Does he, or does he not know where the ship is?’
He said it slowly as though talking to a child.
‘He thinks he can take us there.’
Ward stared at her a moment.
By then I was on my feet and I could see her face, the cheeks marked by the slaps he had given her, the eyes showing signs of intelligence again.
She seemed to have pulled herself together, but she didn't answer him.
Ward's head swung back to Gómez.
He looked like a bull about to charge.
But then he restrained himself and said in a quiet voice, ‘Know anythin' about sailin'?’
‘Some.’
‘And ye've seen this ship we're goin' to look fur?’
There was a moment's hesitation, then he nodded.
‘I think so.
There was low cloud, white drifts of mist close down on the ice.
But yes, I think I see it.’
‘And ye pin-pointed the position?’
‘Yes, I have the position.’
‘Have ye given Mrs Sunderby the co-ordinates?’
Gómez did not answer, and Iris Sunderby said, ‘No.
He refuses to say.’
And she added, cheeks suddenly a-flush and her voice wild, ‘I tried very hard to get it out of him.
Didn't I, Ángel?’
She pronounced Ángel with a short ‘A’.
‘I do everything you want, but you don't tell me, do you?
I crawl, I kiss your arse, do everything —’ She had worked herself up into a state of almost incoherent fury, like a child in a tantrum, tears streaming down her face and her whole body shaking in a sort of passion as she suddenly flew at him, clawing with her nails.
He held her off, quite easily, standing there, smiling, and the look on his face was one of pleasure.
He was a powerful, very fit-looking man, and he was obviously enjoying the mental distress he had caused and the fact that he held her powerless in his hands.
‘Ye bastard!’
Ward's voice was a harsh mixture of anger and contempt.
Gómez, still smiling, still holding Iris Sunderby at bay, said over the top of her head, ‘That's one thing I am not.’
He said it  with extraordinary force, his face reddening below the dark skin and the eyes gone black again with anger.
Ward looked at him then with intense interest.
‘Ye don't like bein' called a bastard?’
‘No.
Nobody likes being called that.’
‘Och, that's not altogether true.
There's some it doesn't upset the way it does ye.
It's even a term of endearment to some people.’
He gave a little laugh.
He was suddenly relaxed, his voice almost casual.
‘So yer mother and father were married, right?’
‘Of course they were married.’
The angry flush was still there on his face.
‘So don't call me a bastard.’
‘Ah'm sorry.
My apologies.’
Ward was smiling.
He was enjoying himself so much he almost bowed.
‘Very vulgar of me.
Or perhaps Ah should say very stupid.
Ah seem to remember it is all there, in that book by Luiz Rodriguez.
Yer father married a nightclub singer.
Then, when the family heard of it, they packed him off to Ireland, arranged fur the marriage to be annulled, and he married the Connor girl.’
‘This is nothing to concern you.’
Gómez began to turn away, but Ward stopped him.
‘No, of course not.
Ah was only makin' certain Rodriguez had got it right.
A very tightly written little thumbnail sketch.
If Ah remember rightly, he says the Gómez family already had Irish connections, so it was fairly simple fur them to find an impoverished landowner with a beautiful daughter goin' spare.
That's where the Connor side of the name comes from, isn't it?’
Gómez nodded.
‘All done in a hell of a hurry, with yer grandfather, Eduardo Gómez, obtainin' a special dispensation, or whatever ye call it, from the Pope.’
Gómez nodded again, waiting and watching, his eyes intent.
‘And they were married in Ireland, at Rathdrum in County Wicklow, right?’
‘Yes, but they returned to Argentina almost immediately.’
‘So who is yer mother?
Wasn't she the nightclub singer, Rosalli?’
‘No, of course not.
I am half Irish.’
Ward laughed.
‘So yer mother was that Irish girl, Sheila Connor.
Is that what ye're sayin?’
‘Of course.
I tell you…’
But he stopped there, realising suddenly what that would mean.
‘Sheila Connor — Mrs Juan Gómez — is also Iris Sunderby's mother.’
Ward said it very quietly.
‘That makes ye and Iris brother and sister.
Ye realise that?’
Silence, and Ward turned to Iris Sunderby with a smile that was very near to a smirk.
‘Ah just like to know the company Ah'll be keepin' down there in the Southern Ocean.’
Her face had paled.
Hadn't she realised that her infatuation for the man was incestuous?
‘Mother of God!’
Ward was looking from one to the other.
‘The tae of ye will need somethin' more than a dispensation from the Pope, Ah would think, if ye go on like this.’
He turned back to Gómez, his head thrust forward.
‘But perhaps ye have made a mistake and it is really the Sicilian woman…’
He let it go at that, smiling to himself as he suggested to Iris Sunderby that she go up to her room and put her things together.
‘We'll be leavin' just as soon as Ah've had a final word with our friend here.
Ye go with her,’ he said to me.
‘Give her a hand with her packin'.
It's wearin' off, but she's still a wee bit confused.’
She was more than a wee bit confused.
I think, if I hadn't been there, she'd have gone to sleep right away.
‘The bastard!’
She said that several times, walking round the room.
I wasn't sure whether she was referring to her brother or to Ward.
Then suddenly she flung herself down on the bed and closed her eyes.
‘Where's your suitcase?’
I asked her as I began opening drawers to see how much had to be packed.
‘Under the bed.
Where do you think?’
I had to kneel on the floor to reach it and her fingers fastened in my hair.
‘You don't approve, do you?’
‘What?’
I had got hold of the suitcase and with the other hand I unclasped her fingers from my hair.
‘How else was I to try and get the location out of him?’
‘And did you?’
But now she had gone to sleep, or into a coma, I wasn't sure  which.
I put the suitcase down on the other bed and began packing the contents of the drawers into it.
It was mostly warm-weather gear, light cotton and silk dresses, blouses, skirts, jeans, tights, panties, bras, the whole lot smelling of her, a mixture of scent, talc, perspiration and her own peculiar body odour.
By the time I had packed the things from the wardrobe and stuffed her toilet things on the top I could barely shut the case.
I dumped it outside the door with her anorak and a crimson and gold coat on top.
Shoes!
I had left out her shoes.
And when I had put these into a plastic bag that I found lying beside them under the dressing-table, I put my hand on her shoulder, about to shake her.
Instead, I found myself staring down at her, remembering that moment alongside the Cutty Sark when our eyes had first met.
She looked so peaceful and relaxed, lying there with her eyes closed and no expression on her face, just the good bone formation and the smooth flesh with the bloom of healthy, slightly darkened skin, like a madonna, very beautiful.
It seemed a pity to wake her.
She was breathing so quietly I could hardly see the rise and fall of her breasts, and those lips of hers looking fuller than I remembered, the mouth wider, and the line of the teeth just showing very white.
‘Mrs Sunderby…!
Iris!’
I shook her gently.
The eyelids flickered and the lips moved slightly.
‘We're leaving,’ I said.
‘No.’
The eyes were suddenly open, strongly blue and very wide.
But no expression in them — just wide, and the blue very deep, almost violet.
‘Not unless he comes.’
She spoke slowly and with some difficulty.
‘Come along,’ I said, tightening my grip on her shoulder.
Her lips moved again and I bent down to her.
‘What was that?’
‘I said — he is not — my brother.’
I shook my head.
‘I don't follow you.’.
‘That's what you think, isn't it?’
She was suddenly sitting bolt upright, staring at me.
‘You and that Iain Ward.
I tell you, he is not my brother.
He says he is, but he's not.
I know that.
I feel it — here.’
She pressed her hand to her stomach.
‘In my guts.’
I didn't know what to say.
‘According to Rodriguez…’
‘To hell with Rodriguez.
I know.
When I am lying with him, and he is inside me — that is the moment I know for sure.’
She  swung her feet off the bed.
‘Now, let's get going, yes.’
She lifted her feet, waggling her toes at me.
‘My shoes.
I'm not walking barefoot.’
I got her a pair of tough brogues from the plastic bag and all the time I was putting them on her she was looking at me with a vacant stare, her eyes still very wide, the pupils enormous.
I took her things out to the Toyota.
No sign of Ward, but I could hear the murmur of voices from the direction of the stable block.
I called out that we were ready, but there was no answer, and when I returned to the bedroom I found her lying back full length on the bed, her eyes open and gazing up at the ceiling with that same vacant stare.
‘You all right?’
But I might have been speaking to a corpse, she was so pale and still and silent.
Somewhere somebody was playing a pipe, a sad fluting lament in the hot air.
I pushed the sliding glass of the door to the patio further back to listen.
There was no tune, but the notes had a pattern nevertheless that was very compelling.
The primitive sound of it stirred something deep inside me as though it were Pan himself, not some Indian labourer, playing those haunting notes on that rude instrument.
I looked at Iris, wondering whether she could hear it.
But she hadn't moved and I began thinking about how I was going to get her out to our vehicle.
The piping stopped abruptly and a horse neighed.
I went out through the glass doors to the edge of the little patio.
It was the same horse, the Indian holding its head and Gómez just swinging up into the saddle, Ward standing in the stable doorway.
Gomez said something, smiling, his teeth white in the broad, handsome face.
He looked young and carefree, almost like a boy.
A lift of his hand and then he had picked up the reins and, with a quick dig of his heels, went straight into a canter.
Ward watched him, without any expression on his face, as he rode out through the arch, turned right and was lost to view behind the outbuildings that formed a part of the square courtyard.
He turned then and came across to me.
‘How's our little skipper?’
He sounded in a jocular mood, no sign of tiredness.
‘Come and see for yourself.’
I said.
‘We'll probably have to carry her.’
And I added ‘How did you get on with Gómez?’
‘Connor-Gómez.
Please!’
He was almost grinning.
‘We understand each other now.’
And then he said something that struck me as rather strange: ‘He's made up his mind now.
He's comin' with us.
He's suddenly quite determined about it.’
‘Why?’
‘Ah.
Ye tell me that, laddie, and it'd save me an awful lot of time.’
We were back in the bedroom then and he stood for a moment looking down at her.
‘Ye're right.’
Her eyes were still wide open, a blind stare that was without any expression of intelligence.
‘It's not speed,’ he said.
‘It must be crack.
That's the worst way to cut the damned stuff.
Ah wonder where he got the paraldehyde?’
‘Is that what you mix it with to get crack?’
He nodded.
‘Like cocaine it has anaesthetic qualities.
Ye only need about three goes of crack and ye've got yerself an addiction problem.
Och, well, we'll know soon enough.’
We picked her up then and carried her out, dumping her, limp as a sailbag, on the back seat.
‘Where are we going?’
I asked as he began fixing the rear safety straps so that she wouldn't roll off the seat if he had to brake suddenly.
‘Back down south.’
He was fussing over her, arranging a sleeping bag under her head as a cushion.
‘Accordin' to our hero, there's another road back to the coast by way of Cajabamba and Huamachuco.
It's passable, he says, and it leads direct to Tmjillo.
We'll spend the night there, and then, if she's recovered, we'll go on in the morning through Lima to Tacna in the south of Peru.
We pick up the plane for Punta Arenas at Arica, just across the Chilean border.’
He had it all worked out and he wasn't wasting any time.
‘Ye drive,’ he said and got into the passenger seat.
‘Where's Gómez gone?’
I asked as I started the engine.
‘Doin' the rounds of his estate.’
‘As long as he's not fixing for another of his boys to play around with this alternative route through the mountains,’ I said.
‘No, he won't try that again.’
‘So what's the hurry?’
He was silent a moment and I thought he wasn't going to answer that.
But then he said, ‘Ah don't know.
Just a feelin' that the sooner we're on board Isvik the better.
Once he's joined us it'll probably be okay, but till then…’
He paused.
‘Ah'd just like to check her over, make sure nobody starts playin' silly buggers with the engine or the seacocks, somethin' like that.
A fire on board…’
He turned to the back seat as I swung under the arch and headed towards the Baños del Inca.
‘Ah wonder if she has any idea what it is all about.
Did ye ask her?’
‘Ask her what?’
I was trying to memorise the road.
‘She comes up here, throws herself at a man who may or may not be her brother, but who is undoubtedly mixed up in a very unsavoury episode in his country's history, lets him persuade her to fool around with a very dangerous drug…
Why?
And why should he go to such pains to stop us comin' up here?’
‘That's simple,’ I said.
‘A girl as attractive as Iris Sunderby, if you'd got her alone in your hacienda…’
‘Ye mean ye'd be willin' to try and kill off her friends just to keep her to yerself?’
He shook his head.
‘That man is as cold-blooded as a snake.
No, there has to be some deeper reason.
And to suddenly decide he'll come with us…’
He was looking at me, a hard, interrogative stare.
‘What is it about that ship?
He knows where it is.
He's willin' to pilot us there.
Why?
What's he know about it that we don't?
And when we find it, what then?’
I shook my head, my attention half on the road.
There were quite a few people about, women as well as men, nearly all Indians, some of them on mules.
Donkeys, too, and because it was hot, with only the faintest breeze, many of the men had their wide-brimmed hats pushed to the backs of their heads, held there by the leather thongs that were really chin straps.
Occasionally a garishly painted truck passed us, raising a cloud of dust, and away to the west, hanging over us and clearly visible now that the clouds had lifted, the coastal range of the cordilleras towered pale and trembling in the heat.
I think what attracted me most about the country round was its Englishness, meadows deep in grass and wild flowers, and willows wherever there was water.
It wasn't truly English, of course.
It had a different feel to it, a different look, a different smell.
And there was Iris Sunderby's recumbent body sprawled in the back.
Nevertheless, the countryside reminded me of East Anglia, the willows in particular making me realise how far I was from home.
At Cajabamba we joined a slightly better road, and soon afterwards we turned west and headed up into the mountains through Huamachuco, climbing all the way.
I don't know how high the pass was, but even with the sun casting long, black shadows, there was none of the fearsomeness of the journey we had made only that morning.
No storm mist shrouding the slopes, no rain, no lightning stabbing, no thunder rumbling, the clouds all swept away as though by magic, the sky blue, the mountains looking quite serene now, almost kindly in the late afternoon light.
Inevitably the road worsened as we neared the pass, the surface rutted by trucks and still awash with water spilling down steep gullies.
An abandoned truck, its snout rammed into the steep bank of a cut, caused me a moment's panic.
Ward was asleep.
I was climbing in low gear, my eyes searching the vehicle and the bank behind it for any sign of movement.
‘It's all right.’
He must have sensed my hesitation, his ears alert for any change in the note of the engine.
‘Ah didn't tell him which route we were takin'.
That truck has been there at least three days.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Use yer eyes.
The road's dry under the chassis.’
He was asleep again before I had edged the Toyota round it.
Shortly after that we came over the top of the pass and started down towards the coast.
The sun was setting and there were moments when I, too, felt like ‘stout Cortés’ and thought I could see the Pacific.
Perhaps here, from the vantage point of the Andes, I would see the green flash as the upper rim of the sun slid below the ocean horizon to leave a prismatic glimpse of the spectrum's final colour.
Twice I ran perilously close to the edge, my eyes dazzled and eyelids drooping.
I was beginning to feel sleepy and I began  to sing, softly, to myself.
I was singing ‘All things bright and beautiful…’
I don't know why.
I just felt that way.
And then a voice from the back said, ‘Where the hell am I?’
‘We're taking you down to the Pacific for a bathe,’ I told her.
‘Like hell you are!
Where's Ángel?’
She was leaning forward.
I was on a tricky bend, the road falling away sharply and badly in need of a grader.
I couldn't turn my head, but I could smell her, feel her breath on the back of my neck.
‘Stop the car!’
Her voice was shrill.
‘I said stop the car.
Turn round and take me back.’
And then, when I said nothing and kept on driving, she said, ‘If you don't stop, I'll jump out.’
I braked a little harder then and turned to look at her.
Her face was still very pale, the skin shining with sweat, but the eyes were almost normal now, the pupils no longer dilated.
I could see them quite clearly, the blue formed of all sorts of colours, like sapphires picked out in the sun's last rays.
‘Where are you taking me?’
She started to wrestle with the nearside door, but Ward had locked it and in the end she gave up, lying back again and muttering something about remembering now.
‘Our little skipper more herself, is she?’
The way he said it I knew he meant to goad her.
She flared up on the instant, turning on him and almost yelling, ‘You bought a boat, that doesn't mean you bought me.
Now tell our pest control officer here to turn round and drive back to the hacienda.’
‘Why?’
Ward's face was suddenly contorted with anger.
‘Why the hell dae ye want to go back there?
Are ye in love with him?
He fills ye up with coke, uses ye like a whore…
And he's yer own blood.’
‘How dare you!’
Her face was flushed and angry.
‘He's not my brother.’
‘All right, yer half-brother then.’
And he added, turning the knife in the wound, ‘Christ almighty!
Ye're a Catholic and you have an incestuous relationship…’
‘I do not.
I do not.’
She banged her fists on the back of his seat.
‘Okay, but what are ye goin' to say to the priest next time you  go to confession, eh?
How are you going to explain that ye're playing around…’
‘He is not my brother,’ she repeated.
‘And I do not commit incest.’
And then she went over to the attack again.
‘Can't you understand, you great big stupid asqueroso, I was close to getting it out of him, the information I need to prove my husband is not imagining things.
And I would have got it, if you hadn't come blundering in.’
‘Balls!
Ye'd never have got it out of him in a million years.
Ye're besotted with the bastard.
That's the real reason ye're holed up here in the mountains…’
‘Oh, for Christ's sake, stop your play-acting.’
And she added, maliciously, ‘All right.
He's a beautiful hunk of male virility, something you'll never be, and I enjoy playing around with him, as you so delicately put it.’
That was when I scraped the fender on a protruding lump of rock.
It's not often you find yourself an enforced eavesdropper on two people screwing each other up with murder in their hearts.
And when he said, ‘Ye start playin' around with the bugger on board Isvik…’
I slammed on the brakes, stopping with a jerk that almost threw her on the floor.
‘Shut up!’
I shouted.
‘Both of you.
The road's difficult enough without you yelling at each other, and I'm tired.’
An abrupt silence followed my outburst.
I think they had both been so wrapped up in themselves they had quite forgotten my existence.
‘We're all tired,’ Ward said at length.
‘Yes, but you're not driving.’
‘Want me to take over?’
‘How far to the coast?’
I asked.
‘No idea.’
‘I'll drive till the sun sets,’ I said.
‘I want to see it drop into the Pacific.’
I let the clutch in, jerking the vehicle into motion again, my driving suddenly vicious.
I think I was scared again.
I had every right to be if there was going to be this sort of hostility between the two of them all the way down into the ice.
And Gómez?
There was Gómez, a catalyst for disaster.
My mind went back to the scene in that bedroom and the sliding doors to the paved patio.
I seemed to remember statuary and flowers — hibiscus or something flaming red, roses maybe, in great urns — and there were doubtless other bedrooms leading off it with similar softly sliding glass doors.
I should have questioned her then.
Still mazed with whatever the drug was she had taken, I might have got the truth out of her.
Was he her brother, or wasn't he?
She said not.
She'd been very positive about that, not just here in the car, but she had said it to me in the bedroom while I was packing her things and she was still in a mentally uninhibited state.
And if he wasn't her brother, what were his real origins?
And was she in love with him?
Well, not in love perhaps, but besotted.
I remembered the charm of the man, that almost blatant virility.
And Ward had said it was all fixed, he would join us on Isvik and navigate us to within sledging distance of the trapped vessel.
And then, suddenly, there was the Pacific, and the sun, a great crimson ball, like the tuning indicator on a giant music centre, dipping its lower rim on to the hazed line of the horizon.
I stopped right there, where I had an uninterrupted view, and watched the rim of it flatten out, spreading fire along the ocean's edge.
It didn't take long.
It just sank slowly and steadily below the ocean's horizon, and suddenly it was gone.
No green flash, nothing, and the sky above fading from blue through green to the beginning of Stygian darkness.
Suddenly a star showed.
‘Venus or Mercury?
Venus, Ah think,’ Ward said, and I realised he, too, had been watching the spectacle in absolute silence.
‘That was the star that brought Cook into the Pacific — the transit of Venus.
Tae centuries ago.’
He was silent then and I had the feeling he was thinking of all that Cook had done, first in Endeavour, then in Resolution and Discovery, ships not much longer than Isvik.
And he had taken them down into the Southern Ocean, not as far as we were going, but far enough to be in amongst the ice, circumnavigating the whole land mass of Antarctica in waters no man had ever sailed before.
‘Ah'll take over now,’ Ward said.
RENDEZVOUS AT USHUAIA
ONE
‘So what did she say about him?’
‘Nothing,’ I said.
‘Ye were in that room alone with her.
She must have said somethin'.’
I shook my head.
‘Jesus Christ, man!
Didn't ye ask her?’
He was leaning forward across the table, staring at me with a sort of frustrated belligerence.
‘Weren't ye curious?’
‘I was packing her things.’
‘Ah know ye were.
But ye were there all the time Ah was talkin, to Gómez.
Must have been quarter of an hour at least.
Surely to God…’
He stretched out his left hand and gripped my arm.
‘Come on, ye had the opportunity, and after that extraordinary scene in the garden ye must have been bubblin' over with curiosity.’
‘She was drugged,’ I reminded him.
‘Ah know that.’
His voice had risen, his impatience spilling into anger so that other guests were beginning to watch us.
‘Now just go back in yer mind to that room, tell me everythin' she said, or even how she looked in answer to your questions, that would help.’
‘I didn't ask any questions,’ I said.
‘, Not the sort of questions you want answered.
I asked where her suitcase was and she said, under the bed, where else?
Oh, and before that, before she collapsed on to the bed, she called him a bastard.
She said that several times, walking round the room.’
I didn't tell him how she had caught hold of my hair again when I was reaching under the bed.
I could still hear her voice, the way she had said, ‘You don't  approve, do you?’
As though my approval mattered to her.
There was no room service and we were breakfasting in the hotel dining-room at a table looking out on to a square adorned by several yuccas and some dusty oleanders.
Iris hadn't surfaced yet.
She had told Ward she didn't want any breakfast.
‘Anythin' else?’
I hesitated, but in the end I told him: ‘She said something about how else could she get the location out of him?’
‘The location of the ship, d'ye mean?’
‘I suppose so.’
‘Tradin' her body fur the information?’
His grip on my arm had tightened, his voice, dropped to a whisper, suddenly quite menacing.
‘That's what ye're implyin', isn't it?
Or was it…?’
I shook my head, unwilling to answer him.
‘And did he give her what she wanted?’
His persistence annoyed me.
‘Sex or information?’
I asked.
‘Which do you mean?’
The way I put it was intentional and I think if we hadn't been sitting in full view of some dozen of the hotel's guests he would have hit me.
‘The location,’ he almost snarled.
‘No.
She was suddenly flat out.’
He stared at me a moment, as though he suspected I might be hiding something from him.
Then he let go of my arm.
‘Och well, Ah'll have to get it out of her myself.’
He sat back, evidently considering how to go about it, then finished his coffee and got slowly, almost reluctantly, to his feet.
‘Aye, Ah'd best have a wee talk with her myself.’
He glanced at his watch.
‘On the road at nine-fifteen, okay?’
He was just turning to leave the room when the door opened and Iris appeared.
It was almost as though there were some telepathic understanding between them.
Later I was to find this sort of coincidence recurring.
They were after all, both of them, Sagittarians.
As she came over to our table I was amazed at the change in her.
The olive colouring of her skin was back in full bloom, and though she was wearing little or no make-up, her lips, or rather her mouth, which, with her nose, was the most notable part of  her features, was bright red.
Her cheeks, which had been so white the previous evening, now had colour, and instead of sagging with exhaustion she radiated the extraordinary vitality that had so attracted me at our first meeting on the Cutty Sark.
‘Isn't it about time we hit the road?’
She was addressing Ward, not me, and she glanced pointedly at her watch.
‘Ah was just comin' to call ye,’ he answered gruffly.
She ignored that and asked him whether he'd booked her a seat with us on the flight south from Lima.
‘Ah was plannin' to drive down through Arequipa to the Chilean border.’
His manner was slightly defensive.
‘There are quite a few archaeological sites Ah'd like to have a look at while Ah'm here.’
‘There's also a boat waiting for us down at Punta Arenas.
We may find something wrong with her, items we need for overwintering in the ice.
She's a long way from any source of supply and if there's something that has to be specially made, or is too bulky to fly out — a new engine, for instance…’
They stared at each other for a moment, not exactly hostile, more two people measuring each other up.
‘We can discuss that while we drive, no?
Have you settled the cuenta?’
Her tone was imperious, deliberately provocative.
I saw Ward hesitate, then he smiled and nodded.
‘Aye, we can talk about it — while we're lookin' round the mud ruins of Chanchán.’
He, too, was being provocative, quite deliberately making it a clash of wills, but still smiling as he told me to get the bags into the Toyota.
‘And don't let that briefcase out of yer sight.’
He nodded to the case, which was under the table, and strode out.
The route we had taken through the cordillera from Cajamarca had brought us virtually into the outskirts of Tmjillo and we had put up at a hotel in the centre of the city, all three of us more or less out on our feet.
Now, in the brightness of a cloudless morning, the air clear after a night of rain and surprisingly dry, we started out thoroughly refreshed.
Certainly I felt, for the first time, that sense of anticipation, of excitement almost, at the prospect ahead of me — a journey down the whole coast of South  America, and then on to the very southernmost rim of the world.
Even the digression up to Cajamarca now seemed in retrospect more like an adventure than something to send shivers down the spine.
But though my spirits were high, the shadow of that man, who liked to be called the Ángel of Death, travelled with me, the memory of his good looks, his well-oiled virility, above all Iris Sunderby's apparent infatuation, constantly there in my mind.
Ward took the wheel as we left the hotel, but instead of heading south, he turned north, and when Iris Sunderby remonstrated with him, all he said was, ‘Chanchán.
Ah'm bloody well goin' to have a look at Chanchán.’
Adding, by way of explanation, that it was the old Chimú capital.
‘pre-Inca and almost as powerful.’
Like Iris, I was impatient now to get on with the journey south and see the vessel that was to be our home, but when I saw Chanchán…
It was incredible, so incredible, so lost in time that it did something to me — changed my perspective, my outlook, something strange that even now I barely understand.
To begin with it was vast, a huge mud city fallen into min, desolate, remote as the moon, and gloomy as hell, for a mist had rolled in, completely obscuring the sun.
It was only a short distance off the Pan-Americana, all grey mud dust, the outer walls towering so thick, so solid, that, after the better part of a millennium, they were still standing eight or nine metres high, only the ramparts showing the erosion of time.
It was virtually desert country, the irrigation channels blocked with debris, nothing that could be called a tree to be seen anywhere.
Once inside those walls, it really was another world, more than fifteen square kilometres of streets bordered by the crumbling walls of houses, public buildings, cemeteries and reservoirs, some with bits and pieces of bone lying exposed where long-dead looters and grave-robbers had been at work.
Looking back towards the Pan-Americana, the huge mud complex appeared ringed with peaked and desiccated mountains.
Westward its bulwark was the Pacific.
I could hear it, a steady, grumbling sound, like an earthquake.
I walked right through that fantastic min.
It was the largest I  had ever seen, split up into walled units, ten of them Ward had said, and when I reached the western limit of it I was face to face with the heaving bulk of the ocean.
A big swell was rolling in, building waves like mountains in the mist and breaking with a thunderous and persistent roar.
There was a slight onshore breeze.
I stood there with the salt spray and the mist damp on my face, and the vastness of it, and the antiquity of the desolate remains behind me, made all my life to date seem insignificant and of no account.
I can't explain it, but it was as though I were transported outside of myself, on the verge of grasping the significance of being.
In the atmosphere of the place there was something almost biblical, and yet this was a pagan world I had stepped into.
How could it be so full of meaning?
Was it the monstrous, heaving power of the waters confronting me, or was it my conscious awareness of the dead of a great city.
I don't know what it was, but I felt almost disembodied, ten feet tall and near to God.
The impact was so great that the effect of it was to remain with me in the months ahead and give me strength when I most needed it.
I must have stood there for at least ten minutes, quite still as though transfixed.
Finally I turned and started back, not conscious of anything, my mind still locked in on the impression the place had made so that I only vaguely heard a voice calling me.
She was sitting in a gap in the outer wall, and as I approached her, she said, ‘You look as though you've seen a ghost.’
She smiled.
‘What were you staring at?’
‘Nothing — just the sea.’
She was looking up at me with an expression of concern.
‘You are thinking about what lies ahead.’
I nodded.
I was looking down at her, brown knees drawn up to her chin and the open V of her shirt showing the round of her breasts, even the pinking of the nipple circles.
She patted the broken wall beside her.
‘Does it scare you?’
I didn't say anything and she turned her head away, facing the sea again.
‘Well, it does me.’
She said it in a whisper.
‘It's so vast.
That's what I find disconcerting.
It goes on and on and on — ten thousand miles of  virtually uninterrupted ocean.
And where we're going the winds come from right around the globe.’
I sat down beside her, both of us gazing out through the mist at the heaving, pounding water, the noise of it thundering in our ears, filling our whole world with sound.
‘He's coming with us, is he?’
I asked her.
‘Ángel?
Yes.’
She nodded.
‘He'll navigate us down into the ice, and afterwards he will act as our guide.’
And she added, speaking quietly as though to herself, ‘He knows where it is.’
‘You trust him?’
She hesitated.
‘No.
No, I don't trust him.
But he will take us there.’
‘Why?’
She gave a hollow little laugh.
‘Ah, if I knew that…’
I waited, but she didn't pursue the matter.
‘Do you love him?’
I asked.
She turned on me then, but not with anger, her tone one of contempt.
‘Love!
That is not something he would understand.
You don't love a man like Ángel.’
‘What then?
He fascinates you, is that it?’
Her mouth was compressed into a tight line.
‘It is none of your business.
But yes, he is very attractive.
Don't you feel it?’
And she added slowly, ‘He is as attractive to men, you know, as he is to women.’
I wondered about that, why she had said it.
‘It's you I'm concerned about.
I'm asking about you.’
It was presumptuous of me, but I had to know, and now I had the opportunity.
The atmosphere of the place, the mood between us, everything was right.
She nodded almost reluctantly.
‘I suppose.
It is the way we are made.
He is a devil, but you cannot help what the gods…’
Her voice tailed away in a little shrug of the shoulders that was like a shudder.
‘And he is not my brother.’
‘Not even your half-brother?’
‘No.’
‘Then who is his father?’
‘How the hell do I know?
I have barely seen him since my father died.’
‘What about Carlos then?
A cousin, you said.’
She ignored the question, turning to me and asking why Iain had brought us here.
‘Why does he insist on Chanchán?
All these mud walls — it is so depressing.’
There was a pause, and she added, ‘He never does anything without a purpose.
The play acting, those accents, the changes of mood — all is intentional I think.’
She was looking at me again, waiting for an answer.
And I thought, my God!
We're going to lock ourselves inside the fragile skin of a small floating home, and all of us, three of us anyway, at odds and full of motives I didn't understand.
She nodded as though she had read my thoughts.
‘Looking at that sea, you have reason to be scared.’
‘I'm not scared,’ I assured her.
‘Just a little concerned.’
‘A leetle concairned!’
She laughed at her mimicry.
‘About Carlos?’
I reminded her.
‘What about him?
He is all right.
The police will sort it out, and if they have arrested the boy, then he will be released as soon as they realise the body is not mine, but that of some poor little Dockland tart.’
‘But your handbag.’
‘My handbag?
Yes, of course.
It suddenly came to me.
If they mistook the body…’
‘And the ring.
Victor Wellington said there was a ring of yours on the dead woman's left hand.’
‘I got very wet.’
She nodded, smiling.
‘Also I was a little frightened, and the water was filthy.
There was nobody around.
Nobody saw me, thank God.
Poor little Carlos!’
She glanced at me quickly.
‘Why are you asking about him?
You think they will blame him?’
She said it almost eagerly.
‘You recognised him when he followed us out of Greenwich.’
‘Of course I recognise him.
He is —’ She stopped there.
‘You ask too many questions.’
‘I only want to know what his relationship is to Gómez.
You said he was some sort of cousin.’
She was staring at the sea again.
‘Per'aps he is.
Per'aps not.’
She shook her head, the dark hair glinting with moisture, her eyes turned to me and searching mine.
‘I can talk with you, I  think.’
I was to learn that her English always tended to deteriorate when her emotions took hold.
‘With Iain, no.
I can't talk to him, not about private matters.
I don't understand him.
I suppose in a way I don't trust him.
On practical matters, yes.
He is a good man to have with us on this journey…’
She shrugged.
‘You ask about Carlos.
I don't know what that boy is, except he is something very close to Ángel.
His mother is that Rosalli woman, I think.
But who his father is —’ Again the slight shrug of the shoulders.
And then she got to her feet.
‘It is time we rejoin Iain and get going.
We need to be in Lima tonight.’
‘Where is he?’
I asked as we turned our backs on the Pacific and began working our way back through the maze of walls and rubble.
‘I left him examining what appeared to be the remains of a cemetery.
He was armed with an archaeological book he had dug out of that bulging briefcase of his and was on his hands and knees sifting through a pile of discarded bones.’
We found him seated on a particularly high section of wall sketching the decoration of an inner chamber, and when I climbed up beside him I noticed his vantage point gave him a clear view of the Toyota.
When we had parked there hadn't been another vehicle in sight.
Now it had been joined by several cars and a coach was disgorging a gaggle of tourists.
‘I see you're not taking any chances.’
I said it more as a joke, but he took it seriously.
‘Would ye after what happened on the way up to Cajamarca?’
I realised then that Iris had been right.
It wasn't entirely his thirst for knowledge that had made him insist on driving north to Chanchán.
It was almost eleven before we left that great mud complex, driving back through Trujillo and on south across dull, desiccated country, a lot of it near-desert.
The sun gradually ate up the mist until by the afternoon we were in a blazing oven under a burned blue sky.
By the time we rolled into Lima it was dark and, though we had taken hourly turns at the wheel, we were all of us limp with exhaustion.
The following morning we flew to Tacna in the far south of Peru, crossed into Chile by taxi and flew on from Arica to Santiago.
From there a delayed flight took us on to Punta Arenas where we arrived late in the evening.
I don't remember much about our arrival, only that the fourteen-kilometre drive from the airport was something of a nightmare with visibility almost nil in pouring rain mixed with flurries of hail and howling gusts of wind.
It seemed bitterly cold after the heat of Peru.
‘Ah doubt this fuckin' place has even heard o’ primavera,’Ward said in his foulest Glaswegian, and that just about summed it up.
The house we were in was solid Victorian in style, both inside and out, except that it had a tin roof.
Between the gusts, the sound of rain on the roof and water pouring off it was continuous.
The place was owned by an old ship's captain.
He gave us coffee laced with Chilean brandy.
‘Es bueno.
Hara dormir bien.’
He had been at sea on the Chilean coast most of his life, running cargoes between the isolated ports of the southern waterways, a marvellous-looking old man, big gnarled hands warped with rheumatism and a long wrinkled face, little lines running out from his eyes, which were slitted as though he were permanently peering out into fog.
His hair was thick and iron grey, and the rather drooping moustache was curved round the mouth to finish in a little tuft just below the under lip.
The effect was that he always seemed to be smiling.
I was half asleep when he showed us up to our rooms, Ward and I sharing one at the rear of the building, which, in place of beds, had a double-tier bunk in the corner.
The wind in the gusts seemed directed straight at the small casement window, which rattled and banged.
At times the whole house shook.
When I woke the sun was shining, everything very still.
Ward had already washed and was getting into his clothes.
‘Mornin'.’
He was smiling.
‘Ah think we can regard this as being the start of our voyage.
D'ye think it's an omen?’
‘What?’
I was still half asleep.
‘Ye'll see what Ah mean when ye get to the bathroom.
It looks right out on to the Strait, and it's flat calm, not a breath, the  ships anchored off all standin' on their heads in marvellous reflection.
And somethin' else —’ There was an excitement about him that showed the boy behind the man.
He looked so much younger with a mountain peak all covered in snow peering over his shoulder through the little window.
‘Come on, stir yerself.
Ye'll find me down on the quay looking at her.
She's right there, right in front of us, and she's rusty as hell.
But she's a good-lookin' boat all the same,’ he added as he went out.
Thus my first glimpse of Isvik was from the bathroom window of a seafaring man, who had exchanged his small coaster for a house on the quay looking straight out on to the Magellan Strait.
She was, as Ward had said, rusty as hell, but behind the rust she had a solid look to her.
I just hoped he'd had a good surveyor on the job before committing himself.
By the time I reached the quay the water out in the centre of the Strait was darkening with little puffs of wind and the mountains west of the town were half obscured by cloud.
My breath smoked and I began to feel the wind-chill even through my sailing jersey and the special anorak I had bought for southern latitudes.
The quay was white and slippery with the granules of a recent hailstorm.
I was only a short time standing there, but long enough to take in the vessel's lines, the quite dainty sheer, her size and the layout of the masts and rigging.
By comparison with a freighter, moored so close her black stern virtually hung over Isvik's knife-edged bows, she looked very small, but viewing her from the standpoint of the maxi in which I had raced round the world, I guessed she was roughly the same size — at least twenty-five metres long with a good beam and what looked like a deep V-shaped hull.
There was a low deckhouse amidships with an upper wheel and emergency tiller steering from a small cockpit aft.
I thought at first she was ketch-rigged, but then decided she was more of a schooner.
Her running rigging was in an appalling state, the ropes all frayed and tangled, but the standing rigging, which was partly of stainless steel, seemed to have been well looked after.
The hull was presumably steel; it was this that gave her a rust-streaked look under the dirty coating of ice and snow.
The topsides and deckhouse, many of the fittings, were of aluminium or some smooth grey alloy.
A blackened pipe stood up out of the deck, just aft of the deckhouse on the port side, a heat haze dancing from the top of it and the ice on the metal supporting bracket dripping moisture.
A delicious smell of bacon frying was wafted on a blattering down-blast of wind.
I was suddenly very hungry.
I went on board and from the open doorway of the deckhouse came the murmur of voices.
‘Mr Ward?’
I called his name twice, ‘Are you on board?’
‘Aye.’
But it wasn't Ward who poked his head up the companionway.
It was a big, bearded man with a shock of blond hair on a round bullet head that seemed to have no neck.
The shoulders were immensely broad, padded out by the grey and brown loose-woven rollneck sweater he was wearing.
‘You are Pete Kettil, ja?’
And when I said I was he held out a massive paw that gripped my hand as though in a vice.
‘Nils Solberg.
Velcome on board Isvik.
The boss, he is already here.
You come for frokost, ja?
Bakkon, eggs, some seaveed, also fried lichen, what we call lav.
Is god.
Kom down.’
Ward was already eating.
‘Nils is a bloody good cook,’ he said with his mouth full.
‘But ah learned one thing already.
Ye take a gander at the engines.
She may look a ruin topside, but beJaisus, the engine-room…
Reck'n ye could've fried the eggs on the cylinder heads it's so bright and clean and polished.
That right, Nils?’
‘Ja.
Engines okay.’
‘So we need a cook.
First priority.
Nils may be a good cook, but his time will be better spent away from the galley.
And we need to dae somethin' about the drive shaft.’
Apparently the retired sea captain, in whose house we were billeted, was willing to provide us with beds ashore, but nothing else.
The deal was we made our own beds and fed on board.
‘What about Mrs Sunderby?’
I asked.
He looked at me with a quizzical lift to his eyebrows.
‘I suppose she's sleeping it off.’
I said it without thinking.
‘Then ye suppose wrong.’
He was grinning.
‘She was down  before me, breakfasted and lookin' as though she was just off to complete a big business deal in the money centre of BA or wherever.
In fact, she's over at the Yard now chattin' up some foreman or other she's got eatin' out of her hand.
As ye doubtless noticed, there's work to dae.’
He thrust his head forward as the big Norwegian dumped a plateful of an extraordinary mixture in front of me — a great wadge of fried bread, two eggs, two very thick rashers and the rest a mêlée of doubtful greenery swimming in bacon fat.
‘Ah'm Iain, this is Nils, Mrs Sunderby is Iris — no, better call her Eeris, she responds to that much quicker — ye're Peter, or Pete for short, and what the hell we call Gómez we'll find out in due course.
But Christian names from now on.
Quicker to say, quicker to react to.
And by God, where we're goin' we're likely to need quick reactions.
Had a look at the riggin'?’
I nodded, suddenly realising what was coming.
‘That'll be yer department.
Ah know nothin' about sails, nor does Nils — he's a wizard of an engineer, that's all.
And Iris, she's the managin' director.
Okay?’
‘And you?’
I asked, my mouth stuffed full of lichen which was really much nicer than I'd expected.
‘Me?
Ah'm just old moneybags.
But Ah tell ye this, laddie, Ah'm a helluva fast learner, so don't think ye can pull the wool or sit around on yer fat little arse doin' bugger all.
Ah want that riggin' fixed and workin' inside of a week.’
‘And the sails?’
‘Iris is checkin' on that now.
We've yet to find out if they've any sail-makin' facilities here at all.
Ah suspect not, in which case we'll have to measure them up and have them flown out.
Or we make our own.
In a place like this there are bound to be some good seamstresses and Singers will surely have had their salesmen down here back in the days of the square-riggers.
Iris will soon have some women organised.
She's a great organiser, that girl.’
It was, in fact, Iris who found us a cook.
He was a youngster of twenty-two just on the point of being invalided out of the Chilean Navy.
Besides cooking, he seemed to have done most things, course after course.
His name was Roberto Coloni and  he had been in hospital following a bad fall in which he had broken his shoulder blade, forearm and two ribs, as well as suffering bad concussion, which had affected his hearing.
It was because of his deafness, not his more obvious injuries, that he was being invalided out, and it was several days before he finally joined us and took up his culinary duties.
My immediate concern on that first morning in Punta Arenas was to learn all I could about the ship.
Iain filled me in on the essential details while I was devouring that gargantuan breakfast.
Isvik had been built in the Canadian Maritimes for an American millionaire who wanted to emulate Staff Sergeant Henry Larsen of the Royal Canadian Mounties who, in the years 1940 — 42, had sailed the schooner St Roch from west to east through the North-West Passage.
He was the first to make the Passage except for Amundsen.
And then he did it again in 1944, that time from east to west, the first man to make it across the top of Canada in both directions.
The design for Isvik was influenced to quite a marked degree by the Peterhead-type sailing vessels of the Mounties, also by a sketch made for him by that extraordinary Antarctic single-hander, David Lewis.
‘Roughed it out fur him on the back of an envelope, a squeeze-up steel hull design with platin' thick as a tanker.’
It was, in fact, a much beamier vessel than the police ship, the hull fining up sharply towards bow and stern so that both fore and aft her deep, strong wedge-shape would cause the ice to squeeze her upwards in the event of her being caught in a series of pressure ridges.
She was also much smaller, the police ship having been over three hundred tons.
But it was from that and the scribbled design on the back of an envelope that Isvik had been pupped.
Unfortunately her building was delayed by the failure of the small specialised steel company that was constructing the hull.
Then the American millionaire had had a heart attack.
He lost interest after that, his plan overshadowed by the oil tanker Manhattan making it across the top of America.
Lawyers handling his affairs had then dumped the boat on the  market just after Wall Street had had one of its periodic crashes.
Three years had passed since the time of her conception and she was still without spars and rigging and had not been fitted out internally.
Her purchase by the B. J. Norsk Forsking of Larvik for seismographical work in the Bellingshausen Sea almost due south of the Horn was, as Ward put it, ‘just about the very first good thin' that had ever happened to her,’ even if it was a slightly clandestine operation.
He didn't say the vessel was jinxed, but after the sail plan and the interior layout had been redesigned and the ship completed for her new role in Antarctic waters, the B. J. Norsk Forsking, a drilling outfit operating in the Norwegian sector of the North Sea, struck a bad patch following a fall in the price of oil and abandoned the Southern Ocean project.
They had acquired Isvik at a knock-down figure, spent about the same again completing the fitting of her out to their requirements, and Iain Ward had picked her up for not much more than they had originally paid for her.
‘Ah tell ye this, Pete —’ He was leaning across the table, his little steely grey eyes bright with a barrow boy's excitement at striking a bargain —‘it'd cost a wee fortune now just to build the hull.
She's plated in the bows with steel eighteen mil thick.
If we get caught up in the ice that means she'll pop up like a cork when the pressure's on.
At least’, he added, with a down-turn to the corners of his mouth, ‘that's the theory of it.’
‘What did your surveyor think?’
I asked.
‘Just that.
In theory, that's what should happen.
There the wee man goes and spoils it all by sayin' he's not an ice man and if we get ourselves into a really bad pressure ridge he couldn't say fur sure what would happen.
The truth is, Ah suppose, if ye've got a berg sailin' down on ye and ye're trapped in the ice there's no thickness of steel that will save ye from gettin' crushed.
That right, Nils?’
The big Norwegian shook his head, frowning.
‘Jeg fonstår ikke.’
I don't think he found Ward's accent at all easy, and anyway, like many foreigners, he found it easier to speak English than to understand it.
‘Yu haf finish your café, Iain?
Zen ve go look at skrue shaft, eh?’
There was an old pressure cooker half full of coffee simmering on the stove, a saucepan of milk beside it.
I helped myself, and when I had finished, I went up on deck and began sorting out the rigging.
Nils had already opened up the engine compartment, which was directly below the deckhouse, and he and Iain were sitting on the floor with their legs dangling over the big diesel, going through a list of requirements he had produced.
As I stepped past them Iain had his glasses on and was peering at a diagram the engineer had roughed out in his notepad.
‘Well, that makes sense, but if it means takin' the engine out and havin' engineers crawlin' all over the place so we can't get on with the job of takin' on stores and equipment —’
‘Nei, nei, nei.
We cut the shaft there.
I do it myself.
No need for Yard engineers.
No need for anything, only gears and lever to disengage.
And new dynamo — small one so we haf power off the skrue…’
‘The  propeller ?’
‘Ja, ja, the  propeller .’
I left them to it.
Engines didn't interest me very much.
But rigging and sails did, and once I was on deck, coiling and sorting the ropes and making notes of what I would need, I barely noticed anything else, time slipping by and my mind so concentrated on the job that I barely felt the wind force rising, small frozen particles of snow driving almost horizontally.
Periodically I went down into the warmth below, to write up my notes and check them over against the ship's design plans, which Nils had produced for me before going off with Iain to talk to the Navy Yard people.
We were almost into November now and I didn't need to be an expert navigator to work out from the charts, and the Admiralty Pilot lying open on the chart table, that to be into the south of the Weddell Sea in time to take maximum advantage of the summer loosening of the pack we would need to be away not later than end-November.
It was a voyage of close on two thousand miles and, allowing for eventualities, it would be a month at least before we were within striking distance of the position where Charles Sunderby had had that brief sighting of the Andros.
And Nils was planning a major operation on our engine.
Also the snowmobile ordered in England had not yet arrived.
That evening we learned the name the Argentinians had given their reconstructed East Indiaman — Santa Maria del Sud.
And it wasn't Iris who told us, though she had known for some time that it had come through the Strait shortly after the Belgrano had been sunk.
It was the old sea captain, in whose house Nils had billeted us, who told us.
Iain had invited him over for a meal.
The man lived on his own, except for a half-Indian woman who came in every morning.
It was in the nature of a goodwill invitation, nothing more, none of us realising that he was the one man in Punta Arenas who had some idea of why an old wooden-walled East Indiaman, built like a frigate, should have been reconditioned and brought south by the Argentine Navy during the war.
Iris came aboard with him, wearing a long dress and in full warpaint.
The Contraalmirante had invited her to dine at the C-in-C's residence.
He was a Rear-Admiral, and as Commander-in-Chief of the Third Naval Zone, he was the most important man in Punta Arenas.
The Gobernador Maritimo would be there, also the officer in charge of the Navy Yard.
How she had managed it, God knows, except perhaps that beautiful and exciting women dropping in out of the blue at the bottom of the world were not very plentiful.
‘It's important we get the co-operation we need.’
She smiled and waved the formidable list of requirements I had helped her prepare.
The C-in-C was sending his car for her, and when it arrived, I saw her to the quay.
By then it was blowing a full gale from the west, the wind slamming down off the mountains with katabatic blasts that hammered the luminous white of the water with such fury that it splayed out like shot, a reminder that the heights west of the port were almost six hundred metres high, the first ski-run only eight kilometres away by car.
She looked like a Cossack in jackboot-black sea boots, the skirt of her long dress looped up and tucked into the strap of a gold lamé handbag, the top half of her padded out by a fur-hooded anorak.
It was sleeting, the ice-cold droplets driving past the light on the quay in a  white mist, the freighter's stern glistening as though with salt spray.
I was slit-eyed and shivering by the time she was driven off.
Our seafaring landlord was Finnish — Captain F. F. Kramsu.
‘Like the poet.
Ve haf a poet, same name, but different view of life, very full of miseries.
The F is for Frederik, so you call me Freddie.’
He was a little gnome of a man with intense blue eyes.
‘F for Freddie.
I am from Lapland.
They don't speak my language here.
It is English or nodding but their own sort of Spanish.
So we speak English mostly and everybody call me Freddie — or something vorse in Spanish when they don't think I understand.’
He grinned, baring rabbit teeth stained brown, his eyes crinkling with laughter as he reached for the drink Nils had just poured him.
‘Then I get big laff with them because I am by then very fluent in Chilean Spanish.’
He raised his glass, first to Nils, then to Iain, finally to me.
‘Skool!’
He knocked it back in one gulp.
‘It is pisco, I am afraid,’ Nils said apologetically.
‘Chilean brandy, not vodka.
Vodka is difficult.
So many foreign ships come through the Strait.
The factory and freeze ships, they stay at sea, gobbling up krill and all the fish their boats bring them, and when they are full, they go straight back to Russia, Poland, wherever they come from, or if they haf trouble, they go to the Atlantic ports further north, in Argentine or Brazil.
They are for them nearer to home.
Captain Freddie's position in Punta Arenas was an unusual one and largely a result of the Falklands war.
Being Nordic, and regarded as a neutral, he had come to be looked on as port representative for foreign ships passing through the Magellan Strait, a sort of consul.
It was not official, of course.
Nobody had appointed him.
It was just that, since he had sold his coaster and settled in Punta Arenas, he had kept a log of all ships passing through.
He had brought his telescope ashore with him and mounted it in the little dormer window high up under the eaves of the steep-pitched east-facing gable of his house.
In that log book, which he showed me later, was the name, port and country of origin, of every ship that had passed through during the last eight and a half years, together with her age and condition, her destination, and of course the name of the captain and details of the cargo.
As he pointed out to me, the port and other government officials, also the navy and military personnel, came and went, generally posted south for only a short period, whereas he was a permanent fixture.
We learned later that he was paid an honorarium by the government in far-off Santiago, so that he was also in a sense their man in Punta Arenas, and it was, therefore, quite natural for him to cultivate us and be as helpful as possible.
He had a second book, started at the outset of the Falklands War, which though still in the form of a diary, was more of a journal.
It not only covered ships passing to and fro through the Strait, but also included reports of Argentine air strikes, naval activity, including the sinking of the Belgrano, and even references to the British helicopter that had landed on the coast of the Magellan Strait almost opposite Punta Arenas, and had been destroyed by its pilot.
He was full of all the gossip and rumours, most of it picked up from the ships he visited and seamen he talked to.
It was in this book that he was able to show me the first reference to the Santa Maria.
The entry read:
On board the MV Thorhavn the first officer was from Helsinki.
He told me they had put into Puerto Gallegos to land seven Swedish engineers with spares for Volvo and Saab equipment and had seen an old wooden square-rigger lying at the Navy Yard quay.
She is the Santa Maria del Sud and had recently been brought down under tow from the Argentine naval base near Buenos Aires where she has been undergoing a complete refit.
Captain of the Thorhavn, Olaf Peterson, tells me there were men aloft fitting aerials up the sides of two of the three masts and there was talk that the gun deck of this maritime relic, renovated just before the war as a museum ship, was nov equipped with the very latest in electronics.
This is a translation, of course, the original being in Finnish.
Then, shortly after the British Task Force arrived off the Falkland Islands, there was another reference to the Santa Maria del Sud:
There is talk of the British landing on the coast of Patagonia north of Puerto Gallegos.
But it is just rumour.
I do not think it probable they will land.
It would not make sense.
At sea they have mobility.
This, and the carrier-borne Harrier aircraft, are their great advantage.
The only vessels in today are an Argentine tug towing what I presume to be the Santa Maria del Sud.
She is a wooden ship, not unlike the old clippers we used to run for the grain trade before World War I, but she is at least a century older.
She has been excavated out of the mud that preserved her in La Plata, they say, and virtually rebuilt.
Now they have aerial wires attached to the masts and they made me think they must intend to use her for some sort of electronic surveillance.
It was about a fortnight after I arrived in Punta Arenas that he showed me his journal and I was able to take a translation of those entries.
But that first evening on Isvik we had it from him direct.
Iain asked him what he thought the electronics were for.
He smiled and shook his head.
‘I don't make any speculation.
Not at that time.
It is not wise because there are quite certainly agents of the Argentine Junta in Punta Arenas.
I am well known here for the checkings I make of the movement of ships.’
He pulled a battered pipe from his pocket and began to fill it.
‘One time,’ he continued slowly, ‘I come back to my house to find it is rummaged, and they have taken out everything, all the drawers bottoms-up on the floor, also boards ripped up.
I am telling the police, of course, but nothing happen, they don't arrest nobody.
But they know.
I am very sure they know who do it.’
He lit his pipe, drawing on it slowly, a Puckish smile lifting the corners of his mouth.
‘Chile and Argentina…’
He gave an expressive little shrug.
‘You can see from the map how the frontiers between them here in the south are not made very good.
So it is like a game of chess between them, eh?
This country vile  haf its own people in sensitive posts in the Argentine.
They don't want them arrested for doing what they are trained for, so they don't arrest agents of Argentina.
They live and let live.
That is right, ja?
You operate same vay, I guess.
Anyvay —’ He laughed and slapped the table —‘they don't get what they come for.
I start a new book just before they land on Malvinas, when those demolition men start work on South Georgia, remember?
It was the begin of the war.
I think what I say in that book may be sensitive, so I keep it always on my body, and in Finnish.
The other books, of course, they leave.
They are of no interest.
That is what make me certain who they are.’
‘They could have taken that book from you by force,’ Iain suggested.
Captain Freddie shook his head.
‘That is mugging, no?
Ve don't haf too much mugging in Punta Arenas.’
His smile was so elfin I was reminded of a troll and a performance of Peer Gynt I had seen at the Maddermarket in Norwich.
‘If they are mugging me, then it is too much obvious.
The police do not hesitate then, and it is more important at that time for the Argentine to have their observers here in freedom.’
‘I understand.’
Iain nodded.
‘And even if they do take my book, they don't find nothing.’
A crafty look had come over his face.
‘After I go on board I don't write anything about my visit.
Is too dangerous.’
Iain was leaning forward then.
‘Ye went on board?’
‘Kyllä, they invite me on board.
That is when I begin to realise what the Santa Maria del Sud is about.’
Silence then, the sounds of the port coming to us softly through the night, partially overlaid by the persistent hum of machinery from the freighter moored ahead of us.
Ward waited, but in the end it was only by persistent questioning that the details gradually emerged.
It must have been a very strange sight.
Captain Freddie said he could hardly believe his eyes when he looked out of his bedroom window.
It was like a ‘ghost ship’— he used those words — the three masts standing black against the white of the low, snow-mantled line of the shore opposite and that enormously long  bowsprit jutting out from the wooden hull of the ship ‘like a lance’.
He hadn't seen the tug at first because it was alongside on the far side.
The two vessels had laid there off the Navy Yard all that morning.
Finally, in the early afternoon, he had been summoned on board the tug to try and resolve the ‘liddle difficulty’ that had arisen.
The tow was on passage from Puerto Gallegos to the Argentine port of Ushuaia in the Beagle Channel.
Just short of the entrance to the Estrecho de Magellanes they had encountered gale-force winds and off Cabo Virgenes the tow had begun to sheer violently and range up on the tug.
The tug-master had never, of course, towed a large sailing vessel before and had no experience of the windward effect of three tall masts in a gale.
Periodically the ship had literally sailed up on to the tug, ramming her bows against the stern, and finally the towing hawser had ripped out the capstan to which it was fastened.
All the tug could do then was to stand by the tow until the gale abated.
The towing hawser was finally reattached with rope strops round the bowsprit fastenings, and with this makeshift arrangement they had towed into Punta Arenas.
What they were requesting was the co-operation of the Chilean Navy Yard in installing steel bits strong enough to ensure that the hawser did not again tear itself free.
Also materials were required to effect temporary repairs to the starb'd bow where several timbers had been started by the ship riding up against the tug's stern.
And they needed the loan of extra pumps because she was making water.
The difficulty was that there was a naval lieutenant in charge of the tow and he refused absolutely to let any officer of the Chilean Navy on to the Santa Maria del Sud to assess the damage.
That was when they had sent for Captain Freddie, and after what he described as a long, sometimes ‘vair ackermonious diskussion’, and after a good deal of long distance telephoning, fax instructions had finally come through that allowed the Chileans to accept his decision as to what was required.
That was how he had come to go on board the Santa Maria del Sud.
‘It is a political decision, you see.
On poliittinen päätös, ymmär-rättekö.
Everything politics.
There is a war, but they still want friendly relations.’
The fastenings for the steel bits would need to be on the gun deck, and it was on the gun deck they had some of the electronic equipment they did not want the Chilean officers to see.
‘They don't want the purpose of the ship understood.
I know nothing about electronics.
Olen vain vanha lastilaivan kapteeni, siksi olen turvassa.
Me know nothing, eh?
Only old cargo boat captain.’
He smiled, his eyes twinkling as he told Iain how he had had a glimpse of the lower decks, which had all been cut away in the centre and some sort of plastic covering installed.
He had been on board the Santa Maria some two hours or more working out with the Argentine naval lieutenant and the tug's engineers just what was required to get the tow safely down the short cut into the Beagle Channel and thence to Ushuaia.
The pumps were sent out from the Navy Yard immediately.
All the rest of the equipment, together with additional tools and a power generator, were sent out the following morning.
Because they were effecting the repair work themselves it had taken longer to complete than if they had let the Yard do it, but even so the tow had been under way again shortly after noon on the third day.
That's all he could tell us.
What the precise purpose was of installing complex electronics in an old sailing vessel he did not know for sure, and Iain did not press him.
However, he did ask him about the crew, particularly those on the Santa Maria.
‘Was there a man named Gómez among them?’
The old man shook his head.
‘Ei.’
There had been two Argentine naval officers, one on the tug and the other on the Santa Maria, and he had seen at least six crew, but he did not know the names of any of them.
Iain dipped into his briefcase and pulled out a photograph.
It was a picture full-face of Mario Ángel Gómez in Navy uniform.
‘Where did you get that?’
I asked him.
His eyes flicked in my direction, but he didn't answer.
‘D'ye recognise him?’ he asked Captain Freddie.
‘Was he one of the officers?’
The Captain stared at it briefly, then shook his head.
‘Ei.
That man is not aboard the Santa Maria del Sud, nor the tug neither.
Vy do you ask?’
Iain slid away from that, cross-examining him about the details of the electronic equipment.
But all he could do was describe the look of the equipment on the gun deck.
The rest was under wraps.
Iris returned, her eyes bright and her cheeks a-glow with the sudden transition from the cold outside to the warmth of the saloon.
Everything was fixed, the Yard would do all they could to help.
She had a private word with Iain in the after cabin, then put her anorak on over her dress and went off to bed, escorted by Captain Freddie.
We had a final drink with Nils while he checked the list of his requirements for the prop-shaft alterations, then we went out into the night, walking quickly through the bitter blustering of the wind back to our billet.
That night I was woken by a thin, tinkling sound and sat up wondering where the hell I was.
There was movement below me and I remembered that I was in the upper berth of a two-tier bunk and Iain had one of those wristwatches with a built-in alarm.
I drifted off again only to open my eyes almost immediately to the sight of a head level with mine and arms reaching up.
The wool of a sweater brushed my face.
‘What the hell's up?’
‘Nothin'.
Somethin' Ah have to dae, that's all.’
An almost full moon filtered through racing clouds to give a pale light and I watched as he pulled on his rubber seaboots and slipped out of the room.
I rolled out of the upper berth and padded down the corridor to the bathroom.
I needed a pee anyway.
It was 03.17 and I was just in time to see him climb into a waiting car and drive off.
It was almost five before he returned.
But when I asked him where he had been all he said was, ‘Go back to sleep.’
He undressed and got quickly into his berth.
‘You've been gone almost two hours.’
‘Ah had to make a telephone call.
Now shut up.
It's cold outside and Ah want to sleep, even if ye don't.’
I didn't ask any more questions, just lay there listening to the wind.
London.
Via satellite.
It had to be London.
Europe anyway.
Otherwise he wouldn't need to make the call in the middle of the night.
But what was it about, and why now?
What was the  urgency?
Questions buzzed around inside my head and I think there was a glimmer of dawn before I finally dozed off.
I don't know whether it was the overpowering sense of being imprisoned in a world of cloud and rock, the wild remoteness of it and the everlasting bludgeoning of the wind, but everything seemed to take longer than expected.
And there were setbacks, of course.
Coloni received a message to say his mother had been injured in some sort of political disturbance in Valparaíso, so instead of cooking for us, he decided to go home.
Iris and Nils continued taking turns at the galley stove with the inevitable result that the dynamo that would run off the free-turning prop when we were sailing arrived by air from the States before the alterations to the drive shaft were complete.
And then the ship had to be slipped, not once, but twice, first for the scraping, repainting and antifouling of the hull, then a second time for replacement of five defective keel bolts.
Several items Iris had arranged to be flown in proved to have been wrongly listed and had to be sent back.
About the middle of the month Nils discovered metal fatigue in two of the seacocks, the worst being the inflow to the heads, which meant that for all of a week, till we could slip yet again and fit replacements, we were using a good old-fashioned shit bucket.
And all the time, work going on internally while I wrestled with rigging and sails, mostly on the open deck.
The one good thing was the Australian pair finally making up their minds to come, the wife's partners having agreed to her taking up to a year's sabbatical.
Will join ship end-November — Andy and Go-Go Galvin, they cabled.
And I had a piece of luck, too.
The ship's library, in addition to all the necessary navigational books, a Bible, a Book of Common Prayer, accounts of Antarctic expeditions and a dozen or so lurid paperbacks, contained one or two self-help books, among them one on the rigging and canvassing of sailing vessels.
It had been written for an age when wind was still the motive power for most of the world's shipping, so that, though technically out of date , it was invaluable for some of the work I was doing, particularly wire splicing, and if we were rolled over and had to jury-rig the ship it would be a life saver.
Re-rigging the ship for an Antarctic voyage inside of a week, after she had been lying idle for over a year, was quite impossible.
A month at least was my estimate after I had sorted everything out.
We were all working flat out and the only break we had was on the second Sunday when Isvik was on the slip and the Yard closed.
For once the forecast was good.
We took the semi-rigid rubber boat and went south towards Dawson Island, finally beaching it in a little cove of black sand and gravel on the shore of the Brunswick Peninsula just before the dog-leg that took the Strait north-west through miles of narrow channels to the Pacific.
Moraine boulders were piled in rounded heaps and we walked inland through tufted heaps of tussac grass, climbing well up the scree-covered slopes to picnic in a spot where we had a magnificent view of the Strait and the channels and islands further west.
The sun was shining, the water a deep indigo-blue and the air so crystal clear that it seemed as though I could stretch out my hand and touch the gleaming white of Sarmiento far to the south-east in Tierra del Fuego.
We had agreed not to talk about fitting-out problems and we lay in the sun drinking from the bottle Iain had humped up in his backpack.
With the fish and cheese sandwiches Iris had brought the world seemed a different place, gentle and relaxed.
And then she suddenly said, ‘Carlos is arriving on Friday.’
Iain had been telling us how ten to fifteen thousand years ago early man had crossed from Mongolia to Alaska by way of the Aleutian chain of volcanic islands and then, over a period of some five millennia, had worked his way down through North and South America until finally he had reached Tierra del Fuego, living out the winters virtually naked except for the natural hair of his body.
He talked about Fitzroy, the naval officer who had carried out the first detailed survey of the waters we were looking down on, and of Darwin, who had joined Fitzroy in the Beagle for a second voyage in which the survey had been completed, followed by the long voyage home via the Galapagos and other islands, including New Zealand.
‘Five years it took them, the first tae of them spent in these waters, so Ah would guess Darwin's first tentative thoughts about the origins of species started here.’
The range of Iain's reading was a constant surprise to me, and  he had that rare ability to remember what he had read so that he could pass it on.
And then Iris, by that non sequitur announcement of Carlos's imminent arrival, showed that, far from listening to him, her thoughts had been on the voyage and what lay ahead.
‘Why?’
She must have given Iain some idea of the boy's background, for he didn't ask her who he was, just that explosive question —‘Why?’
‘Why?
I don't know why.’
She was lying stretched out, her head against a pillow of lichen-covered stone, her eyes staring straight up at the incredible blue of the sky.
‘All I have is this message.’
She fished a crumpled sheet of paper from the pocket of her anorak and handed it to him.
Arriving Punta Arenas 1700 27 Nov — Carlos Borgalini.
He read it aloud, then handed the paper back to her, and I thought what a pity it was to have to worry about that wretched boy on the one really good day we had had since our arrival.
There was nothing much she could tell us about him anyway, only what we knew already.
‘Ye're sure he's Gómez's cousin?’
Iain had just bitten into a cheese sandwich and his mouth was full, so I don't think she heard him properly.
He swallowed and repeated the question, adding, ‘Ye're quite sure?’
‘You have only to look at him to see he is some sort of a relation,’ she said sharply.
‘Borgalini.
Who is Borgalini?’
‘I don't know.’
She said it too quickly and he glanced at her.
‘Ah think ye dae.
He is closely connected with that woman of yer father's, Rosalli Gabrielli.
Accordin' to Rodriguez, that is, so why dae ye say he is a cousin?’
She didn't answer that.
‘Is he a cousin?
Or is he really somethin' closer?’
She shook her head.
‘He is Ángel's cousin, not mine.
That is all I know.’
‘And Ángel is not your brother?’
She was silent, frowning.
‘That's what ye told Pete.
When he was with ye at the hacienda.’
‘Did I?
I don't remember.’
He was silent for a while, juggling with two small stones that were white like sugar cubes.
At length he murmured, ‘Somethin' wrong somewhere.’
‘Wrong?
What is wrong?
I don't understand.’
‘My information…’
He stopped there, the click of the quartz-like cubes the only sound.
‘Pass me the bottle.’
He held out his hand and she gave it to him, watching him as he put it to his lips, her eyes fixed in an almost mesmerised stare.
‘What is this information?
What is it you are thinking?’
He had turned so that he faced her, his body propped on that deformed arm of his, the sleeve of his anorak empty, the metal forearm and hand stuffed incongruously into his pack.
‘Let's get this straight, Iris.’
He had reached over and was gripping her shoulder with his left hand, holding her so that her face was close to his.
‘Yer father was born Juan Roberto Gómez.
Following the annulment of his marriage to Rosalli Gabrielli he went to Ireland and married yer mother, Sheila Connor.
After that he hyphened the tae surnames and called himself Juan Roberto Connor-Gómez.
That right?’
She nodded, her eyes locked with his.
‘Now, ye were born tae years after they were married.
All very respectable.
But our friend Ángel, when was he born?
Dae ye know?’
She didn't answer.
‘For God's sake!’
His voice was suddenly high and sharp.
‘What sort of a person are ye?
Ye go up there to Cajamarca, behave like a whore, try and trade yer body fur information about the position of the Santa Maria del Sud, and now ye pretend ye don't know who the man is.’
And he added, in a voice that would have done credit to an elder of the Wee Frees, ‘If he is yer brother, then ye've been committin' incest.
That's a carnal offence in the eyes o’ the Church.’
He paused.
Then in a softer voice, ‘An’ if he's no' yer brother, then who the hell is he?’
The question hung there in the cool air of the mountainside, the whole world seemingly silent and listening.
A bird slid past, wings soughing as it planed down towards the water below, darkening now with the beginnings of a breeze.
‘Well?’
And then she went for him, her voice trembling, her eyes staring with sudden hate, all the Latin in her coming out as she ripped his hand from her shoulder.
‘You big, filthy-minded shit.
You spik to me like that again and you can go back to wherever is the name of that Glasgow slum where your drunken father spawned you.’
She was almost screaming at him.
‘All I wanted was to prove my husband right.
I know Ángel has seen that ship.
I know he has.
I did get that much out of him.
But he don't say where.
He don't give me the position.
So now I have to put up with him on the boat.
And you throw it all in my face, calling me a whore, which I am not, and you know I am not.
All I want is to show the world that Charles was not hallucinating.’
And she added, quieter now, ‘All right.
Charles was scared.
I know that.
He was afraid of the ice.
But there is nothing wrong in being scared.
And there is nothing wrong with his brain.
He don't hallucinate.
That's what I want to prove.’
‘And yer brother?’
Iain's voice, too, was suddenly very quiet, very controlled.
‘Ángel, do you mean?’
‘No, of course Ah don't mean Ángel.
Yer other brother, yer real brother, Eduardo.
Don't ye want to know what happened to him?’
Her eyes widened, as though the reference to Eduardo was something physical like a blow, the fury quite gone out of her as she said, ‘Why do you say that?
Do you know something?’
She leaned forward, gripping hold of him.
‘What is it?
What do you know?’
And when he shook his head, she asked him in a voice fallen to a whisper, ‘Who are you?
Please, please tell me — who are you — what are you?
I must know.’
And when he still didn't reply, she said, ‘If you know something, for God's sake tell me.’
The entreaty in her voice, the limpid, almost tearful look in her eyes…
I suddenly had the feeling Eduardo meant more to her than anyone else in her life, even her husband.
‘Do you know what happened to him?
Do you?’
‘No.’
He said it abruptly.
And then, almost in the same breath, his voice gone hard, ‘What was the date of Mario Ángel's birth?’
He was leaning towards her again, very tense.
‘Ah have the date yer father married Sheila Connor.
What Ah don't know for certain is what happened immediately before that.
Was Mario Ángel already born then, or did Rosalli give birth to him afterwards?’
‘Why?
What does it matter?’
‘Don't be a fool.
Ye know it matters.
He claims to be yer father's son.
Now, dae ye know the date of Ángel's birth or don't ye?’
She was staring at him, her eyes wide, breathing quickly.
‘I know when his birthday is.
October 17.’
‘And the year?’
‘I don't think I can answer that — not for certain.
You see, I never saw him till he came to stay with us in the school holidays.’
‘You mean he was a schoolboy then?’
She nodded.
‘And that was the first time ye'd ever set eyes on him?’
‘Yes.’
‘What sort of impression did he make on ye?’
Her eyes had a sudden dreamy look.
‘He was different, totally different — different to any boy I had ever met before — quite…quite uninhibited.’
‘How old did ye think he was then?’
‘Oh, about ten, I think.’
‘Did ye ever meet a man called Borgalini?
Roberto Borgalini.’
‘No.
I never meet him.
Why?’
‘He was Rosalli Gabrielli's manager.
He was also a member of the Mafia, and he was up to his eyeballs in drugs.
Altogether a very nasty piece of work.’
He hesitated, then got to his feet.
‘He just could be Ángel's father,’ he added, gathering up his things and starting back down the slope, scree-walking very fast over the first long patch of loose grey stones, swinging his pack, and the empty sleeve flapping against his hip.