

6
Cameron was already half an hour later than Alexandra had budgeted for him to be.
And that was including the very worst possible scenario of disasters she could devise.
Even if there had been three fatal accidents on the Piccadilly line in from Heathrow plus two mechanical failures beyond London Transport's control, he should have been here by now.
He had said he would pick her up at the office, so that's where she was.
The others had all gone home hours ago.
Alone, with most of the lights out and the cleaning ladies dotting about in the corridors, she tidied the papers on her desk for the fiftieth time.
In the weeks she had been here, she had managed to create an area of ordered calm which spoke of high efficiency and brisk management.
Nina had already commented favourably on it, throwing pointed looks at both the Health and Beauty desk and the disordered alcove from which Fashion operated.
‘And you always dress so well, too,’ she said approvingly.
‘That's good, Alex.’
‘I'm glad you —’
‘It gives the magazine the right image when people can see that its representatives care .’
‘Quite.’
Alexandra was not entirely sure that she chose her clothes with the magazine in mind.
In fact, she knew darn well that she didn't.
On the other hand, she did care about it.
What surprised her was  just how much.
The others tended sometimes to laugh at Nina's dedication to Athene , the way she seemed to live and breathe the magazine, think of nothing else.
It was a surprise to find that she was beginning to feel the same way about it herself.
There was an article on collagen injections lying in front of her.
Collagen, she read, plumped out the flesh beneath the skin, thus eliminating those telltale wrinkles.
Yes, well.
Health and Beauty was a required factor in any woman's magazine, as was Fashion.
But for her, the challenge in Athene lay in bringing to the attentions of the readers items which were not of specifically female concerns.
There was Vogue to cater for the high-fashion interests; there was any number of weekly magazines which provided the usual mix of what society fondly regarded as feminine issues: child-rearing, beauty hints, recipes, light fiction, articles on celebrities and, of course, the obligatory occasional piece on the ghastly lives some of the ‘ordinary’ readers led.
As a formula, there was nothing wrong with it.
As far as it went.
But it didn't go far enough.
It missed out on a small but significant slice of the market.
So many women today were independent high achievers, controlling their own money and their own lives.
They already knew what they looked good in, which make-up suited them, how to handle their bodies or their children.
They were too busy forging their careers to want to spend much time in reading about ageing pop-stars marrying eighteen-year-old virgins, or the crisis in some show-biz liaison.
They weren't particularly bothered by telltale wrinkles.
It was a question of how to give them what they wanted.
Thinking about it, Alexandra picked up the sample pack of a new hand cream and rubbed some into the backs of her hands.
She looked through some copy which her assistant had left on her desk and crossed out a typing error.
She read the first page of a review copy of the new novel by a Royal Shakespeare Company actor and put it down again when she realized she hadn't taken in a single word.
Where was Cameron?
Had he changed his mind about coming to England?
Had he come to England and changed his mind about seeing her?
Had his plane crashed?
Restlessly, she got up and went into Nina's office where a small black-and-white television sat on top of the filing cabinets.
It was 9.57, three minutes to news time, an hour and fifty-seven minutes after the very latest she had thought he would arrive.
Waiting for the Ten o'Clock News , she wondered whether, if — no, when — he did arrive, she would melt into his arms.
Whether he would even want her to.
She listened to the headlines and then switched off.
The crisis in the Balkans, pollution on Mediterranean beaches, Sadam Hussein behaving like a cad, a Royal behaving even worse…
Nothing about planes crashing, or delays in New York.
Nothing like that.
She picked up the phone and dialled Heathrow, asked for Flight Information, was told that the flight from New York had arrived on time some three and a half hours ago.
So where was bloody Cameron?
She opened the top drawer of her desk.
Lying there, together with a photograph, was a withered red rose tied with a piece of scarlet ribbon: the rose  Cameron had sent her before she left New York.
It had been a sentimental gesture on her part to keep it; now she asked herself what was the point?
She dropped it into her wastepaper basket.
Then fished it out again.
It was all she had left of him and of the days they had spent together.
Yet she knew that if the scentless hothouse rose had symbolized something intangible about their relationship, the dead one surely signified something quite concrete: that it was finished, over and done with.
She picked up the photograph and studied it.
She and Cameron, arms around each other, facing the camera and squinting into the sunlight.
She had been so happy that day.
They had driven up to Maine for the weekend to stay in the house on the coast owned by Cameron's aunt.
It had been hot, humid almost to the point of unbearability.
They had swum in the huge Atlantic breakers, diving from the tumbled rocks into cool green water, lithe as seals.
And there had been seals, too, out on two offshore outcrops of stone, basking in the heat, barking sometimes at them.
The crash of the waves, the drifting scent of pine from the woods on the shore above them, the salt on their skins…
They'd barbecued lobsters, drunk wine, slept out all night in a hammock, wrapped in each other.
She had wanted the night to stretch into infinity — but of course it had not.
They had woken in the morning, stiff and damp, rushed into the house to warm themselves in the huge old-fashioned bathtub, cooked an enormous breakfast and driven back to the city so Cameron could interview some visiting fireman from Washington.
And although he had promised they would return to the seaside house, somehow they never had.
‘It was a day to remember for the rest of our lives, wasn't it?’ a voice said behind her, and she jumped, startled.
‘Cameron!’ she said.
‘Sugar baby.’
He held out his arms to her.
He looked as he always had, with the same lopsided grin.
‘Why are you so late?
Where have you’
‘Don't start in with the questions,’ he said.
‘Kiss me.’
She stepped into his arms.
He tasted of wine, of coffee.
He smelled of cigars and, fleetingly, of herbs.
Head against his chest, she frowned, thinking: herbs?
More specifically, oregano.
Has he already been out to dinner with someone before coming here?
If she asked, he would accuse her of nagging, of wanting to keep tabs on him.
He would ask what the hell did it matter where he had been, now that he was here?
He would say she always did ask too many questions and why didn't she stay cool, tell him she loved him?
That's what had happened before, in New York.
That was why they had drifted apart.
Against his shirt, she felt the old confusion again, the tangle of love and anger.
How could you kiss someone properly when you knew they had let you sit there for hours waiting for them while they went off and had dinner with someone else?
With some other woman , probably.
How could you melt ?
Even though your knees trembled and your heart fluttered and you felt weak with longing, how could you melt , knowing that?
She pulled away from him.
‘I'm starving,’ she said lightly.
‘Let's go and find somewhere to eat and you can fill me in on all the news.’
‘OK,’ he said.
‘Let's do that.
But I should warn you, I'm not all that hungry.’
‘Aren't you?’ she said.
He looked away from her and she knew she was right.
She had seen that shifty look before.
‘They fed us about five times on the plane,’ he said.
‘You know the way it is.
They've got to keep the passengers occupied so they don't start worrying about how the plane manages to stay up in the air.’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘I know.’
They sat opposite each other in the little Covent Garden restaurant they used to patronize two years ago.
Cameron had wanted to go somewhere else, but she had insisted.
Francisco, the head waiter, seemed surprised when Cameron walked in.
Quickly he led them to a table, produced menus and wine, but deep in her despairing heart Alex was convinced that it was the surprise of someone seeing a customer who had already been in once that evening.
Definitely not the surprise and pleasure he would have shown at seeing Cameron again after so long.
Miserable, she broke a breadstick into pieces, let him fill her wine glass a second time.
Was she being neurotic?
She'd been waiting for this moment for so long, and all she could do, now that it had finally arrived, was think the worst of him, instead of simply being happy to see him again.
‘How's the new job?’ he said.
‘Going well?’
‘Terrifically,’ she said.
‘That's great, Alex.’
His gaze wandered round the room as though he were looking for someone.
Making an effort she could see quite clearly, he took both her hands in his.
‘That's really wonderful, kid.
I know you've got a great future ahead of you.’
‘Do you?’
‘Sure you have.
With your looks and your talent, what's to stop you going right to the top?’
‘Trouble is, I don't know exactly what the top is.’
‘An editorship of your own, wouldn't you think?’
‘Sometimes I wonder if that's really worth achieving.’
‘Of course it is.’
He pushed the candle stuck in a straw-covered bottle to one side and held her hands tighter, smiling at her.
The long lines on either side of his face — starving dimples, she used to call them — deepened.
‘Darling Alex, you're a career woman, after all.
This is your chance to go for gold, you know.
You work hard, you have a real flair, you're already a success at your job, and you know it fulfils you.’
‘Does it?’
‘Other women opt for husbands and babies,’ he said.
‘You want something more out of life than that.’
She looked at him steadily.
‘I wonder.’
‘Don't wonder.
Just have faith in yourself.’
‘And you, Cameron.
‘What do you want?’
He looked away from her.
‘What most guys want, I guess.’
‘What's that, exactly?’
‘Someone to love.
A couple of kids.
Somewhere to settle down.’
‘That's not what you used to think,’ she said and was horrified to hear the accusing tone of her voice, the almost-shrillness.
‘No.
But I was younger in those days.
Maybe I've matured since then.’
Maybe you've met someone else, she wanted to say.
Maybe you just had dinner with her, and wish you were with her now.
She pushed away her plate, almost untouched.
‘Are you coming home with me tonight?’ she  asked, and knew the answer before he even started to speak.
‘Well, honey, that could be kind of awkward.
See, I've got to talk to this guy over a working breakfast at my hotel first thing in the morning.’
‘I could stay with you,’ she offered, despising herself.
‘I'd have to get up real early,’ he said.
‘I'd hate to disturb your beauty sleep and all…’
‘I don't mind,’ she said, watching him squirm, feeling nothing at all except self-disgust at allowing herself to get into this situation.
At still wanting him, even though she knew herself betrayed.
‘But I do,’ he said.
He glanced at his watch.
‘I can't have that.
I've kept you up late enough as it is.’
She leaned forward.
‘Cameron.’
‘Yeah?’
‘Just for once in your life be honest with me.’
‘I'm always —’
‘No.
You're not, Cameron.
But this time, please don't lie.’
He watched her warily.
‘What's the question, Alex?’
‘This person you've been with tonight, or you're going to…this woman ’
He opened his mouth to protest but she shook her head.
‘Is she someone you just met, someone you went off with on the spur of the moment?
Or is it a long-term thing, something which will lead to the things you just said you wanted: the wife, the kids, the home?’
Either way, she thought tiredly, it doesn't really matter.
I love him but I value my good opinion of myself more.
And if I carry on with this relationship  I shall just end up where I was in New York, miserable, unhappy, alone.
Cameron floundered, staring down at the checked tablecloth, drinking from his glass, checking hers.
‘Beats me,’ he said finally.
‘I really couldn't say.’
‘That means it's probably someone you met on the plane.’
‘Yes, but…it's different, Alex.
It really is.
I've never felt like this before — not so suddenly.’
He shrugged.
‘I see.’
‘It's different this time.’
Alex stood up.
‘Cameron,’ she said gently.
‘Don't you realize that with you, it's always different?
And probably always will be?’
Walking out, finding a cab, leaning back against its leather upholstery, she wished she felt something stronger than lethargy.
Hatred, perhaps.
Contempt.
Even compassion for a man so much at the mercy of his physical urges.
But she didn't.
She felt nothing at all.
In the lobby of her building, waiting for the lift to come down, she found herself wondering whether she would bump into Matthew Prescott before next Wednesday.
And later, falling finally into sleep with her heart as cold as a snowball in her chest, she thought: at least there is Wednesday.
‘Any ideas, people,’ Nina said, ‘on this magnificent summer morning?’
She surveyed her team, variously engaged in poking a pencil at an avocado (Helena, Health and Beauty), removing nail varnish (Felicity, Fashion), reading a raunchy letter from the author who was her lover (Lydia, Literary) and fiddling with the hinge of a pair of sunglasses (Petronella, Problem Page).
Carol, the Cookery Editor, was still down with chicken-pox, according to Barry, the husband they had thought she was divorcing, and with whose prowess on the orgasm front they were all far more familiar than they wished to be.
Only Alex seemed more than half awake.
‘Ideas?
What are those?’
Felicity said, lobbing a disgusting cotton-wool ball at the wastepaper basket with the accuracy of a Harlem Globetrotter.
‘How about something really radical on the dangers of sunbathing without blocker?’ said Helena, who had just found a mole on her arm which had definitely not been there at the beginning of the summer.
‘There's nothing really radical to say about it,’ said Lydia, not looking up from her letter.
‘And besides, we're talking about the November issue,’ Nina said.
‘If you remember.’
She brushed at the folds of her silk Versace blouse and smoothed her short black skirt over her hips.
Nina lived in the constant expectation that a horde of paparazzi was about to burst into her office and start firing off flashbulbs.
Should this unlikely event take place, she did not want to be caught looking less than her usual immaculate self.
She preened her elegant nose, turning her head slightly in order to give them all the benefit of her profile.
‘November?
Oh God,’ said Petronella.
‘I always go into a massive depression in November.
Always.
Every year.
Never fails.’
‘How about something on depression?’
Felicity said.
‘Why women suffer from it more than men do, why’
‘Do they?’ asked Helena.
‘I certainly do,’ Petronella said.
‘What about an Italian issue?’
Alex suggested.
That roused them a little, apart from Nina who was in a permanent state of arousal.
‘Italian — that's good,’ Lydia mused.
‘I was reading an awfully good crime novel the other day, set in Italy.
Judging by the photograph on the back, the author's really dishy, too.
I wouldn't mind doing an interview with him.’
‘Italian fashions,’ said Felicity, ‘the ready-to-wear collections — one of us could go over to Milan…’
‘And a whole feature on Italian food,’ said Nina, ‘presuming Carol's back in time.
Otherwise we'll have to do it between us.’
‘Italian restaurants,’ said Lydia.
‘Not just the food,’ said Alex, ‘but the wine, too.’
‘Yes, please,’ said Petronella.
‘Italian shops in Soho.’
‘Italian opera.’
‘Films…’
‘Shoes…’
‘Art…’
‘Politics…’
‘And there's all those fabulous Italian princesses, ready to hand out their beauty tips and talk about their clothes and their parties,’ Helena said.
‘Good idea,’ Nina said.
‘Let's think about it some more — but it sounds like something we could go for.’
She beamed approval.
‘That's good, Alex.’
Wednesday arrived.
At eight o'clock Alex was knocking on Matthew Prescott's door.
She hoped he wouldn't be drunk.
Although he had been late at Emma Chisholm's dinner party last week, he had seemed perfectly sober, but you could never tell with alcoholics.
At least she wouldn't have far to go home  if the evening turned into an unmitigated disaster, with him weeping drunken tears and slobbering all over her shoes while he told her the sad story of his life.
She had taken a considerable amount of trouble over her appearance, she realized now, waiting for him to open the door.
More so than was necessary.
Or desirable.
She didn't want him to think she had dressed up for him, or anything.
It was just that after a weekend of weeping over Cameron, and two absolutely hectic days at the office with Helena now also down with chicken-pox, she felt like a bit of glamour.
This was why she was wearing her Ralph Lauren silk crepe trousers and matching jacket with a white Armani shell underneath, and her favourite silver earrings.
Matthew Prescott seemed to be taking a heck of a time to open the door.
Briefly she wondered whether he'd already drunk himself into oblivion and was lying in a paralytic stupor on the hearthrug while saucepans boiled dry on the stove and vegetables burned to a crisp.
She lifted her hand to knock once again, and the door opened.
He didn't speak.
Just stared at her.
Was he sloshed?
Shy?
Or simply bewildered at seeing her there, having forgotten his invitation last week.
‘You were expecting me?’ she said.
‘Of course.
I've been waiting for this moment all week.
Come in.’
She did so, leaning slightly towards him and giving a surreptitious sniff.
Nothing but cologne, something discreet and lemony.
No stale booze or anything.
‘What can I give you to drink?’ he said, leading the way into a sitting room which was the twin of hers.
‘A glass of white wine, please.’
She sat down on a modern sofa in cream and chrome and surveyed the room.
A fire leaped in the hearth under a marble mantelpiece identical to the one in her own flat.
There was a lot of contemporary art on the walls, not exactly her taste but not overly crude and jarring.
There were flowers, some handsome furniture, one or two pieces of sleek modern sculpture, good lighting.
A pleasant room, she thought.
A warm room.
‘I'm going to have a whisky,’ he said.
‘My tongue's hanging out.
It's been a horrendous day at work.’
‘What exactly do you do?’ she asked.
He told her.
It sounded fascinating.
She remembered one of the ideas chucked around at the brainstorming session a week ago: a series on Eligible Males.
‘Not aristos,’ Lydia had said.
‘But ordinary good-looking chaps with decent careers and no ties — for the moment.’
They all knew she wanted to nominate her boyfriend as one of the Eligible Males.
As an aspiring bestselling author, he could do with the publicity.
Then Felicity had pointed out that GQ had run a feature along similar lines in their last issue, and they abandoned the idea.
Was Matthew Prescott an eligible male?
It was a question she had not thought to ask until now, but there certainly didn't seem to be any obvious Mrs Prescott hanging about in the background.
And he had turned up alone at Emma Chisholm's house…
‘What about you?’ he said, then checked himself.
‘But you work for that women's magazine, don't you?
Athene .’
‘How did you know that?’
‘Emma told me.
Emma Chisholm.’
‘She's terribly nice,’ Alex said warmly.
‘We got on really well.’
‘I'm glad to hear it.’
‘I'd only met her once before that evening, but I feel we'll be friends for life.’
Alex sipped her wine, which was cool and fruity, with just the right degree of dryness.
‘Do you know her well?’
Matthew looked at her quizzically.
‘Extremely well.’
‘Oh?’
‘You obviously hadn't realized she was my sister.’
‘No.
As a matter of fact, I hadn't.’
Immediately Alex thought: so that's why she invited me to dinner, to try and match me up with her semi-alcoholic brother.
And I thought it was because we seemed to be so much on the same wavelength.
‘I've got two sisters,’ Matthew said.
‘And a mother.
I love them dearly, but they're the bane of my existence.’
‘Why's that?’
‘They spend their entire lives trying to match me up with the most unsuitable women you could possibly hope to meet.’
‘Really?’ she said coldly.
He obviously realized how that sounded.
‘Not that I meant to imply that that's why Emma — that you were’ He gestured helplessly, the sentence impossible to retrieve now.
‘What about you?
Have you got family?’
‘A younger brother,’ she said.
‘David.’
‘Is that the chap who was helping you move in the other day?’
‘Yes.
And I have a father, who lives down in Somerset.’
‘Whereabouts?’
‘In a place called Merry Beauchamp.’
‘How extraordinary,’ said Matthew.
‘Is it?’
‘It's just that my mother lives a few miles away from there, in Blindenhall.’
They stared at each other.
Then Matthew said, ‘I grew up there.
Don't tell me you did too.’
She laughed.
‘No.
My father was in the Army.
We moved around a lot, until we were old enough to go to boarding school.
He retired there.’
‘Does he like it?’
‘Loves it.
It's within reach of the cricket ground at Taunton.
He likes watching cricket.’
‘My father used to be a member of the County Cricket Club.’
‘My father even used to play, until he broke his hip earlier this year.’
‘Is he over it?’
‘Not really.
It's taking a long time to heal.’
‘When you get older, these things take so much longer, don't they?’
‘He's not that old,’ Alex said.
‘Sixty-one in a couple of months.’
‘My mother's still only fifty-eight,’ Matthew said, somewhat irrelevantly.
‘His hip's not mending as quickly as it ought, which makes him very impatient.
When he gets frustrated, he tends to shout a bit.’
‘Don't we all?’ murmured Matthew.
‘Poor old Colonel — he does love his cricket and of course he can't drive a car at the moment.
It's almost impossible for him to get to the decent matches.’
‘Somerset's playing Kent next week.’
‘I know.
I was going to go down and take him, but  — well, something's come up and I can't.
And my brother's in Hong Kong all that week.’
Matthew shook his head.
‘It really is extraordinary, though, you have to admit.
I mean, there was I, living in Blindenhall.
And there were you’
‘Goodness,’ she said.
She opened her eyes wide at him, teasing.
‘Maybe we even passed each other in the supermarket.
Or got on the same bus.
Or parked — wow!— in the same car park .’
‘Come on,’ he said, laughing.
‘You can't deny it's a bit of a coincidence.’
She looked at the papers piled beside the arm of the sofa.
‘And you're thinking of moving back?’
She picked up a sheet of estate agent's particulars.
‘Not really.’
‘Then why these?’
He hesitated.
‘It's just one of those dreams the urban yuppy like me goes in for,’ he said.
‘I'm not really into the whole bit of owning a second home, but I'd dearly love to have a cottage in the country.’
He laughed self-mockingly and filled her glass again.
‘I don't suppose it'll ever happen, but I can see it so clearly.
Thatch and apple trees and lavender bushes by the door — you know the kind of thing.’
‘Inglenooks,’ she said.
‘Absolutely.
Masses of those.’
‘Blackened beams.’
He smiled at her.
‘How did you guess?’
‘I've had the same dream,’ she said.
‘Sometimes London just gets a bit too much.’
‘The man who is tired of London is tired of life,’ he quoted.
‘I know all that.
But the noise and the traffic and the petrol fumes and the stress of getting around — occasionally I feel like just selling up, giving my  designer-clothes to Oxfam, and starting again in a simple dress of dimity’
‘Dimity?’
‘— weaving my own bed linen and keeping bees and putting up preserves.’
‘With me it's digging in turnips,’ he said.
She wrinkled her forehead.
‘You're obviously deeper into this dream than I am.
I loathe turnips.’
‘So do I,’ he said.
They both burst out laughing.
Over the excellent dinner he produced, they talked more about themselves.
Although they discovered they had hardly a single taste in common, he was nonetheless a witty and amusing host and she found herself laughing in a way she had not done for a considerable time.
It felt good.
As he began to take the cork out of a second bottle of wine, she said, ‘Look…’
‘What at?
You?’ he said.
‘I'm more than happy to oblige.’
‘I wanted to ask you something…’
‘I read the Independent , I'm gainfully employed and all my teeth are my own,’ he said.
‘No.
I'm serious.’
‘What is it?’
He came back to the table and sat down.
His eyes were an amazing blue-grey colour, she could not help noticing.
Almost aquamarine.
‘I just have to know: have you got a drink problem?’ she blurted out.
‘A what?
A drink pro’ He looked at her and flushed slightly.
‘Look.
I'm not going to pretend I'm a teetotaller.
But I don't drink very much — it slows up the reflexes and I play squash and tennis two or three times a week.’
‘But that night I moved in, you were’
‘Very definitely the worse for wear,’ he agreed.
‘I'd  been out with a client, and one thing led to another.’
‘That's a relief,’ she said.
‘My sobriety is a byword among the members of the English judiciary system.
Judges comment on it.’
‘I'm delighted to hear it.’
‘I'm almost afraid to offer you another glass,’ he said, ‘in case you get the wrong idea.’
‘You've laid my fears to rest,’ she said.
‘So why not?’
He talked a little about Anthony Cashman.
Nothing that could be labelled as a breach of client-confidentiality, but enough to engage her attention.
‘Could be something of interest there for you, too,’ he said.
‘Why?’
‘He's married to Cindy Hill.’
The name was, of course, familiar.
‘But we don't go in for top models,’ she said.
‘For one thing, our readers don't expect it from us.
For another, even if they did, we couldn't afford her fees.’
‘She didn't strike me as awfully thrilled with things,’ he said, staring into the fire, remembering the look on Cindy's face as she recognized him.
‘Is that marriage problems, do you think?’
‘I don't know.
I haven't seen enough of her.
I think not, though.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘They seemed happy together.
Lovey-dovey and so on.
He was talking about having her portrait painted: you don't do that if your marriage is heading for the rocks.’
‘Unless he hasn't noticed.’
Alex frowned thoughtfully.
‘I wonder if there's a feature to be written on the downside of fashion modelling.
You always hear  about the glamour — plus, of course, the obligatory remarks about hard work and the horror of it all.
Maybe I should try and get in touch with her, see if she's got anything interesting to say.’
‘Good idea.’
‘Except, if I remember rightly, she never gives interviews.’
‘Really?’
‘I think I've got that right,’ Alex said.
She was feeling pleasantly buzzed.
She smiled at Matt across the bowl of fruit he had put on the table, her perceptions heightened by the relaxed atmosphere of the evening, very much aware of the bloom on the grapes, the green of the apples, the soft fuzz on the peaches.
The fragrance of woodsmoke from the fire hung in the air, mingling with the scent of wine, the warmth of lighted candles.
Reluctantly she put down her glass.
‘If this was a restaurant, they'd be putting chairs on tables about now,’ she said.
‘And I'd be asking you back to my place for coffee.’
She smiled.
‘But of course I wouldn't accept.’
He raised his eyebrows, murmuring something about it depending, surely, on the choice of coffee.
‘Come and sit down on something more comfortable,’ he said.
‘I'll bring it in and you can decide then whether you'd accept or not.’
Alexandra leaned back against the sofa cushions.
Matthew Prescott was a nice man, even though she could not imagine ever feeling about him the way she did — had — about Cameron.
Not that burn-in-the-gut feeling, that melt-of-the-heart feeling.
‘What do you think?’ he said.
‘Would you accept my invitation back to my place for coffee?’
‘Mmm,’ she said, sipping from her cup.
‘Deserves to be savoured…’
She let her eyes linger on him suggestively and watched him react, watched him wonder what exactly she meant.
He thought she was giving him an unmistakable message of availability.
She remembered the time she had returned the coffee she had borrowed from him, and how she had instinctively known there was a woman waiting for him in this very room.
The memory chilled the warmth she could feel gathering inside her, the warmth which might have proved treacherous if she lingered here with this yes — definitely attractive man.
She stood up.
‘Pity I have to leave.’
He choked on his coffee.
‘Leave? but we've’
‘I'm on the first flight to Milan in the morning.’
‘But that's terrible,’ he said.
He put down his cup and got up to come and stand very close to her.
‘Yes.’
She raised her face to his.
If he kisses me, she thought, I won't stop him.
It might be quite nice — might be very nice.
She knew she had drunk more wine than was wise.
And then he said something facetious, and she stepped away from him.
She turned to look at him over her shoulder, then walked towards the front door.
‘It was a wonderful evening,’ she said.
‘But now it's over?’
She smiled her enigmatic smile.
‘For the moment.’
Milan was one of the big cities where she felt very much at home.
She had spent a year here once, working as an au pair for the family of one of the big industrialists.
For years she had holidayed in Italy and her command of the language was good enough  for all but the most difficult of situations.
And there was the opera house…
Kicking her shoes off in her hotel bedroom, hanging up her Chanel suit, removing her earrings, she couldn't help feeling glad — sorry though she undoubtedly was,of course — that poor Felicity had been laid low with the chicken-pox.
The trip to Milan would otherwise have undoubtedly fallen to her, as the nominal fashion editor.
Instead, Nina had said, ‘It was your idea, Alex, this Italian issue.
I think you should go and do the fashion bit in Milan.’
‘Fantastic,’ Alex had said.
‘My assistant's prepared a list of people to see and places you should visit.’
‘I've got some ideas on’
Nina produced her terrifying crocodile grin.
‘But of course if you have any ideas of your own about who else you should talk to, go ahead.’
‘Right.’
‘We've called up the PR firm we normally liaise with and given them the name of the hotel you're booked into.
Someone from there will be in touch.
Do you want to be met at the airport?’
‘No thanks.’
She much preferred to take a cab in to the centre of town when she was on these assignments.
It gave her a chance to put everything on hold for a brief while, recharge the batteries after a flight.
She did not like flying and the mental energy involved in getting through the ordeal without flinging herself down in the aisle and drumming her heels was considerable.
‘And remember, Alex, the whole magazine's behind you on this one.’
What did she mean, exactly?
‘That's great,’ Alex said.
‘Win this one for Athene ,’ Nina said.
‘Right.’
Win what one?
Sometimes, Alex thought, eating a grape from the bowl provided by the management and then walking barefooted across to open the windows and step out on to the balcony, sometimes Nina seemed to be living on her own private planet.
Would she herself end up like that, if she achieved her ambition of becoming the managing editor of a magazine?
Was that how she would talk to her staff, in that faintly surrealist way?
Behind her, the telephone shrilled.
It was the hotel receptionist.
‘Signorita Maitland?’
‘Yes?’
‘Signor San Lorenzo is here for you.’
‘Signor who?’
Alex had never heard the name before.
Was he the man from the PR agency?
‘San Lorenzo?’
‘Uh — I'll be down in about half an hour,’ she said.
She hoped he wasn't somebody hugely important.
She wanted to shower, to change, to relax for a few minutes.
She had only just arrived, after all.
‘Does he mind waiting?’
There was a murmur of conversation, then the receptionist said, ‘He will wait for you in the bar.
OK?’
‘OK,’ she said.
Carlo San Lorenzo was extraordinarily good-looking.
He stood up when Alexandra came into the bar, held out his hand, smiled, showing beautiful teeth.
He handed her something, murmuring, ‘Welcome to Italy.’
She looked down at the two pink roses, the green spray of fern.
‘Thank you so much,’ she said.
She  lifted the flowers and smelled their cool scent.
‘Roses for an English rose,’ he said.
‘Though I am bound to say, Signorita Maitland, that you are more beautiful than any flower.’
Normally Alexandra was not susceptible to that kind of come-on rubbish.
But there was no mistaking the admiration in his eyes, the way they lingered on her.
And after the smarting ache left by Cameron's faithlessness, it was pleasant to bask in the kind of warmth — spurious though it might be — which such admiration provided.
They discussed business for a while, over the bottle of champagne he ordered.
He planned to take care of her himself over the next five days, he told her.
He had drawn up a long list of people she ought to talk to during the day: fashion houses, designers, a couple of artists' studios, a gallery specializing in contemporary prints.
‘And on two evenings I have tickets for La Scala,’ he said.
‘You have ?’
‘Yes.
We shall see La Traviata tomorrow, and Ernani the following evening.
I hope this will not be too much Verdi for you.’
‘Who can have too much Verdi?’ asked Alex.
His eyes rested on her appreciatively.
‘What an excellent response,’ he said.
‘And how — if I may say so — unEnglish.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘So often your fellow countrymen appear to despise the Italians.’
‘The loss is theirs,’ said Alexandra robustly.
‘How could anyone despise a country which gave us the Renaissance, Venice, Michelangelo?’
‘Leonardo.’
‘The Sistine Chapel.’
‘The Colosseum.’
‘Benetton.’
They smiled at each other.
I'm going to enjoy this week, Alexandra thought.
Carlo proved to be an informed and cultured man.
He took his assignment seriously, accompanying Alexandra to the various meetings he had fixed up for her, talking knowledgeably about everything from architecture to fashion, from music to ice-cream.
She wore her Bill Blass cocktail dress to the opera, and was glad she had done so, finding herself by no means overdressed.
When Rodolfo poured out his love for Violetta, Carlo sighed and put his hand on her arm.
Turning her head, she saw tears in his eyes.
‘So beautiful,’ he murmured.
‘So sad.’
She thought: and so Italian.
How many Englishmen gave in to their emotions like that?
She wondered whether Matthew Prescott would weep at the beauty of Verdi's music and remembered, with a little jolt of her heart, that he hated opera.
Carlo walked her back to her hotel, after they had eaten baked swordfish and a tender salad at a small restaurant he knew.
She was afraid she might have a problem getting rid of him — not altogether sure she wanted to — but in the lobby he merely took her hand and raised it to his lips.
‘A domani ,’ he said, and stared deep, deep into her eyes, leaving her feeling just a trifle breathless.
The two of them were sitting at a table in the open air.
Lamps swung above their heads, red and green and white in the warm darkness.
They were drinking wine, waiting for the abbacchio they had ordered.
They had started with fichi con prosciutto , green figs with Parma ham, washed down with a light wine  which Carlo had promised she would enjoy.
And she had.
She felt remarkably at ease with this man who only three nights before had been a total stranger.
Was it their shared interests?
Or the romance of Italy on a summer's night?
Was it just the wine, or the heart-warming sense of being seen as a beautiful woman?
Carlo projected approbation effortlessly, making no secret of his liking and admiration for her.
‘I shall be visiting London very soon,’ Carlo said.
‘Then it will be my turn to look after you,’ Alex said.
The thought was curiously pleasant.
After Cameron, it was wonderful to be so esteemed, so cosseted.
Carlo brought her flowers each day when he picked her up from her hotel, often adding other gifts: a silk scarf, chocolate truffles, a pair of sunglasses after she had mislaid her own.
Always small things, nothing she could have a qualm about accepting, which made them all the more delightful.
‘I shall be looking forward to seeing you again from the moment we have to say goodbye,’ Carlo said.
Alexandra smiled.
With Carlo it was sometimes difficult to judge where his somewhat flamboyant courtesy ended and true feeling took over.
He held both her hands in his and brought them to his lips.
‘Tell me, Alexandra…’
He paused.
‘Tell you what?’
‘You wear no rings — is there, then, no man in your life?’
‘Not at the moment.’
‘How is this possible?
Are you not inundated with men wishing to become your lover?’
‘Not particularly.’
‘Then Englishmen must be even more brutish than I have long suspected,’ he cried theatrically.
‘I have some say in the matter, too,’ Alexandra said.
There was always this line to be walked, she mused.
On the one hand, you wanted to play down the sleaze factor, not let it be thought that you'd been involved with hundreds of men, that you slept with just anyone.
On the other hand, you didn't want to give the impression that no-one was interested, thereby making him wonder just what exactly was wrong with you.
‘Ah yes,’ he said.
‘A woman of taste, like yourself, does not give herself to just anyone, isn't that right?’
You bet it is, thought Alexandra.
‘That's exactly right.’
She raised cool eyebrows over the rim of her glass.
Make what you like of that .
‘And the man who eventually wins you will be the luckiest man in the world, I think,’ said Carlo.
‘Mmm,’ she said.
There was no response to a remark like that which did not sound either conceited or simpering, or both.
He kissed her bunched fingers again, then quickly dropped them as an elegant woman paused by their table.
‘Ciao , Carlo,’ she said in freezing tones, giving Alexandra a frosty look.
‘Gina!
Caro !’
Carlo got to his feet.
‘It has been such a long time!
Where have you been?’
‘Living in the same apartment as always,’ Gina said.
She seemed rather angry about something.
‘But I have lost your telephone number’
’— and I still have the same name in the telephone directory,’ snarled Gina.
‘Or have you lost your glasses too?’
‘Gina,’ said Carlo reproachfully, ‘how can you speak in such a way?’
‘Are you going to introduce me to your…companion?’
Gina said, giving the words shades of meaning which were new to Alexandra.
‘This is Alexandra Maitland, one of my — uh — clients from England,’ said Carlo uneasily.
‘A client.
I see.’
Gina didn't need to express her opinion of so-called clients who allowed their fingers to be kissed — her look said it all.
She was a stick-thin blonde, dressed in skintight black with a large amount of Etruscan-style silver jewellery hanging from various parts of her emaciated frame.
She was carrying more weight on her face than on her body, her make-up being so thick, so perfect, that her cheeks looked as though they had been carved out of porcelain.
Perhaps that was why she had such a hard expression.
Unless she was simply a prize bitch, Alexandra thought.
She held out her hand.
‘How do you do?’ she said.
Very British.
Very cool.
Gina ignored the hand.
‘Gina owns a chain of beauty salons,’ Carlo said.
‘Very successful ones, too.’
‘Thanks, of course, to Carlo's — uh —services ,’ said Gina, flicking a finger at one of her earrings which began to swing back and forth.
She left Alexandra in no doubt that whatever services Carlo might have performed on Gina's behalf, they had not been confined to public relations but had included private ones as well.
Not that Alex minded.
A man with a past was always going to be more worth knowing that a man without one.
Much better to get involved with someone who had plunged fully into the sea of life than with someone who had stood wimpishly on the edge, afraid to dip in so much as a toe.
Not that she was planning to get involved with Carlo San Lorenzo, but the possibility was there…
‘I must go,’ Gina said, giving Alexandra a final inimical glance.
‘We have to attend a reception at the Ambassador's.’
She lifted her hand to her immaculate hair, causing the many bracelets along her wasted arm to clank and clatter like old dustbin lids.
‘Ciao , Carlo.’
‘I will call you, Gina.
Next week,’ Carlo promised.
‘I shan't be at home,’ said Gina icily.
‘The following week?’
‘No.
Nor the following year,’ Gina snapped.
When she had gone, Carlo gave Alex a rueful look.
‘This poor woman thinks she is in love with me,’ he said.
‘Does she?’
‘Every time we meet, it is the same thing.
‘Why have you not rung me, Carlo?’
‘Here is my phone number, Carlo.’
What does she expect?’
He spread his hands in a gesture of exaggerated bewilderment, lifting his shoulders to the level of his ears.
‘Just because I do a good job for her business does not mean that I wish to sleep with her.’
Alexandra drooped her eyes a little.
‘Oh, yes?’
‘But certainly, Alexandra.
What do you think I am?
A man who tells every woman that he meets that he is in love with her?’
‘I really don't’
‘No, no,’ cried Carlo, his voice rising.
‘I say this only to the very special women, of which there are few, and of which, my dear Alexandra, you are one.
I do not say this to just anyone, it would not be correct to do so.
Can I help it if this foolish woman — and others like her — have misunderstood the courtesy with which I treat them?’
‘Carlo, really, there is no need to explain,’ Alexandra said.
‘But that's just it: there is nothing to explain,’ said Carlo passionately.
Alexandra was enjoying herself.
She knew he was lying.
He knew she knew.
Nonetheless, he continued to try and persuade that he was telling the truth.
That he was no more than a simple well-bred Roman, going about his daily business, kind to animals and women, his motives constantly misconstrued…
And all about something completely trivial.
So Latin, thought Alex.
It really did not matter to her whether Carlo had slept with the entire population of Rome.
Well, not much.
She could make up her own mind about him without any help from hard-faced blondes, thank you.
‘How about another bottle of wine?’ she said.
Gazing with deliberate dreaminess at him across the table, she watched him respond, smoothing back his hair, raising an eyebrow.
‘An excellent idea,’ he said.
7
In two days' time Matthew was off to New York.
He had not seen Alexandra Maitland since the evening she had spent in his flat and, stupidly, he had not asked when she would be back from Milan.
He himself would be away for nearly a month: already his appointment diary for his time in the States was crammed.
Quite apart from specific commissions from various clients — Anthony Cashman was by no means the only one he would be representing — he had auctions to attend and galleries to visit.
There were a number of contacts to make, both in New York and on the West Coast; Cadogan's was thinking of expanding to San Francisco to take advantage of the considerable artistic activity out there, and he had been asked to spend a week in reconnoitring and reviewing possible sites.
In addition, he had been put in sole charge of handling negotiations between Cadogan's and one of the major American corporations.
It was standard procedure for such conglomerates to collect contemporary art, now that it had been recognized that such art was plentiful, reasonably affordable, and able to yield substantial returns.
It was one of the big breakthrough fields for houses such as Cadogan's but they needed a good front man, since the collecting of corporate art was an activity which needed to satisfy shareholders and customers alike.
‘We trust you, Matthew,’ James Cadogan, the seventy-two-year-old chairman, said, having called Matt into his office the day before he was due to fly out.
‘I'm aware of that.’
‘I don't wish to embarrass you, but the board is very impressed by your ability to spot future trends.’
‘Thank you.’
‘Not only that, you're also extraordinarily astute at a purely commercial level.’
Anxious not to sound servile, and unable to think of a response which was not, Matt smiled but said nothing.
‘It's all good for us here at Cadogan's, of course…’
The chairman sighed.
‘But I can't help thinking that this business of mixing aesthetics and commerce is a strange one.
Don't you agree?’
‘Come on, James.
You know as well as I do that art and commerce have walked hand in hand since at least the Renaissance.’
‘Maybe so…’
James Cadogan looked gloomy.
‘But these days, art collecting seems to have moved right away from any idea of personal passion or desire for beauty.’
‘Beauty ?’
Matthew raised derisive eyebrows.
‘Is beauty what we're in the game for?’
‘It's certainly a major reason why I am.’
Quite apart from the little matter of inheriting the business founded by his grandfather over a hundred and fifty years ago, Matt thought.
‘Anyway,’ he said.
‘Since when have either passion or beauty been the only rationale behind collecting works of art?
Look at the wealthy English aristocrats of the seventeenth and eighteenth century.
You don't  think they collected paintings and sculpture simply for their aesthetic qualities, do you?’
‘But what else?’
James Cadogan spread his hands wide.
He hated discussions of this nature.
‘Art by the square foot was more like it.
Just the way the nouveau riche of today buy leather-covered volumes by the metre, in order to fill the shelves of their libraries.
Ever been to Woburn, for instance?’
‘Took the grandchildren to the safari park only the other’
‘There's a room in there which has twenty-four Canalettos in it.
Not because the current Duke of Bedford was obsessed with Canaletto's work, not even because they're very good Canalettos, but simply to cover the walls, and to be able to tell his friends he had them.’
‘You seem to have adopted a very cynical viewpoint, Matthew.’
‘And look at the Medici,’ Matt said.
‘They didn't collect art simply for art's sake, but also to demonstrate to those around them just how much power they possessed, that they could afford to hire the greatest names of the day.
I don't suppose old Pope Leo the Tenth sat around gazing at the latest thing he'd just commissioned from Michelangelo, for instance.
Much more likely he boasted about the fact that he had the top man working for him.’
‘You're right, of course.
But I still don't really like it.
My poor father would turn in his grave.’
‘I don't see why,’ Matthew said robustly.
‘What matters is that art — however you choose to define it — is still considered something worth bothering about.’
‘Even if the business manager increasingly seems to be as important a factor these days in the acquisition of art as the dealer such as ourselves?’
‘That's good ,’ Matthew said.
Privately he wondered if poor old James wasn't getting a bit past it.
You couldn't go back to the time when the great art critics like Bernard Berenson and Herbert Read reigned supreme, even if you wanted to.
And while to a certain extent the chairman was right that the aesthetic of art was being eroded, nonetheless a whole infrastructure of artists and those who dealt with them was being maintained and subsidized, thus providing creative freedom.
The chairman, looking subdued, said, ‘We'll see you later on, shall we?’
‘Wouldn't miss it for anything,’ said Matthew.
‘M'wife asked me to — er — remind you that you're welcome to bring someone if you wish.’
‘That's awfully good of you, James, but’
‘Oh quite, quite,’ the chairman said, clearly embarrassed.
‘Absolutely.’
Later, changing into his dinner jacket in the executive cloakroom, Matthew wished he had thought to ask someone to accompany him to the chairman's party.
The occasion was ostensibly to mark the birthday of his wife, Barbara, and was an excuse to mix business with pleasure, since invitations were issued not only to personal friends of the chairman's but also to various luminaries of the art world, and a few favoured clients.
The large ballroom at the back of the Cadogan building had been opened for the occasion.
Normally used as a storeroom-cum-gallery, it had been cleared of extraneous clutter.
The handsome parquet flooring had been rewaxed, the girandoles around the walls had been set with pure wax candles purchased from an ecclesiastical suppliers in Hounslow, elaborate arrangements of flowers graced gilded stands  all around the walls.
The room was an elegant eighteenth-century fantasy, all gilt and white, with rococo plaster moulding and mirrorwork.
Barbara insisted that in keeping with the period the only light was to come from the candles, which flickered romantically from the walls and the three Bohemian crystal chandeliers on the ceiling.
‘You've done it again,’ Matthew murmured, taking Barbara's hand and bowing over it.
‘Done what?’
She was James Cadogan's second wife, thirty years younger than her husband, and Matthew had sometimes wondered whether she roamed and if so, whether she would consider roaming with him.
It was not a question he would ever have put to her.
For one thing, he did not mess with the wives of other men.
For another, it would definitely not be a smart career move.
‘Managed to make us products of the late twentieth century somehow feel like eighteenth-century fops.
Any minute now I shall produce a quizzing glass and start saying, ‘Oh la, ma'am.’
‘What a kind thing to say,’ Barbara said.
She glowed at him, her thick silvery hair piled elaborately round her head.
‘And how very much what I had hoped people would feel.’
‘Look at them,’ Matthew said.
Together they surveyed the room.
‘Men I work with every day.
Men who normally wear Armani suits or washed-silk shirts tucked into Joseph trousers: tonight they're all behaving like heroes in a historical novel.’
‘Kissing hands,’ said Barbara.
‘Making a leg.’
‘Too Jane Austen for words.’
‘And they're only wearing DJs.’
‘Perhaps I should make it a costume party next year.’
‘Masks?’
‘Doublet, I think.
And hose.
Definitely hose.’
‘Actually,’ Matthew said, ‘I've always wondered how those girls managed to wear muslin to the crushes at Bath and not end up with pneumonia.
But these candles generate a lot of heat, don't they?’
‘Enormous.’
Barbara took another glass of champagne from the tray which passed in front of them.
‘Rather like yourself.’
‘What?’
She smiled, showing dimples.
Her eyes were huge and blue; she had beautiful skin.
‘You heard.’
‘My dear Barbara,’ Matthew said lightly.
‘Around you, even a snowman would generate heat.’
‘So sweet.’
She touched his cheek.
‘You're a dangerous man, Matthew.’
‘Am I?’
‘It's time you took yourself off the market,’ she said.
‘Us older women sometimes have dangerous fantasies.’
At the far end of the room a musical quartet struck up some kind of tinkling dance music.
It was difficult to know how serious Barbara was being; nonetheless Matthew was aware that things change, that boundaries could be moved, that the wives of chairmen might not always be sacrosanct.
There was a burning sensation somewhere near the pit of his stomach.
Barbara, snowy sheets, stolen weekends…it suddenly seemed important to remember that she was a tireless charity worker, a champion bridge player, an indefatigable rider to hounds.
Above all, that she was the chairman's wife.
He cleared his throat, casting about for something to say which would indicate that though he was game for anything, he nonetheless knew how to keep his hands to himself.
Before he could come up with a satisfactory formulation they were joined by Georgina, the chairman's daughter by his first marriage.
‘You two look as if you're flirting in the most outrageous way,’ she said.
‘We were,’ said Barbara.
She was smiling, her eyes bright.
‘We always do,’ Matthew said.
He hoped Barbara could read the sub-text here: that if she was offering him some kind of invitation — and he was not for a moment suggesting that he was worthy of such a thing if she were — then he was regretfully declining it, on the understanding that both of them knew why.
Very complicated.
Sub-texts often were.
Taking another glass of champagne, he wondered if he had really managed to convey all that.
Or whether he just looked like a Cadogan employee who fancied his employer's wife.
‘I'm jealous.’
Georgina gave Matthew a sultry look.
Sultry looks had been a speciality of hers for some years, so much so that Matthew sometimes wondered whether she practised them in front of a mirror for ten minutes each day.
‘So you should be,’ he said.
‘Barbara is a fascinating woman.’
‘So am I. Haven't you noticed?’
Georgina was wearing a black Azzedine Alaïa and a choker of huge fake pearls.
Her eyes were heavily outlined in kohl; her mouth was scarlet.
Matthew, who had known her since she was a plump eight-year-old, smiled down at her.
‘Of course.
How could I help but notice?’ he asked.
‘Come and dance,’ Georgina said.
‘My quadrille footwork's a bit on the rusty side,’ Matthew said.
‘Or is this a gavotte?’
‘It's an old Beatles number, actually,’ Georgina said, looking at him scornfully.
‘Silly me.’
Matthew turned to Barbara.
‘Will you excuse us?’
‘But of course.’
She had an imperturbable air.
It was known at Cadogan's that she had once fallen from a horse while out hunting and had broken her collarbone, but continued to follow the hounds for the rest of the day until she collapsed as they ran the fox to earth.
‘I fancy you, Matt,’ Georgina said, leading him through the crowded room.
‘You know that, don't you?’
‘Yes.
So does everyone else in the room,’ Matt said.
‘What?
Fancy you?’
‘Know that you fancy me.’
‘Do you mind?’
‘Not in the least.
I'm extremely flattered.’
‘I saw a picture of you in GQ the other day,’ Georgina said.
‘You looked stunning.’
‘What's GQ?’
‘It's a magazine,’ Georgina said, making an obvious effort to keep the pity for someone Matthew's age out of her voice.
‘You must have known you were in it.’
‘Oh Gawd,’ said Matt.
‘I'd completely forgotten about it.’
‘You can't have done.’
‘But I did.
They came months ago to take a picture.
I don't know where they got my name, or why they thought I was suitable material for their article.’
‘I do.’
Georgina stood very close to him, swaying in time to the music.
Looking down at the long fair hair flowing over her shoulders, at the skimpy dress, the unlived-in face, he felt immeasurably old for not wanting to sweep her off there and then and make passionate love to her.
He wanted something more these days than mere bonking.
He wanted
‘Matt!’
It was his sister Victoria.
‘I knew we'd see you here.’
She looked approvingly at Georgina.
‘Is this by any chance…?’
He wanted to say, ‘No, Victoria, this is not Miss Right.’
Instead, he said merely, ‘Georgina.
This is my sister.’
As he introduced them, the two women nodded at each other.
‘How nice to meet you,’ said Victoria.
Her eyes hoovered the younger girl, gathering up every detail of her dress, her make-up, her jewellery and shoes, in order to relay the information to Emma and his mother.
He could see her give a mental thumbs-up: although she was a bit young, Georgina Would Do.
Inwardly he gave a world-weary smile.
He supposed the women in his life would only stop this outrageous assessing of the women he went out with, when he finally stopped going out with any and settled at home with one.
God knows what they would make of Georgina when Victoria passed on an estimate of her age.
She and Victoria were chatting animatedly.
Georgina was in her last year as a law student at Cambridge and was joining the same set of chambers where Victoria herself had trained before her marriage.
As so often when in the company of women, Matthew felt a little superfluous.
Their lives always seemed to him to be more complete than those of men, more…together , somehow, less compartmentalized.
And they did not seem to feel the same need to compete that men did, the urge to scatter  names, achievements, possessions about, like so much status-defining dandruff.
The group was joined by Hugo Bathurst, the firm's immensely tall specialist in medieval artefacts.
He smiled benignly at Matthew, his quiff of white hair and heavy black-framed glasses giving him the air of a learned cockatoo.
‘What an asset you are to Cadogan's,’ he said.
‘Aren't we all?’
Matthew replied.
‘Otherwise we shouldn't be here.’
‘My dear, I don't mean for your professional expertise.’
Hugo was smoking a thin cigarette through a long cloisonné holder which he now began to wave about, causing highly aromatic ash to fall on to the sleeve of his green velvet jacket.
If that was a Benson & hedges , Matthew thought, then he himself was Frans Hals.
‘Though that, too, adds to your many charms.’
‘Thank you, Hugo.’
The other man heaved a deep sigh.
‘Ah, me,’ he said.
‘How swiftly one falls into the sere and yellow.
How little attention one pays to the passing of the seasons when one is young and heedless.’
‘You're in one of your melancholy moods, I see.’
Hugo shook his head.
‘If only one could recapture one's lost youth.’
He drew deeply on the cigarette — hand-rolled, Matthew could not help noticing and hoped no-one else had — in his holder.
‘Which particular youth was that?’
Matt said.
‘There were so many.’
Hugo trickled smoke out through his aristocratic nostrils.
‘So many beautiful boys.’
‘Is now the time to be talking of them?’
Matthew looked round.
‘You might regret this line of conversation tomorrow morning.’
‘The great thing, dear boy, is to regret nothing.’
‘Unlike yourself, I have very little to regret.’
‘Then you are not living life to the full.’
Hugo stared round the room.
‘What I meant when I said you were an asset, Matt, is that you provide the sexual fillip which Cadogan's would otherwise lack.’
‘I'm moved by this tribute, Hugo,’ Matthew said, laughing.
‘As you should be.
I don't pay tributes lightly.’
Hugo's restless eyes targeted a handsome dowager who stood in front of the long gilt mirrors.
‘Ah!
The very woman I was looking for.’
‘You mean you've been a closet hetero all these years?’
‘I mean I'm hoping to sell her a gorgeous blanket chest I discovered two weeks ago in Shropshire.’
Hugo started to move away and then turned back.
‘You're looking at the ideal client over there, dear boy.
She has the money to spend, the taste to choose correctly and, above all, the right setting for what she buys.
Perfection.’
He kissed his fingers in a flamboyant sort of way and swept off, his quiff bobbing above the heads of the other guests like a small ship on a turbulent sea.
One of the newer recruits to Cadogan's came up.
‘Georgina!’ he said.
‘Bootsy!’ cried Georgina.
‘You'll never guess who's here.’
If Bootsy had a chin, it was not much in evidence and Matthew could see two distinct pimples beside his nose.
Was this to be his destiny? he wondered.
Was he doomed to spend the rest of his working life watching babes in arms wheeling and dealing the way he used to?
Would he eventually be ousted by one of them, a toothless lion left to die of starvation while the rest of  the herd loped off after game he could no longer compete for?
‘Who?’
Georgina was asking.
‘Rory.’
‘Rory King-Lewis?’
‘Yeah!’
Georgina turned to Matt.
‘Rory's a chap Bootsy and I were at school with,’ she said.
‘I haven't seen him for ages.
You don't mind if I go, do you?’
‘Not at all.’
Quite a relief, actually, Matthew thought, feeling older than Methuselah as Georgina rushed off to see Rory King-Thing.
There had been no girls at his school, though the sixth form often fantasized richly and in great detail about the possibility.
It was a fancy which occupied their thoughts by day and their dreams by night.
Georgina's generation were much luckier.
He tried to remember which school she had been sent to: Haileybury, was it?
Or Oundle?
Somewhere like that.
‘Nice girl,’ Victoria said.
‘Very intelligent.’
‘And very young,’ said Matthew.
Victoria raised her eyebrows.
‘Is she the one you…?’
‘No,’ he said.
‘She isn't.
We aren't.
We haven't.
We don't.
We shan't.’
Victoria put a hand on his arm.
‘Don't worry, darling.
You'll find her one of these days, I promise.
Miss Right, I mean.’
Matthew groaned.
Waking early the day before he was due to go, he remembered something he had intended to organize.
He dialled his mother's number; when she finally answered, he said, ‘I'm your only son, right?’
‘I think I can more or less guarantee —’
‘And you dote on me, right?’
‘I did once, dear,’ his mother agreed cautiously.
‘But’
‘But you will admit that’
‘Besides, you're rather big to be doted on.’
His mother sighed, her voice taking on a nostalgic tone.
‘You were so sweet once.
Round about the age of four.
I remember the little romper suit I bought in Harrods’
‘Mother, do you mind?’
‘To answer your question, I won't deny that I'm extremely fond of you.’
‘Not to put too fine a point on it, you'd do anything for me, wouldn't you?’
‘No,’ she said promptly.
‘You want me to be happy, don't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then will you do me a favour?’
‘Depends what it is.’
‘I want you to take someone to watch the Somerset v. Kent match next Wednesday.’
‘Is this ‘someone’ a special someone?’
‘Very special.’
‘Who is she?
What's her name?’
‘It's not a she.
It's a man who lives in Merry Beauchamp.’
There was a long silence.
Then his mother said quietly, ‘What are you trying to tell me, Matthew?’
‘I'm trying to tell you — well, ask you, to be accurate — to take someone to the cricket match next week.’
‘This special man.’
‘Yes.
I can't see that it is so diffic’
‘Oh God,’ his mother groaned.
‘What on earth's the matter?’
‘Matthew, I'm trying to be very understanding and modern about this, but I want you to realize that for women of my generation, it's difficult to accept the prevailing mores.’
‘Mores ?
What mores?’
‘If you're — uh — gay, as they insist on calling it these days, then I'll just have to accept it, but I shall always blame myself, always wonder where I went wrong with you, wonder whether it was that school I sent you to, I was never sure if it was a mistake or’
‘MOTHER!’
‘What?’
‘For God's sake,’ Matthew shouted.
‘I am not gay.
I simply want you to take a friend's father to a cricket match.’
He gave her the name and address, and added, ‘I'd take him myself if I was free.’
‘This is a female friend's father?’
‘As a matter of fact, yes.’
‘Oh, Matthew.
How thrilling.
What's she like?’
After a pause, Matthew said, ‘If you really want to know, she's the most wonderful woman in the world.’
And put down the receiver, instantly regretting his words.
They were no more than the truth, but now his mother would ring Victoria and Emma and they would ring him and it would be one question after another until he went completely mad and started calling for humming-bird sandwiches or something.
Thank God he was off to New York tomorrow.
That evening he went down to Alexandra's flat and knocked on the door.
It was opened by a man he had not seen before.
He hid his surprise.
After all, just because she had been unaccompanied at Emma's house, just because she had accepted his invitation to dinner, did not mean that she was unattached.
Of course this might be the brother, but it wasn't a question he felt like asking.
‘Good evening,’ the other man said.
He was wearing a tie Matt recognized.
Suppose this chap was Alexandra's special friend, her Significant Other, as they called it in the States, wouldn't he get a bit peeved if some strange man appeared at the door asking for her?
He knew he would, if the circumstances were reversed.
‘Do you want the lady of the house?’ the chap said.
Was it his imagination or was there a certain edge to the way he said that?
‘Well…’ said Matt, not wanting to commit either Alexandra or himself.
‘She's in the bedroom, getting changed,’ the chap said, making it very obvious that he had proprietorial interests in her.
In the bedroom , indeed.
Establishing his territory, in other words, Matthew thought angrily.
Like some damn dog, lifting its leg, leaving its mark.
And then he had the blasted cheek to offer him a coffee, emphasizing his familiarity with the flat, his rights of ownership.
‘No thanks,’ Matt said.
And then, just to clarify his position, added, ‘I'm…a neighbour.
If she's busy it really doesn't matter.’
‘She is rather,’ the chap said, a self-satisfied smirk on his smug — in Matt's opinion — face, and looked at his watch.
‘We're going out to dinner, as a matter of fact, and we're running late.’
In other words, shove off, matey, she's mine.
‘I won't keep you then,’ Matt murmured, backing away, feeling a total and utter prat.
Next time he saw Alexandra he would establish for once and for all just exactly how committed she was, and just exactly to whom.
In fact, he was unable to do so.
The next time he saw her she was emerging from the very lift he was waiting for.
A host of foolish remarks rose to his lips.
He wanted to blurt out that she looked beautiful in blue, that he'd like to kill the man who'd been in her flat the previous evening, that he hoped her date with him had been a miserable failure, that he had hardly slept a wink all night, beside himself with jealousy.
He said none of these things.
Partly because of the stranger standing in the lift behind her.
Partly because he had to catch his flight, was indeed already behind schedule.
‘Hi!’ she said, stepping out, searching in her bag for something, wrenching his heart.
‘Hi.’
He made a bit of a thing of bending down to pick up his bags, anxious to hide his confusion.
Whatever happened to Matthew Prescott, the King of No Commitments?
Given the slightest encouragement, he'd be on his knees swearing eternal devotion.
She looked at his luggage.
‘Was it something I said?’ she asked lightly.
He laughed.
‘No.
Just business.’
‘Long?’ she said.
It was impossible to judge whether she was asking because she was interested or merely for the sake of politeness.
‘A month.’
‘That's long,’ she said.
‘I called round last night but you had company,’ he said, dumping his bags into the lift, stepping after them.
‘You mean my brother?’
His jaw dropped.
‘Brother?’
He would have said more, but it was too late.
The lift doors closed across his exclamation of relief and  frustration and he was carried down to the ground floor.
It was her brother.
Immediately the smug features reassembled themselves in his imagination and took on the friendly demeanour of an irrelevant sibling.
Come to think of it, he'd seemed rather a decent chap, someone it might be worth getting to know.
Same college tie as his own, too.
They were bound to have things in common, even if the difference in age made it unlikely that they'd have overlapped at university.
He was lucky.
He found a cab immediately and the traffic was light enough for him to get to Heathrow with plenty of time to spare, in spite of the stringent security control that the American airlines now insisted on.
As soon as he could, he found a phone booth.
He called Directory Enquiries and gave her name.
The mechanical voice intoned, ‘The number you require is’ and he found he hadn't got a pen handy, nor anything to write on, and had to start all over again.
She picked up on the first ring, almost as though she had been expecting him to call.
He found himself less flustered now, more in control.
‘I forgot to say I shall be in New York,’ he said.
‘I — uh — I hope you remembered to take your favourite coffee with you,’ she said.
It had become a joke between them; he had said something similar when she told him she was off to Milan.
Hearing her voice, he laughed, feeling as though a hundred years had dropped from his shoulders.
He understood now all those clichés about hearts singing, feeling ten feet high, walking on air, cloud nine.
It was all happening to him, right there in a see-through plastic telephone nodule in the airport concourse with the crowds jostling and plaintive  announcements coming over the Tannoy system, and the orange-juice machines gurgling and travellers humping suitcases about with those peculiarly tense expressions people always adopt prior to a long-haul flight.
‘So you might like to know,’ he said, studiedly casual, ‘that I'm staying at the Plaza.’
She didn't say anything.
She didn't need to.
He could hear her smiling.
He could feel the expression on her face.
Hardly daring to trust himself, he gently replaced the receiver.
He turned, picking up his briefcase.
‘I do believe,’ he said, addressing a startled Arab trailing six womenfolk in metal face-masks and flowing robes, ‘I do believe she's as keen as I am.’
And for a moment he was afraid that the huge grin he could not control was going to stretch his face permanently out of shape.
‘I heard you were in town,’ the voice said.
Matthew had been at the Plaza for a week now, with scarcely a moment to call his own.
Quite apart from the working breakfasts, the working lunches, the sock-it-to-'em suppers and the power parties, he still had two or three hours of paperwork to deal with each evening after he stumbled back to his hotel room.
He squinted at his watch.
Seven thirty.
He was still in bed and felt like staying there for the rest of the day.
The accepted rate at which New York life moved was at least three factors faster than in London.
Exhilarating, yes.
But also bloody exhausting.
He was beginning to wonder how much more he could take.
The voice was familiar but he couldn't place it.
He stifled a groan.
‘Who is this?’
‘Oh, Matthew…’
The voice was full of reproach.
‘I'm sorry.
I'm still half asleep.’
He wished his mouth didn't feel so dry — the air conditioning was hellish at this time of year, but the temperature and humidity without it would be even worse.
The voice laughed.
‘How quickly they forget.’
It was a female voice.
At least he was on the ball enough to realize that.
And it belonged to someone whom he had known once; that, too, he could deduce.
The voice began to sing softly in his ear, something about a kiss being just a kiss, a sigh being just a sigh.
‘Laura!’
‘Hi, Matt.’
‘Laura, for God's sake.
How are you?’
‘Getting by.
And you.’
He shook his head to clear it.
‘Getting by?
I thought you were going to live happy ever after with the man of your dreams.’
‘Yeah, well,’ she said.
‘Dreams have a funny way of turning sour.’
‘Oh dear.’
‘Why don't we meet sometime, Matt?
I'd really love to see you again.’
‘When?
I'm fearfully busy — and that's not just an excuse.’
‘Tell me when you're free.’
He got out of bed and padded across the carpet to his briefcase.
‘How about two days from now?
That's the first window I can see.’
‘I'll be there,’ Laura said.
‘Shall I come to your hotel?’
If she did it could be awkward…
‘No, I'll pick you up somewhere,’ he said quickly.
Once they had settled when and where, he climbed  back into bed, hoping to catch another hour of sleep.
But memories kept him awake, particularly of that last night with Laura, and all the pain and anguish she had subsequently caused him.
In the end he got up and made himself some coffee, then watched the early morning skies above Manhattan as he recalled the past.
He had been working in San Francisco at the time, still learning his trade, revelling in the whole carefree Californian ethos, the sense of shackles dropping, of new horizons glimmering.
He was beginning to see that his concept of Art with a capital A was European, based on a classical tradition that was never going to expand to meet the challenge of the new generations of painters because it was defined by its time.
He embraced the new dogmas, or lack of them, with enthusiasm.
He wallowed in the shock of the new, absorbing, listening, learning.
And then he met Laura.
She was English, a little older than he was, working as a buyer for Gump's, the big department store on Union Square.
She had lived in the States for several years but she still retained her British accent, though she often maintained that she loathed England and would never return to it.
Her black hair seemed to gush from her scalp and her blue eyes were never still, constantly on the lookout for the next opportunity, the next adventure.
He had never before met a woman so entirely free of the constraints which he had come to associate with being female.
Nor a woman with such a passion for living.
‘Gather ye rosebuds while ye may,’ she used to say.
‘We might be dead tomorrow, Matt, so let's do it now .’
And ‘it’ might be a frantic drive down the coast for  a weekend over the border into Mexico, or a trip into the wine-growing country beyond the Berkeley hills, or trying a new recipe involving chocolate sauce and lobster claws or something equally revolting.
It was with Laura that he had first tried hang-gliding, drunk tequila, fished in Alaska, eaten salt-water taffy, read Proust, watched a blue movie.
‘Come on, Matt,’ she would say, calling him at two or three in the morning, her voice hoarse with the cigarettes she chain-smoked.
‘It's rosebud-gathering time…’
And off they would go on another frenzied dash to see, to feel, to experience , before it was too late.
Long afterwards, when it was over, when he could finally bear to think of it all, he understood that, deep down, Laura had not expected to live beyond thirty and that, without realizing it, he had picked up on this and joined in the relentless, exhausting determination to sample life to the fullest.
Afterwards, of course, he told himself he should have been able to predict what would happen.
How could Laura, eternally seeking new sensations, ever be satisfied with one man?
At the time it had seemed that they shared so much that they must have some mystic chain binding them together.
Indeed Laura often said so: ‘Twin souls, Matt,’ she would drawl, as she lolled back on the velvet cushions which covered the floor of her apartment.
‘We're twin souls, joined at the cosmic hip.’
Matt would sometimes try to develop this image but found it impossible.
Did souls have hips, to start with?
And if they did, how would a pair of Siamese souls work, exactly?
Being one half of a cosmic Chang and Eng did not, somehow, appeal.
And then came the day when he came home to find  her standing by the door with her bags packed.
‘I couldn't leave without saying goodbye,’ she said.
‘Who to?’
‘You, dumbo,’ she said affectionately.
‘Why goodbye?’
‘It's been really great, Matt.
Some of the best times of my life.
Truly.
But when you gotta go, you gotta go.’
‘Go where ?’
‘I'm going to Nepal,’ she said.
‘But why?’
‘Why not?’
‘Without me?’
‘You're not free, Matt.
You know that as well as I do.
You're into career structures, office hours, pension schemes, all that kind-of crap.
You did a good job, you know,’ and she had leaned forward and patted his cheek as though he were a well-behaved little boy.
‘But you know and I know that deep down I'm about as alien to your concept of life as a creature from outer space.’
‘But I love you,’ he said, and even today the memory could make him wince with remembered pain and passion.
‘So you got something positive out of this whole scene,’ she said.
‘That's good, Matthew.
Hold on to it.’
‘And I thought you loved me.’
‘I do, Matt.
You gotta go on believing that.’
‘Then how can you leave me?’
Back then it all seemed so simple.
You loved someone; you wanted to spend the rest of your life with them.
He had been too young to understand the complications which human beings establish for themselves, or the complex meaning of love.
‘Would you believe, like this?’
She hoisted her carpet-weave bag higher on her shoulder, about to pick up her bags and walk.
He stopped her.
‘Who are you going to Nepal with?’ he said.
He was shaking now, taking in the fact that she meant it, feeling his heart begin to twist and crinkle like the burning books in Fahrenheit 451 .
‘Does it matter?’ she said.
‘To me it does.’
‘What does ‘with’ mean, anyway?’she said airily.
‘You know damn well what it means.’
‘If you really feel it's relevant, I'm sharing my personal space with Steve Lavalle.’
‘And where is your soul joined to Steve Lavalle's?’ he asked bitterly.
‘At the cosmic crotch?’
‘Ours is a spiritual relationship,’ she said.
‘Oh sure it is,’ Matt said.
‘It is .
Not that I expect someone like you to’
‘Steve Lavalle is about as spiritual as a traffic bollard, and four times less intelligent — and you know it.’
She gave him her infuriating Wise Woman smile, picked up her bags and went.
He had postcards from her after that: from Amsterdam, from Athens, from Istanbul and Baghdad and Delhi.
And finally, a card from Kathmandu.
He had left San Francisco by then, and returned to London.
The card followed him, its corners bent and the stamps half torn-off by the time it reached him.
By then some of the hurt had lessened and he was able to look down at her scrawly handwriting and think: so she made it.
And four or five years later another card arrived, from San Diego, saying she was married and blissfully happy, that she had found her Prince Charming and life was great.
Standing in his hotel bedroom, Matt hoped he hadn't made a mistake in agreeing to see her.
At best it was pointless; at worst it could be really awkward.
By now the buds she used to gather so assiduously must be full-blown roses.
And as for cosmic hips…
A cup of coffee in his hand, he looked out at the New York skyline and started to laugh.
‘You look really great, Matthew,’ Laura said.
‘So do you,’ Matt murmured, though in actual fact it was not entirely true.
Californian sunshine was not particularly kind to the English complexion, and circumstances had evidently not treated Laura well.
The lines of experience were marked on her face and although she still had all the exuberant charm which had drawn him to her in the first place, he thought she looked older than he knew her to be.
Not that he would dream of telling her so.
Not if he wanted to get out of the restaurant alive.
‘So,’ Laura drank her wine as though it was water, then refilled her glass.
‘How's it going?’
‘Very well indeed,’ said Matthew.
Looking at her across the table, it was hard to imagine that once he had thought her the most exotic extraordinary thing in the entire world.
‘And you?’
‘I get by, I guess.’
She gazed into the middle distance.
‘I'm on my third divorce, did I tell you that?’
‘Not until now.’
Three divorces?
When even one was not to be contemplated.
Thank goodness he had never rushed into anything-though that was partly because he had never found the woman he wanted to rush into anything with.
At least, not until now.
The tawny  hair of Alexandra Maitland brushed briefly across his mind.
He had been brought up to believe that marriage was for ever.
And if not for ever, then for as long as possible.
He thought of his own parents, blissfully happy together until seven years ago when his father had died suddenly of an unsuspected heart condition, just before their silver wedding anniversary.
‘Any children?’ he said.
‘Two,’ Laura said.
‘Both by my first husband.
They're staying with him now.’
‘And what do you do?
Apart from looking after them, I mean?’
Matthew stumbled a bit on this question, trying to remember what the prevailing feminist attitudes were towards such things as parenting and families.
Was it insulting to assume that mothers still raised their children?
Were women expected to do things still, or was it all earth-motherhood and fulfilment-through-family these days?
‘I work at Saks,’ Laura said.
‘Buying for the glass and china departments.’
‘That's what you were doing when we —’
‘When we met.’
Her eyes glowed with the remembrance of things past.
‘God, I was wild in those days.
I wanted to have it all, see it all.
I didn't realize that you can't.’
‘You had a darn good try, Laura,’ he said.
‘I did, didn't I?’
‘Tell me, whatever happened to Steve?’
Matt asked.
‘Steve?
Which one?
There are so many Steves.
My first two husbands were both called Steve.’
‘So you married him in the end, did you?’
‘Married who?’
‘Steve Lavalle.’
She frowned.
‘Never heard of him.’
‘You went off to Nepal with him, if memory serves.’
‘Heavens above.
So I did.’
‘Where is he now?’
‘I haven't a clue.
He got lost in Istanbul and I couldn't wait so I went on without him.’
‘That was a bit cool, wasn't it?
He could have been murdered by a carpet-seller or something.’
‘More likely run off with a belly dancer,’ Laura said bitterly.
‘It's the story of my life.’
‘But didn't you check with the police?’
‘'Course I did.
They couldn't find him.’
‘And you just abandoned him?’
‘He rang up from some baths or some place like that, said he'd be back soon.
I waited two days and then I left.
The hell with him,’ Laura said.
She reached across the table and stroked Matthew's face.
‘It's really good to see you again, Matthew.
Terrifically good.’
‘Yeah.’
Matt looked at his watch.
She was getting amorous, and he wasn't.
He needed all his skill and tact if he was going to extricate himself from this situation and spend the night sleeping in his hotel bed, alone.
‘Listen, I hate to break this up and it's been wonderful to see you, but I have to get back to the hotel.’
‘I'll come with you.’
‘No!’
She looked at him in surprise as he almost shouted the word.
‘What's wrong, Matt?’
‘I've got this — this ferocious headache,’ he said, massaging his temples in what he hoped was a realistic way.
‘Migraine coming on, I should think.’
‘Poor thing.’
She gave him her bedroom look.
‘Do you want me to come back and give you one of my special back rubs?
Help you get rid of the tensions?’
‘The only way to deal with it is lie in the dark and stay absolutely quiet,’ he said firmly.
‘No voices, no distractions.
Otherwise it'll hang about — and I've got these really vital meetings in the morning.’
‘I understand,’ she said.
‘Can we meet again before you go back?’
‘Absolutely,’ he said, nodding away.
‘Call me.’
‘I will.
If I miss you, I'll be in England soon, looking at glass and porcelain.
Maybe we could get together then.’
‘Fantastic,’ he lied.
‘I can't wait.’
He stood up, pushing his chair over to give the impression of a man going mad with pain.
He staggered slightly, tried to make his eyes look wild.
‘Ooh.
My head.’
He felt really mean, sitting back in the cab, watching Manhattan by night.
But Laura was a piranha; she'd have chewed him down to the bone if he had let her.
Although he did not hold with lies, there were occasions when they were the best option.
Like tonight.
Much better to be untruthful and leave Laura thinking that but for a migraine, they might have spent the night together.
Recovered their lost love.
Their lost youth.
Whatever it was she had so plainly hoped to recapture.
8
‘There was a dwarf in here just now, looking for you,’ Felicity said, as Alexandra came back from lunch.
Her chicken-pox had turned out not to be chicken-pox but an over-violent reaction to a takeaway pizza.
‘What kind of dwarf?’
‘How many kinds are there?’
Felicity spoke without moving her lips since her face was covered in something hard and green, like the shell of an exotic beetle.
As she spoke, she surveyed the result in the mirror.
‘But I don't know any dwarfs,’ Alex said.
‘Are you sure he wanted me?’
‘That's who he asked for.
I think he left his card on your desk.’
A peach-coloured business card lay on top of Alexandra's papers.
She picked it up and saw the name Jarrett Keach flowing across it in brown mock handwriting which was presumably a facsimile of  Jarrett's own signature.
On the reverse Jarrett had written:I'll call back in a couple of hours.
How about dinner tonight?
‘I hope you were nice to him,’ Alex said.
‘Wha'?’
Felicity was lying with her head resting on the back of her chair, gazing up at the ceiling, her long legs stretched across her desk.
Even as Alex  watched, the green stuff on her face was turning blue.
‘I hope you were nice to the dwarf.
He's Jarrett Keach.’
Felicity leaped up from her seat, her face contorted.
Chunks of blue-green stuff flaked off and scattered over the floor.
Other bits stayed where they were, making her look like something Special Effects was trying out for the next Dr Who series.
‘The designer ?’ she shrieked.
‘Yes.’
‘Why didn't you say ?’
‘I wasn't here, was I?’
‘Jarrett Keach,’ moaned Felicity.
‘Oh God.
I've been trying to get through to him in New York for weeks , and when he finally shows up in the office I'm covered in green face-mask.
He must have thought I was bonkers.’
‘I don't suppose he thought you always look like that.’
‘And on top of that…
Oh God …’
‘What else?’
‘I told him to be sure not to fall into the wastepaper basket on his way out,’ said Felicity, attempting to bury her parti-coloured face in her hands.
‘What a strange thing to’
‘He ate my lunch,’ Felicity said.
‘Just picked up my yoghurt and cucumber sandwich and ate it before I could stop him.
I told him to get lost.’
Straightening the accumulation of paperwork on her desk with rather more success than she was managing to straighten her face, Alex remarked, ‘Well, at least he owes you one.’
‘I suppose so…’
Felicity sounded doubtful.
‘Anyway, he's coming back.’
‘He is ?
When?’
‘In a couple of hours.’
Felicity grabbed her make-up case from the bottom drawer of her desk.
‘That just about gives me time to make myself look presentable.’
‘He wants to take me out to dinner tonight,’ Alexandra could not resist adding.
Felicity paused between the desks and looked suspicious.
‘Why?
You're Features, not Fashion.’
‘I'm also reasonably sane,’ Alexandra said.
‘For instance, I don't cover myself in gunge during working hours.’
‘Nor do I, normally.’
Felicity pulled at a loose bit of the stuff on her face, which detached itself from her skin with a small popping noise.
‘But with Helena away, someone's got to try out the samples.’
‘I see.’
‘What's Jarrett Keach like?’
‘Short,’ Alex said.
‘What else?’
‘Talented.’
‘You can say that again.
His spring collection was absolutely beautiful.
Bit beyond most people's prices, which is a shame.
I wonder if he's thought of a ready-to-wear collection…’
‘Why don't you ask him?’
‘I will.
If you don't mind, that is.
I don't want to butt in’
‘You won't,’ Alexandra said.
‘Anyway, as you pointed out, you're the Fashion Editor.
Tell him what you just told me about his spring collection and you'll have him eating out of your hand.’
‘He'd have to stand on tiptoe,’ Felicity said with a rare flash of humour.
‘Better prepare some questions for him,’ Alex said.
‘Show him you're really interested in what he's done in the past and what he's planning to do in the future.’
‘Good idea.
’ Felicity tugged another shard of blue-green shell from her face.
‘It might be quite fun to hear his views on the whole phenomenon of fashion,’ Alex said, thinking aloud.
‘Why women follow it, why they tolerate it, the whole psychology behind it, the dichotomies it invokes.’
‘The what?’
‘Dichotomies.’
Alexandra looked over and saw Felicity listening with attention.
She was embarrassed, realizing that she had been sounding exactly like Nina.
‘Come on, Fliss.
You know as well as I do the sort of thing to ask him.
You've done it a hundred times before.’
‘But not to a midget who's just eaten my lunch and whom I've subsequently insulted, who then turns out to be one of the world's top dress designers.
Oh God…’
‘Never mind.’
‘You're right.’
Felicity shrugged it off, looking down at her notepad.
‘Could be good, Alex.’
‘Tempt him with the possibility of a spread on his designs.’
‘I could ask him,’ Felicity said thoughtfully, ‘whether he felt fashion could be viewed as one means of pasting the fragments of self into the semblance of a unified identity.’
‘You certainly could.’
‘And if he thought fashion was one of the more potent means whereby women can achieve self-expression.’
‘I'm sure he's got lots to say on that one…’
‘And fashion victims: that'll get a dialogue going.’
Satisfied, Felicity loped off towards the loo.
Jarrett Keach reappeared two hours later, as promised.
He looked like some kind of rare orchid, dressed in a Crocodile Dundee hat of soft green suede and miniature matching trousers under a jerkin of pink washed silk lined with purple.
His T-shirt was pale blue.
Had there been any butterflies around they'd have been stacked above his head three layers high, all waiting for a chance to land…
‘Jarrett!’
Alex exclaimed.
‘How nice to see you again.’
‘You too, baby.’
Alexandra bit back the unpleasant retort which rose to her lips.
Baby , for heaven's sake.
That was really rich, coming from an update of Little Lord Fauntleroy.
She led him over to the Fashion desk where Felicity was sitting, a vision of crystalline beauty and sparkling efficiency.
‘Mr Keach,’ Felicity said, rising from her seat with one fluid movement and holding out her hand.
Her eyelashes swept slowly up and down like bellows, causing a small breeze to ruffle Jarrett's hair.
‘How truly exciting to meet you.’
‘Why, thank you.’
‘I don't know if Alexandra has told you, but we've been hoping very much to feature your next collection in our spring bumper issue,’ Felicity said.
‘You'd have to talk to my agent about that,’ Keach said.
‘Oh, but a word from you couldn't go amiss, could it?’
The dimples she kept for emergencies suddenly appeared in Felicity's cheeks.
Keach leaned his little forearms on her desk.
‘Say, were you round here during the lunch-break?’
‘No,’ lied Felicity, ‘I had an appointment in Bond Street.’
‘If you want my advice, you should revise your security arrangements,’ Keach said earnestly.
‘I was able to walk right in here, you know.’
‘We've never seen any need to’
‘And you oughta check if anything's gone missing.
There was this real weirdo in here, rifling about the desks, wearing some kinda disguise.’
He turned to Alexandra.
‘Did you know that in New York a significant number of burglaries are now perpetrated by women?’
Alex shook her head.
‘I didn't.’
‘And the number's on the increase?’
‘When you say disguised,’ Alex said, looking over at Felicity, who was violently shaking her head, ‘what exactly do you’
‘She had this sorta Hallowe'en mask on,’ said Keach.
‘Kind of a Monster-From-The-Blue-Lagoon type thing.’
‘Would you recognize her again?’
Felicity asked.
‘How could I?
Couldn't see anything of her face at all.’
He looked around.
‘Hey.
Any chance of a coffee?’
‘I'll make you one,’ Alex said.
‘Stay and talk to Felicity.’
She brought back three cups made from her favourite blend, gave one to Felicity and set the other two on her desk.
‘So, Jarrett,’ she said.
‘How's things?’
‘Just dandy,’ he said.
His tiny feet dangled above the carpeting as he reached for his cup.
‘Look, honey.
Are you free to have dinner with me tonight?’
She didn't like to say that she would sooner lick a toad.
‘Actually, Jarrett,’ she said, ‘I've already got a prior engagement.
So I can't’
‘Great, great,’ he said.
‘So you won't mind if I take Felicity instead?’
‘Not in the slightest.
The two of you can’
‘Great,’ he said again, hardly listening.
‘Is she shacked up with anyone?’
‘I'm not sure.’
‘So I'm in with a chance?’
Alex picked a bloom from the large bouquet of mixed carnations which stood to one side of her desk and held it to her nose, savouring the cinnamon scent.
They had arrived two days ago, courtesy of Interflora and Carlo San Lorenzo.
‘I wouldn't go that far,’ she said coolly.
‘Would she?’
Keach winked at her.
‘That's what I really want to know.’
‘You'll have to ask her.’
Ghastly little unreconstructed midget, Alexandra thought.
She already knew the answer to his question, which was a decided negative.
Felicity was Saving Herself for her Wedding Night.
Although it was August, the flat seemed cold.
She built a small fire in the grate, just for the comfort, then went into the kitchen.
She made a chicken salad and poured herself a glass of chilled white wine, then put them on a tray and took them into her sitting room.
She had lied to Keach.
Instead of going out she was planning to spend a quiet evening at home, the first, it seemed, for weeks.
She slipped a CD of La Traviata into the player and closed her eyes.
Bliss.
With two of the office down with chicken-pox, she hardly had time to think these days, let alone relax.
As Joan Sutherland soared through Violetta's anguished aria of love renounced, she thought of Carlo San Lorenzo.
He would be over in England  soon.
She wondered how she would feel when she saw him again.
And there was Matthew Prescott, too: she was by no means averse to him.
After Cameron's laid-back attitude to any form of commitment, it was a boost to the morale to know that there were other men around.
When the telephone rang, she picked it up and heard the Colonel's voice.
‘It's your father here,’ he said.
‘Hello, Pa.
How're —’
‘Colonel Maitland,’ added her father, in case there was any doubt in her mind as to his identity.
‘Oh,that father,’ said Alex.
‘How's the hip?’
A series of clicks and sounds like a heavy breather with asthma began.
A high-pitched whistle screeched along the line.
He was using the cordless phone she and David had bought him last Christmas.
‘Pa,’ Alex said patiently, ‘leave it alone.’
‘Dratted thing,’ roared her father, his voice fading in and out of static.
‘Blasted…modern…not like the old days…built to last…’
‘Pull the aerial out.’
‘…idiotic…no idea…call it progress.’
He suddenly swam into vocal range again.
‘Alexandra?’
‘I'm still here.’
‘What were you saying?’
‘I was asking about your hip.
And for heaven's sake stop fidgeting with the aerial.’
‘My hip's much better, thanks.’
‘It's a shame you had to miss the Somerset v. Kent match.
I'm really sorry David and I both had to be away.
Did you catch any of it on the local telly?’
‘No.’
‘Why not?
Wasn't Mrs Hope’
‘Because I was there, wasn't I?’
‘Were you?’
‘Yes,’ said the Colonel.
‘Sitting right there in the Members’ Stand.’
‘How did you manage that?
Did Freddy come for you?’
‘It was that woman you sent.’
A piece of smokeless fuel fell out of the grate and on to the hearth.
Alexandra watched it, wondering whether she ought to get up and put it back before it started to spit flame and muck on to the carpet.
‘Which woman?’
‘Knocked on the door, said she'd come to drive me up to the county ground, had a picnic in the car and she hoped I was ready.’
‘Were you?’
‘'Course not.
Still in my dressing gown, wasn't I?
Damned embarrassing.
Had to ask her in.
She said she'd like to walk round the garden while Mrs Hope helped me to get some clothes on.’
‘What was she, some lonely widow who'd heard about your hip?’
‘She was a widow all right, but not exactly what I'd call lonely.
Seemed to be on kissing terms with half the chaps in the cricket ground, when we got there.
Said her husband had been a member for years.’
‘This is rather weird, Pa.
You don't usually go off with strange women like that.’
Her father chuckled.
‘Don't often get strange women asking me to, m'dear.’
‘So who was she?’
Alex poured herself another glass of wine and sipped it slowly, saving up the details of her father's assignation in order to tell David when he got back.
‘Trouble is, I can't remember her damned name,’ the Colonel said.
‘Idiotic of me, really, but I just didn't have time to ask.’
‘You can't have spent the day with some total stranger and not even found out what she was called.’
‘First name was Erica, that much I do remember.
Dashed rude about my roses, I may say.
Said I obviously hadn't a clue about pruning.’
‘What was her other name?’
‘For the life of me’
‘Was she nice?’
‘Damned nice.
Pretty little thing.
Could see why everyone was queuing up to kiss her.
And the picnic she put up for us was first-rate.
Only one thing wrong with her, as a matter of fact.’
Alexandra hadn't heard the Colonel sound this cheerful since he'd been confined to the wheelchair.
Or even before that.
Long before.
She had been nineteen when her mother died, old enough to notice how poor old Pa seemed to shrink inside himself at the time.
What she hadn't noticed until now, being much too busy getting on with her own life, was that he had never really come back out.
A pale imitation had emerged, yes; but not the rambunctious roaring man she had loved.
‘So what was wrong with this paragon?’ she asked.
‘She would keep banging on about her son.
The way she told it, the fellow's a cross between the Pope and Einstein, with a hefty dash of film star thrown in.
Put a stop to it in the end, though.’
‘How?’
‘I said, ‘Forgive me, madam, but I've got a blasted son myself, and I know what they're like.
Sons, I mean.
They just aren't that damned perfect,’ I said.
‘Wouldn't want them if they were.’’
‘You didn't!’
‘Think I was a bit brutal, eh?’
For once, the Colonel sounded unsure of himself.
‘Real Attila the Hun stuff, Pa.’
‘Had to stop her somehow,’ the Colonel said uneasily.
‘Hope I didn't overdo it.’
‘How did she take it?’ asked Alexandra, trying not to laugh, wondering who the intrepid widow could possibly have been.
The whole story sounded very odd.
Perhaps David knew some girl with a mother who'd been persuaded to co-operate.
It was extremely charitable, whoever was responsible.
‘Pretty well, considering,’ answered the Colonel.
‘Said she was anxious to see the lad settled and she was sorry if she was being a bore.’
‘After driving you all that way, I should think she was entitled to be a bit boring.’
‘No, no,’ the Colonel said firmly.
‘Start as you mean to go on.’
‘You mean to go on, do you?’
‘Good Lord, yes.
She's coming over tomorrow, as a matter of fact.
For lunch.
Have a look at the roses, give me a tip or two about pruning.’
‘Tips?
You?
You've gone on for years about being the only person in the West Country with the faintest notion how to prune roses.’
‘You're never too old to learn.’
‘You certainly didn't waste any time, did you?’
‘That's one thing they taught you in the army,’ said the Colonel, with more than a touch of complacency.
‘If a job needs doing, get on with it.’
‘The job in this case being the mysterious Erica.’
‘Absolutely.
Told Mrs Hope to pull all the stops out for lunch tomorrow.
Smoked salmon and so forth.
She was wearing a hat, you know.’
‘Mrs Hope?
What for?’
‘Not Mrs Hope,’ roared the Colonel.
‘Erica…uh…
Thing.
Fetching little number, made of straw, with a pink sort of thingy round it.
Haven't seen a woman in a hat for years.
Except in church, of course.
And not always then.’
‘I wonder who she was.’
‘I've already told you, Alex.
I wish you'd learn to pay attention.
She'd come because of you.’
‘Me?’
‘That's what she said.’
‘You must have got it wrong.
I don't know anyone called Erica.
And if I did, why would I send her all the way down to Somerset to take you to a cricket match?’
Her father took some persuading but eventually accepted that Alexandra had nothing to do with organizing his trip.
‘Hmm,’ he said eventually.
‘Bit of a puzzler, really, isn't it?’
‘Isn't it, though?’
Alex was in early the following morning.
With two of Athene 's editorial staff off sick, a heavier load was falling on the shoulders of those remaining.
She sat down at her desk and sorted through her mail.
At least the postbag was relatively light at the moment: so many people were away because of the holiday season that the normal deluge of correspondence had dried to a trickle.
She saw the thick envelope immediately.
US stamps.
New York postmark.
Familiar handwriting.
Why did her mouth go dry and her treacherous heart start pounding away inside her chest like war drums in the jungle?
Deliberately she pushed the letter to the bottom of the pile, to save it for later while she got on with the work which awaited.
Halfway through the morning the telephone on her desk rang.
When she picked it up, a feeble voice said, ‘Alex?’
‘Yes.
Is that you, Nina?’
‘Sort of.’
‘What's wrong?’
‘Seems ridiculous, really, but I think I've got chicken-pox.
My husband's sent for the doctor but he hasn't arrived yet to confirm it.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘What else can it be when you're covered from head to toe in foul little pustules?’
Nina said peevishly.
‘And when I think that I paid the earth three days ago to have a facial at that new salon in Sloane Street…’
‘Poor you.’
‘I expect you'll be next,’ Nina said gloomily.
‘I've already had it.’
‘I thought I had too, when I was a child.
Obviously you can get it more than once.
Anyway, the point is, can you cope?’
‘We have so far.
Felicity's here, and Petronella, and Lucy.
All the editorial assistants except Hannah, who's on holiday, and all the production staff.
I'm sure we'll manage.
Just relax, Nina, enjoy a few days off.’
‘How can I relax when I look like a blancmange covered in maraschino cherries?’
‘Try.’
‘I feel absolutely awful .
Sore throat, runny nose, head like a cottage loaf.
Alex…’
A note crept into Nina's voice which Alexandra recognized with surprise as pleading.
‘What?’
‘Don't tell anyone about this, will you?’
‘Not if you don't want’
‘Private Eye would love it.
I've already had a couple of spats with them and they wouldn't pass up an opportunity like this to poke fun.
I mean, chicken-pox is such a stupid thing to have at my age.’
‘I won't breathe a word,’ promised Alex.
‘And Nina…’
‘Yes?’
‘Whatever you do, don't scratch.’
‘Oh God.’
Together with Nina's secretary, Alex rescheduled most of the Editor's appointments for the next couple of weeks.
The ones which could not be changed, or were too important to be missed, she shared out with the others and put a schedule on their desks.
She hoped a fortnight was enough: she knew it was supposed to take about that length of time to get over chicken-pox, but perhaps it was more serious for adults.
She checked with all the contributing editors to ensure that the copy still needed for the forthcoming issue of Athene was in hand.
She glanced through Nina's notes for her Editor's piece at the front of the magazine and since it was by no means complete, jotted down some further ideas.
Felicity staggered in late, looking tired.
‘Hi,’ she said hollowly.
‘How was your evening?’ asked Alex.
‘Dreadful.’
‘And Jarrett?’
‘Frightful.’
‘Why?’
‘He took me to his hotel for dinner then spent the first half of the evening trying to get me drunk and the second half trying to get me upstairs.’
Felicity yawned hugely.
‘Cunning little devil,’ said Alex.
‘Did he succeed in either aim?’
‘In the first one, yes,’ said Felicity.
‘I'm not sure about the second.’
‘Fliss!
You didn't!’
‘I don't think so,’ said Felicity, reaching for her hand mirror and examining the skin under her eyes.
‘I'd look different, wouldn't I?’
‘You'd feel different,’ said Alex.
‘Well, I don't.’
‘That's all right then.’
‘God, I hate men.’
Felicity struck out her tongue and had a good look at that too.
‘But at least I got a terrific interview.
And all sorts of snippets and gossip.
Plus a whole batch of original drawings previewing his next collection.
You should see them, they're sensational.’
‘Does he know you've got them?’
Alex asked suspiciously.
‘I'm not awfully sure,’ Felicity said airily.
‘Won't he kick up a fuss when he discovers they've gone?’
‘Not as big as the fuss I'll kick up if he says anything.
He wouldn't want to end up sharing a cell with Mike Tyson, would he?’
Felicity's jaw jutted in a way Alex had not seen before.
Alex raised her eyebrows.
‘May I have a look?’
The sketches were sensational, no doubt about that.
They would make a splendid focal point in a forthcoming issue; the various editors could produce copy related in various ways to new trends in the States…
Alex sat down at her desk and took several very deep breaths.
She pretended to be busy dealing with her correspondence but she did not see the letters she  appeared to be looking at.
Instead, she was savouring the mix of power and excitement which surged through her.
It was that 42nd Street feeling —‘Hey gang!
Let's do the show right here , whaddya say?’
The overwhelmed sensation any understudy had when picked out of the chorus line to take over the leading role, the star having suddenly collapsed.
No-one else knew that Nina was sick.
Nor how long she would be away.
With Nina out of the office, however, someone was going to have to take nominal charge.
Why not her?
The notion exhilarated her.
She thought ahead to the December issue and the one after that.
They should both be in preparation now.
Even the current one, though more or less wrapped up, still needed further work.
And she, Alexandra Maitland, had a chance to put some of her own ideas into practice and see whether they worked or not.
If they did…
All she had to do was imply, without ever actually saying so, that the reins had been temporarily handed over to her.
She knew none of the others possessed the ambition which fired her.
If she told them what she was doing they would probably support her, probably do as good a job for her as they did for Nina.
But if she told them Nina had given her the go-ahead, and Nina discovered the lie, she would be out.
And unless they thought Nina had put her in charge, she would not be able to get things done the way she wanted.
So she had to tread carefully.
She stood up and clapped her hands loudly until everyone was looking up from their work.
‘Nina's not well,’ she said briskly.
‘She's going to be out of the office for a while.’
‘Heavens,’ cried Felicity.
‘Not chicken-pox, is it?’
Since her fiancé was a close friend of one of the Private Eye writers, Alex shook her head.
‘Something gastric, I believe.
Meanwhile, obviously she wants us to get on with completing the next issue.’
‘It's just about ready,’ the production manager said.
‘Still one or two things needed.
I'll come and have a word around lunchtime, if that's OK.’
‘That's fine,’ Alex said.
Her heart thudded.
He seemed to take it for granted that she was the one to talk to.
And no-one else had raised any objection.
‘I did want to ask about the photographs for the item on Herbal Remedies,’ one of the part-time editors said.
‘Can I speak to you about it this afternoon?’
‘Of course.’
Alex couldn't believe it was that easy.
Although she was the most recent arrival on the team, nobody seemed to question her authority.
‘And since we're already developing the Christmas issue,’ she added, ‘let's see if we can surprise Nina when she gets back.’
‘How?’ asked Petronella.
‘We could start by taking an entirely new look at Christmas.
Any ideas?’
Alex stayed behind when the others were gone.
She made herself a cup of coffee and sat slowly drinking it, savouring the rich smooth brew.
On the desk in front of her was the envelope which had arrived that morning.
She put down her cup and took a paper-knife out of her desk.
It was ridiculous to feel slightly breathless, but she did.
Inside the envelope was an airline ticket, an open ticket on Concorde.
And with it, a note.
Join me.
I can't live without you, Alex.
You know it, I know it.
I guess we were meant to be, however much we try to fight it.
The ticket is open ended.
Just telephone me and I'll be at the airport to meet you.
I love you.
She sat back in her chair and closed her eyes.
She was an idiot, a fool.
She should have learned her lesson by now.
And yet the longing to break out, to do the sudden impetuous thing, to drop everything and go running off to New York was suddenly irresistible.
All her life she had played it safe, done what others expected of her, hidden her emotions behind the stiff upper lip the Colonel was so fond of, played the straight bat he always wanted her to.
And now, sitting on her desk, was an invitation to change.
It was not the ticket alone — she could have bought one herself any day she wished.
What mattered was what it represented.
She looked at the stiff carnations from Carlo San Lorenzo.
She looked at the layout she had been working on.
If she went home and packed a bag, she could be in New York tomorrow.
But…
There were always buts.
If she went, she would have made an irreversible decision.
She remembered Cameron's voice —This is your chance to go for gold …
If she went to New York, she would be saying, in effect, I choose love over gold, love over my career.
I accept that my development as myself is less important than the chance to become part of a couple.
She thought of husbands and children and Volvo estates.
Nappies.
Dirty underpants.
Measles.
The school run.
She picked up the ticket, opened it, looked at the destination.
She got up, made herself another coffee, sat down and picked up the note again.
There was a movement at the door of the office and she stiffened for a moment, remembering Jarrett Keach's warning about security.
Suppose an intruder had got into the building?
The cleaners weren't here yet: she was alone on this floor, even if there were still people working in the offices above and below.
Then she saw Matthew Prescott.
For a blank moment she stared at him.
Then she said, ‘You're supposed to be in New York.’
‘I didn't like the coffee,’ he said with a wry grin.
Silently she handed him her cup and watched him sip it appreciatively, his eyes on hers the entire time.
She had forgotten how good-looking he was, the intriguing way he managed to appear cool on the surface, nonetheless conveying an impression of passion ready to be ignited at a moment's notice.
He came over and stood by her desk.
‘I thought you might have joined me in New York,’ he said softly.
‘Whatever gave you that idea?’ she said flirtatiously.
His face was very close to hers as he bent and picked up the airline ticket from her desk.
‘This,’ he said.
He was so near her that she could smell his cool lemony cologne.
Instead of pulling away she stayed looking up into his eyes, then slowly closed her own, waiting for his kiss.
His mouth brushed hers.
He came closer, and she felt herself begin to melt, anticipating the tenderness of his lips, the way they would harden as excitement took hold of them both, the way she would step into his arms and surrender to his embrace.
Behind them, on one of the editorial desks, a telephone began to shrill.
‘Leave it,’ Matthew whispered, as she stood up.
‘Alexandra.
Leave it.’
‘I can't,’ she said, and was surprised at the unsteadiness with which she walked across the room, lifted the receiver, handled the mundane enquiry.
By the time she had dealt with it she had recovered her usual self-possession.
When she reached her own desk, she perched on the edge and raised her eyebrows at Matt.
‘Well?’ she said.
‘I think we should have dinner together and talk,’ he said.
‘What about?’
‘Us.’
‘You think there's something to talk about?’
‘I know there is.’
She picked up the airline ticket and tucked it into her bag.
She needed to think.
And the decision she would almost certainly come to would be a hard one to take.
Meanwhile, there was Matthew.
Following him out of the office and down into the street, sitting beside him in the cab which took them to Covent Garden, sitting opposite him in the warm restaurant full of good smells, candlelight, fresh flowers, her predominant feeling was one of surprise.
She knew she liked him.
She knew he was fun to be with, someone whose company she enjoyed.
She remembered the distinct thud of disappointment verging on alarm she had experienced when she had stepped out of the lift to find him surrounded by luggage, obviously leaving.
But what really astonished her was the way she had responded to him just now in her office.
I haven't felt that melt of the heart since Cameron, she thought.
I never thought I would again, and certainly not so soon.
I hardly know him, yet I wanted to fling myself at him, I wanted him to kiss me, make love to me.
She knew from bitter experience how treacherous such feelings could be, and the blind alleyways down which they led.
She thought of the Concorde ticket in her handbag and Cameron's note:
I guess we were meant to be, however much we try to fight it.
Was it true?
How could it be if she was able to think about another man in such physical terms?
She forced herself to concentrate on the here and now.
They drank wine, consulted the menu, ordered, but she took little notice of what she was eating, trying to calm the turmoil within her.
‘Did your father enjoy his cricket match?’
Matthew asked as they lingered over coffee.
‘Yes.’
She forced herself to concentrate.
‘The most extraordinary thing.
Some woman turned up on his doorstep and simply swept him off to the county cricket ground in Taunton in her car.’
‘Really?’
‘He had a fantastic time.
Said she was a fetching little thing.’
Alex laughed.
‘I can't remember when I last heard him so animated.’
‘Did he say who she was?’
‘That's the extraordinary thing.
He hadn't the faintest idea — and being the Colonel, didn't bother to find out.’
‘Mmm.’
Matthew was smiling at her over the edge of his glass.
‘All he knows is that her name is Erica.
He didn't even know her surname.
But she was coming round the next day to have lunch with him.’
‘Good.’
‘I told him the first thing he has to do is establish who she is and where she comes from.’
‘Absolutely,’ Matthew said.
‘A man of his age can't have strange females dotting in and out at any time of the day or night.
What will the neighbours think?’
‘Right.’
Alexandra giggled.
‘She's going to get him right on his roses.
Apparently she thinks his pruning technique leaves a lot to be desired.’
‘Mother's a bit bossy when it comes to gardening, I'm afraid.’
Alex stared at him.
‘Mother?’
‘That's right.’
‘This Erica person is your mother ?’
‘Yes.’
He looked away, as though embarrassed.
‘But…how did she know about the poor old Colonel's hip?’
‘I told her.’
‘And how did she know he was dying to go to the match?’
Matthew didn't answer.
‘Matthew…’
Alex said insistently.
He opened his eyes very wide and leaned towards her.
‘I told her, all right?
It's no big deal.
I asked her if she'd take him.’
‘Oh, Matt.’
Sudden tears pricked Alexandra's eyes.
‘What an incredibly sweet thing to do.’
‘Not really.’
He tried to pass it off.
‘She's quite a cricketing fan herself, so I knew she wouldn't mind.’
‘But for you to remember about my father…’
Wordlessly, she leaned across the table and put her hand on his.
She tried to imagine Cameron doing something so thoughtful.
Or even Carlo San Lorenzo.
It was impossible.
She sensed that the man  opposite her had spent his lifetime in such small acts of kindness.
‘By the way,’ she said.
‘I've been asked to dinner by one of the neighbours.’
‘Which one?’
‘Charlotte Hanover, she's called.’
‘Isn't she a portrait painter?’
‘That's right.’
‘Rather a good one, I believe.
She won the BP Portrait Award a couple of years ago — and something at one of the recent Royal Academy summer shows, if I remember correctly.’
‘She said she'd won one or two things.
But not in a boastful sort of way, only because I asked her.’
Alexandra wondered if there was a feature in it: successful younger women, the varied careers it was possible for them to take up these days, the chances they had to rise to the top in their chosen professions, whether or not those professions were less orthodox than the ones chosen by their male counterparts.
It could be interesting…
‘I didn't know she lived in our block,’ Matthew said.
‘I think she's seeing something of my brother,’ said Alexandra.
‘Anyway, she came to my door and invited me to dinner.’
‘Prospective sister-in-law vetting, do you think?’
‘I don't know if it's got that far…anyway, she suggested I might like to bring someone.’
‘And?’
‘Would you like to be that someone?’
‘Love to.
When is it?’
‘Next Saturday.’
He checked his diary.
‘I'm free.
Shall I bring a bottle?’
‘Bring something, but not a bottle.
Lady Charlotte  Hanover is very fussy about the wine she drinks.’
Alex recounted her meeting with the young painter and they laughed together.
‘She looks about sixteen,’ Alex said.
‘When I was that age, I slunk about in an agony of embarrassment in case anybody looked at me.’
‘I worried about spots.’
‘God, yes.
Remember how they used to feel as though they were the size of grapefruit?’
‘Neon-lit…’
‘Throbbing like jukeboxes…’
‘I don't believe you ever had a spot in your life,’ Matthew said.
He smiled warmly at her, reached across the table and gently touched her face.
‘It's a contradiction in terms.’
‘I'm glad I'm not a teenager any more, aren't you?’
‘Yes.
On the other hand, they're far more self-possessed these days, aren't they?’
Matt said.
‘Or seem to be.’
‘Though this Charlotte Hanover can't be all that young, when you think about it.’
They drove home in silence.
When they stopped outside her door, Alex knew he wanted her to invite him in.
Standing close to him in the hallway, she looked up at him and bit her lip.
‘I need to think about this some more,’ she said.
He nodded.
‘That's all right.’
His voice was gentle.
‘We needn't rush into anything.
I'm not going anywhere.’
But I might be …
‘No.’
Alexandra reached up and kissed his cheek.
‘Thanks, Matt.
I enjoyed the evening.’
Closing the door of her flat behind her, she thought: something rather important has passed between the two of us.
9
It was a hell of a day.
For a start, Matthew had not slept well, lying awake in his bed with what seemed like every pulse in his body hammering away with the insistence of a drumbeat.
Leaving Alexandra at her door, unkissed, untouched, was one of the hardest things he had ever done, especially when what he had really wanted to do was to carry her into her bedroom — or his — and make love to her.
Lightheaded from a combination of wine, jet lag and lack of sleep, even thinking about it made him breathless.
Several times during the night he was forced to get up and go into the kitchen for a glass of water.
The thing which kept him in such a feverish state was the unmistakable message her brown eyes had sent him as they stood so close together outside her door.
She might not have kissed him, but for the moment he knew he was willing to settle for that message: I love you — I think.
Or had he read it wrongly?
Was he merely indulging in wishful thinking?
He had naively assumed that the Concorde ticket he had seen on her desk had been one she had gone out and bought in order to join him in New York.
But when he thought back, there was no logical reason whatsoever why she should do such a thing.
It might not even have been hers.
And if it was, perhaps she was supposed to fly to New York sometime soon, on business.
Or  perhaps it had been a present from a — he swallowed, feeling sweaty with embarrassment — from a lover or something.
Given the brief span of their acquaintance, the even briefer time they had actually spent together, how could he have been so presumptuous as to imagine that she would wish to fly out and join him at the Plaza?
He had never even kissed her.
And yet, those eyes of hers, those messages…
He remembered all the nights when his sisters had sat at the end of his bed and sobbed their hearts out over some man.
How he had soothed and advised — most of the time, that is.
He wondered whether he dared ring Victoria or Emma, but when he saw what the time was, he knew he could not.
All three of them were adults now, supposedly able to cope with the crises life flung at them.
For the hundredth time he turned over, rearranged his pillows, tried to put his brain into neutral, think of nothing.
It was hopeless.
All he could see was Alex, her mouth, the way her head tilted.
And beyond that, some fairytale kind of Hansel and Gretel cottage full of apple trees and roses and Alex herself stooping under a low lintel in a summery dress…
In the end, he got up, unable to sleep any further.
He stood under the shower for a long time, trying to relax, feeling the alcohol of the night before still burning through his veins.
He twisted the nozzle of the shower-head and turned off the hot tap, revelling in the icy needle-sharp spray stinging his body.
A game of squash or a hard workout was what he really needed, but the gym wouldn't be open for another three hours, nor did he know anyone he could call at such short notice to partner him…
He got into Cadogan's early, and found himself with two empty hours in which to get on with his  work before anyone else showed up.
There was a huge amount of correspondence waiting in his In tray; a start had to be made on completing the business he had transacted in the States, clients had to be notified, shippers contacted, import permits sorted out.
There was a heap of sales catalogues from all over the world to be sifted through, magazines to be trawled for items of interest…
By concentrating hard on the papers in front of him, he gradually found himself calming down, normality taking over.
And then the phone rang and it was Alexandra.
‘I don't think this is going to work,’ she said.
She sounded frightened, a little distraught.
There was a note in her voice which reminded him of his sisters, and he smiled to himself.
Though neither of them mentioned it, she was obviously feeling much the same as he was and he was overcome by a longing to rush to her side, hold her, comfort her, whisper that everything would be fine.
‘You may be right,’ he said soothingly, though frankly he thought it would work wonderfully well.
‘We — we don't seem to have much in common,’ she said.
‘I know.’
There was mock resignation in his voice.
‘I hate opera, you hate jazz.’
‘And I loathe modern art’ she began.
‘It's my job,’ he said firmly.
‘So, about the only thing we do have in common is…’ she said, and hesitated as though she could think of nothing they shared.
What did things in common matter, when it came to love? he wanted to ask.
It's the big things which matter, not the details, and those we surely have in common.
Besides, if it's understood from the outset that you have entirely different tastes, perhaps you're  less likely to disagree.
‘…Our taste in coffee,’ he said lightly.
‘Yes.’
She needed reassurance of some kind, he could tell.
‘Have faith, Alexandra,’ he said.
‘In both yourself and in me.’
‘Yes.’
But she did not sound convinced.
He could see Ruth at the door of his office, frowning, shaking her head, looking back over her shoulder.
He raised enquiring eyebrows at her, and she mouthed, ‘Trouble!’ at the same time jerking her thumb over her shoulder at the reception area.
He said into the telephone, ‘We'll talk about it later, all right?’
‘Yes.’
‘And, Alexandra’
‘Yes?’
‘I l’
But before he could complete the sentence, he saw Tony Cashman, solid as a double-decker bus, loom into view behind Ruth, who was gesticulating and trying to explain the reason for the interruption.
The lines of his short-cropped ruthless hair were disturbed, as though he had forgotten to comb it that morning or else, having combed, had continually run his fingers through it since then.
Matthew stared, nonplussed.
Cashman had not come into Cadogan's before, preferring Matthew to go down and see him in Hampshire.
So why was he here now?
In his ear he heard Alexandra's voice saying, ‘You what?’
‘I'll tell you some other time,’ he said, putting down the receiver.
Standing up, he advanced towards Cashman with his hand outstretched.
‘Tony!’ he said warmly.
‘Good to see 
It was at that point the day started to spin badly out of control.
‘Where is she?’
Cashman shouted, ignoring Matt's hand, walking across the room to lean on the desk as though he was finding it difficult to remain upright without support.
He looked terrible, his face blotched and patchy, his eyes red, as though he had been up all night.
‘Where is who?’
Matthew said.
‘Tony, I’
‘Cindy!’
Cashman exploded.
‘My wife.
Where's she gone?’
‘I really don't know,’ said Matthew.
He wondered what was wrong, wishing he had had a chance to talk to Ruth — though from the expression on her face as she hovered behind Cashman she didn't know either.
‘Has something happened to her?’
‘I wouldn't be here otherwise, would I?’
Cashman said loudly.
He pounded the desk with a large fist, shaking the vase of freesias so that a single crimson flower detached itself and dropped to the shiny mahogany surface.
‘Fact is, she's disappeared.’
‘Sit down, Tony,’ Matthew said.
He came round the corner of his desk.
‘Sit down and tell me about it.’
He looked over at Ruth.
‘Two coffees, I think.
All right?’
She nodded, her face concerned.
‘I'll get them right away.’
Cashman lowered himself heavily into a chair and sat with his face buried in his hands.
‘She's gone,’ he said in a muffled voice.
‘And obviously you don't know where,’ said Matt.
‘Stands to reason, dunnit?
Otherwise I'd go and get her, wouldn't I?’
Imagining the scene, poor Cindy hustled out to some waiting car with one of Cashman's beefy paws  grasping her arm like a manacle, Matthew tried to repress the thought that it might have been exactly to escape such strong-arm tactics that the beautiful Cindy had vanished, Matthew said, ‘Why do you think she might have come here?’
‘Because she fancies you, doesn't she?’
‘She what ?’
‘Fancies you.
I knew it when she met you that first time you came to my place.’
‘Tony, I can assure you you’
Cashman held up one of his bulldozer hands.
‘No worry about it, old son.
I don't blame you — though if I thought you was messing around with her, anything like that, you'd be in dead trouble, believe you me.’
‘I haven't spoken more than half a dozen words to your wife in the whole time you and I have been working together,’ protested Matt.
The last thing he needed at the moment was an outraged husband on the warpath.
‘If your wife fancies me — as you put it she's been keeping it very much to herself.’
‘Yer, well,’ Cashman said.
‘I know Cind.
And I'm telling you, she's dead keen on you.’
Though he hoped he remained outwardly calm, Matthew was conscious that his spirits had taken an ominous dip.
There had obviously been something wrong with the Cashman ménage for some time — why else would Cindy Hill have lied about her whereabouts, telling her husband she had been in Wales when she had really been in a London nightclub?
Though he had no idea what lay behind it, he knew that by virtue of having witnessed Cindy in the execution of a lie, he himself was — whether he wanted to be or not — somehow involved.
‘Have you called her mother in Wales?’ he said patiently.
‘'Course.
First place I tried.
Drove straight down to Ebbw Vale, didn't I?
She wasn't there.
Not unless she was hiding in the loft or something.’
‘You searched the place, did you?’
‘Wouldn't say searched, exactly.
Had a good sniff round, though.
I didn't trust the old girl to be telling the truth — though I think she is.
She's as worried as I am.
Nuts about Cindy she is, always has been.’
Matthew settled into his own chair on the other side of the desk.
He leaned back and stared at the window.
‘It's one of the perks of being a parent, isn't it?’
‘What is?’
‘Being nuts about their children.’
‘Wouldn't know, would I?’
Cashman said, easing his shoulders as though they hurt him.
‘Never had any.’
‘Do you want any?’
Matthew said.
‘Do you and Cindy plan —’ but Ruth was coming into the room with a tray, setting it down on his desk, handing one of the white bone china cups with the delicate gold rim to Cashman, watching him take his first appreciative sip.
Matthew's unruffled manner had evidently soothed the businessman a little.
He looked up and managed a somewhat wavering smile.
‘Sorry, Matt,’ he said.
‘Shouldn't have come barging in here.
I know it's nothing to do with you really, but honest, I'm at my wits’ end.’
‘Has she ever done this before?’
Matthew asked.
‘Gone off without telling you, I mean?’
‘No,’ Cashman said.
He shook his head.
‘Never.’
‘Have you tried asking around her friends?’
‘Rung them all, haven't I?
Been on the dog for hours.
Unless they're covering up for her, none of them have seen her.’
‘Have you contacted the police?’
‘The police?’
Cashman stared at Matthew as though he had suddenly levitated.
‘The police ?’
‘You know,’ Matthew said lightly.
‘The guardians of law and order.
Those chaps in helmets who're always willing to tell you what the time is.’
‘Not round where I grew up, they're not,’ Cashman said.
‘I wouldn't ask the fuzz the time if it would save me old granny's life.’
Matthew felt a certain embarrassment.
He had been brought up to believe that policemen were havens of security, to whom you turned in times of trouble.
He knew, from reading the newspapers, that there was a wide stratum of society for whom this did not hold true.
On the other hand, if Cindy Hill was genuinely missing, who better to find out where she had gone — or been taken — than the police?
‘Don't you think it might be a good idea to get in touch with them?’ he said quietly.
‘The longer you leave it, the colder the trail will be.’
‘Yes.’
Cashman twisted in his seat, the first time Matthew had seen him in anything but complete control of any situation in which he found himself.
‘Well, that's why I come to you, really.
Thought you might be able to help.’
‘I honestly don't see how.
I'm an art dealer, not a private detective.’
‘Yes.’
Cashman stared down at his big hands, his shoulders bowed.
Familiar with his usual belligerent stance, Matthew found it strange to see the brash, self-confident businessman reduced to the kind of helplessness he was now displaying.
‘Tony,’ he said, ‘I don't think I can be of much help to you.
But you might find it helpful to talk about it, don't you think?’
‘Talk?
I'm not much of a one for talking,’ Cashman said.
‘What d'you want to talk about , exactly?’
‘Well, had you and Cindy had any — uh — sort of, you know,marital difficulties?’
Matthew found it difficult to suggest such a thing to a man like Cashman, but, surprisingly, the businessman did not seem to take the question amiss.
‘Marital?’ he said.
‘You mean, like, was we quarrelling a lot?’
‘That sort of’
‘No sex life any more — that what you mean?’
‘I wasn't exactly’
Cashman leaned forward and narrowed his eyes at Matt.
‘Was our marriage on the rocks?
Straight up, that's what you want to know, isn't it?’
‘I wouldn't go so’
‘Nah,’ Cashman said.
‘I don't think so.
I love Cindy and as far as I know, she loves me.
Never seen any signs that she doesn't, anyway.’
‘Any — uh — areas of dispute?’
Matthew asked, thinking that at least he'd be able to get a job with a marriage guidance bureau if Cadogan's suddenly folded.
‘Areas of dispute,’ Cashman repeated, slowly nodding his head.
He gave the matter a certain amount of consideration.
‘Not really.
Nothing more than you'd get with any married couple.
You know the kind of thing: do we have steak or salmon for dinner?
Should we go to Corfu for the summer or to the house on Mustique?
Annabel's or Tramp?— that sort of thing.’
‘Ah.’
Matthew did his best to look sophisticated.
Annabel's or Tramp, indeed, he thought.
Night after night, all over the country, ordinary married  couples must be wrestling with exactly this sort of knotty problem.
No wonder the divorce rate was soaring.
‘Or Regine's,’ Cashman added thoughtfully.
‘But you didn't argue about anything serious?’
Though, as he had already noted, Matthew was aware that to one stratum of society the choice between Annabel's or Regine's could be seriously serious.
Cashman avoided his eye as he said, ‘Like I told you, nothing.
Not what you'd call important.’
Behind his back, Ruth appeared in the doorway.
Soundlessly she mimed picking up a phone and speaking into it.
Her expression indicated that the call was urgent.
Matthew got up.
‘Just a minute, Tony,’ he said.
‘Something I must do.
I'll be back in a moment.’
‘What is it?’ he said quietly, dosing the door of his office behind him.
‘It's her,’ Ruth whispered.
‘On the phone.’
‘Which her?’
Matthew's thoughts immediately flew to Alexandra.
‘Cindy Hill,’ hissed Ruth.
‘She's asking to speak to you, and she sounds as if she's crying.’
Matthew went into Ruth's office and picked up the receiver.
‘Hello?’
‘Mr Prescott?’ a choked voice asked.
‘Yes.’
‘It's Cindy Hill here.’
There was a gulping sound as though the model was choking back a sob.
‘How can I help you?’
Matthew said.
‘It's the most tremendous imposition, I know, and I have absolutely no right to call you up like this or anything, but I just — I just…’
Cindy's voice began to wobble out of control in a way which was familiar  to Matt from many late-night sessions with his sisters.
‘Anything I can do, I'll be glad to,’ he said soothingly.
‘Mr Prescott, would you do me a favour?’
‘Of course.
And please call me Matthew.’
‘Would you — could you possibly meet me?’
There was some further snuffling.
Then Cindy said, ‘I really really need to talk to someone.’
Matthew did not need to ask why.
Although he hardly knew the super-model, he was aware that there were times when a semi-stranger was a better confidant than a close friend.
And a lot more likely to offer advice that could be trusted to be impartial.
Which was what he was prepared to bet Cindy wanted.
‘Where and when?’ he asked.
‘Uh — oh God, I don't know.
Um…’
‘I'll be at the Ritz at one o'clock,’ Matthew said.
‘I'll see you there.’
‘Oh…’
Cindy Hill breathed out a long sigh of relief.
‘Thank you so much.’
‘But before I do that, there's something I'd like you to do for me,’ Matthew said firmly.
‘What's that?’
‘Tony's in a fine old state.
Don't you think it would be kind to give him a call on his portable telephone and’
‘I can't, I can't, he'll start shouting and’
’— tell him you're all right?’ said Matthew.
Cindy gave a laugh which was half a sob.
‘I'm not sure that I am.’
‘At least let him know you're alive.’
‘Yes.
It's not fair not to, is it?’
‘Not a bit fair.’
‘I'll do that.
And I'll see you at the Ritz at one.
You don't know how much better I feel.’
‘I don't suppose there's much I can do,’ said Matthew cautiously.
‘Except provide an ear.’
‘That's practically all I want,’ said Cindy, and put down the receiver.
Practically all…
Oh Lord, thought Matthew.
The words implied at least one something else, if not more.
He had a premonition that providing an ear would be a piece of cake; it was the something else which was likely to prove complicated.
Ruth raised questioning eyebrows at him.
‘Everything OK?’
Matthew shrugged, rolling his eyes.
‘I don't know.
I can't work out what's going on.’
‘Why's she ringing you?’
‘Would you believe, because she knows a soft touch when she sees one?’
‘And what does she want the soft touch to do?’
‘I won't know that until I meet her at lunchtime.
Perhaps I'll be able to find out what this is all about.’
Back in his own office, he found Cashman talking on the cellular phone he carried wherever he went.
‘Where the hell are you?’ he was saying loudly.
‘Cind, for God's sake, why don't you just’
He fell silent while the voice at the other end said something.
Then he spoke again.
Matthew could see that anxiety was making him sound angry and bullying, qualities which Cindy Hill, in her current distressed state, was bound to find threatening.
How did you tell a man like Tony Cashman to lighten up, to ease off?
‘But I love you!’
Cashman shouted.
‘You know I'm crazy about Cind?
Cindy?’
For a moment he stared in disbelief at the instrument in his hand.
Then he  said, ‘She's only gone and cut me off, hasn't she?’
‘You were shouting rather.’
Cashman continued to gaze at his phone.
‘Cut me off,’ he said again.
‘Do you believe that?’
‘Mmm,’ Matthew said, very noncommittal.
He'd have done the same in Cindy's place.
‘At least you know she's not in any danger, don't you?’
‘Yer.’
Cashman sighed and shook his head.
‘I dunno.
You work and scrape your way into the big time, you achieve most of the things you want — houses, cars, gorgeous wife, foreign travel, all the things you dreamed of when you were a grubby kid — and then, when you settle back to enjoy them, it all goes wrong.’
‘Life's a bitch,’ Matthew said.
‘You can say that again, mate.’
‘I expect it'll come right in the end.’
‘Gawd.
I bloody hope so,’ Cashman said, with feeling.
She looked beautiful but fragile, tucked into one of the big armchairs in the central hall of the Ritz.
She had ordered nothing.
Without consulting her, Matthew asked for a bottle of white wine to be brought.
When they both had a glass in their hands, and Matthew had watched her drink at least half of hers, he said, ‘Right.
What's this all about?’
She was wearing huge aviator glasses, designed to hide but only drawing attention to the palely perfect face, the unlipsticked mouth, the silvery blonde hair fine as maize silk, which was drawn back into the nape of her neck.
She was wearing a Ralph Lauren silk shirt tucked into tight leather jeans and a Hermes belt; she caught the attention, whether she wished to or not.
At first he thought she was going to ignore his question.
Then, leaning forward, she picked an olive out of the glass dish in front of them and held it between thumb and forefinger.
Not for sustenance, but so that she had something on which to focus her attention while she thought about her response to him.
After a while, he said, ‘Look, Mrs Cash’
‘Cindy.’
‘— Cindy, I can't help you unless I know what's wrong.’
‘I need somewhere to stay,’ she said flatly.
‘How do you mean?’
‘Not a hotel, not with any of my friends, not with my mother.
I need somewhere where he can't find me.
Somewhere he doesn't know about.’
Matthew frowned.
‘Are you in some kind of trouble?
In danger?
Has he threatened you or something?’
He certainly wouldn't put a spot of wife-beating past Anthony Cashman.
Yet the man had seemed sincere when he said he loved Cindy.
She shook her head.
‘Nothing like that.’
‘Then why do you want to hide from him?’
Neither of them needed to spell out the fact that the ‘he’ they were talking about was Cashman.
‘I need some time to think.
And he won't let me.
Wherever I am, he rings up or follows me or wants to be with me.’
‘Is that so awful?’
Cindy gave him a long look through her sunglasses.
‘It is when it becomes an obsession,’ she said.
‘I can't go anywhere without him tagging along.
Which is rather sweet, I suppose, of course it is.
But he's a busy man, with a lot of interests.
What it means is that I have to be with him, except when I'm  working, since he can't always take time to be with me.’
‘And is that why you've run off?’
‘Basically, yes.
I want some space.
I need to get my act together, work out exactly what I want, and then keep on telling him until he hears what I'm saying.’
She took off her glasses and stared at Matt.
Her eyes were the clearest of blues; her skin was flawless, without the faintest line to mar its perfection.
Matthew wondered whether it was simply a lucky draw from the gene pool that she had ended up with such spectacular looks, or was it the result of years of careful nurturing?
And would his sisters envy her superlative looks?
Or Alexandra?
He rather thought not.
It was not something he had considered much before now, but he could see that outstanding looks could be more of a curse than a blessing.
They raised expectations; they got in the way of the person behind them.
‘You know what he's like,’ she said, and drank a little of her wine.
‘How exactly do you think I can help?’ he asked gently.
He took an olive himself.
‘And why me, anyway?’
‘You, because I already know that you're kind, and discreet,’ Cindy said.
She looked away from him, a faint blush beginning at her jawline, and he knew she was referring to the fact that he had not betrayed her, even though he knew she had lied about being with her mother in Wales.
‘And what about the first half of my question?’ he asked.
‘It seems odd, I know,’ she said.
‘I look like I've got it made, don't I?’
‘Frankly, yes.’
‘Looks, money, career, handsome husband, several homes…’
Cindy ticked them off on her fingers.
‘The girl with everything is how it looks.’
‘In actual fact, I haven't got anything,’ Cindy said, and a desolate expression crossed her perfect face.
‘I could pay for a hotel, of course, but he'd find me.’
‘How?’
‘He'd track me down through the credit cards I use,’ she said.
‘It could be weeks before he —’
‘Not for Tony,’ she said.
‘And if he didn't do that, he'd get one of his men to ring round every hotel in England.
In the entire universe, if necessary.’
‘Couldn't you use a different name?’
‘Of course.
But I can't use a different face,’ she said.
‘And whether I like it or not, it's a face everyone knows.
Anyway, Tony's people would ask if there was a model staying, or someone who looked like a model.
Even if people don't know my name, they know I'm someone.’
She said it without conceit, simply as a fact.
Again, the realization of the downside of being beautiful hit Matt.
You could not hide extreme good looks any more than you could disguise extreme ugliness.
Most people were average, neither particularly hideous nor outstandingly lovely, and departures from the average were always noticed.
‘I see.’
‘Mr Prescott, all’
‘Matthew, please,’ he said.
‘All I want is a bed for a few days.’
Matthew thought of his flat.
The second bedroom had long ago been turned into an office.
Besides, he  could just imagine Cashman's fury if he discovered that Cindy had been staying unchaperoned with Matthew.
He was the sort of man who would come to the worst possible conclusion.
Even thinking about his reaction made Matt's mouth go dry.
He thought suddenly of Emma and her huge Hampstead house.
‘A bed?’ he repeated.
‘That's all.
And time to think.
I love my husband very much, but he just won't give me room to be me.
And right now, that's what I need.’
Matthew realized he still didn't know what this was all about.
Never mind.
If anyone could get it out of her, Emma could.
He stood up.
‘Don't go away,’ he said.
‘I've just thought of something.’
‘I knew you would,’ Cindy said simply.
He could see that she was a gentle uncomplicated creature, whose life ran on clearly defined tracks.
For Cindy Hill, things either were or were not.
There were no in betweens, no grey areas.
She was not a woman who would see both sides of a question, or want to analyse a given situation.
He went away and found a pay phone.
He called Emma.
‘It's Matt,’ he said.
‘Hi!’ she said.
‘How was the States?’
‘Terrific, thanks.
I got a lot of’
‘Tell me about this new girl,’ Emma said.
‘Fantastic.
Ma says you made her take her father to a cricket match.’
‘Whose father?’
‘Hers.
This girl's.
Wasn't it…?’
Emma trailed off uncertainly.
‘What are you talking about?’
‘This girl of yours.’
‘I didn't take a girl to a cricket match,’ Matt said, deliberately obtuse.
‘You must be thinking of  someone else.
Look, Emma, how's your bump of philanthropy these days?’
‘But I'm sure Ma said My what?’
‘Are you feeling charitable, in other words?’
‘I gave twenty quid to Oxfam only the other day,’ said Emma.
‘And stood outside the Tube station rattling a tin for the RNLI a couple of weekends ago.
What more do you want?’
‘The loan of a guest bedroom.’
Emma said cautiously, ‘Who for?
Not another of your lame dogs, is it?’
‘I don't know what you mean.’
‘Yes you do.
That Bulgarian.’
‘Bulgari’
‘The artist Cadogan's was sponsoring to attend a symposium or something.
The one who drank a whole bottle of vodka before making off with all Leo's boxer shorts.’
‘Emma, hasn't anyone told you it's wrong to harbour grudges?’
‘Leo actually had to go to work in a pair of my knickers,’ Emma said.
‘You can't surely hold me responsible for that.’
‘I most certainly can.
He spent the entire morning with his legs crossed, not daring to go to the loo in case one of his colleagues was in there at the same time and came to the wrong conclusion.’
‘Emma, would you please shut’
‘So who is it this time?
Some Latin-American gigolo like the one you took down to Ma?’
‘He was not a gigolo.
He's a highly respected artist.’
‘With a nice sideline in bottom-pinching.
Poor old Ma was black and blue for weeks afterwards.’
‘Once,’ Matthew said.
‘He pinched her once.
Where he comes from, it's probably considered insulting not to.’
Emma drew a sharp breath.
‘This isn't a Norwegian, is it?’
‘No.
It's a’
‘Because I absolutely refuse to have any more Norwegians, not after the last one tried to cut his throat in the drawing room.’
‘It's Cindy Hill,’ Matthew said quietly.
‘What?’
Emma sounded incredulous.
‘The model?’
‘Yes.’
‘You want me to put Cindy Hill up for a night?’
‘Or two.
Maybe even three or four.’
‘Matthew!
Is this the girl Ma was talking about?
Is it Cindy Hill you're so keen on that you even force our poor Aged P out into the snow to take her father to a county match?’
‘Emma, why you ever took up silversmithing instead of romantic fiction, I'll never know.’
‘I can't spell.’
Matthew sighed gustily.
‘Just to put you in the picture.
Cindy Hill is married to someone else with whom I rather think she's madly in love.
And for your meteorological information, it rarely snows in Somerset in the summer.
Nor have I ever been able to force Ma to do anything she didn't want to.’
‘But why do you want me to have Cindy Hill to stay?’
‘It's too complicated to explain this minute.
But say yes, and I'll tell you all about it later.’
‘Yes,’ Emma said.
‘You will?
That's great.’
‘When will she arrive?’
‘This afternoon.
I should think.’
‘There's one condition.’
‘I knew there would be.’
‘That you swear to tell me all about this woman you told Ma was the most wonderful girl in the world.’
‘I swear, Emma.’
‘And I don't mean next year,’ Emma said, wise in the ways of brothers.
‘I mean like, before the end of the week.’
‘Um…’
‘The end of the month?’
‘Yes.
Before the end of the month.’
‘Matt…’
‘What?’
‘You did say Cindy Hill, the model , didn't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘That's what I thought.’
Putting down the receiver Matthew returned to his table.
Cindy Hill was nibbling an olive.
She looked up at him.
‘All right?’ she asked.
He nodded.
‘That's wonderful.’
She smiled trustingly at him and his heart melted the way it did when his small nieces slipped their hands into his when he took them out.
Complete faith, he thought.
An absolute certainty that no-one wishes you harm.
He cleared his throat.
‘I asked my sister,’ he said.
‘Oh, thank you, Mr Pres Matthew.
Thank you so much.’
‘Here's the address.’
Matthew wrote it down.
‘She's expecting you.
You can go up there whenever you want.’
Cindy was looking at the piece of paper in her hand.
‘Emma Chisholm?
Isn't she a jewellery designer?’
‘Among other things.’
‘I've got some of her pieces,’ Cindy said.
‘The most gorgeous silver breastplate sort of thing.’
‘She's good on armour.’
And even better at finding chinks in other people's.
‘It'll be great to meet her.
Perhaps I could commission something special from her while I'm there.’
Cindy suddenly seemed more animated.
‘I should think she'd be really pleased,’ Matthew said.
Although he had had no such thoughts in mind, he realized that Cindy might well be in a position to do Emma some good, just as Emma was undoubtedly doing Cindy some.
He felt decidedly pleased with himself.
After seeing Cindy into a taxi, he went back to the office.
A pile of queries was waiting to be answered.
There was an awkward problem to sort out concerning a shipment which had been damaged in transit from Rio de Janeiro to the Cadogan warehouses.
He had several phone calls from Japan to deal with, and a request from a Bombay-based Hindu businessman that he fly out in the next few weeks to — as Mr Kapoor put it —‘spring clean’ his collection of modern primitives.
Which meant sorting out wheat from chaff, and living like a rajah while he did so.
Yes please, Matthew thought.
He left the office late and dropped into a nearby wine bar to have a glass of the house Chardonnay and unwind from the day's traumas, his thoughts drifting haphazardly from Cindy to Alexandra to Emma and back to Alexandra.
Undoing his Sulka tie, he rolled it up and put it in his pocket.
Women, he thought, smiling a little.
What would we do without them?
A friend he had not seen for ages came into the bar  with his wife, and, in the end, the three of them went on somewhere for dinner.
It was exceedingly late by the time he got back to the mansion block.
Leaving the lift at the third floor, instead of the fourth, he stood outside Alexandra's front door, listening.
He could hear nothing.
For a moment he wondered whether to knock, but decided against it.
There was definitely some unfinished business between the two of them, but he was extremely tired.
He remembered what he had said to Alexandra the night before: ‘We needn't rush into anything.’
Opening his own door, he thought how great, how truly fantastic it was that there should be something into which they need not yet rush.
10
Alexandra woke late, feeling tired and sluggish.
After her evening with Matthew Prescott she had slept badly, lost in feverish waking dreams, in memories which whirled kaleidoscopically through her brain, hurling fragmented images of Italy and crashing seas, roses and carnations, the aroma of coffee and the taste of wine, Carlo, Cameron, Matthew, the sound of bat on ball, thatched roofs and dusk falling across an English lawn.
She lay in a hot bath for a long time, thinking of nothing, letting her mind float free of the here and now.
There was no need for life to be complicated, yet it invariably turned out to be so.
The only way to handle it was to ignore it and hope that at least some of the complications would sort themselves out on their own.
Go with the flow.
She remembered Donna Fratelli's raucous laugh, the number of times the two of them had sat together over a glass of wine or a plate of pasta, discussing the things which really matter: men, or life, or the latest movie.
‘In the end,’ Donna used to say, ‘that's what it all comes down to.
You gotta go with the flow.’
The trouble was, Alexandra thought, walking into her kitchen wrapped in a bath sheet, the trouble was that you couldn't really go with the flow until you'd had time to work out which way it was going.
Pointless trying to swim against it, but sometimes it just  wasn't that easy to see which way the current went.
On impulse, she picked up the phone and began to dial Donna's number.
It would be great to talk to her again, to get a blast of her reassuringly down-to-earth Stateside common sense.
But she caught sight of her watch and realized that it would be half-past three in the morning in New York.
Not exactly the hour for making social calls.
She put down the receiver again.
The Concorde ticket to New York was where she had left it the night before.
She picked it up and stared blearily at it.
Today its message seemed less equivocal, and the accompanying note no more than one of Cameron's spur-of-the-moment enthusiasms.
Nice gesture, Cameron, she thought.
He probably hadn't even paid for it, just put it on his credit card.
She rang the Athene office and got Prunella.
‘I'll be in a little late this morning,’ she said.
‘Is everything all right?’
‘A bit of a blip in that special offer on silk scarves we're running in the next issue,’ Petronella said.
‘How big a blip?’
‘The importers just rang to say their shipments have been held up in Delhi.
Some question of whether they're liable for import taxes or not.’
‘There's not a lot we can do about it at the moment, is there?’
‘It can certainly wait until you get in,’ Petronella said.
‘It might even have cleared itself by then.’
She seemed to accept without question that Alexandra was the one who would handle the crisis, if it was still a crisis by the time she got into the office.
When she was dressed and ready to head for work, Alex sat down with a cup of coffee and thought once more about Matthew Prescott.
The kiss — the nearly-kiss — last night had changed things.
No question  about that.
She felt like someone who suffered from vertigo and suddenly found themselves standing on the edge of a deep abyss.
Either she took a step back, or she stayed where she was, aware that sooner or later she would plunge into that unknowable chasm.
Before she could stop herself, she had pulled the phone towards her again and was dialling Cadogan's.
‘Matthew Prescott, please,’ she said.
She was put through to his office.
‘Matthew Prescott's secretary.
Can I help you?’ someone said.
It was a pleasant voice, with an undertone of humour, and Alexandra was immediately jealous, envisaging Matthew and his secretary in his office, laughing together, sharing jokes about his work, perhaps going out for a quick meal before they both went home.
Perhaps not going home but booking into a hotel and
‘I'd like to speak to Matt — to Mr Prescott,’ she said, and could feel her voice trembling.
‘Who may I say is calling?’
‘Just tell him it's a — it's a personal call.’
‘One moment.’
Then he was on the line.
She closed her eyes.
‘I don't think this is going to work,’ she said, not announcing herself, confident that he would recognize her voice and the thoughts which filled her mind.
He seemed to grasp immediately what she was talking about.
‘You may be right,’ he said calmly.
‘We — uh — we don't seem to have much in common.’
‘I know,’ he said.
She thought how steady his voice sounded, how soothing.
She could not imagine him chasing after other women once he had committed himself, could not imagine him being so insensitive as to leave a woman — his woman — wondering why he  was so late arriving home, or whether he was coming home at all.
He went on, ‘I hate opera, you hate jazz.’
‘And I loathe modern art,’ she said.
He paused.
Then he said firmly, ‘It's my job.’
She found that reassuring.
No passionate declarations about changing for her sake, about chucking it all in and finding something else to do.
This was a man secure in himself and what he did.
‘So,’ she said flippantly, ‘about the only thing we do have in common’
’— is our taste in coffee?’ he said, and she could almost hear him smiling.
‘Yes,’ she said in a tiny voice.
‘Have faith, Alexandra,’ he said.
‘In both yourself and in me.’
‘Yes.’
‘We'll talk about it later, all right?’
‘Yes.’
‘And, Alexandra’
‘Yes?’
‘I lo’
‘You what?’
She heard someone in the background, a voice saying that Mr Cashman was insisting on seeing him.
‘I'll tell you some other time,’ he said.
The office was seething like a beehive when she got in.
Two of the production team were absent, down with suspected chicken-pox.
Lydia had rung in to say she was chasing a story in the Lake District, though everyone knew that what she was really chasing was the ravaged-looking thriller writer she had met at the launch of his last book and slept with the very same night.
Felicity had come out in a severe facial rash  and spent the time either screaming or staring fixedly at the paperknife on her desk.
‘It's probably that face pack you put on,’ Alexandra said.
‘Write it up.’
‘I can't do that unless I know for sure, can I?’ shrieked Felicity.
‘They could sue.’
‘Ring round some of the other magazines and see if the same thing's happened to them,’ suggested Alex.
‘The manufacturers are bound to have sent samples to other people, not just us.’
‘That's an idea.’
‘And for heaven's sake give me that paperknife.’
‘But supposing it hasn't happened to anyone else,’ Felicity said.
‘Supposing I'm the only one?’
‘Then it could be something you ate, couldn't it?’
‘Like what?’
‘I don't know.
What do you eat?’
‘Pure things,’ said Felicity.
‘Grapefruit and yoghurt.
Stuff like that.’
‘Could be an allergy,’ said Helena, peering closely at Felicity's skin.
She looked up at Alex.
‘As a matter of fact, I think it's time we did another piece on allergies.’
Felicity picked up her mirror and began studying her face again.
‘Look at me!
I look like the title role in Night of the Iguana.’
Helena reached out and stroked Felicity's cheek.
‘Allergy,’ she said wisely.
‘Definitely.’
‘Yes, but what to?’
Felicity shouted.
‘And how long before it clears up?
I'm going to a party on Friday and I can't turn up looking like this.’
‘Perhaps you've been overdoing the yoghurt and grapefruit,’ said Alex.
‘Incidentally,’ said Helena.
‘Did you know that Marilyn Monroe was a size sixteen?’
Felicity let out a high-pitched shriek.
‘What are you trying to tell me?’ she demanded.
‘Not only have I got skin even the Elephant Man would have rejected, but I'm fat as well?’
‘I was talking to Alex,’ Helena said defensively, stepping back a couple of paces.
‘She was saying the other day about the way the media make women afraid to enjoy their own bodies.
I thought we could hang something on the fact that one of the most enduring sexual icons of the age was in fact what today would be called — uh — big.’
‘I read somewhere that more than 47 per cent of British women are size sixteen or over,’ Alex said.
‘I'm not,’ said Felicity.
‘Big, Bold and Beautiful,’ Alex said, ignoring this piece of egomania and looking at Helena.
‘Love to be Large,’ said Helena.
‘I could ring round, find some of the women who've come out as Frankly Fat.’
‘That one who was in that movie about that writer,’ said Felicity, tearing herself away from herself and her rash.
‘You know, where she keeps him prisoner.’
‘Dawn French,’ said Alex.
‘Or Roseanne Barr,’ said Helena.
‘I'd still rather be thin,’ said Felicity.
‘Oprah Winfrey,’ said Helena.
‘Or Liz Taylor, if you get right down to it.’
Felicity stared.
‘You don't seriously imagine Liz Taylor's going to give an interview about how fat she is, do you?’
‘Not really, but’
‘I mean, didn't the last husband say something about ‘Lose the fat or lose me’?
And we all know which she chose.’
‘Wouldn't you?’ said Helena.
‘All those blond-streaked curls?’
‘Liz Taylor's gone blonde?’ said Felicity.
‘Not her, him,’ said Helena.
‘People, could we get serious here,’ said Alex, and heard again the authentic Nina-note in her voice.
‘Helena, put something down on paper.
See what you can make of it and we'll discuss it later.
Felicity, see whether you're alone in this reaction to the face pack or not, and then we'll take it from there.’
One thing about having a job, she thought, sitting down at her desk and leafing through the messages which had been left for her, it certainly takes your mind off your worries.
One of the pink slips was a Returning-Your-Call message from a recently-elected female politician she had been trying to contact for days.
Ringing the woman's number again, she found her in, and more than ready to offer her somewhat trenchant views on the House of Commons and the way that seminal institution seemed to cling to the outmoded notion that women were an inferior breed.
‘Which,’ said the lady politician, in her famous gravelly voice, ‘they are not, as you and I both know.’
‘Quite the opposite,’ said Alexandra.
‘Superwoman,’ the lady politician said.
‘That's what they want us to be.
And you know why?’
‘Why?’
‘So they can laugh at us when we fall flat on our noses.
They set it up deliberately so that we force ourselves to do more than any three men could do, and naturally quite a lot of the time we can't manage it.’
‘But you believe in the innate superiority of women?’
‘I do, as it happens.
But try suggesting that down  here in the Royal Palace of Westminster,’ said the lady politician robustly, ‘and they'd all spontaneously combust.
They pay lip service to equality but they don't want to have to do anything committed about it.
I mean, look at the hours we're supposed to keep — Parliament is all about being a gentleman amateur, and absolutely nothing to do with working mothers or the demands of a family.
And as for the loos…’
Having set up an interview, Alex sat back, making notes, trying to think of other entrenched bastions of male privilege, circles from which women were excluded.
The Garrick.
The Athenaeum.
The MCC.
This reminded her of the Colonel and his visit to the Somerset County Cricket ground, courtesy of Matthew Prescott and his mother.
Perhaps she could go down next time there was a one-day match and drive him to Taunton herself, interview some of the club's officers, work something up.
She spent the rest of the day going through copy, dealing with the Customs and Excise men in an effort to sort out the red-tape tangle about the silk scarves, fielding telephone calls for Nina, running down elusive editorial, discussing layout.
The others had been gone for an hour by the time she was ready to leave.
She stood up, stretched, packed her briefcase.
There were still things she wanted to go through, if she was not too tired by the time she got home.
She was meeting friends for dinner that evening, but she might be able to snatch an hour later that night.
As she was about to walk out of the office, the telephone rang.
For a moment she stood at the door, watching it, wondering whether to answer it or not.
Whoever it was could ring again in the morning if  they wished to.
Then, unable to resist the telephonic siren song, she picked it up.
A transatlantic voice said, ‘I'd like to speak with Alexandra Maitland, please.’
‘Donna!’ exclaimed Alex.
‘Hey, is that you, honey?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, aren't I the clever one, getting you first time?’
Donna said.
‘You're not going to believe this,’ said Alex, ‘but I actually picked up the phone to call you this morning, except I realized it would have been the middle of the night your end so I put it down again.’
‘Smart move,’ said Donna.
‘I'm not at my best at two in the morning.’
‘Just for the record,’ Alexandra said innocently, ‘do you actually have a best?
If so, I can't quite remember when it is.’
‘Is that what they call dry English wit?’
‘No, schoolboy humour.’
‘Smart ass.’
‘Did you ring for any particular reason?’ asked Alex.
‘Or just to insult me?’
‘That too,’ said Donna.
‘But mainly — guess what!’
‘What?’
‘I'm coming over to stay with you.’
‘That's great,’ said Alex.
‘How long for?’
‘Why?
You gotta problem with that?’
‘Only that I thought I might move house in a couple of years.
But you're welcome to stay until then.’
‘Alex, it'll be just terrific to see you again.’
‘And you, Donna.
Absolutely wonderful.’
‘How're things?’
‘Terrific.’
‘Any men?’
‘Men?
What're those?’
‘You remember: they wear pants and take us out to dinner if we're very lucky and kick us in the teeth every chance they get.’
‘Oh, those.’
‘So?’
‘Any of them around?’
‘I'm a career girl, Donna, you know that.’
‘Aren't we all, baby?
But not so much so that we'd junk a permanent commitment to a man in order to keep on our job.
And talking of junk, how's Cameron?’
‘Steady on,’ said Alex, laughing, slipping back easily into the comradely banter she'd always enjoyed.
She hadn't realized how much she had missed Donna.
‘I know you don't like him’
‘In spades’
’— but he's all right.’
‘He's all wrong for you, Alexandra Maitland.
Juvenile, selfish, conceited, immature.
If you really want to foul up your entire life, take my advice and go for him, white dress, veil, the whole shtick.’
‘Well, thank you, Aunt Donna.’
‘How to live unhappy ever after…’
‘Some things never change,’ sighed Alexandra.
‘How do you mean?’
‘The sun comes up each morning, the Pope's a Catholic, and Donna Fratelli's still sticking her nose into other people's business.’
‘I care about you, Alex.’
‘I know.
So, when are you arriving?’
They discussed arrangements for a while.
By the time she had replaced the receiver, Alexandra's mood was definitely up.
She looked at her watch, cursed, ran for a taxi.
She was late arriving at the restaurant where she had arranged to meet her friends, but they were women she had known since university days and were busy catching up on everyone else's news.
Most of them were married, with children: they seemed to be set fair on the roads they would be travelling now for the rest of their lives.
She alone was unmarried, though one had recently divorced.
Alex listened to them with a smile on her face but an increasing chill in her mind.
Had she opted for the wrong values?
Was her career that important?
Her friends plainly felt sorry for her, a little embarrassed at the fact that she did not have a husband to contribute to the conversation, nor children, nor any of the little ups and downs of family life.
They asked her questions about her job, professed to be envious, but she knew that they were not.
Yet these were all women who, ten years ago, would have called themselves liberated, independent, ambitious.
All of them had pursued careers and then, thankfully, relinquished them.
The euphoria of Donna's phone call slowly evaporated as the evening went on.
She felt solitary and isolated, as though she were missing out on something very necessary, while the others discussed their families, raising their eyes to heaven, complaining about the circumstances of their lives in that particular way women do when they don't really want to change a thing.
Back at her block of flats, Alexandra stepped into the lift, then, about to press the button, hesitated.
Instead of getting out at her own floor she went on up to the fourth floor, and stood in front of Matthew Prescott's front door.
She listened but heard no  sound.
She put her finger to the bell, and then dropped it quickly.
In her own flat, although she normally drank very little, she took one of her best cut-glass tumblers and poured herself a stiff whisky — Laphroaig, bought on her last trip abroad.
Sometimes it was important to spoil oneself — Helena had written a piece on it for the last issue of Athene, explaining that when women felt the need for a little luxury they should give in to it, that pampering oneself created an inner glow which proclaimed that this was a Special Woman.
As a matter of fact, the whole issue had been built round a concept which Nina had labelled Special Women.
Curled up in a corner of the sofa, Alex took the Concorde ticket out of her bag once again, and set it on the cushions beside her.
She had a choice: she could go or she could stay.
If she went, much as her emotions screamed at her to do so, she knew deep in her heart that eventually it would just be more of the same, more of Cameron's evasion, his neglect, his unexplained absences.
More of the gradual deterioration of the relationship into nagging on her part and lying on his.
More of the helplessness of simply not being on the same wavelength as the person you were supposed to be closest to.
There would also be more of that marvellous exhilaration that comes with being in love.
More of the excitement Cameron always generated, more of that sense of being swept up into something wonderful and outside her control.
There was nothing circumspect about Cameron, nothing held-back.
The unpredictability of the man was more than made up for by the heady feeling of surrendering to life at its sweetest and most bright.
On the other hand…
She got up and poured herself another slug of whisky.
Donna Fratelli was absolutely right.
Cameron was immature.
Cameron was selfish.
And she knew that nothing would change, that she herself, a Special Woman on her second glass of neat spirits, deserved something better than Cameron could — or would — offer.
And then there was Matthew Prescott.
With him, she felt none of the seething intoxication of love or lust or whatever it was which called her to Cameron.
Yet, if she stopped to examine it, wasn't there something better than intoxication being built between them, as delicately as a spider's web, line by gossamer line?
If they went on seeing each other, would they not eventually produce the same complicatedly beautiful pattern of commitment as her friends had?
Wasn't that implicit in whatever it was which was going on between the two of them?
And wasn't the sexual element there too?
Hadn't she felt stirred, moved, breathless when his mouth had trembled on hers, before the telephone rang and broke the spell?
The answer to all those questions was an emphatic yes.
She poured herself one last mouthful of whisky and tossed it back.
Then, before she could have second thoughts, she picked up the telephone and dialled his number.
When he answered, she said quickly:
‘I want to see you.
Now.’
11
Matthew's phone was ringing as he put his key into the lock of his door.
Racing into his flat, he picked it up and heard his mother's voice.
‘You're up very late,’ she said reprovingly.
It was the kind of flanking attack which always left Matthew speechless with admiration.
‘What about you?’ he said.
‘Old ladies shouldn't be up at’ he squinted at his watch —‘at eleven fifteen at night.’
‘I can't think why not.
And anyway, who says I'm old?’
‘Not me.
I wouldn't dare.’
‘You're as young as you feel,’ his mother said.
‘Erica, the Cliché Queen,’ Matthew said with affection.
Carrying the telephone with him, he walked into the kitchen and poured himself a small whisky.
‘Did you ring to say something important or just because you wanted to check up how late your son got home?’
‘I rather like your Colonel Maitland,’ his mother said.
‘I'm delighted to hear it.’
‘I don't know why you should have led me to believe he was some kind of old buffer.’
‘Isn't he?’
Matthew went back into his living room, sat down on the sofa and began to take off his shoes.
Sitting down, he realized just how tired he was.
He swung his feet up and leaned back with his head on a cushion.
‘Not at all,’ his mother said.
‘Quite the opposite.
Rather dashing, actually.’
‘Isn't he confined to a wheelchair at the moment?’
‘Yes, but’
‘Can one actually dash when one is in a wheelchair?’
‘Believe me, Matthew, Richard can.’
‘Richard?’
‘Colonel Maitland.
I don't know when I've enjoyed myself more.’
‘Really?’
‘After the match, he took me out to dinner.’
Matthew thought his mother sounded very young, her voice bright with some emotion he could not quite define but which made him feel instantly — paternally — protective.
‘Quite right too,’ he said.
‘He even got out of his chair.
He said it was the first time he'd done so but he was damned if he was going to be wheeled into a restaurant like a blasted mental patient out with his nurse.’
‘A wheelchair doesn't imply lunacy, does it?’
‘Not really.’
‘But I can see his point,’ Matthew said.
As he talked, he glanced with pleasure round his flat.
It always looked immaculate after his cleaning lady had been in.
He took in the carefully chosen objects, the discreet lighting, the gleam and shine of it.
On the table in front of the sofa was a vase holding four pink roses, the blooms in various stages of uncurled perfection.
He reached forward to brush one of them with his finger, and thought suddenly of Alexandra.
‘Yes,’ said his mother.
‘So in he stumped with his leg in plaster, sort of roaring.
He's got this roar he does.’
She giggled, the way Emma and Victoria used to when they were young.
‘Mother, are you giggling?’ he said, rather touched.
‘Why shouldn't I?’
‘No reason at all.’
‘Actually, there's only one thing wrong with him, really.’
‘What's that?’
‘He goes on about his daughter rather a lot.’
‘Does he?’
Matthew was not going to rise to the bait his mother dangled so expertly in front of him.
‘Yes.
He said most girls, no-one would drink champagne out of their slippers if you paid them to, but a girl like Alexandra — that's her name, Alexandra…’
‘Is it really?’
‘…he wouldn't mind betting they'd queue up to drink plain tap water out of her Wellington boots and count themselves blasted lucky to have the chance.
Isn't that sweet?’
‘Adorable,’ Matthew said, thinking, just pass me Alexandra's wellie and I'd do the same.
‘At least the two of you agree,’ his mother said.
‘On what?’
‘On the fact that she's the most wonderful girl in the world.
I can't wait to meet her.
Richard said he'd invite me over next time she came down for the weekend.’
‘Did he, indeed.’
The thought of his mother meeting Alexandra under other auspices than his own was vaguely alarming.
‘I gather you've been fairly stern about the way he prunes his roses.’
‘Someone had to be,’ his mother said.
‘What a mess they were in!
Anyway, I've sorted them out now.
I went over and had lunch with him.
Took my own secateurs, of course.
You can never rely on anyone else's.’
‘Mother, I asked you to take him to a cricket match, not to start hacking the poor chap's rosebushes to pieces.’
‘He loved it,’ said Matthew's mother.
Thoughtfully, she added, ‘So did I.’
‘Just watch it,’ Matthew said.
‘These retired military men can get a bit frisky if you don't keep an eye on them.’
‘I don't know why you should think I'd object to a frisky man, military or otherwise.
I may be getting on a bit but I still know a thing or two.’
‘Mother, please.
You're making me blush.’
‘How old-fashioned you are, Matthew,’ said his mother.
‘You sound like a throwback to the days of Queen Victoria.’
‘Absolute rubbish.
I'm’
‘You'll be wanting us to stand round the piano singing hymns next,’ said his mother unfairly, and forestalled his indignant riposte by replacing the receiver.
He lay where he was, the whisky glass balanced on his chest.
Heavens, he was tired.
In a minute he would go and run a hot bath, luxuriate in it for ten minutes or so, and then get his head down.
For the moment, it was enough to lie back and do absolutely nothing.
He was fast asleep when the telephone rang beside his bed.
He scrabbled for the light switch, saw the time — my God! picked up the receiver.
It couldn't be Emma, could it, with some ghastly news about Cindy Hill slitting her wrists or something?
Or Cashman, drunk and abusive in the lobby, looking for somewhere to lay his head?
Or
‘Hello?’ he said.
It was Alexandra.
‘I want to see you;’ she said, in a breathy little voice.
‘Now.’
Before he could respond, she had put down the telephone.
Unfinished business, he thought.
He remembered her phone call at the office that morning, and the declaration he had been about to make when Cashman appeared.
Was he really going to commit himself to that extent?
Had he really made up his mind that firmly?
For a moment, throwing back the duvet, he paused.
Ahead of him stretched the future, and this time, instead of a summer landscape full of lush green fields, it suddenly took on a closed and wintry air.
Instead of Alexandra with her tawny hair loose about her shoulders, he saw a muscle-bound Fury wielding a rolling-pin, like something out of a Christmas pantomime.
It occurred to him, as indeed it had occurred many times before, that commitment to one woman had as its inevitable corollary a lack of commitment to all the others.
Was he ready to retire from the fray — the rather delicious and exhilarating fray — just yet?
On the other hand, it could be argued that Alexandra Maitland was a woman for whom it was more than worth abandoning the rest of the female sex.
And she had sounded fairly unequivocal about what she wanted from him, too.
Yawning, he got out of bed and, unhooking his dressing gown from the back of the bedroom door, shrugged himself into it.
Unequivocal or not, it wouldn't do to open the door in the altogether — though with any luck, that would be the next step…
The doorbell rang.
Walking towards it, he yawned again, and hoped he wasn't too exhausted to cope with whatever might follow Alexandra's arrival in his  flat.
At the same time, he found to his astonishment that his feelings about this late-night call — this unequivocal late-night call — were mixed.
On the one hand, the promise, the expectation, warmed the pit of his stomach and flooded him with a sense of delicious possibilities; on the other, something in him wondered whether this wasn't all too easy, especially since the reins seemed to have been removed from his hands and were being expertly manipulated by someone else.
He wasn't used to it.
In any relationship, there was one who led and another who followed.
Maybe only a pace behind, maybe almost shoulder to shoulder, but definitely there was an alpha person and a secondary one.
He wasn't all that sure he wanted to be Mr Beta.
Or rather, since he indubitably wanted a relationship with Alexandra, perhaps what he hoped for was to dictate the terms, rather than have them dictated to him.
This made him what, exactly?
Some kind of sexist beast?
As impenitently chauvinist as — as Anthony Cashman, for instance?
Surely not.
Yet, if he was honest, he found that when it came right down to it, he wanted to call the shots, not have them called.
He reached the door.
Opened it.
Did a double take.
‘Hi,’ the woman outside said.
‘Laura!’ he said.
Of all the damned inconvenient times…
‘You always did stay up late,’ she said, moving towards him, standing provocatively close, before walking past him into the hall.
‘Uh — how long have you been back?’ he said.
Though back was hardly the word since she had dropped her English origins, as so many other  things, along the littered roadway of her life.
‘About a day and a half.’
She shrugged, looking flirtatiously at him.
‘I was just — uh — passing by.’
‘At this time of night?’
‘Are you — uh — alone?’
She waggled suggestive eyebrows, stared at him from under her eyelashes.
‘Ye-I mean, no.
Look, I'm expecting someone.
A neighbour.’
She gave a half-laugh, enjoying his obvious confusion.
‘At this time of night?’ she countered.
‘Do we at least have time for a…coffee?’
Her tone made it clear that if he wished, coffee was only the beginning of what they might have time for.
The situation was one he found it difficult to handle.
He could hardly order her out of the flat.
On the other hand, Alexandra would surely be here any second.
What did women mean when they said ‘Now’?
Usually they meant in about fifteen minutes, didn't they?
Nose-powderings and so forth.
He plugged in the kettle and reached down the jar of coffee.
‘Just a quick cup,’ he said.
‘And then you'll have to go.
It's been a real stinker of a day.’
‘And on top of that, there's this neighbour dropping by,’ Laura said archly.
He could see mischief in her eyes.
He spooned coffee into a cup, poured boiling water on to it, handed it to her.
‘Laura,’ he said warningly.
‘Just drink up your coffee and go.
We'll talk another time, when I'm less exhausted, when I've got my diary in front of me.
We'll have dinner, OK?’
‘Heavens to Betsy!’ she said in a teasing manner.
‘Must be one hell of a neighbour for you to be acting so twitchy about her.’
He opened his mouth to speak and she put her  hand over it.
‘And don't tell me it's not a her,’ she said.
‘I recognize the signs.’
‘I wish you'd go, Laura,’ he said coldly.
It was extraordinary to think that once he had loved this woman to distraction, and now all he wanted was never to see her again.
‘Drink your coffee, all right?’
‘It's hot,’ she murmured, peeping suggestively up at him over the rim of her cup.
The doorbell rang again.
He had a premonition of imminent disaster.
‘Just stay here!’ he said.
This time, when he opened the door, it was Alexandra.
She stepped up to him, put her arm round his neck and leaned in towards him, waiting for his kiss, while he wondered how he was going to explain Laura's presence in the kitchen.
‘I hope I didn't get you out of bed,’ she murmured.
Then she stiffened.
He saw her eyes grow huge, saw their softness replaced with bewilderment and something which wrenched at his heart.
Behind him he heard Laura's voice, shiny with malice.
‘This coffee tastes good,’ she said.
He turned.
She had taken off her coat, somehow contrived to make herself seem a little dishevelled, as though the two of them had just been snogging on the sofa or something.
‘Hello,’ she said brightly, head on one side, as though she belonged in the flat, making it obvious that Alexandra didn't.
In Alexandra's expression as she drew away from him, stepped back, turned to leave, in her brown eyes, Matthew read a hundred messages.
And knew, with a sinking heart, that there wasn't a single one he wanted to hear.
The next morning, after another sleepless night — this  really had to stop or he was going to start dozing off at his desk — he got up, made himself a coffee and, wincing already in anticipation of her reaction, called Alexandra's flat.
As soon as the first ring sounded he knew she was not there, that the sound of the telephone was reverberating through empty rooms, as lost and desolate as wind crying across a salt marsh, as hopeless as he felt his own heart to be.
Nonetheless he let it ring, feeling closer to her even through this tenuous connection, because his phone was ringing in her flat.
In the end, he had no choice but to replace the receiver.
He picked up his briefcase and found his way to the car park, where slots were reserved specifically for residents of the block of flats.
As he drove out of his allotted space, to his astonishment he saw Alexandra about to get into her white saloon.
She looked wonderful, in a short skirt which showed off her long legs and a hip-length jacket which emphasized her shape.
Quickly he rolled down his window.
‘Good morning,’ he said, pretending a nonchalance he did not feel.
He gave her a wide toothy grin, and immediately realized it was exactly the wrong approach.
She would inevitably interpret it as some kind of macho statement about the fact that even as he entertained one woman in his flat, another was on her way upstairs with…what on her mind?
Whichever way you looked at it, something fairly explicitly sexy.
She glanced down at him as though he were something she'd found smeared on the sole of her shoe after visiting an abattoir.
‘Good morning,’ she said.
Her tone was dismissive, her voice icy.
‘Look,’ he said, braking and getting out — at least they would be on the same level then, instead of her being ten frigid feet tall and him crouching six inches high in the driving seat of his car —‘about last night…’
She appeared to be astonished.
She raised cold eyebrows.
‘You don't have to explain,’ she said, the way a school matron might have spoken on finding a member of the Fifth Remove engaged in some filthy practice in the school dorm.
Without looking at him again she riffled through her leather handbag, found her car keys and opened the door of her Mercedes.
‘Laura's just an old friend,’ he said, knowing it was hopeless, that he had blown it or rather that Laura had blown it for him, and found he was speaking to the back of her neck.
Perhaps if he seized the moment, lifted her long mane of hair, kissed the tender little place where the fragile bones disappeared into the collar of her jacket…
‘I understand,’ she said, as though she didn't give a damn.
She got into the driving seat and began revving her car unnecessarily loudly.
Maybe she was hoping to asphyxiate him with carbon monoxide fumes.
He bent down, still trying to keep them both at the same height.
Over her shoulder, lying on the black leather upholstery of the back seat, he could see a black velour trilby which was vaguely familiar, though for the moment he did not have time to sort out exactly why or how.
Alexandra was backing out of her parking space, much too fast.
To get away from him, probably.
Her expression was steely.
‘I'll call you,’ he said quickly, before she could disappear.
She looked at him with a derisive little smile — the sort of smile a lamb might bestow on a wolf promising that being eaten alive won't hurt.
‘Sure,’ she said, and she was gone, in a cloud of exhaust.
He stood looking after her.
What was the next step?
What kind of a lecher did she think he was?
His mind went back to their brief conversation of the night before: ‘I want to see you,’ she had said, ‘now.’
And had put down the receiver before he could say anything at all.
She had given him no opportunity to indicate that there was an old friend with him — not that there was, at that point, but there might have been, and if there had been, it was hardly his fault if Alexandra had chosen to come knocking on the door without giving him a chance to explain — and then getting stroppy when she found someone had got there before her.
All the way to Cadogan's he worked on this scenario.
By the time he reached the office Matthew was feeling distinctly indignant.
Alexandra was clearly in the wrong but, in a typically female way, she refused to acknowledge it, blaming the whole fiasco on him.
Her attitude that morning was unreasonable.
If anyone deserved an apology, it was Matthew, not her.
And was he going to get one?
Was he, hell!
Handing his keys to the parking valet, he decided that he would take a firm stand.
Until an apology was forthcoming, he was damned if he was going to get in touch with her.
She could stew in her own juice.
In the lift to his floor he thought how odd it was that taking a firm stand should make him feel so bad-tempered.
He walked into his office.
‘Good morning,’ Ruth called.
‘Mmm,’ he said crossly, not looking at her.
‘Coffee?’
Flinging open the door of his office so that it  hurtled back against the wall, he didn't even bother to answer.
‘Nothing urgent so far this morning,’ Ruth said.
He grunted.
‘I've put your letters on your desk.’
‘Good.’
He banged his briefcase down, causing the tiny Giacometti bronze he kept on his desk to topple over.
‘Anything else I can do for the moment?’
‘No.’
‘Aspirin?’ murmured Ruth.
‘Arsenic?’
He pulled himself together.
‘Do I look that bad?’
‘Well, let's say if I was choosing someone to share my fortnight for two in Majorca, you wouldn't be my first choice of companion.’
‘Mmm.’
‘In fact, you wouldn't be my tenth choice.
Not in the mood you're in.
In fact, given the choice of you or a bear with a sore wotsit, I'd take the bear every time.’
‘Très droll.’
‘What happened?
Cleaning lady move the bed and you got out the wrong side or what?’
‘Ruth, if you don't mind’
‘OK.
All right.
I'll get the coffee.
Perhaps it'll cheer you up.’
As soon as she was out of the room he pulled the nearest phone across his desk and punched out the number of the Athene office.
So much for firm stands.
‘Athene magazine.
Can I help you?’ a female voice enquired.
He asked to be put through to Alexandra's desk and was disconcerted when the voice wanted to know who was calling.
‘Uh — Matthew Prescott, Cadogan's, Art Dealers,’ he said, too flustered to give a false name.
He hoped he at least sounded businesslike, as though it were not a private call, and realized immediately that Alexandra would refuse to take the call if she knew it was him.
There was a pause.
Then, two seconds later, just as he thought: ‘I'm afraid Miss Maitland is not available right now,’ whined the voice.
‘Can I take a message?’
Yes, he thought.
You could tell her it's her fault, not mine and next time she's feeling like a bit of fun — if that was what she had been feeling like — maybe she'd give a chap a chance to explain that there's already a woman in his flat, a woman he will kick out with the utmost speed if she'd just hang on, a woman he never even invited into it in the first place.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Do you know when she'll be available?’
‘I couldn't say, I'm afraid,’ the girl said.
Was he being paranoid to imagine that she was looking at her fellow switchboard operators, rolling her eyes, one hand over the receiver, saying, ‘It's him!
Matthew Prescott!
The one Alex told us not to put through!’
He could see them all sitting there, earphones on their heads, giggling themselves silly at his expense.
He clenched his fists.
After a moment, he stood up and went over to the window.
Below him traffic crawled down Bond Street.
Among the press of cars he saw a taxicab painted like a page from a newspaper and another advertising a brand of beer.
He pressed the redial button and was connected to Athene again.
‘Athene magazine, can I help you?’ a singsong female voice — a different one — replied.
‘I'd like to speak to Alexandra Maitland,’ he said, deepening his voice, adding a hearty note which was alien to him.
‘Who can I say is calling?’ the voice asked.
‘Uh — Michael Watney,’ he said.
‘Of — of Cartier.’
Across the road, a taxi drew up in front of the august jewellers and a man in pinstripe trousers and black jacket got out, then helped a woman with magnificent grey hair to alight.
Either an eminent barrister, Matthew decided, about to buy his wife — not his mistress, not with that hair — some expensive bauble, or else he worked in Fortnum's, down in Piccadilly, where all the salesmen dressed like that, and was just showing off to his mother.
‘One moment, please.’
The voice came back, seconds later.
‘I'm afraid Miss Maitland is not available right now.
Can I take a message?’
‘That's all right,’ Matthew said, and put down the phone.
Did he feel better or worse that neither the genuine Matthew Prescott nor the spurious Michael Watney was able to get through to Alexandra?
He burned with embarrassment.
For the rest of the morning he had no time to think about her.
The hours passed quickly.
At eleven thirty he was called into James Cadogan's office to talk about the best way to handle their latest commission.
An Australian who had acquired millions through the construction industry now also wished to acquire respectability.
‘Extraordinary people, the Aussies,’ James said.
He lit one of the cigars which he smoked nonstop and blew rich smoke upwards.
The habit had given his  room — it was hardly an office, packed as it was with artefacts from all over the world — a curious olfactory patina, as though the whole place had been dipped in aromatic tobacco and then hung out to dry.
The ceiling had the creamy colour of a pub and everything in the place smelled; it was always a simple matter to discover which files had passed through James's hands, just by sniffing them.
‘I agree, but in what sense, exactly?’ asked Matt.
‘This chap, for instance.’
James tapped the folder in front of him.
‘He says he's interested in building up a representative collection of primitive and tribal art, but when we tell him the best place to look is in his own back yard, as it were, he tells us he doesn't want Abo art,’ James said, trying unsuccessfully to pronounce the last two words of his sentence with what he imagined was an Australian accent.
‘He's not the only one,’ said Matthew.
‘Seems so shortsighted, though.
Some of the work the Aborigines have produced is quite beautiful, especially where it hasn't been corrupted by commercial interests.’
‘I know.’
‘So how can this chap ignore it?’
‘If you despise the race, then you're not going to rate its art works, are you?’ murmured Matthew.
‘Perhaps not.
But then aren't you taking a political stance, rather than an aesthetic one?’
‘How long have you got, James?’
Matthew said, looking at his watch.
‘Because that's one of those questions we could debate for some considerable time.’
‘Well, are you prepared to take this man on?’
‘Absolutely.
The first thing I'd do would be to point out, in the gentlest possible way, of course…’
‘Of course.’
‘…that it would look much better if he was seen to be supporting indigenous native art as well as looking to Africa or Latin America.
There's a big surge of Australian nationalism at the moment.’
‘Trying to ditch the Queen, aren't they?’
‘Among other things.’
‘Wouldn't blame you, Matt, if you refused.’
‘Why should I?’
‘It'll almost certainly mean a trip or two out there.
You won't mind?’
‘Not in the least.’
‘No-one who — er — might object?’
The chairman picked up a small Graeco-Roman bronze from his desk and turned it between his fingers, while a faint flush crept up the flesh above his stiff collar.
‘No.’
Matthew allowed a small uncomprehending frown to appear, though he knew exactly what the chairman was getting at.
‘No-one who might miss you…’
The chairman gave an audible gulp.
‘…if you were away for as long as — say — a month?’
‘My sisters might, I suppose,’ Matthew said innocently.
‘And my mother, of course.
Otherwise…’
He shrugged, feeling more cheerful.
He guessed that the chairman's embarrassment stemmed from the fact that these personal questions had been instigated by Barbara, or even Georgina, rather than from any curiosity on his own part.
‘Otherwise, I don't really know what you mean.’
‘You know.
Some kind of a…’
James waved a hand that strove to be nonchalant, encompassing the various paintings and sculptures which surrounded him and which, as it happened, featured an extraordinary number of nubile and semi-naked ladies in a  recumbent posture.
Realizing what they represented, he added quickly, ‘Not that I think for a moment that you…though, of course,’ he floundered ever deeper, ‘naturally, a man like, you, presentable and so forth , you probably have several…’
He stopped, looking Matthew severely in the eye.
‘I don't know what you're laughing at,’ he said plaintively.
‘James, you really are priceless.’
Matthew grinned.
‘And, for your information, at the moment there isn't anyone who would mind if I flew out to Sydney for a month or two.
Or even six.
So don't worry about it.’
‘At the moment?’
James said keenly, scenting a titbit to take home to Barbara and Georgina.
‘But there might be soon?’
‘Honestly, you're worse than my mother and sisters,’ said Matthew.
‘It is a truth universally acknowledged that a single man in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a wife,’ said James.
‘I'm not going to argue with Jane Austen on that one,’ Matthew said.
‘Only trouble is, I haven't got a fortune.
And on the miserable pittance you pay me, I'm unlikely to amass one.’
To his surprise, although he had been joking, James took him seriously.
‘Perhaps that's something we could discuss when you get back from Australia,’ he said.
‘Can you wait until then?’
‘Just about,’ said Matthew.
He called Emma.
‘All right if I drop in for a drink this evening?’ he said.
‘Absolutely fine.’
‘How's the patient?’
‘What swine you men are,’ Emma said, and banged down the receiver.
It occurred to Matt that this was the third time in about twelve hours that a woman had done that.
A stop must be put to it.
And where did Emma get off, calling her only brother a swine?
Perhaps it meant that Cindy Hill had revealed at least some of whatever it was that bothered her, which was a good thing, really.
He dialled the Athene office again, and was told once more that Alexandra Maitland was not available.
Later that day he parked his car outside Emma's house and knocked at the door.
Leo, his brother-in-law, let him in.
‘I just want to say that you've made an old man very happy,’ he said, leading the way into the high-ceilinged drawing room and pouring Matthew a drink.
‘What do you mean?’
‘It's not every day that a man gets up and finds one of the most gorgeous creatures in the western hemisphere spooning in the cornflakes at the breakfast table,’ said Leo.
‘You mean Emma, of course.’
‘Of course, old boy.
Who else?
You can't imagine I meant that hideous model you sent round to stay with us, can you?’
‘Not for a moment.’
‘Seriously, both Emma and I are thunderstruck,’ Leo said.
‘I mean, Emma's no slouch in the looks department, as you know, but this Cindy of yours is like — well, like something turned out by a machine.
Absolutely perfect.’
‘I'm sure she wouldn't enjoy hearing that very much.’
Through the open French window leading out into the garden, Matt could see Cindy sitting on a  swinging bench with Emma's children on either side of her.
She seemed to be reading to them, while they listened with close attention.
‘Exactly,’ Leo said.
‘Which seems to be part of the poor girl's trouble.
A lifetime of being treated as an object rather than as a human being must be very debilitating.’
Leo's voice took on a lecturing note.
‘The cult of the beautiful, it seems to me, has its roots in the ancient fetishistic worship at the shrines of such earth mothers as Dea’
‘For God's sake, Leo, save it for your students,’ said Matthew.
‘What?
Oh sorry, was I beginning to bang on a bit?’
Leo grinned good-naturedly.
‘Don't mind me.’
‘Has she…’
Matthew indicated Cindy ‘…talked to Emma at all?’
‘Yes.’
‘Any hint as to what it's all about?’
Matthew raised his eyebrows.
‘Difficult to say, old boy.
However, the two of them stayed up late last night, drinking my best booze, and this morning Em's been slamming doors quite a bit, and giving me dirty looks.
From which I deduce that it's the same old scenario, don't you?’
‘What scenario's that, exactly?’
‘The one where all the male characters are foulmouthed and lecherous with only one thing on their minds, and the females are all patient, suffering, submissive angels with hearts of gold.’
‘Oh, that one.’
‘Sometimes, old boy — and I speak as one who has changed a good many nappies in his time and is not a total stranger to either the washing-up bowl or the kitchen stove — sometimes I wish we were still living in the good old bad old days.’
Leo looked owlish and  splashed more whisky into their heavy cut-glass tumblers.
‘I know what you mean.’
‘No-one in his right mind would want to revert to the horrible inequality of the Victorian era or anything like that,’ Leo said earnestly.
‘Good God, no…’
‘Those benighted days when men slogged their guts out oop at t'mill, or died of dysentery out in India, while their poor wives led lives of cruel hardship, bringing up the children with the help of a couple of nursemaids and a skivvy or four.’
‘Terrible, terrible,’ murmured Matthew.
‘Not for a single moment would one want those days to return.
On the other hand…’
Leo stared out into the garden and drew a deep regretful breath.
‘They had a certain something, don't you think?’
‘Definitely,’ said Matthew.
‘A certitude,’ said Leo, gesturing with his glass and sloshing whisky over the carpet.
‘A — how shall I put it?— sense of everything knowing its place, and keeping to it.’
‘By everything, you mean women?’
‘What else, old boy?’
‘Don't let Emma hear you.’
‘I know my place, and I keep to it.’
‘I've noticed.’
‘Actually, that poor girl's a bit cut up about something,’ Leo said, putting an affectionate arm around the younger man's shoulders as they watched Cindy in the garden.
She was looking down at the two children, her face animated as she turned the page of the book on her lap.
‘Good idea of yours to send her here.
Can't imagine anyone better than Emma for sorting things out, really.’
‘Good.’
‘Oh, there you are.’
Emma herself appeared, looking a mite unfriendly.
‘Yes.
Here I am,’ said Matt.
‘Humph,’ Emma said.
‘I see we're in militant mood,’ said Matt.
‘You could say.’
Emma was carrying a glass of white wine, which she proceeded to sip aggressively.
‘So before we go any further, could I just state that I am not personally responsible for burning any witches at the stake.’
‘And I,’ said Leo quickly, ‘have never sexually harassed any female employee in the workplace by word or deed, though I confess to the occasional lewd thought.’
‘I've never recommended an induced birth to a pregnant woman merely in order to fit in with my golfing schedule,’ Matt said.
‘And I have never turned down any woman for a job on the grounds that she might go and get married, or have a baby, thus necessitating six months’ paid maternity leave.’
‘Nor have I ever suggested to any working woman that she'd be better off at home where she belongs.
And it's not my fault that women have periods,’ finished Matt.
‘May I also put it on record that I love you for your mind?’ said Leo earnestly.
‘What do you men think you are: NW3's answer to the two Ronnies?’
Emma asked.
‘Gosh — are we that good?’
Leo said.
‘You gave me that line about my mind ten years ago,’ Emma said.
‘It worked, didn't it?’
‘I wasn't fooled then,’ said Emma, smiling at him.
‘And I'm not fooled now.’
‘Darling,’ said Leo.
‘Sweetheart…’
‘I hate to interrupt this love-fest,’ said Matthew.
‘But, Emma, I wonder if you'd mind having a quick business discussion with me before things get out of hand?’
‘OK.’
‘Come and sit down over here.’
He indicated one of the big Chesterfields which stood on either side of the fireplace.
‘I'll go and fix something for the kids’ supper,’Leo offered.
‘Give you two a chance to have a natter.’
Emma allowed herself to be led over to the sofa.
She sighed.
‘Sorry,’ she said.
‘It's not really you or Leo I'm against.
But sometimes men can be so…so obtuse.’
‘Tell me what it's all about,’ Matt said.
‘I don't know if it's confidential or not…’
Emma glanced out into the garden.
‘She did come to me in the first place.’
‘I know.
But…’
‘She obviously wants some help.
But unless we know what it's about, we can't do much.’
‘She had an abortion,’ Emma blurted out.
‘What?’
‘Cindy was pregnant, and she had an abortion.’
‘That's dreadful.’
‘And she can't forgive her husband for it.’
‘Did he know about it?’
‘No.’
‘Then how is it his fault?’
‘Because,’ said Emma patiently, ‘he wants her to continue her career as a model.
He wants her to be  the top model in the world.
He says she's got plenty of time to have babies, but for now she's got to focus on her career.’
‘What's wrong with that?’
‘She doesn't want to.
She doesn't particularly want to be a top model.
She doesn't need the money.
She's one of those women who wants to stay home and be a sweetheart-wife, as she puts it.
And he keeps shooing her out into the cold hard world.’
‘Does he know how she feels?’
‘She's told him, hundreds of times.
But he doesn't really know, because he doesn't really listen.’
‘I see.’
Matthew looked down into his glass.
‘And having an abortion —’
‘Is that what she was doing in London when she told him she was in Wales with her sick mother?’
‘Yes.
She told me about seeing you at that nightclub.’
‘Odd place to be, if you'd just got rid of a baby.’
‘It was an act of defiance, she told me.
If he wanted her to be a top model, she'd behave like one.
But she wants to be at home, with her husband, and lots of children, and dogs everywhere.’
‘Really?’
‘She's got it all worked out.
Two girls and two boys.
Piano lessons.
Ballet classes.
Brownies.
No boarding schools or anything like that.
No nannies.’
‘It's not a hugely ambitious desire, is it?’
Matthew said sadly.
‘You'd think she ought to be allowed to get on with it.’
‘It actually,’ said Emma, raising a hand to her face and brushing it across her eyes, ‘made me rather weep, listening to her.
As it's doing again, thinking about it.’
‘Do you think I ought to tell her husband?’
‘I don't know.
She's slightly terrified of him, but she seems to adore him.’
‘Has she said what she wants to do about any of this?’
‘I don't think she knows.’
Emma put her hand on Matthew's arm.
‘Bit bloody ironic, isn't it?’
‘What is?’
‘Most women moan about the problems they have trying to get out of the house to pursue their careers.
And here's one who's desperate to throw up her career and stay home, only she's not allowed to.’
‘Can you bear to have her for longer?’
‘As long as she wants.
She's absolutely wonderful with the children.
And she's been sitting with me down in my studio while I work.
She's given me a couple of great ideas.
Moving in the kind of world she does, she has a real eye for what looks good.’
‘I'd better go and have a word,’ Matthew said.
‘There's one other thing, Matt,’ said Emma.
‘What?’
‘I'm not sure how well she is.
She's hardly eaten a thing since she got here, and last night I went into the kitchen and found her looking terrible.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘All sweaty and pinched-looking.
She said it was nothing, but I'm sure she was in pain.’
‘Do you think something's gone wrong?’
‘I don't know.
She was crying a lot yesterday.’
‘I can imagine.’
Matthew frowned.
‘Cashman's not exactly the most sensitive chap I've ever met, but I'm sure he'd be appalled to hear about all this.’
He got up as Leo walked across the lawn outside and smiled down at the trio in the swing-seat.
‘Once the children have gone I'll talk to her.’
But Cindy, when he joined her in the garden, seemed withdrawn and cold.
She sat, not meeting his eye, her fingers restlessly turning the pages of the book on her lap.
‘Shouldn't you tell Tony?’
Matthew asked gently.
‘He won't listen.’
‘But he'll have to, eventually.’
‘No.’
‘It was his child too,’ Matthew said.
‘He's forced me to be a murderer,’ Cindy said, and burst into tears.
Matthew put his arm round her and she burrowed her head into his shoulder.
‘If only he would listen to me,’ she said.
‘Can I ask you something?’
Matthew said.
‘What?’
‘Do you love him?
Do you want to stay with him?’
‘Yes,’ Cindy said.
‘Yes.
But unless he stops forcing me to be something I don't want to be, I shall have to go.’
She sat up and stared at Matthew, her eyes red with tears.
‘I think it's the thought of leaving him as much as anything else which is worrying me.
I don't want to.
But sometimes I feel he doesn't give me any choice.’
‘Shall I talk to him?’
‘I think it would just make him angry.
He'd see it as some kind of betrayal, that I'd allowed someone from outside to see that things aren't as perfect as they ought to be.’
‘Well, think about it some more,’ Matthew said.
‘If it would help, I'll go down and see him.’
He took her hand in his and stroked it gently, as he might an unhappy child's.
‘Meanwhile, why don't I pick you up and take you out to dinner one evening?’
‘That would be lovely.’
‘I'll ring you in the morning to fix it.’
‘Thank you all for being so kind.’
Cindy began to cry again and for a while the two of them sat in silence, gently swinging to and fro.
Standing in the foyer of his mansion block later that evening, waiting for the lift to descend, Matthew was joined by a small blonde girl of about twelve or fourteen.
He assumed she was the younger daughter of the couple who lived on the second floor, until she spoke.
‘You work at Cadogan's, don't you?’ she said.
He turned, surprised, his head full of Cindy, of Alexandra.
Looking at her more closely, he realized she was much older than he had at first thought.
There were lines around her mouth and eyes, and a kind of earnestness which he did not associate with prepubertal girls.
‘How did you know that?’ he said.
‘I saw you at Sir James Cadogan's party recently.’
‘Oh.’
He smiled.
‘And you are?’
‘Charlotte Hanover.’
She put out her hand and he shook it.
‘Ah.
The portrait painter.’
‘Yes.’
‘I've heard of your work, of course,’ he said.
He was about to add that he was supposed to be coming to dinner at her flat very soon, then wondered if that was still on, since he had been invited by Alexandra who presumably would now rather eat maggots than go anywhere with him.
‘Look,’ Charlotte said.
‘It's fearfully short notice, but if you're available next Saturday, I'd be awfully pleased if you could come to dinner.’
‘Gosh,’ he said, pretending to think.
Obviously Alexandra had not mentioned the possibility of him coming as her…what?
Escort?
Companion?
‘That's nice of you,’ he said.
‘As a matter of fact, I am free.
Something just fell through today.
So thank you — I'd love to come.’
‘Good.
See you about eight then,’ Charlotte said.
Shutting the door of his own flat behind him, Matthew wondered if Alexandra would still be planning to attend.
Almost certainly, he decided.
For a start, she was the original invitee.
And then it wouldn't occur to her that after what had happened, he would have the nerve to go under his own steam.
But since he had been invited in his own right, he would go.
It would be a chance to see her on neutral ground, maybe even a chance to explain that it wasn't his bloody fault that Laura had shown up at the door only seconds before she herself had.
He wished he felt more positive about it than he did.
Remembering his own thoughts as he walked towards the door last night, not knowing it was Laura, thinking it was Alexandra and feeling his freewheeling lifestyle threatened, his macho image slightly dented, he realized he must be mad.
How could he have been so shortsighted, so absolutely thick as to worry about commitment when the girl he was worried about committing to was Alexandra?
The fact that it turned out to be Laura on the doormat, instead of Alexandra, made no difference whatsoever to his sheer idiotic lunacy.
12
Donna came out into the arrivals concourse at Heathrow wearing Day-Glo cycling shorts, a shiny purple baseball cap and a big T-shirt emblazoned with the words KEYCUTTERS DO IT WHILE YOU WAIT.
Wow!
Alexandra blinked.
No chance of missing that.
Confronted with Donna's exuberant wardrobe, she realized there were only two courses open to her: either she took it on the chin (‘straight spine, old girl,’), or she slunk away and refused to answer the phone when Donna called to see why she hadn't been met.
And obviously she couldn't do that.
She squared her shoulders and, facing up to the challenge of those uninhibited Spandex-covered thighs, waved vigorously.
Catching sight of her, Donna opened her arms wide and started screaming.
‘Alex!
Honey!’ she shrieked.
Heads turned as, oblivious, she surged towards Alexandra like an excitable goose.
‘How are you?’
‘I'm just fine.’
Alex gave her a big hug.
‘And you?’
‘Never better, kid.
You better believe it.’
She planted a boisterous kiss on Alex's cheek.
‘You look fantastic.’
‘Wish I could say the same about you.’
Alex held her friend at arm's length.
‘Is this dress-to-impress couture or what?’
Donna looked down at herself and shrugged.
‘I  read somewhere you gotta wear loose comfortable clothes on a long-haul flight.’
‘Otherwise what happens?’
‘I don't know — I didn't read any further.’
‘Well, you certainly look comfortable,’ said Alex.
‘I am.’
‘Not to mention loose.’
‘Loose?
I sure hope you're not going to give me a hard time after I just travelled three thousand miles to see you,’ Donna said, her eyes crinkling as she gave Alex another bear hug.
‘Did you really come just to see me?’
‘Not quite.’
Donna picked up her bags and followed Alex towards the exit.
‘I got myself a few commissions — did I tell you I was thinking of going freelance?’
‘Think you can make a go of it?’
‘I hope so.
Otherwise, I starve.
Which wouldn't be a bad thing, I guess.’
She twirled, big as a bus.
‘I put on twenty-three pounds in the past two months.
Look at me.’
‘Difficult to look anywhere else,’ Alex said.
‘Thing is, I just got sick and tired of nine-to-fiving.
Is this all there is to life, I asked myself.’
‘And?’
‘And what?’
‘What did you answer yourself?’
‘Yeah, I said.
Or do I mean no?
Anyways, I decided to go for it.
So though I'm officially on vacation, I'm actually working.
Got people to see, places to go, the whole bit.’
‘Great.
I'll introduce you around.
Maybe you could do a piece for Athene — a Yank's-eye view or something.’
‘I want to go to Paris, Madrid, Prague, Vienna, places like that.’
In the passenger seat of Alex's Mercedes, Donna stretched luxuriously.
‘It's years since I was in Europe.’
‘The place has changed,’ Alex said.
‘I can see that already.’
Donna turned and stared intently at her friend.
‘OK, Alex.
Let's hear all about this new man of yours.’
‘New man?’
Alex wished she had not immediately thought of Matthew Prescott, who was not only emphatically not her new man, but unlikely to be any kind of man at all, as far as she was concerned.
‘I know you have one, otherwise you wouldn't be looking so great.’
‘I always look great, thank you, Ms Fratelli.’
‘Uh-oh,’ said Donna.
‘Is this where she goes all English and uptight on me?’
‘Not at all.’
‘Not at all,’ mimicked Donna.
‘Hey,’ said Alex.
‘Don't call us, OK?
We'll call you.’
‘Don't like my English accent, huh?’
‘Is that what it was?’
‘So what's he like?’
‘Who?’
‘This guy you're obviously so mad at you don't want to tell me about him.’
‘There's nothing to tell.’
‘But there is a guy?’
‘There was,’ Alex said.
‘So what happened?’
Alex told her.
It felt good to talk about it, to describe her sense of total humiliation at having, as it were, bared herself to Matthew only to find him in a dressing gown, with some…strumpet drinking coffee with her dress half-unbuttoned.
‘Some what?’
Donna said.
‘Strumpet,’ said Alex.
‘Where the heck did you find a word like that?’
‘That's what she was.
And the awful thing, Donna, was that it was my own fault really.
I just assumed that he'd be alone.
I didn't give him a chance to say anything, just said I was coming to his place right that minute, and then I put the phone down.’
‘Sure it wasn't his sister or something?’
‘Absolutely certain.
Sisters don't have that Things-Were-Just-Getting-Interesting look.’
‘What look's that?’
‘You know — sort of bedroom eyes.’
‘Bee-stung lips?’
‘Lots of those.
And sort of moving about inside her dress as though her bra was suddenly too tight.’
‘She could have been putting it on.’
‘Or taking it off,’ Alexandra said.
‘Perhaps the poor baby was just feeling a bit hot.’
‘Oh, sure.’
‘Come on, Alex.
If he'd got her to that state, why was she drinking coffee?
I mean, you don't get down to things and then break off for refreshments, do you?’
‘I suppose not.’
‘And you said he was wearing a bathrobe, and she was still in her dress?’
‘Ye-es,’ Alex said uncertainly.
By now they were part of the endless stream of traffic speeding towards west London.
‘I bet what happened was, just after you called him, this witch turns up out of the blue.’
‘Two women showing up late at night within five minutes of each other?
Bit of a coincidence, wasn't  it?’
Alex dodged a pizza delivery van with a poor sense of timing.
‘They happen, honey, believe me.
Remind me to tell you some time about my Uncle Morton's wife and his mistress both turning up to his funeral in the self-same dress…
Anyhow, there's the witch outside your guy's door and he tells her to bug off, she can't come in, he's expecting someone and she says, oh please, baby, sweetie, honey pie, can't I have just a teensy weensy little coffee after I've come all this way to see you, and he says — because he's a proper English gentleman, right?’
‘Right.’
‘He says: well, OK, but get your skates on, sister, because I'm real keen on this someone I'm expecting, so being this really obnoxious kind of a female, she decides to kill his chances.’
‘It could have happened like that.’
‘I'll just bet she was some broad he used to be in love with or something, and he's been giving her the brush-off while she's trying to fan the embers, get back to the way it used to be.’
‘Hmmm.’
‘Bet you.’
Alexandra was beginning to feel a lot more cheerful.
Donna always had that effect on her.
At the same time, she felt a creeping guilt about Matthew.
Perhaps it had happened the way Donna said.
Perhaps it was by pure chance that the other woman had been there, and Matthew was entirely innocent.
Innocent of what?
She hadn't really given him time to explain, just looked at that horrible creature prancing about in the hall all sexed up, and assumed the worst.
She decided that as soon as she got back to the flat, she'd call him and apologize.
‘Hey, I love it!’
Donna cried.
She turned slowly in the middle of the living room, like a gyrating parakeet.
A parakeet with, Alexandra had to admit, extremely large thighs.
‘Love what?’
Alex had forgotten Donna's wonderful exuberance, the zest with which she approached life.
‘This apartment.
All the amazing stuff you've got.
That gorgeous bureau thing.
Where did you get it, for heaven's sake?’
‘It belonged to my grandmother.’
‘Looks like it ought to be in a museum,’ Donna said with awe, fingering the inlaid panel on the top.
‘And those dishes — what are they?
Limoges, or something?’
‘Coalport, actually.
My mother gave them to me when I left university.’
‘They're just beautiful,’ breathed Donna.
‘I know it's a terribly Yank thing to do but while I'm here, perhaps we could go and do some antique shops, yes?’
‘London's awfully expensive for that kind of thing.
Maybe you'd like to come down to visit my father and we could look around there, too.’
‘Love to.’
‘Make yourself at home while I fix you a coffee,’ Alex said, ‘then what would you like to do?
Take a shower, have a nap?
We'll go out somewhere to eat, if you want, or stay in, whatever.
I've got some complimentary tickets for the theatre tonight, nothing too heavy, a murder mystery, which you might like.
You say.’
‘I'm not that jet-lagged right this minute,’ said Donna.
‘A soak in the tub first, maybe, and then let's hit the town, OK?’
‘OK.’
‘I'll be really spaced-out tomorrow morning, so we might as well not waste tonight.’
‘We're invited out to dinner tomorrow evening,’ said Alexandra.
‘Anywhere nice?’
‘I don't really know.
It's this friend of my brother's who lives in the same block.
She looks about eight years old but has to be more than that.’
‘Why'd she invite you — checking you out?’
‘For what?’
‘Sister-in-law material?’
‘Could be.
Anyway, she told me to bring someone so I phoned and asked if I could bring you.’
As she said this, Alex felt her face begin to flush, aware that she had originally invited Matthew Prescott.
She had not had a chance to mention it to Charlotte Hanover before their…their contretemps of the other night, and assumed that he would have the decency to realize that she would not, in any case, want him to accompany her now.
Going into the kitchen, filling the kettle, finding cups and saucers, she wondered if Donna's version of the events of that night could be anywhere near correct.
Two women showing up at nearly midnight?
It was possible, of course.
But was it likely?
On balance, she had to admit that it could have happened that way.
And if so, then the least she owed Matthew was an apology.
While Donna lay in the bathtub, inaccurately bawling the bits she could remember of My Fair Lady, Alex dialled Matthew's number, only to find that he had switched on his answering machine.
She listened to his calm voice explaining that he was not available and if she would like to leave a message…but the message she would like to have left was far too complicated, so she rang off without saying anything.
Waiting for the kettle to boil, she thought about the other night, and the more she thought about it, the more obvious it became that Donna had got it wrong.
After all, if things had really been the way she said, wouldn't Matthew have rung up and tried to explain?
She remembered her own off-putting attitude the day after it had happened.
She remembered coming back into the office after spending the morning talking to a woman who had started her own cosmetics business in her kitchen, and the pink message slip on her desk, saying that Matthew Prescott had called her.
She had scrumpled it up and tossed it into the wastepaper basket with an insouciant laugh…well, more of a furious scowl, actually, and then had had to put up with Helena asking whether Matthew Prescott was that rather super chap who had been featured in GQ a short while ago.
‘Was he?’
Alex had said, feigning indifference.
‘Yes.
Wearing Armani.
Rather dishy, I thought,’ Helena said.
She reached into Alex's wastepaper basket and fished out the message slip.
‘Matthew Prescott, from Cadogan's,’ she read.
‘Yeah.
That was him.
‘Unmarried but still hoping’, the magazine said.
There were some other guys featured but I definitely picked him out as the best.’
‘Really?’
‘Aren't you going to call him back?’
‘No,’ Alex said curtly.
‘I'll do it if you like,’ offered Helena.
‘That's all right.
I know what it was about.’
‘But you’
‘And I've already dealt with it,’ said Alex firmly.
And there had been that other message…she had rung Cartier to speak to someone called Michael Watney, only to be told that there was no-one called Michael Watney working there, and did she mean Michael Courteny, and if so, would she hold on?
This she had done, only to find herself talking to a horribly languid sort of character who obviously fancied himself rotten and who, she was prepared to swear, was wearing brown suede shoes and a shirt featuring tattersall checks, accompanied by a green knit tie.
He kept asking her to get to the point as he was in a meeting, while she was waiting for him to get to the point, since, as far as she was aware, he'd made the call to her in the first place.
Very embarrassing.
Could it possibly have been Matthew?
And had she given him a chance to explain?
She dialled his number again.
Again she got the answering machine.
Perhaps he was away for the weekend.
Perhaps he'd gone down to Somerset to see his mother.
His mother, called Erica, who wore a straw hat to cricket matches, and who was obviously as kind as he was, since she'd taken the trouble to drive the Colonel — a complete stranger — all the way to Taunton in order to watch the one-day county match and — and…
Alexandra suddenly found she was crying, great gulping sobs, tears splashing down on to the kitchen counter, an aching sense of something very precious which she had discarded without even a second glance.
It was like the time she had thrown a cheque for one hundred and twenty pounds into the fire one Christmas, thinking the envelope was empty, though luckily it had been a present from her godfather, and  he had good-naturedly written her another.
Would it be as easy to make things up with Matthew?
She went on sobbing and gulping, imagining him down in Somerset.
Maybe his sisters would be there, with their husbands and children.
Maybe his mother would have organized a dinner party, invited the girl next door to make up the numbers.
Maybe Matthew would look at her with fresh eyes, realize that the innocent freckled little creature he used to take swimming (or riding, or bicycling or something) had suddenly grown into a beautiful woman.
Maybe, even as Alexandra Maitland wiped her eyes on a tissue and sniffed unalluringly in the kitchen of her London flat, Matthew Prescott was facing his destiny across a Somerset dinner table, and liking what he saw.
In the bathroom, Donna had segued clumsily from ‘I could have danced all night’ to ‘I'm getting married in the morning’, her attempts at a Cockney accent so ludicrous that normally Alex would have been falling about.
All she wanted to do today, however, was get into bed, pull the covers over her head and hope the world would go away.
Instead she blew her nose, splashed her face with cold water, carried a cup of coffee to the bathroom door and knocked.
‘Who is it?’
Donna said.
‘My name's Peeping Tom and I want to eyeball your luscious body,’ Alex said.
‘In that case, come right on in.’
‘Honestly, Donna, who did you think it was?’
Alex said, pushing open the door.
‘Could have been anyone,’ said Donna.
She lay wallowing like a rosy dolphin in clouds of foam, with her exuberant hair pinned up on the top of her head.
‘I mean, how was I to know you weren't a sex-mad pervert who'd broken in and hideously raped you before coming after me?’
‘Do you think I'd have bothered to knock first, if I were?’
‘You could have been a well-brought-up sex-mad pervert.’
‘Yeah.’
Donna twisted about in the bath, sending water sloshing over the edge and on to the cork-tiled floor.
‘Have you been crying?’ she demanded.
‘No.’
‘Funny.’
‘What is?’
‘The way your eyes are all puffed-up and red and your face is all blotched and hideous and your’
‘Thanks, Donna.
You know how to make a girl feel really good.’
‘What's up?’
Alexandra bit her lip.
Then she said, ‘If you were a good-looking chap who wore Armani suits and washed-silk shirts and things, and you found yourself sitting across from a girl with freckles and a ponytail — or at least, a girl who used to have freckles and a ponytail — and you realized she'd grown up to be gorgeous, would you go for her?’
‘That depends.’
‘On what?’
‘Where are these two — the Armani guy and the ex-ponytail?’
‘Um…in the country.’
‘And what're they sitting across: a fence?
A ravine?
A chessboard?’
‘A dinner table,’ said Alex.
‘Or maybe a picnic table, having lunch.’
‘Are there other folk around or are they alone, in shimmering sunlight, with violins in the background, making a commercial for shampoo or coffee or something?’
‘They're with other people.’
‘No,’ Donna said decidedly, holding one leg straight up in the air and looking at it critically.
‘If I was him, I definitely would not make a play for her.
Especially not when I'd left my heart with this fantastic woman up in London.’
‘This fantastic career woman?’
‘This amazing brown-eyed, gorgeous, strong yet let's face it — vulnerable career woman,’ said Donna.
‘Hey, if I have to go on with this much longer, I'm going to start fancying you myself.’
The two of them laughed.
Alex could not help thinking how much easier and less complicated it was to enjoy the company of women, how much less fraught with the possibility of misunderstanding.
Much later that night, coming back from dinner and the theatre, followed by a stroll round Trafalgar Square and Whitehall so Donna could glimpse some of the sights, Alexandra looked up at Matthew's windows.
In the dark it was impossible to see whether the curtains were drawn, but certainly no chink of light showed and she could not tell whether he was there, asleep, or whether his flat was empty.
‘Am I supposed to wear a tiara to this kindergarten kid's place tonight, or what?’
Donna asked.
‘Difficult to tell,’ said Alex, her head on one side as she appeared to give the matter some consideration.
‘Charlotte's an artist, so she might be bohemian.
And she's young, ditto.
On the other hand, she's titled …yes, on balance, I think the tiara would strike just the right note of gracious elegance.’
‘Boy,’ said Donna.
She smoothed the black cycling shorts she was wearing and shimmied a little inside her baggy grey workout top.
‘You want gracious elegance, you came to the right place.’
‘I think we'll have to ask David what we ought to wear.
He'll be here any minute and he ought to know what's best.’
Alexandra was still in her dressing gown, trying to decide on the appropriate garments for dinner at a portrait painter's flat.
Not just any portrait painter, either, but one who might possibly end up as part of the family and on whom it was therefore important to make a good impression.
‘I'm looking forward to seeing your brother again,’ Donna said, sipping the dry martini Alex had given her a few minutes earlier.
‘I really enjoyed his visit to New York, and talking of New York…’
She gave her friend a significant glance and then clamped her lips together, in a parody of someone who was not going to say whatever it was that had just crossed her mind.
‘What?’
Alex said.
Donna shook her head.
‘What?’ demanded Alex.
‘Did I say anything?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Not ever.’
‘That I don't believe.’
‘Not about this, anyway,’ said Donna.
‘About what?’
‘This thing I'm not going to say anything about.’
‘Cameron’ said Alex.
‘That's who you're not going to say anything about.’
‘Right.’
‘You mean, where is he?
Do we still speak?
Are we still an item?’
‘Something like that.’
‘Last I heard, he was all set to get married and live happily after,’ Alex said.
‘Oh, sure,’ said Donna, with heavy sarcasm.
‘Except a few days ago, he sent me a ticket to New York.
Open-ended.
Via Concorde.’
‘What'd he do — rob a bank?’
‘Plus he included a note about the two of us knowing we couldn't live without each other.’
‘Which I hope you promptly tore up and flushed down the nearest john.’
‘I've still got it.’
Alex went over to the mantelpiece and picked up the Concorde ticket.
‘Here.’
Donna made a lunge for it.
‘Give it to me and I'll flush it down the john,’ she said.
‘I can't.’
‘Come on, Alex.
You know this guy is seriously bad news.’
‘What about love?’
‘Love?
Get outta here.’
The doorbell rang.
‘That'll be David,’ said Alex.
When she opened the door, David said, ‘I hope you're not going dressed like that?’
‘I was, actually.
I often wear a towelling dressing gown when I'm invited out to dinner,’ said Alex.
‘Do you take it off before or after they've wheeled in the birthday cake?’
‘I hear there are some great openings for stand-up comics in Mongolia,’ said Alex.
‘I applied but they turned me down.’
David leaned forward and kissed his sister.
‘Come and say hello to Donna,’ she said.
She walked behind him down the passage to the living room and watched, smiling, as her brother and her friend hugged each other.
Donna asked, ‘So what do we wear to meet your child bride?’
‘We haven't quite got that far,’ said David.
‘I'm glad to hear it.
There are laws against that sort of thing, aren't there?
Alex says she's only seven years old.’
‘I'm sure I said eight,’ Alex said.
‘You know my sister,’ said David.
‘Never been able to get to grips with the difference between illusion and reality.’
‘Is that right?’
‘You mean Charlotte is actually over the age of consent?’ asked Alex, wide-eyed.
‘Illusion and reality,’ said Donna.
‘You hit the nail on the head there, David.’
‘I so often do…’
‘I've been saying the exact same thing with regard to this Mr Wrong she's so darned keen on.’
‘Cameron, do you mean?’
‘Yes.’
‘I don't quite know how to handle it,’ said David, lowering his voice and putting on a mock-serious face.
‘But I've been wondering whether I ought to consult someone professionally about it.’
‘I would.
Can't go on like this.’
‘Frankly, I'm worried about her.’
‘Me too.’
They both stared over at Alex with expressions straight out of some medical soap opera on their faces.
‘Thank you both for your concern,’ said Alex.
‘Could you tell us what we're supposed to wear, so I can drag Miss Loudmouth here off to her boudoir?’
‘That little black dress thing you wore to Pa's last birthday party would be perfect,’ David said.
‘You don't think it's too dressy?’
Alex was astonished.
‘Absolutely not,’ David said positively.
‘I don't have a little black dress thing,’ complained Donna.
‘Only a ginormous coral jacket and pants thing.’
‘Sounds great.’
‘Looks it, too,’ Alex said.
‘I've seen her in it.’
‘Best thing about it is, it hides my thighs,’ said Donna.
Charlotte Hanover's flat was a surprise.
Built diagonally on the corner of the top floor of the mansion block, it had windows on three sides and an extra reception room.
Apart from a pleasant faint odour of oil paint there was no indication that this was a working studio, though the walls of her hall were hung with examples of her work.
‘This is fantastic,’ Alex said, stopping to admire, while Charlotte gave David a decorous kiss.
There were various elongated portraits, all painted on canvases of an idiosyncratic size, roughly six foot by two.
The result was a curiously concentrated view of the subject.
‘Thank you,’ Charlotte said in her self-contained way.
‘I love the way the length of the canvases forces the viewer's eye up towards the face.’
‘Which is what portrait-painting's mostly about, isn't it?’
David said.
Charlotte smiled.
She had pinned her long hair up in an elegant knot on top of her head, and was wearing a chic little number which Alexandra recognized  immediately as a Thierry Mugler.
Obviously the portrait business was doing very nicely.
‘Part of it,’ she said.
‘Do come on in.’
She led the way to her living room.
For a moment it was as though they had stepped through the doorway and into a Mediterranean resort.
All round the walls, above the old-fashioned dado, was a mural of a beach scene, blue skies, brilliant sea, sunshine, swimmers, sunbathers.
Concealed lighting made it seem so naturalistic that Alexandra almost expected to smell the salt and hear the cry of the seagulls which dipped and swooped at intervals around the walls.
The theme was continued in the furnishings, which consisted of thick carpeting and a number of low sofas covered in sand-coloured linen, offset with candy-striped cushions placed here and there.
Everything was light and airy and immensely inviting.
‘Gee.
I wish I hadn't left my swimsuit downstairs,’ Donna said.
She was looking magnificent, the long loose jacket hiding her hips and thighs, the silky trousers adding height.
Once again, Alex was struck by the absurdity — no, the cruelty — of the self-image that society tries to impose on women.
When you looked like Donna, why did you have to fret about not looking like the average social X-ray you saw in New York?
Or Paris, or Milan, or London?
‘It's great, isn't it?’ said David, smiling at Charlotte.
‘Did you do it yourself?’
Alex said.
She went closer to the walls, marvelling at the detail: the starfish flung up on the painted sand, the panting dog, the discarded bucket and spade, the bottle of sun oil.
‘It was done by a friend,’ said Charlotte.
‘I think he's going to be really big one of these days.’
‘It's a marvellous piece of work,’ said Alex.
She thought of Tony Cashman, the man Matthew  had mentioned.
Perhaps he could be persuaded to commission the muralist to cover some of the acres of bare wall which Matthew had described.
The doorbell rang again and a couple came in, followed at intervals by two more separate people.
Introductions were made and conversation became general as Charlotte poured drinks and David passed round nuts and olives.
It was nearly half an hour later that the doorbell sounded again.
David bounded up from his seat and went towards the door.
‘I'll get it,’ he said to Charlotte who was supervising something last-minute in the kitchen.
When he returned, he was followed by Matthew Prescott.
At the sight of him, Alexandra grew hot.
She knew her face had gone red.
She raised a hand and fingered her heavy silver earrings, trying to compose herself.
How dare he? she thought, after more or less flaunting that — that woman in front of me.
Admittedly she had never got around to telling him that the invitation was off.
But wouldn't a man of any sensitivity have attempted to check with her, wouldn't he have assumed that, without needing to be told?
And yet, perhaps he had tried, and, not hearing from her, had decided to come anyway.
Charlotte appeared.
‘This is a neighbour of mine,’ she said, introducing him to the others.
‘Matthew Prescott.
He works for Cadogan's, the art dealers.’
There was a murmur of recognition for the name.
Alexandra grew even crosser as it became obvious that Matthew had been invited in his own right.
She watched covertly as he sat down with a drink on the opposite side of the room from her and then  proceeded carefully to avoid her eye, by turning to talk to the person seated on the sofa beside him.
He looked tanned, fit, his hair recently cut; he looked good, she thought fondly, then frowned, annoyed with herself.
What the hell did it have to do with her whether he looked good, bad or indifferent?
It was ridiculous.
Why should she care whether he was tanned, or when he had last been to the barber?
Much more to the point, why hadn't he said he knew Charlotte Hanover when she'd asked him to accompany her here this evening?
Though, thinking back, surely he hadn't known her at that stage, had hardly known who she was.
So when did he suddenly become so buddy-buddy with her?
And how?
Above all, how could he have the nerve to come here after what had happened the other night?
Beside her, Donna said quietly, ‘If I had freckles and a ponytail, do you think that guy would make a play for me?’
‘Which guy?’
Alex said repressively, knowing quite well whom Donna referred to.
‘The hunk over there in the Armani suit.’
‘I really couldn't say.’
‘Or do you think he's got the hots for this fabulous brown-eyed career woman he's acquainted with in London?’
‘I wouldn't know.’
Alexandra stared up at the piece of mural nearest her, which showed a rocky little headland, some twisted pines, a stretch of white sand lapped by azure waves.
Still hot with embarrassment and irritation, she could feel a sheen of sweat on her forehead.
‘You're either lying or having your first hot flush,’ said Donna.
‘You don't miss a trick, do you?’
‘Never have, never will,’ Donna said complacently.
‘Have an olive.’
‘You make it sound like a hand grenade with the pin pulled out.’
‘I wish I thought it would have the same effect.’
‘Did you learn to talk so nice in charm school, or does it just come naturally?’
Donna said, grinning.
‘Actually, I have to say he's damn dishy.’
‘I think we could sit down now,’ Charlotte said in her clear voice, smiling at them from the door, and they followed her into the dining room.
She had placed Donna next to Matthew Prescott, while Alex was seated beside one of the other men.
As Matthew drew out the chair and waited for her to sit down, Donna said suddenly, ‘My God!
That plant!’
Her voice was bloodcurdling.
Everyone stopped where they were and stared as she pointed dramatically at a dark green house plant which stood on some kind of plinth behind the seat she'd been allocated.
‘What's wrong with it?’
A delicate frown creased the smooth skin between Charlotte's brows.
This was clearly a departure from her script for the evening.
‘I'm most terribly sorry,’ Donna said.
‘But I'm afraid I have this real phobia about plants.’
‘Phobia?’ said Alex coldly.
‘First I've heard of it.’
She knew Donna was up to something.
‘Would you mind too much if I sat…um…over there?’
Donna said, pointing to Alexandra's chair.
‘If that's what you really’
Donna flashed a wide and, to Alexandra's mind, extremely phoney grin.
‘I guess I just saw too many of those sci-fi movies when I was a kid.
You know, the ones where the killer cauliflower or the deadly  cucumber or whatever comes down from Venus in a spaceship and proceeds to devour everybody in sight.’
‘Killer cauliflower?’ said David disbelievingly.
‘I must have missed that one.’
‘I can easily move the’ Charlotte began, looking at the house plant.
‘No, no.
If Alexandra doesn't mind changing places, I'll just sit over there, if it's not too inconvenient.’
‘Alexandra?’ murmured Charlotte.
‘That's fine,’ said Alex, trying not to look furious.
Donna threw another big smile around the table.
‘I guess you polite English people would have suffered in silence, wouldn't you?’
Everyone murmured awkward disclaimers except Alexandra, who, seething with embarrassment, now found herself seated next to Matthew.
Curse Donna.
She turned pointedly to the man on her other side, who had been introduced to her as Harry.
‘What a lovely room this is,’ she said.
She looked round the deep red walls of the dining room, set off with black paintwork.
Heavy gold-framed paintings of Hanover ancestors hung from a picture rail; in each corner of the room were columns of shiny black marble topped by big dark green plants which drooped out of white marble urns.
A black upright piano stood against one wall, the candles in its sconces burning brightly.
‘It's perfect for evening occasions.’
‘Isn't it?’ he said.
‘Charlotte's fearfully clever about that sort of thing, always was, even when we were all kids.’
‘You're old friends, then?’
‘Her sisters and mine went to the same school.’
‘I believe her sisters are keen on horses,’ Alex said.
‘So are mine,’ said Harry, shuddering.
‘Much too keen.
Always trying to get me up early for gallops through the morning mist.
Never seemed to cotton on to the fact that I don't like morning mists.
Nor gallops, for that matter.’
‘I see.’
‘Charlotte and I used to try and hide together, so as to avoid all that ghastly heartiness our families went in for.
Stirrup cups and so forth.’
He tasted the delicate fennel-flavoured soup which sat in a shallow bowl in front of him.
‘Do you hunt?’
‘No.’
‘Glad to hear it.
I always think the world divides into those who do and those who don't, and I know which half I belong to.’
‘Me too.’
‘Loathe horses,’ Harry said broodingly.
He picked at a home-made roll and popped a piece of it into his mouth.
‘Great brutes, liable to trample all over you at the drop of a hat.’
‘Quite.’
On her other side, Alex could hear Matthew talking to Charlotte about painting and some man he knew — was it Anthony Cashman?— who was interested in commissioning a portrait of his wife.
‘And dashed ungrateful, too,’ said Harry.
‘You wouldn't believe the number of times I've offered the beastly things a sugar lump and been nipped like billyo in return.’
‘Biting the hand that feeds you.’
‘Absolutely.’
As the soup plates were removed by a white-overalled woman who appeared from the kitchen, the person on Harry's other side stirred and turned her head towards him.
Some signal had obviously been  given, though Alexandra had not seen it, and now it was plainly time for everyone to turn and talk to their other neighbour.
For, far from being the paper-plates-and-pasta evening which Alex had imagined, this dinner party had turned out to be solid English upper-middle-class stuff of the most formal kind.