

SOLVING LEGAL PROBLEMS
PROBLEMS ABOUT PROBLEMS
WE encounter a difficulty at the beginning of this part of the book by directing our attention to the solution of ‘legal’ problems.
How should such problems be defined?
Are there distinctions to be drawn between legal problems and social problems?
How effective are lawyers in solving legal problems?
How far should lawyers be ‘creating’ problems by identifying malpractice and abuse and making the victims aware of it?
What is a problem?
These are issues which have been the subject of research and discussion in the last two decades reflecting the growing awareness of the existence of an unmet need for legal assistance with problems and the development of law centres and other agencies to meet it.
They are central to the debate over the provision of legal services and the response to these issues will affect the formulation of policy.
This chapter explores some of these issues and Chapter 9 assesses the strengths and weaknesses of the major agencies currently involved in giving advice and solving problems.
Throughout both chapters we shall be particularly concerned with the role of lawyers.
A great deal of emphasis is placed on the role of courts in settling disputes.
The law student learns much of his or her law from decided cases, public attention is inevitably focused upon the adversarial contest, civil and criminal procedure is lengthy and complex, books on the English legal system (including ours) devote a considerable amount of space to litigation, and procedure tends to individualise grievances and tailor them to the adversarial model.
Yet it remains true that only a tiny fraction of legal  matters end up in court.
If it were otherwise the court system would simply collapse under the strain.
This is partly explained by the ability of lawyers to advise on and negotiate settlements to the mutual satisfaction of the parties to the dispute.
Such settlements are an acceptable part of English civil procedure.
Again, some legal matters are non-contentious and would not, in any event, come to court.
Other matters may be resolved simply by the giving of information or advice about the law.
However, it is now clear that many legal matters never emerge even for legal assistance, let alone litigation, because they are never identified as legal problems by the sufferers, or never reach lawyers, or, having reached lawyers, are not recognised as problems within the purview of the law.
This situation is not acceptable and the success of any scheme to provide legal services to the public should be judged on its ability to bridge this gap by involving lawyers in the resolution of all matters that require their assistance.
A. WHAT IS A PROBLEM?
This may appear to be an odd question to pose, but it has a bearing on our approach to the provision of legal services and the involvement of lawyers.
Does a situation only become a problem when the sufferer identifies it as something about which he or she, can do something?
If the mood is one of resigned acceptance, that the situation represents one's life difficulties, that there is no help to be obtained in dealing with the matter, should we consider that such a person has a problem?
This is not confined to legal problems (although in many situations there may be an unrecognised legal problem) but has its effects in other areas as well.
The failure on the part of the sufferer to appreciate that solutions might exist may be the result of a combination of factors including ignorance, apathy, complexity of the situation, generality of the problem and the extent of financial or physical resources required to rectify matters.
When the need for assistance is not even recognised, there is considerable difficulty for any advice agency in providing assistance.
The role of the lawyer or adviser in taking the initiative in identifying problems with which help can  be provided becomes important, and it is in this type of work that the law centres have been particularly successful.
The identification of the problem then is made by the adviser rather than the sufferer and the relationship between the need for legal services and the demands actually made by clients is exposed.
If the provision of legal services is to be limited to those matters in which the sufferer realises that there is a situation of difficulty for which the law provides a means of solution and with which a lawyer can be of assistance much of the pioneering work of law centres would be nullified.
B WHEN IS A PROBLEM ‘LEGAL’.
The attribution of a particular ‘legal’ character to certain problems underlies the research which has been done into ‘unmet legal need’for it is by no means every problem which requires the assistance of a lawyer in its resolution.
Equally, not every problem with which a lawyer is asked to deal is a legal one since many lawyers are proud of their reputation as sound advisers on general financial and property matters.
In any event, it would be pointless to define as legal problems only those which are actually dealt with by lawyers for that would exclude all those problems which never reach them, but perhaps should.
However, would it be realistic to define legal problems as those with which the private practitioner normally deals? this definition involves the combination of two factors — the selection of appropriate problems by potential clients and, on presentation, their acceptance by the solicitor as appropriate for him or her to handle.
The combination of these factors establishes a pattern of work to be regarded as normally appropriate for a solicitor and, arguably, a definition of legal problems.
In fact, this definition would be highly restrictive because it depends upon the subjective views of both client and practitioner.
If a client does not identify a failure on the part of a landlord to make repairs to a rented house as a problem appropriate to a solicitor, or if a solicitor considered such a matter outside his or her field, it  would not, under such a definition, be a legal problem.
This cannot be right.
There have certainly been criticisms of the relatively narrow view which private practitioners have taken of their work (a failing which results partly from the type of legal education currently provided) and it is true that the introduction of the legal advice and assistance scheme in 1973 was intended to give solicitors the opportunity to take a wider range of work.
It did not succeed in this objective.
An alternative approach is to attempt an objective definition of problems which have a legal component by reference to a list or catalogue of types of problem.
This approach does not place the emphasis upon the problems with which solicitors do deal, but upon those with which they could deal.
The list is composed of a variety of types of problem including those traditionally accepted as legal by both lawyer and client, those regarded as legal by lawyers but not necessarily by clients and those not normally viewed by either as legal.
This approach was adopted by Abel-Smith, Zander and Brooke in their research into unmet legal need, published as Legal Problems and the Citizen.
Their approach led them to choose 17 specific and common situations as the basis of a questionnaire.
This approach was adopted because of the differing perceptions of what is a legal problem and the consequent inadequacy of a questionnaire which simply sought information on ‘legal problems.’
It is important to note what the purpose of the definition was before being too critical of the notion that legal problems can be objectively defined by reference to specific situations.
The authors acknowledged that ‘…new needs will come to be recognised and new legal remedies will come to be developed,’ but asserted that ‘…at any time there will be some problems which are clearly perceived by lawyers or lay [people]as more ‘legal’than others.’
An objective definition of this nature is inevitably open to criticism on the grounds of particular exclusions from, or inclusions in, the categories on the list and as to the extent of the categories themselves.
However, there is a more fundamental objection.
Such a definition involves the construction of categories within the general scope of the law and, though they may be widely drawn, is open to the same objection as a definition based upon the perceptions of solicitors.
It tends to be exclusive rather than inclusive, in that our thinking may be confined to those matters which fall within accepted categories rather than accepting that all situations to which the law pertains  can give rise to legal problems despite the fact that there is no immediately available legal framework for their solution.
A definition of a legal problem as ‘an unresolved difficulty to which the law is relevant,’ may appear to be far too vague and begging too many questions.
However, it may form the basis of a new approach to problems in which lawyers and advisers will not seek to establish the legal nature of the problem and then find the relevant law, but will rather seek to establish the nature of the problem and then contemplate whether any part of the law might be relevant.
Such a definition tries to indicate an approach, an attitude, rather than provide a litmus-paper test.
Three potential advantages of such an approach have been demonstrated by research projects and other developments in recent years.
First, it diminishes the tendency to distinguish between legal problems and, for example, social problems.
Even in some official reports there are discussions of social need or legal need and the likelihood of overlapping problems is too often ignored.
Any definition which helps to recognise that there may be substantial overlapping of legal and social issues, and that neither can be adequately dealt with in isolation is to be commended.
Consequently, the call in the Report of the Marre Committee for a response to the unmet need in relation to social welfare law (including housing law, immigration law and the law of debt) is to be welcomed.
Secondly, the inclusive approach may act as a positive encouragement to clients to make use of legal services.
It is often the case that a stumbling-block for those needing advice is how to identify the ‘correct’ agency to approach.
The legal profession seems to have a distinct image and the number of matters which are identified by the public as appropriate to a solicitor is relatively narrow.
The adoption of a more broadly-based approach would help.
Finally, the acceptance of a problem and consequent search for any law which might be relevant may disclose a novel application of the law or a new remedy.
It is certainly an approach which encourages the lawyer to use imagination in the solution of the problem.
We have considered alternative definitions of a legal problem and indicated what we consider to be the best working definition to adopt, but this discussion will remain largely academic (save in estimating the extent of unmet legal need) unless there is some effective way of ensuring that those who have legal problems, however defined, secure legal assistance.
C. LEGAL PROBLEMS AND THE USE OF LAWYERS
Some writers would not accept the proposition that the best people to assist with legal problems are always lawyers.
In an important article, Titmuss suggested that lay people are better advocates than lawyers in certain tribunals and the Consumer Council doubted the wisdom of allowing lawyers to practise in the new small claims courts which it proposed.
These arguments are based on the disadvantages of applying established legal techniques in situations where speed, flexibility and informality are the objectives of the tribunal.
Of course, the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 is designed to extend the types of people who may offer at least certain firms of legal services, but it remains to be seen whether this will make a dramatic difference by demystifying the provision of advice.
However, whilst noting that view, we are primarily concerned with the passage of legal problems through to lawyers and the reasons why that passage may become obstructed.
1.
WHO USES SOLICITORS
The survey of what the private profession do and for whom, conducted on behalf of the Royal Commission on Legal Services, reinforced the results of earlier, more limited, surveys and has largely been confirmed by more recent surveys.
The range of problems on which solicitors are consulted is quite narrow, and of 27 categories adopted in the survey, seven accounted for over 80 per cent.
of all matters taken to solicitors.
These seven were domestic conveyancing (30 per cent.); dealing with the estate of a dead person (11 per cent. ); making or altering wills (10 per cent. ); divorce and matrimonial (12 per cent. ); motoring and other offences (7 per cent. ); personal injuries compensation (7 per cent. ); and domestic property matters (5 per cent .).
In the 1989 Law Society survey, it was shown that the public associate solicitors most closely with conveyancing and property matters (68 per cent.), divorces and legal separations (35 per cent. ), wills and trusts (38 per cent. ), and law and order and criminal convictions (30 per cent .).
Following prompting, the respondents in the survey also associated solicitors with disputes between individuals, matters involving claims and compensation, debt and motoring offences.
Whether this pattern of usage of solicitors is evidence of a restricted perception of the sorts of matters with which solicitors deal or of a failure of people to approach solicitors knowing that they could help is unclear.
The Royal Commission survey showed that a number of people were aware that a solicitor could help, but, for a variety of reasons, failed to approach one.
Other surveys have found a much more limited perception of the solicitor's role.
The 1989 Survey revealed that many people are aware of other sources of advice and may well pursue them.
Care needs to be taken in assessing most of these figures in the present situation as there are two important recent changes.
First, more people are now permitted to undertake domestic conveyancing, which may mean that fewer people will see solicitors and this may cause solicitors to encourage greater use of their other services.
Secondly, solicitors are now permitted to advertise their services.
It seems to be clear that not enough use is made of solicitors for the solution of legal problems.
The reasons for this seem to fall into three categories: ignorance of what solicitors can do on the part of potential clients and a lack of preparedness in pursuing legal action, that is apathy; the public image of lawyers; and barriers against use, in particular cost and accessibility.
2.
IGNORANCE AND APATHY
The problem created by people generally not knowing what services solicitors can provide is well documented.
In the context of claims for personal injuries, it is clear that ignorance of the law dissuades potential claimants from seeking advice, and most people only seek legal advice after first obtaining advice from other services, which may be ill-informed and thus cause a person with a claim not to pursue it.
More generally, the Marre Committee was convinced by the evidence which it received that ignorance was a major cause of people not seeking legal advice when it was appropriate.
An aspect of the problem related to ignorance is that of apathy in the sense that a person says ‘it's not worth pursuing it’ or ‘let's just forget about it’or ‘it's just one of those things.’
the Oxford Study shows that apathy is a major reason in explaining why people do not seek legal advice.
The Marre Committee suggested that the solutions lie in four areas.
The first area is the teaching of legal awareness in schools, now being  undertaken through a collaborative project between the Law Society and the School Curriculum Development Committee on Law in Education.
The second area is that of public relations, by which is meant that good public relations exercises, as opposed to advertising, on the part of both individual lawyers and the professional bodies themselves should be encouraged.
The third area is that of media advertising by individual firms on the basis of the Solicitors' publicity Code, which would be of advantage not just to the firms but to potential clients as well.
The fourth area concerns information from the professional bodies, directed to specific areas, rather than generalised campaigns, which tend to be both expensive and ineffective.
3.
THE PUBLIC IMAGE
It has been convincingly argued that the image of an advice-giving agency is crucial because it is at the stage of identification of the appropriate agency that most people are obstructed on the way to the solution of their problem.
A strong image will assist in this identification, although it can act negatively as well as positively.
The Marre Committee made it clear that the image of lawyers is a particular problem.
The Committee identified two aspects of the problem.
First, there is a fear of lawyers.
The Committee took the view that lawyers are unapproachable because of the inaccessibility of premises and their unwelcoming nature, because the methods of work do not tie in with the needs of clients, and because of a lack of response to the needs of linguistic minorities.
Thus they recommended greater use of shop floor premises, encouraged innovative work practices, emphasised the need for interpreters and encouraged the professional bodies to assist people from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds to become established as lawyers.
Secondly, there is dissatisfaction with  lawyers .
It did not appear that this was a major problem.
Nevertheless, the occasional problems of delay, inefficiency or incompetence, overcharging, unhelpfulness, inconsiderateness and lack of communication were felt to be of sufficient concern to demand redress by the professions.
The 1989 Law Society survey showed that ‘the image of solicitors amongst the general public is good but not outstanding.’
In comparison with accountants, bank managers, NHS doctors and estate agents, they were found to be as easy to talk to as bank managers and easier to talk to than all the others bar NHS doctors, to be easier to understand than accountants and estate agents, to be more efficient than accountants and estate agents, to be  more hardworking than accountants, bank managers and estate agents, to be as dependable as bank managers and more dependable than accountants and estate agents, to be as up-to-date as accountants and more up-to-date than estate agents.
Solicitors were found to be ‘mainly on the make’ or ‘after your money’only less so than estate agents and to be regarded as reasonably honest.
In conclusion, the Survey indicated that its results demanded an emphasis on improvements in practice management and that the service could be faster and more responsive to users' needs.
It is interesting to note the different sorts of problems brought to lawyers in law centres and other advice agencies.
They do not seem to be burdened with the same difficulties as the private profession, presumably partly because of the different image of the agency involved and the different expectations of the client involved.
4.
BARRIERS
We have identified difficulties which may be encountered in realising that a problem has a legal dimension and in connecting that problem to the sort of work with which lawyers are commonly understood to deal.
There are, however, further barriers in the way of those needing legal advice, notably its cost and its accessibility.
The bodies and researchers which have considered the problem of access to lawyers all conclude that cost has a deterrent effect on seeking legal advice initially and then pursuing a claim.
This is not surprising in view of the apparent ignorance of the legal aid scheme.
The second barrier is that of the accessibility of lawyers.
If there are not enough lawyers, or they are not in the right place, knowing that a solicitor can be of assistance is of no value.
It is inappropriate simply to throw money at these problems in the hope that they will be consequently solved, since the resources available for deployment are necessarily limited.
Consequently, the recommendations made by, for example, the Marre Committee are much more specific in their treatment of the problem.
Whilst assistance with cost and redeployment of lawyers is part of the answer to the failure of many people to use lawyers, they are clearly hot the whole answer.
Indeed, public education about the nature of legal problems and the role of lawyers in solving them might be much more effective in the long run.
D. UNMET LEGAL NEED
It may appear that we consider that every problem with a legal component  requires legal assistance, for we have not proposed any other criterion for the provision of legal services than that a legal problem exists.
This may seem a profligate approach, yet just as there are difficulties in defining legal problems so there are difficulties in defining when an individual needs assistance.
It is obvious that the circumstances, financial resources and personal competence of individuals differ, as will the subjective importance of the matter.
How can a general proposition of need be formulated when there are so many personal variables?
Should any such proposition even be attempted?
In conducting their pioneering survey, Abel-Smith, Zander and Brooke were faced with this problem.
The solution they adopted was to assess, in respect of each category of problems identified, what would constitute ‘…a risk of substantial loss or disadvantage which would be important for the individual concerned.’
this standard differed for each category and it is difficult to see how it could be translated into a more general form.
Zander later acknowledged that the decisions as to what amounted to a need for advice in each category were conservative, highly artificial and suitable only for research purposes, and he described the test as ‘…necessarily crude and inadequate.’
Such comments illustrate the exceptional difficulty of defining need.
Others have not made the attempt.
In respect of the provision of legal aid, the test of need (usually described as a ‘merit’ test) is based upon whether a solicitor would advise a private client, with sufficient means to pay the costs, to assert or dispute the claim.
A similar test can hardly be applied to legal advice.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services recommended that an initial half-hour's worth of advice should be provided free of charge to anyone who requests it, despite the possibilities of abuse by those who have adequate financial resources.
This recommendation, which has not been implemented, appears to accept that legal need can be defined by reference to the existence of a legal problem on which an individual wishes to be advised, albeit that part of the half-hour would be used to examine the case and determine the ‘need’ for further advice.
At least the individual concerned would have got to the solicitor who might then be able to satisfy those further needs.
If it be conceded that the need for legal advice arises from the existence of a legal problem, the difficulties in meeting that need would appear to have been exposed earlier in the chapter.
However, studies demonstrate that obstructions on the way of obtaining legal advice have different effects on different sorts of people.
The most obvious differential obstruction is cost.
Some studies show that it is those in the higher socio-economic groups that use lawyers more often  than those in the lower groups.
On the basis of this evidence, it has been suggested that poverty is the primary cause of the failure to seek legal advice, and it has been proposed that the failure is due to a lack of ‘legal competence’ among the less affluent who suffer not only from lack of money, but also from lack of influence, lack of energy and lack of awareness.
One important study, the Oxford Study suggests, however, that people from the higher socio-economic groups are less likely to make a claim for damages consequent upon personal injury being suffered.
The most important factor in determining whether an accident victim obtains damages for injuries was found to be access to advice, both pre-legal and legal, which may be offered without it even being sought.
The importance of pre-legal advice was considerable.
Such advice came from a number of sources, not all of them well informed.
It came from the following advisers: trade union, medical, employer, police, potential defendant, AA/RAC, the advisee's own insurance company, workmate or fellow patient, friend, relative.
This finding confirms the need for considerable attention to be paid to general public education, to the various existing advice agencies and to such people as counter clerks, court officials, doctors and others in official agencies.
Taking in part a similar line, the Civil Justice Review has recommended staff training to enable court staff to give direct assistance to members of the public in the handling of their cases.
Needless to say, the answer to the problem of unmet legal need does not lie solely in the development of advice agencies.
Not all recipients of damages in the Study received ‘pre-legal advice.’
The evidence of the Users' Survey of the Royal Commission on Legal Services suggested that three quarters of the people who sought legal advice had received no help from people outside their household on the matter in question.
Further it suggested that of those people who did not go to a lawyer, a higher proportion had received help from outside the household, and of that group only one-quarter had received advice to go to a lawyer which they had ignored  Such contrary evidence does not denigrate the value of pre-legal advice, but suggests that, as would be expected, it is not the only significant factor in determining whether, and if so why and how, people seek legal advice.
The Oxford Study pointed out other significant factors in assessing the kinds of people who do not seek legal advice for a claim for damages for personal injuries.
Of particular interest, is the finding that, proportionately, women were less likely to seek damages, although, if they did, they were more likely to be successful.
Two other groups which were under-represented in terms of making such claims were the young and the elderly.
The needs here may well be partly dealt with by educational improvements and the importance of changing work practices and the image of lawyers.
It is quite possible that the extent of unmet legal need can never be ascertained and that which can be ascertained cannot adequately be explained.
The barriers are clear enough, what remains unclear is why some people are able to surmount them when others fail miserably.
E. INTERVENTION OF LAWYERS — THE ‘CREATING’ OF LEGAL PROBLEMS
Lawyers have not usually been slow in their individual involvement with causes and with legal reform, but questions have arisen over the extent to which it is proper to intervene in socio-legal problems as part of a professional service.
The law centre, in particular, has taken a broad view of its obligation to service the local community and some have been active in stimulating and articulating local protest.
Is this proper?
The Royal Commission on Legal Services concluded that this sort of work should not be part of the responsibilities of the citizens' law centres that were proposed.
What was identified as ‘…general community work…organising groups to bring pressure to bear…becoming a focus in the neighbourhood for campaigns,’ was said to be inappropriate for a legal service.
The Commission took the view that the responsibility of a legal service was the provision of legal advice and assistance to individuals, that community action tends to involve only one section of the community, and that the independence of a centre is compromised if it becomes a base for campaigns.
Consequently, they recommended that ‘campaigning’ should be funded from elsewhere and not undertaken by law centres.
The Report was published after a very interesting and well-argued case was made by the Adamsdown Community Trust for precisely the sort of intervention which the Report proscribed.
Independence was not compromised, it was stated, and although the identification of causes deserving of  support and finance from the advice agency might be questionable, in practice only those problems which gave real cause for community concern could be pursued successfully because of the need for public support.
It was also noted that interventionist action could include  leafleting in the area, talks to local groups and the preparation of kits and materials as well as the organisation of pressure groups and similar activities.
There may be difficulties in particular law centres in finding the right balance between assisting clients in individual cases and taking on group work or projects, but it seems unduly restrictive to deny that the latter was a proper role for lawyers to play.
INFORMATION AND ADVICE SERVICES
BY discussing in the preceding chapter the ways in which the public may perceive a problem as a ‘legal’ problem and the steps which the profession might take to assist in the identification of problems which require legal advice for their solution we have already indicated that we are concerned, in the main, with the provision of information and advice by lawyers.
However, legal advice is not provided solely by lawyers and it is certainly not restricted to those operating within the professional structure described in Chapter 3.
In this chapter we shall deal with the major advice-giving agencies prior to a discussion of the arrangements under which the private profession and the law centres provide legal advice and assistance.
A. THE SPECIAL FEATURES OF INFORMATION AND ADVICE PROVISION
A person may seek advice for one or more purposes and it is important to distinguish those who may need help in establishing whether they have a problem, those who need help in establishing what action they can take and those who need help in pursuing a remedy.
Even when the problem has been identified as having a legal perspective it is by no means certain that the client will conclude that a solicitor is the most appropriate source of advice.
Different agencies may assist in different situations and lawyers still labour under the handicap of their public image.
1.
WHICH AGENCY?
What are the factors which influence the choice of a particular agency?
Whilst there may be circumstances which influence individuals in their selection of an adviser, it seems likely that the crucial factors are availability, cost and reputation.
The distribution of advice agencies around the country leaves large areas (especially the rural districts) without some of the basic agencies, and even  within urban areas it is unusual to find solicitors, in particular, located in the districts with the greatest density of population.
Advice needs to be locally available.
The cost of obtaining advice becomes significant when a client considers using professional agencies.
Cost is obviously a factor which is balanced against the need for special skill or expertise, but it was an appreciation of the fears of the public about the financial consequences of visiting a solicitor which led the Royal Commission on Legal Services to recommend the ‘free initial half-hour’ despite the possibilities of abuse.
Many of the statutory and voluntary agencies provide advice without charge.
The reputation of a particular agency will depend on the public perception of its efficiency, its impartiality, its independence and its approachability.
That there is concern over the indifferent public image of the legal profession is evident — other agencies place varying degrees of emphasis upon different features of their reputation, some stressing their independence, others their approachability.
2.
WHAT HELP?
Information and advice may be different and may require different communication skills on the part of the adviser.
Again, advice and assistance may be different with the latter requiring some positive action on behalf of the client.
Most of the agencies that we shall be describing in the following sections would claim to offer information, advice and assistance but some are dubious as to the extent to which they should take action on behalf of a client and some will refer a matter on to specialists when they reach the limits of their competence.
This raises the question of the role of the specialist agency in relation to the generalist and the development of a referral system.
Co-ordination of generalist and specialist advice services is of prime importance and the National Consumer Council identified as a fundamental objective of a national advice system:
‘…
The achievement of a proper mix of specialist and voluntary services and of working links and effective referral systems for the handling of people's problems where more than one agency needs to be involved.’
We have already noted that lawyers can be expected to provide a whole range of help which would certainly include information, advice and assistance.
3.
GIVEN BY WHOM?
Some agencies we shall be discussing rely solely upon one type of adviser so that there is no dispute about suitability.
In others, however, there can be tensions over the relative desirability of volunteers and professionals.
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, for example, rely heavily upon volunteers with few paid advisers and it is argued that this gives the organisation a positive strength and a particularly good claim to independence and impartiality.
On the other hand, professional advisers (including lawyers) tend to lay emphasis upon the skill and expertise which are supposed to come with professional status and training.
The dispute between the volunteer and the professional is likely to continue but it should not be allowed to obscure the fact that the skills of the good adviser are not necessarily professional skills, nor are they especially lawyerly skills.
The client wants an adviser who can interview sympathetically, ascertain the facts, analyse the problem and suggest a course of action.
The expertise of the adviser in the particular problem which emerges will doubtless influence the proposed course of action (which might include a referral) but the preliminary advisory skills may be possessed by a volunteer as by a professional.
We shall return to these points later in the chapter but should now describe the range of information and advice agencies which will offer help with legal problems.
4.
THE OVERALL PICTURE
One point clearly illustrated in this chapter is that there is no overall strategy for the provision, co-ordination and funding of advice services.
There are many forms that such services may take; there is excessive reliance on the charity of volunteers to provide services that ought in principle to be publicly funded; funding problems seem to be chronic.
An attempt to look at the overall picture was made by the Royal Commission on Legal Services: its recommendations were widely criticised and largely ignored.
More recently, attention has been focused on the statutory legal advice scheme (and, indeed, legal aid generally), prompted, it seems, more by government concern at rising public expenditure costs than any serious wish that those who need but cannot afford legal services obtain them.
In 1986, the Legal Aid Efficiency Scrutiny, conducted by four civil servants from the Treasury and the Lord Chancellor's Department, made radical proposals for change.
Some, but not all, of its recommendations were implemented in the Legal  Aid Act 1988 (which also consolidated legal aid legislation).
The administration of the legal advice and assistance and civil legal aid schemes was transferred to a new Legal Aid Board, whose remit included that of considering fundamental changes in the administration of the schemes.
For a recent overview of the provision of legal services, it is necessary to look, outside the mainstream of governmental activity, to the National Consumer Council.
B. GENERALIST AGENCIES OFFERING LEGAL ADVICE
1.
THE CITIZENS' ADVICE BUREAUX
It is somehow ironic that the major generalist agency owes its existence to wartime necessity.
The CAB service has its origins in the combined operation set up in 1938 by the Ministry of Health, the National Council for Social Service and the Family Welfare Association to provide advice and information in an emergency.
The outbreak of war was the emergency and a centrally-funded national service came into being.
At the end of the war government assistance was withdrawn and local Bureaux were left to scrape along on what they could glean from local authorities and other sources.
Many disappeared.
The service was revived at the beginning of the 1960s by the injection of government funding and was stimulated by honourable mention from two major inquiries.
In 1962 the Molony Committee on Consumer Protection declared itself to be strongly in favour of the service and recognised its potential:
‘The aggrieved consumer needs an accessible local service to which he can take his troubles and where he will receive a realistic appraisal, a measure of help in presenting his case, or a pointer to the next step.
This need cannot be better filled than by the Citizens Advice Bureaux.’
In 1980 the Royal Commission on Legal Services reported that it had:
‘…identified a particular national advice service, provided by the citizens’ advice bureaux, which together form the largest and, in our view, the best placed organisation to provide a primary or first tier service.’
The central body, the National Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux was the subject of a review initiated by Dr. Gerard Vaughan, as Minister for Consumer Affairs, which described the C.A.B.
service as, ‘…an invaluable national asset.’
At the present time there are 709 Bureaux in the United Kingdom which are registered with the National Association of Citizens' Advice Bureaux (NACAB).
All these Bureaux are required to conform with national standards in their operation and to conform to the training requirements adopted by NACAB.
The advantage of membership of the national association is the receipt of the NACAB monthly information service and access to other support services.
The aims of the Citizens' Advice Bureaux service are:
‘— to ensure that individuals do not suffer through ignorance of their rights and responsibilities or of the services available; or through an inability to express their needs effectively;,— to exercise a responsible influence on the development of social policies and services, both locally and nationally.
The service therefore provides free to all individuals a confidential, impartial and independent service of information, guidance and support, and makes responsible use of the experience so gained.’
There is strong evidence that greater and greater use is being made of the CAB service.
In 1989–90 the service handled 6,959,276 enquiries, an increase of 38 per cent.
over 1982 — 83.
In the categorisations adopted by NACAB the greatest number of enquiries were concerned with social security (22.9 per cent.), consumer and debt (20.2 per cent. ), housing (11.6 per cent. ), employment (10.2 per cent. ), family and personal (9.9 per cent. ), and administration of justice (7.5 per cent .).
In relation to those enquiries which have a legal content, a Citizens’ Advice Bureau may adopt one of a number of approaches.
It may train its advisers sufficiently to be able to give para-legal advice in those cases which do not require professional assistance; it may refer the client to a solicitor; it may arrange a rota scheme whereby a solicitor attends at the CAB office to see clients; it may try to appoint its own solicitor.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services gave a firm indication of how it considered the CAB should resolve the conflict between its generalist role and the inclination to become involved in specialist areas:
‘…
The functions to be fulfilled by the CAB service [must]be defined with care.
There is sometimes a tendency for a generalist service to expand into specialisms with which it is in daily contact.
If this were to happen in the case of the CAB, they would have lost their primary purpose as first tier advisory agencies; there would be duplication of effort, waste of public money and, in all probability, deterioration in the quality of specialised advice provided.’
In 1989–90 the financial assistance from central government amounted to £9M.
Three quarters of the money goes to maintain the national organisation and to provide central services for Bureaux.
The remainder is used to set up new bureaux or develop existing ones, with grant tapering down by year 3 or 4.
The running expenses of the actual Bureaux are met mainly from local sources.
Almost all local authorities now fund a CAB, with total funding near £23M, although there is growing evidence that difficulties for local authorities arising from the community charge may in turn put pressure on CAB funding.
2.
NEIGHBOURHOOD ADVICE CENTRES
These are informal groups operating in a wide diversity of localities and conditions, with very different structures and objectives.
In general they offer assistance with all types of problem but are often to be found in the areas of urban development and rehousing which are likely to expose housing, welfare benefit and educational problems.
About two-thirds provide a generalist advice service, and about one third, general assistance to a specific group of users,(e.g. women, the elderly, ethnic minority communities).
These centres may attract finance from a variety of sources, mainly local authorities, and there has been some government funding.
3.
YOUNG PEOPLE'S ADVISORY AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
There are over 70 generalist agencies providing information, advice and counselling to young people.
They are federated nationally to the National Association of Young people's Counselling and Advisory Services (NAYPCAS), which has a small secretariat funded by the Home Office.
The largest proportion of funds is received through local authorities.
4.
THE MEDIA
It is impossible to ignore the increasing use of the media as a source of  information and advice.
Quite apart from the communication of information of all kinds which is the function of radio, television and the press, more and more time is being devoted to the provision of general and specific advice, usually at the request of individuals.
This development is not unconnected with the development of local radio and the popularity of the phone-in programme.
Depending on resources, the media can respond to enquiries in much the same way as any other agency.
The particular organisation can build up its own expertise; it can acquire answers which are then relayed; it can refer the enquirer to another agency; it can bring in specialists to answer the enquiries direct.
Legal advice frequently forms the basis of specific programmes or articles, no doubt because of the inherent fascination of legal problems for the lay people.
There is also some credit to be gained by radio, television or the press where an individual's problem is solved and (as it is normally represented) the forces of darkness are vanquished.
C. SPECIALIST AGENCIES OFFERING LEGAL ADVICE TO THE PUBLIC
1.
CONSUMER ADVICE CENTRES
The high percentage of enquiries to the CABx concerning consumer, trade and business affairs demonstrates the particular need for specialist advice in the field.
Before 1970 it was largely left to the Weights and Measures Departments of local authorities to enforce those statutes which gave protection to the consumer of goods and they often took the view that they had no competence to deal with complaints which did not indicate a possible breach of the criminal law.
It was a combination of pressure from the Consumers’ Association; the introduction of more consumer protection legislation; the injection of national government funding and the reorganisation of local government in 1974 that led to the establishment of some 110 Consumer Advice Centres run by local authorities by the end of 1976.
These centres provided both pre-shopping advice on quality, fitness and ‘value for money’ and a complaints service for disgruntled consumers.
In most places they were very closely integrated with the (newly-named) Trading Standards Department.
They attracted criticism from a number of quarters and only 29 remain, run by the Trading Standards Departments of 20 local authorities; the remainder fell victim to a political change in the relevant local authority coupled with the withdrawal of central government funding.
It is unfortunate that the CACs were seen as a political football and they provide an interesting indication of what might possibly happen were all legal services to be funded from local or central government.
There were advantages for the consumer in the close links between the centres and the enforcement mechanisms of Trading Standards Departments.
2.
HOUSING ADVICE
Housing advice centres were coming into existence at about the time that the first law centre was being opened, and it is not unrealistic to attribute their inception to the generally increased awareness of the need for advice services.
However, the direct impetus came from the Seebohm Report in 1968, which recommended the establishment of an official housing advice agency to give assistance with, inter alia, landlord and tenant problems, public health legislation and rent fixing.
The obligation to provide such a service should rest, it was said, with the local authority.
In the event the first two centres demonstrated the dual approach to much advisory work in that one was set up by a local authority (in Lambeth) and one by voluntary bodies (in South Kensington).
That pattern has continued: a majority of the centres now in operation are run by the local authority, and the rest are independent, many either run by or associated with Shelter.
Financial assistance from the Urban Aid programme acted as an inducement to many local authorities and Department of the Environment schemes fund some centres directly.
One obvious limitation of local authority-run centres is that unlike the independent centres they cannot help local authority tenants and homeless applicants fight legal battles against the authority.
A separate development has seen the establishment of a variety of arrangements offering advice and perhaps representation to defendants to possession actions in the county court.
There are about 20 at present; they offer a valuable service, and are generally welcome Models include a permanent welfare officer available at the county court, rota schemes for duty lay advisers from local advice agencies, and duty schemes staffed by private practitioners.
The major stumbling block to the last of these is that solicitors can only be remunerated for advice under the green form scheme.
The regulations governing assistance by way of representation (ABWOR) in county courts were tightened in 1989 to exclude arranged schemes.
3.
MONEY ADVICE CENTRES
The provision of specialist money advice expanded significantly in the 1980s.
In 1982, the National Consumer Council identified 16 money advice centres in Britain.
By 1986 there were over a hundred specialist money advice services, all but four in England and Wales, taking the form either of individual advisers within a larger unit or of separate units.
The majority were based in CAEx, some in local authorities,(e.g. in social services departments or to support rent officers), and there were six voluntary sector money advice centres.
NACAB have established five Money Advice Support Units, with funding from private sector credit agencies.
A policy Studies Institute report concluded that specialist money advice was helpful to debtors, particularly multiple debtors.
Advisers had skills in negotiating with individual creditors and in planning an overall strategy of negotiation among several creditors, arising out of their knowledge of the legal position, experience of previous negotiations, the ability to communicate in a businesslike way, and their position as independent third parties.
The location of money advice services is, however, haphazard.
The case for expansion is strong, with debt ‘one of the fastest growing problems of the 1980s,’ but they are as much a victim of the lack of a coherent overall strategy as other advice services.
4.
WELFARE RIGHTS UNITS
In 1986, 65 local authorities, usually in urban areas and Labour controlled, employed specialist welfare rights workers.
There might be a single worker employed by the council or a team.
Their work comprises the provision of direct advice services to claimants, including casework and tribunal representation, the promotion of benefits through campaigns, publicity and work with local groups, support and training for other advice givers, both among  council staff and in the voluntary sector, and influencing the policy and practice of public agencies.
5.
CHARITIES AND PRESSURE GROUPS
Organisations with charitable status operating in a particular field often acquire knowledge and expertise which can prove extremely valuable to individuals who may be in need of that sort of advice.
The housing charity, Shelter, was in at the beginning of the Housing Advice Centre movement and the Child poverty Action Group has been extremely active in the field of welfare rights.
DIAL (Disablement Information and Advice lines) give a great deal of assistance to people who are disabled or who have a disabled relative, and Gingerbread, the charity concerned with one-parent families, does much educative and advisory work.
The Claimants Union has been active in the field of social security and welfare benefits and, in some areas of the country, offers advice and representation at tribunals to those in need.
D. SPECIALIST AGENCIES OFFERING LEGAL ADVICE TO MEMBERS
One of the benefits of membership of some organisations is that specialist legal advice is made available, normally connected with the main business of the organisation.
This may be done through the employment of lawyers within the organisation or by the engagement of lawyers in private practice at the expense of the organisation.
It is not proposed to list all the groups providing this sort of service, merely to select three examples.
1.
THE TRADE UNIONS
Legal services provided through a trade union have been, and remain, a significant factor in the recruitment and retention of members.
It appears that most, if not all, trade unions offer some form of legal advice service to members although it is likely to be restricted to those matters which touch  directly on employment.
The unions have been heavily involved in the development of industrial injuries law; common law claims arising out of accidents at work; employment law; and health and safety standards.
Additionally, they provide representation at Social Security Appeal Tribunals and at industrial Tribunals.
This has placed trade unions in something of a dilemma.
Whilst their representatives might wish to see a general extension of legal services in the public sector, they would not wish the value of their own legal services to members to diminish.
The TUC evidence to the Royal Commission on Legal Services appeared to place greater emphasis upon the preservation of the union role in advice-giving than on a general expansion of legal services.
This position was reaffirmed by the exclusion of employment-related matters from the Unionlaw scheme launched in 1989.
The unions provide advice in a variety of ways, some using legal staff engaged for the purpose and others relying on the general full-time officials supported by recourse to the private practitioner.
The professional associations will normally offer a legal advice service in exactly the same way as trade unions and in the medical profession specific groups have been established to provide insurance cover and assist members who are sued.
2.
THE MOTORING ORGANISATIONS
The Automobile Association and the Royal Automobile Club provide a variety of benefits for their members which includes legal advice.
Naturally, this is confined to motoring but can include the cost of representation in summary proceedings as well as advice on claims and general motoring law, disputes with garages, and claims arising out of accidents.
The benefits offered by the AA are not as substantial as they may, at first sight, appear since the free legal representation scheme may be withheld altogether at the discretion of the Association; the AA will not negotiate in respect of the defence of claims made against members; the AA cannot give advice or act where the Association or any of its subsidiary companies may be involved.
Notwithstanding these limitations, members must be reassured by such a scheme and it must be an aid to recruitment.
3.
THE CONSUMERS' ASSOCIATION
The CA began in 1957 as a small group publishing a magazine with the results of the comparative testing of aspirins and kettles and has since then  become a multi-million pound operation with influence over manufacturers and retailers as well as those responsible for the formulation of consumer policy.
The information function is performed through the magazine Which? available to subscribers but having a general impact because of its availability in libraries and the extent to which it is referred to and talked about.
The value of the information lies in its comparative nature and in the reputation for thoroughness which the CA has acquired.
Unfavourable mention in Which? is regarded as a major problem for well-known manufacturers.
On the legal advice side, the CA operates a legal service for individual members on payment of a separate subscription.
Legal advice, in the form of answers to readers' questions, is also contained in the magazines, and there are statements of law in other CA publications.
E. LAW CENTRES
One of the most significant developments in the provision of legal advice and assistance over the last 20 years has been the emergence of law centres.
Drawing some inspiration from the American system of neighbourhood law firms but adapting themselves to local conditions and the rules of the legal profession in this country, the law centres now provide a local base for the dissemination of legal services outside the private profession.
1.
THE BEGINNING
Some provision was made for the giving of legal advice by salaried solicitors outside the ambit of private practice in the Legal Aid and Advice Act 1949, but the part of the Act which would have established full-time paid solicitors located at the Legal Aid Area Headquarters and travelling to smaller places was never brought into force.
An alternative scheme for the provision of advice was proposed and adopted after 10 years of pressure had failed to get the original scheme implemented.
The real origins of the law centre movement are usually attributed to the publication of pamphlets by the lawyers of the Conservative and Labour parties and the individual initiative of pioneers who became impatient at the  slowness of the official bodies to respond to the pressure for change.
Justice for All analysed the unmet need for professional legal services and proposed the establishment of local legal centres in places of deprivation, to be staffed by salaried lawyers and to exist with and be supplemental to the private profession.
It was suggested that the type of work undertaken by the centres should be restricted but that they should be free of those rules of professional etiquette (e.g. advertising and touting for business) which would inhibit their work.
It is not, perhaps, surprising that the solution of the Conservative lawyers in their pamphlet, Rough Justice, to the same problem of unmet legal need was the introduction of subsidies for practitioners operating privately in deprived areas and an extension of the assistance given by lawyers to voluntary advice agencies.
However, they were prepared to countenance the appointment of salaried lawyers as a last resort.
The Law Society was striking various poses in 1968 and 1969, but from apparently implacable opposition to the original scheme of salaried solicitors contemplated in the 1949 Act (to depart from the alternative system adopted in 1959 would be ‘a serious mistake’) and the proposals of Justice for All, it moved to acceptance of salaried solicitors as part of its own proposals for an Advisory Liaison Service.
This Service would provide legal help to CABx and other social agencies, similar to that hitherto provided by solicitors to CABx on an honorary basis; would establish close liaison between the local profession and CABx and other social services; would provide oral advice for the public in cases that could be readily disposed of; would maintain permanent advisory centres where necessary, offering advice and assistance short of proceedings or representation in court; and would set up permanent local centres offering representation in magistrates' courts and county courts and the conduct of litigation so far as this could not be absorbed by solicitors' firms.
Part II of the Legal Advice and Assistance Act 1972 contained provisions which appeared to be designed to give the Law Society power to carry out these proposals.
The Lord Chancellor's Legal Aid Advisory Committee had already indicated that the Law Society should be given these powers, but it, and the Law Society, were then frustrated by the failure of successive governments to bring this part of the Act into force.
In fact, the Law Society had minimal involvement in projects connected with the Advisory Liaison Service.
2.
DEVELOPMENT
Impatient of the slow progress made through the ‘official channels’ local lawyers and community workers set up a law centre in North Kensington in 1970.
After a lapse of three years a variety of centres emerged in 1973/74; by October 1982 there were 38 centres around the country, and by 1987 — 88 61.
The struggle for most of the centres has been for funds.
There are a variety of sources ranging from the Urban programme of the Department of the Environment to charities but there has been much uncertainty about funding, the Legal Aid Annual Reports regularly referring to the financial problems of particular centres.
Law centres can, of course, earn money through taking on work financed under the statutory legal advice scheme.
The other problem which affected some law centres was the necessity to obtain exemption (a ‘waiver’) from the professional rules of etiquette imposed by the Law Society.
The particular rules in question related to advertising and touting and became the focus for the antagonism which some established members of the profession displayed towards the new centres.
After much acrimony an agreement was reached in 1977 about the conditions under which the Law Society would grant waivers to law centres and it was thereafter no longer a source of difficulty.
The objective of the operation of the power to grant waivers was to produce harmonious relations between lawyers and to ensure that the roles of the ‘public’ and ‘private’sectors of the profession continued broadly to complement one another.
3.
WORK
As there are many centres, so there are many different ways of operating, but in a survey conducted for the Royal Commission an extract from a document prepared by the Legal Action Group was found helpful, not only for the description of law centres, but also for the distinction it drew between their function and that of legal advice centres.
‘Legal advice centres are staffed by volunteer lawyers (solicitors, barristers and articled clerks) and have limited opening hours.
The centres are essentially for advice and usually offer only a limited  amount, if any, of further assistance.
There is no charge for the service….
The telephone, where there is one, may be staffed only during advice sessions….
Law centres employ full-time staff, including lawyers, and will handle a client's case from beginning to end, including representation in court or at a tribunal.
The service is free unless the centre explains otherwise.
Law centres vary in the services that they provide for individual clients.
(a) They are all restricted to acting for clients living (or sometimes working) within a limited geographical area round the centre.
(b) They all operate on a very broad restriction against acting for clients who can afford to pay solicitors’ fees.
(c) They are restricted in the kind of work they undertake.
This varies from centre to centre but most specialise in landlord/ tenant, juvenile crimes and care cases, employment and welfare benefits.
(d) Some centres concentrate on group work and do little individual case work.
All centres may be prepared to give preliminary advice to clients falling outside these categories….’
It is important to point out the major differences between the work of law centres and that of the private profession.
The subject-matter of the problems dealt with by a law centre will tend to reflect local community conditions and housing, employment, social security and consumer problems are likely to be predominant.
These problems may be sought out by a law centre with a view to running ‘campaigns’ to benefit all those in the local community who may be in similar difficulties.
It is in the nature of a law centre that the test case strategy will be utilised more extensively because the perception of community need will be greater and because limited resources may best be deployed through group work.
The division of work between the private profession and the law centre has not been based entirely on the choice of clients in deciding which problems to bring in to the law centre.
Until 1990, the waiver agreement required that a law centre should not normally deal in particular matters, save in an emergency or for the provision of initial advice, or for other carefully circumscribed reasons.
Conveyancing, divorce, probate and criminal matters concerning adults were all in this category.
Thus, the profession was protected against competition from law centres in these matters but was not required to refrain from dealing in those matters which ‘normally’ go to law centres.
This overlap has raised some difficulty about the extent to which a client should be expected to contribute to the cost of the services received.
Traditionally, the law centres have not levied any charges on those using the service.
This means that there is financial discrimination operating between those clients who use a law centre and those who may go to a solicitor with the same problem and who will then have to pay fees or a contribution towards the cost under the Legal Aid or Legal Advice schemes.
Should the law centres operate a means test?
Or should certain classes of work be reserved exclusively for law centres?
Or should we continue to accept the anomaly?
In practice, research on the overall provision of legal services in particular areas shows that CABx, law centres and private practitioners tend to establish co-operative and complementary relationships.
The establishment of a law centre may lead to the development of local legal aid solicitors' practices, to some extent relying on referrals from the law centre.
4.
THE FUTURE
It is clear that law centres have played a significant part in the provision of legal advice, but there are contrasting indications about their future wellbeing.
Some have run into considerable financial and political difficulty.
The long and bitter dispute in Hillingdon which culminated in the closure of the centre in April 1979 and the closure of the three Wandsworth law centres in January 1980 illustrate the problems faced by law centres.
Others have had to rely on government funding to keep going, although funding from the Department of the Environment through the Urban Programme has been restricted and only seven centres have been funded on a continuing basis by the Lord Chancellor's Department, and (fir the time being) the Legal Aid Board.
Following the abolition of the G.L.C. and the metropolitan county councils under the Local Government Act 1985 there were difficulties in securing funding from successor councils, and there were further difficulties from 1988 with the rate-capping or charge-capping of particular local authorities.
On the other hand, there is the evidence of new law centres opening.
The Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee has argued in vain that law centres should be treated as an essential part of the national network of legal services and that the Lord Chancellor should take on responsibility for their core funding.
The Legal Aid Board has said itself to be impressed with the contribution of law centres to the provision of legal services in the areas they serve.
However, it intends to continue general funding for its seven in the short term only.
Future funding from the Board to law centres would be for cases done under the green forms and legal aid schemes, including any new arrangements that might be developed, ‘and possibly grants for specific types of work where the law centres could demonstrate that they would provide a better and more efficient service in ways that did not lend themselves to payment on a case by case basis.’
Beyond that, law centres would be expected to look to local authorities and other sources to fund work arising out of other needs of the communities they serve.
F. SOLICITORS IN PRIVATE PRACTICE
For all the varieties of advice agency that have flourished in the past decade it is still the established legal profession which is the major purveyor of legal advice.
The role of the private practitioner has, however, been called into question in respect of two of the requirements of an advice agency discussed at the beginning of this chapter, namely the cost and availability of the service.
Evidence that the cost of a solicitor's advice (together with fear about cost) and the relative inaccessibility of many offices combined to deter large sections of the community from using a solicitor led to speculation about the degree of ‘unmet legal need’ which exists.
It was that speculation and accompanying doubts about the ability of the private practitioner to meet this need which led to the rapid growth of interest in alternative means of providing legal advice.
Other agencies have already been described — we are now concerned with the response of the private profession to these problems of cost and access.
If clients are able to pay the bill they can get advice from a solicitor as often as they desire and on whatever topic they choose.
If they cannot pay the bill they must rely on the services provided voluntarily by solicitors and barristers; or a law centre; or come within the statutory advice scheme; or use another agency; or do without.
1.
VOLUNTARY SCHEMES
It is unnecessary to go too far back in history to discover the origins of some of the voluntary schemes for the provision of legal advice which now exist.
Lawyers have traditionally been generous with their time and talents, more so than any other profession except, perhaps, medicine, and they are accustomed to rendering assistance to those who are genuinely unable to afford professional fees.
This help took the form of the poor persons' procedure in litigation but it was realised that procedures were no good unless those who might need them were aware of them.
From the beginning of this century there was a growing awareness of the need for legal advice.
However, in 1944 the Rushcliffe Committee were still able to conclude that there was no organised provision for legal advice throughout the country.
Amongst the disorganised provision were to be found examples of clients who would never be charged by solicitors; advice-giving by stipendiary magistrates, magistrates' clerks, and county court registrars; a poor Man's Lawyer service in London and the provinces staffed by volunteers; trade union legal advice and Citizens' Advice Bureaux.
Of these the Poor Man's Lawyer scheme involved the greatest number of solicitors and barristers, having begun at Toynbee Hall in 1893 and spread from there.
Cambridge House Legal Advice Centre and Mary Ward Settlement Centre flourished on either side of the Thames.
These are the direct forerunners of the legal advice centres now to be referred to and all such centres relied exclusively on volunteer professional legal personnel.
(a) Legal advice centres
These have already been compared with law centres earlier in this chapter and it was noted then that they are staffed by volunteer lawyers, have limited opening hours, offer only advice, and make no charge for the service provided.
There are 100 or so such centres and they can attribute their origins to the individual legal and charitable initiatives of members of the profession.
They operate to give advice and to act as a referral agency for the private profession.
(b) Rota schemes
The CAB service has taken the initiative in setting up a system of advisory sessions in which local solicitors, operating on a rota, give free legal advice to clients who have been ‘booked in’ to a special session by a local CAB.
These sessions are particularly appropriate where the bureau worker is of the opinion that the problem can be dealt with in one interview with a  solicitor, but it is permissible for the solicitor taking the session to accept the interviewee as his or her own client if further advice is needed.
More and more Bureaux are establishing this arrangement with the consent and encouragement of the Law Society and the goodwill of very many members of the profession.
The importance of the rota scheme should not be underestimated.
It ensures that the solicitor only sees those clients who have been identified by a volunteer worker as being in need of professional advice; it provides a free initial interview to encourage those who may be worried about cost; and it permits the solicitor to take on those clients who may need more extensive legal assistance.
The drawback, inevitably, is that everything is dependent upon the existence of a CAB in the area, its willingness to set up the scheme, and the co-operation of the local profession.
The development of such schemes ought to be assured since they were commended by the Royal Commission, are greatly valued by NACAB and has the support of the Law Society.
However, in 1988 over 300 bureaux still lacked schemes.
(c) General
There is some evidence that solicitors also provide a form of gratuitous legal advice by waiving their charges in respect of a short initial consultation which does not require action on their part or a further interview.
This is partly philanthropic and partly economic — it may cost more to process the bill and collect the money than to write off the charge!
Needless to say, this service is not advertised but nonetheless appreciated.
More formally, solicitors may offer a ‘£5 fixed fee interview.’
this is an initial interview for up to half an hour for which the maximum charge will be £5.
There is also an Accident Legal Advice Service (ALAS!), whereby solicitors offer a free interview to accident victims.
Solicitors willing to offer either of these services are indicated in the Solicitors Regional Directory.
The fixed fee interview scheme has not been successful.
Although many solicitors offer fixed fee interviews they are given little publicity beyond referral lists and notices in some solicitors' offices.
Most clients who seek them in fact qualify for green form assistance and they are comparatively uncommon.
Most participating solicitors seem unenthusiastic.
An accident leaflet scheme was started in 1978 in the North West.
Leaflets were distributed which gave information about personal injury claims, suggested various sources of help and also offered a free interview with a solicitor.
The scheme was regarded as successful in encouraging victims to claim who would not otherwise have done so.
About a third of local law  societies started similar schemes but many gave up following opposition from doctors.
The scheme was relaunched in June 1987 on a national basis under the title ALAS!
It has been much better publicised and early results have been encouraging.
2.
THE GREEN FORM SCHEME
We have already noted that the Legal Aid and Advice Act 1949 made provision for the establishment of a statutory system of legal advice, but that the appropriate part of the Act was never brought into force.
After 10 years of effort to get some form of advice scheme started the Law Society settled for the introduction, in 1959, of two schemes designed to alleviate the growing problem.
Both relied heavily upon the goodwill of the private profession because the payment involved was minimal.
The Statutory Advice Scheme (the ‘pink form’ scheme) was means-tested with the top limit for eligibility set very low, involved an initial payment of half-a-crown by the client and permitted the solicitor to claim £1 per half-hour from the Law Society up to a maximum of £3.
The scheme was not greatly used and was complemented by a Voluntary Advice Scheme under which solicitors would give up to half-hour's advice for a fiat fee of £1 paid by the client irrespective of means.
The current ‘green form’ scheme came into existence with the passing of the Legal Advice and Assistance Act 1972, and a fixed fee interview scheme was resurrected in 1977.
(a) Administration
As the Legal Aid scheme was given to the Law Society to administer in 1949 and it had also been responsible for the voluntary and statutory schemes in 1959 it was quite logical that the Law Society should also run the new advice scheme and that it should use the local and regional structure which already existed to administer the legal aid scheme.
Indeed, the basis of the new scheme had been proposed by the Law Society itself in a memorandum published in 1968.
Administration of the scheme passed to the Legal Aid Board on April 1, 1989, under the Legal Aid Act 1988.
However, it is notable that the individual practitioner has far more discretion in legal advice than legal aid, and need only refer to the Area Director where he or she requires an extension to the financial limit placed on the amount of advice which can be given.
He or she also has power to refuse for good cause to accept an application or to decline to give advice.
(b) Scope
The object of the green form scheme is to make readily available a cheap and effective source of legal advice for those who would otherwise be unable to afford it.
To that end, a solicitor may give oral or written advice on the application of English law to any particular circumstances in relation to the person seeking the advice, and on any steps which he or she might appropriately take.
the client may also be given ‘assistance’ in taking those steps.
If necessary, the solicitor may seek the advice of counsel but this may be difficult because of the financial limits imposed.
It will be observed that although the range of matters which fall within the scheme is very wide, the solicitor is limited to the giving of advice and assistance and not representation.
Since legal aid is also unavailable for representation at the vast majority of tribunals, the scheme was immediately criticised for leaving out of its scope those who needed the services of an advocate at a tribunal.
This was alleged to be a very serious omission, and a great handicap to the efficacy of the scheme.
In fact, various techniques and a belated statutory intervention have combined to lessen the effect of the omission.
It is, of course, possible for a solicitor's written advice to include a ‘brief’ for the client to read out at a tribunal hearing.
Alternatively, the solicitor may accompany the client to the hearing and advise him or her orally as a McKenzie adviser in the course of the hearing.
This can be very tiresome for the tribunal with the constant interruptions and the solicitor may end up as advocate.
provided that the tribunal does not object to the ‘representation’ of the client, and the Area Director has approved an application for any extension, the solicitor can in practice act as advocate for the client and get paid.
Finally, the Legal Aid Act 1979 made special provision for ‘assistance by way of representation’ in certain situations and this development is considered further below.
Another limitation placed upon the scheme is the amount of advice which a solicitor is permitted to give without reference to the Area Director.
From March 1973 (when the scheme started) until October 1980 this figure stood at £25 worth of advice.
It was subsequently raised to £40 in October 1980 and £50 in November 1983.
The limit in respect of advice in relation to undefended divorce proceedings had been raised to £45 in April 1977 when legal aid ceased to be available for such proceedings and that figure was subsequently raised to £55 in 1979, £75 in 1981 and £90 in 1985.
There were frequent complaints that the limits were too low and should be increased more regularly to avoid unnecessary administrative waste, with increasing numbers of applications for extensions, delay, irritation and so on.
From April 1, 1989, the limit for advice and assistance provided to a petitioner for divorce or judicial separation has been three times the sum for preparation for magistrates' court criminal proceedings; and in other cases, two times that sum.
Accordingly, in future the limit will rise with increase in the hourly remuneration rates, which should ease the position.
Further limitations were introduced in 1989 when considerable restrictions were placed on the use of the scheme for conveyancing and wills.
Conveyancing services are now only covered where they are necessary to implement a court order, or an agreement made in matrimonial proceedings, or where the client is proposing to enter a rental purchase agreement or conditional sale agreement.
Advice and assistance in making a will can only be given to a client who is over 70, or disabled or suffering from a mental disorder (or a parent or guardian wishing to provide for such a person), or a single parent wishing to appoint a testamentary guardian.
The exclusion of wills and conveyancing originated in a recommendation of the Legal Aid Scrutiny that public money should be directed towards the enforcement or defence of rights and not simply to enable clients to arrange their own affairs.
The recommendation, and its ultimate partial acceptance, have been criticised on the grounds that lack of legal advice at an early stage may simply lead to disputes later on, to be resolved with the support of legal aid, and that the cost savings were unlikely to be substantial.
(c) Eligibility
Would-be recipients of advice under the green form scheme must demonstrate their eligibility by complying with a means test.
The result of the application of the test will establish entitlement to advice free of charge; or  entitlement subject to a contribution; or disentitlement.
The test is administered by the solicitor who will require information about the ‘disposable capital’ and ‘disposable income’of the applicant.
An applicant in receipt of income support or family credit is automatically entitled to advice without payment of contribution provided that his or her capital does not exceed the prescribed limits.
The financial criteria are altered from time to time by regulations.
A client who has disposable capital in excess of the prescribed limit is not entitled to assistance at all; a client who has disposable income in excess of the lower limit is liable to pay a contribution towards the cost of the advice.
A person who has disposable income in excess of the higher limit becomes disentitled.
The solicitor calculates entitlement by use of the ‘Key Card’ and the green form itself.
The Key Card and the green form are intended to be placed side by side and are reproduced on pages 448–451.
The card discloses the financial limits, the range of contributions and the advice given to the solicitor on the completion of the form.
One further point to note is that the Legal Aid Board may exercise a statutory charge on any money or property recovered or preserved by the client in respect of unpaid fees.
Even though there are both specific and general exemptions from this provision it is so important to the client that the solicitor must be at pains to explain its effect very carefully to an applicant for legal advice.
(d) Assistance by way of representation
The Legal Aid Act 1979, extended the scope of legal advice and assistance so as to include within the ambit of the scheme, ‘assistance by way of representation’(ABWOR) at certain designated proceedings.
Whilst the new provisions appeared to create a very wide power to use the scheme for representation in all manner of courts, tribunals or statutory inquiries, the detailed implementation of the section was left to regulations to be made by the Lord Chancellor, whose approach has been cautious.
From April 18, 1980, the green form scheme became available for domestic proceedings in magistrates' courts, transferring the cost of representation from civil legal aid to legal advice.
The Supplementary Benefits Commission (who then carried out the means assessment in legal aid) were released from 50,000 assessments a year, but the overall effect was minimal.
Indeed, there was some inconsistency in the provisions since the capital limits for legal advice and legal aid were different and some applicants might still be  forced to apply for legal aid.
Since 1980, ABWOR has been made available in Mental Health Review Tribunals (from 1982); prison disciplinary proceedings before a board of visitors where legal representation has been granted (from 1984); and in respect of applications for warrants of further detention (or extensions) under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (from 1986).
There is also provision for ABWOR to be provided at the request of a magistrates' court or a county court by a solicitor within the precincts of the court for purposes other than the provision of ABWOR, where the court considers that the case should proceed the same day and that the client would not otherwise receive representation.
The client must not have previously been refused representation.
ABWOR would only be highly significant if it were to be used for a much wider range of proceedings, especially those for which legal aid is not available.
One critic expressed fears that it might ‘…become a new kind of legal aid on the cheap,’ yet others were concerned lest it be thought that the green form was appropriate for anything other than low-cost proceedings.
The Law Society conceded that it might ‘…be suitable for some tribunal proceedings or even some criminal proceedings in magistrates’ courts,’but remained ‘firmly convinced of the necessity for retaining the certificate [legal aid]procedure for cases which are likely to be lengthy and costly.’
At least the powers are there in the statute and have been used in some cases.
ABWOR is a useful peg for piecemeal extensions of publicly-funded representation.
A solicitor is required to obtain authority to use the green form scheme in such proceedings.
An application must be made to the Area Director, and there is a right to appeal against a refusal to the area committee.
Eligibility depends on the client's resources: the income limits and contributions are the same as for the ordinary green form scheme, but the capital limit is different.
Counsel may be briefed with the approval of the Area Director; assistance may be withdrawn in certain circumstances; costs may be awarded out of the legal aid fund to an unassisted party; the statutory charge operates   subject to specified exceptions.
All these provisions indicate the hybrid nature of assistance by way of representation.
Legal advice in form — legal aid in substance.
(e) Duty solicitor schemes
The first duty solicitor scheme was initiated by the Bristol Law Society in 1972 with the objective of discovering whether there were defendants appearing before Bristol Magistrates who were in need of legal advice but not receiving it.
Experienced solicitors took turns in seeing defendants in custody and those referred to them by the court so that they could advise (not represent) an appropriate course of action.
This could involve an adjournment for legal aid application, social welfare report, referral to another solicitor, bail application or simply suggestions for a plea in mitigation.
All those involved in the Bristol scheme (local law society, magistrates, magistrates' clerks and police) expressed themselves to be satisfied with the result and this scheme provided the model for others which followed.
Since the development of schemes was left to local initiative and was dependent upon the co-operation of the local magistrates' court, national coverage was patchy and the services offered were variable.
By mid-1975 there were 29 duty solicitor schemes operating and the Law Society, in consultation with other interested parties, prepared and published a guide for the assistance of local law societies.
This document listed such matters as the functions of a duty solicitor, the scope of the scheme, remuneration, emergency services and waivers.
These schemes were well received and had extended considerably by the end of the 1970s.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services described them as ‘…indispensable in a number of ways: they provide pre-trial advice to defendants who are often confused or ignorant and who have not previously obtained it, they encourage the adequate preparation of bail applications and help to reduce the number of ill-advised pleas, whether of guilt or innocence, and the number of remands required.’
The Legal Aid Act 1982 enabled the Law Society, under scheme-making powers contained in the Legal Aid Act 1974, to formulate a uniform scheme for the provision of duty solicitor services.
The first statutory scheme was the Legal Aid (Duty Solicitor) Scheme 1983.
This provided for a three-tier committee structure.
Overall responsibility was exercised by the  Law Society's Legal Aid (Duty Solicitor) Committee.
There were 24 regional duty solicitor committees, whose functions included those of deciding at which courts duty solicitors should be in attendance, and establishing and appointing the members of the local committees.
Local schemes were run by a local duty solicitor committee, whose functions included that of considering applications from those wishing to act as duty solicitors.
Selection criteria were specified, including the requirements that the solicitor's office be reasonably accessible to the appropriate magistrates' court and that the solicitor have sufficient criminal advocacy experience during the previous 18 months.
An unsuccessful applicant could appeal to the regional committee.
Under the scheme ‘advice and representation’ was available without a means test or the payment of a contribution.
A duty solicitor had an obligation to provide advice to persons in custody and, if desired, to make a bail application; he or she had a discretion to provide advice and representation to defendants, whether or not in custody, in cases involving imprisonable offences, and even in connection with non-imprisonable offences in exceptional cases.
Representation could not, however, be provided for contested cases or committal proceedings.
The Scheme emphasised the right of defendants to choose their own solicitor, and required the duty solicitor to check whether the defendant already had one.
Remuneration was claimed from the appropriate area legal aid committee.
The first task of the regional committees was to bring the existing voluntary schemes within the scope of the statutory Scheme and to establish new local schemes so as to secure coverage of ‘busy’ courts.
The next stage involved the establishment of schemes for ‘less busy’ courts.
For the former, the normal requirement would be for the duty solicitor to attend the court; for the latter the predominant arrangement would be a ‘call-in’ scheme based on either a list or a rota of duty solicitors.
Coverage has progressively been extended, with 88 per cent.
of courts covered by 1990.
A parallel development, which started in 1983 in anticipation of implementation of what became the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, saw the planning and introduction of the ‘24-hour duty solicitor scheme’ for the  provision of legal advice to suspects and others in police stations.
As we discuss elsewhere, the 1984 Act introduced a new statutory right to legal advice, as part of a detailed legal regime governing the detention and interrogation of suspects.
Both this and the 24-hour Scheme were implemented as from January 1, 1986.
Administration of this Scheme was passed to the committee structure already established for court duty solicitor schemes, and indeed provided an additional impetus for the establishment of new local court schemes.
A local 24-hour scheme can take one of three forms.
First, there can be a rota scheme, where all the member solicitors are on duty in turn.
During the duty period the solicitor has to be available all the time to provide advice over the telephone or at the police station, and receives a standby payment, up to half of which is deducted if advice is provided up to that level of work.
Secondly, there can be a panel scheme where the member solicitors are asked in turn to provide advice; as no one is obliged to give the advice there is no standby payment.
Thirdly, there may be a combined rota/panel scheme where a panel normally operates but there is a rota at certain times, such as at night, weekends or bank holidays.
panel schemes are more appropriate where the volume of work is low.
Solicitors are contacted by telephone, with calls channelled through a service provided by Air Call plc.
The proportion of police stations covered has increased steadily to 95 per cent.
The majority of the rest being small stations where there are likely to be few suspects.
The Scheme has been successful in contributing to the increase in the proportion of suspects who receive legal advice at the police station, although that proportion is still relatively low.
As would be expected, own solicitors are less available than duty solicitors and rota schemes perform better than panels.
There have, however, been difficulties.
On the one hand, the rates of remuneration are regarded by solicitors as low.
The withdrawal of solicitors from a scheme can lead to increasingly unacceptable burdens on the rest, and a number of local schemes have collapsed or come near to collapse.
On the other, a research report commissioned by the Lord Chancellor's Department was critical of the quality of service provided by duty solicitors, with a high proportion relying on telephoned advice rather than attendance at the police station.
It suggested that standards of  recruitment and discipline appeared to be rather low and that there was a reluctance to scrutinise service delivery.
From April 1, 1989, responsibility for both aspects of the duty solicitor scheme has passed to the Legal Aid Board.
The 1988 Scheme was replaced by the Duty Solicitor Arrangements 1989, and the Legal Aid (Duty Solicitor) Committee of the Law Society by the Duty Solicitor Committee appointed by the Legal Aid Board.
This Committee comprises three members of the Board, two lay and two solicitor members from regional duty solicitor committees, two nominees from the Law Society, and one each from the Justices' Clerks Society, the Magistrates' Association and the Association of Chief Police Officers.
The regional and local committees remain, but are now responsible to the Duty Solicitor Committee.
The new Arrangements are very similar to the 1988 Scheme, the main, and welcome, change being the removal of the lower tier in what had previously been a two-tier system for remuneration for advice at police stations: a solicitor could undertake up to £90 of work, extendable retrospectively, where the client was in custody for an arrestable offence, but only up to £50 (non-extendable) otherwise.
The distinction had been criticised by both the Law Society and the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee from its inception.
The Board has decided to change the rules to require duty solicitors to attend the police station where a suspect is to be questioned about an arrestable offence, when an identity parade is to be held, or the suspect complains of serious maltreatment by the police; unless the solicitor can show exceptional circumstances justifying non-attendance.
Attendance is strongly recommended where the suspect is a juvenile or a person at risk.
(f) Green form usage
It was quite clear in 1973 that the new advice scheme was intended to bring into solicitors' offices problems of a kind which had not hitherto surfaced.
The analysis of the unmet need for legal services identified types of problem which were not being dealt with as well as types of people.
Since the advice scheme now permitted access to a solicitor on any question of English law and the advertising campaign which launched it stressed the ‘social welfare’ problems now within the scheme, it was disappointing that the first evidence of usage showed little deviation from the traditional pattern.
The absence of legal aid for tribunal representation was advanced as a reason for the very  low percentage of cases concerned with tribunals, as well as the expectation that cases categorised under other headings (e. g. ‘employment,’‘landlord and tenant’) might have included tribunal work.
In fact, the statistics on the type of problems on which advice is sought have remained remarkably constant since 1973/74.
Over the years, the proportion of family cases has settled at just over 40 per cent.; crime at around 22 per cent. ; landlord and tenant and housing, and hire purchase and debt, at around 6 per cent .
each; accidents and injuries at around 5 per cent.; employment and consumer at around 2 per cent .
each; immigration just under 1 per cent.
and the rest around 11 per cent.
The main features have been a decrease in the proportion of family cases; an increase in the proportion of criminal cases; and, over the last few years, a slight increase in the proportion of welfare benefits cases.
It may be that difficulty in getting people with problems to consult a solicitor is more to do with their perception of the problem and the ability of a solicitor to help than with the cost and availability of the advice service.
The Law Society is left to reflect that ‘…
The types of problem on which advice and assistance was sought during the past year is surprisingly, and perhaps regrettably, consistent with the experience of previous years…people who are eligible for advice and assistance are still accustomed to consult solicitors for a comparatively narrow range of problems.’
Apart from questions of the pattern of usage, the overall amount of usage has steadily increased, as has the cost.
There are, however, considerable regional variations, with variations among solicitors as to their policy in using the green form scheme, and variations in the practice of area offices.
(g) Green form deficiencies
Some would argue that the major deficiency in the green form scheme is that it is administered through solicitors and must, therefore, share the same unattractiveness to some members of the public.
The arguments about the location, availability, approachability and cost of the solicitors' offices emerge again in this context.
The evidence to support these contentions is equivocal.
On the one hand it would appear that only the traditional  problems are being brought in (see above), on the other, the fact that 90 per cent.
of green form assessments require no contribution from the client despite the strict financial criteria suggests that the scheme is serving the least well-off.
Is it that the ‘right’ people are reaching solicitors with the ‘wrong’problems?
Four other major criticisms of the scheme have been advanced — that the initial limit is too low; that the financial criteria are too strict; that the scheme is not sufficiently well-known to attract those who need it; and that the system is open to abuse by solicitors.
The first of these criticisms was by fur the strongest made by solicitors interviewed for the research study by Baldwin and Hill.
The consequences of a low initial limit was that a solicitor would either have to stop work at an early stage and wait for an extension to be authorised, which ‘is time-consuming, causes delay and raises difficulties with clients,’ or work on without an extension.
In any event it might not be worthwhile seeking an extension where the sum over the limit is relatively small.
Work might also be unremunerated given the difficulties of extracting contributions from clients.
The move to limits based on hours may help, but the periods of two and three hours specified have still been criticised as too low.
The financial criteria are contained on the Key Card reproduced earlier in the chapter and the substantial changes in eligibility introduced in 1979 took away most of the grounds for the criticism that they were pitched too low.
However, the position worsened again in the late 1980s so that less than half the population appear to be eligible.
The advertising of the scheme and the consequent level of public awareness has been a constant source of concern.
Two targets have been identified.
One, the general public, can really only be reached by direct advertising in the media — the other, the ‘gate-keepers,’ those who work in the social field and in advice agencies, need to be approached much more selectively.
They are the people who can refer clients on to solicitors and it is highly likely that the ‘Advisory Liaison Service’ and the proposed liaison officers could have played a significant part in making and fostering those contacts.
In their absence, the information circulating about the green form scheme can be haphazard depending upon the enthusiasm of voluntary and statutory advice agencies and the activities of local law societies.
Advertising campaigns have been sporadic and their effect is extremely difficult to assess.
As to abuse of the scheme by solicitors, the research study by Baldwin and Hill found that officials in area legal aid offices ‘tended to view members of the legal profession with considerable suspicion,’ but more on the basis that solicitors might make full or excessive use of the scheme than that there was malpractice or dishonesty.
The checks that were carried out were not particularly rigorous and did not in fact tend to reveal abuse.
Indeed ‘evidence of serious abuse of the green form scheme has always proved elusive.’
There was a case for the introduction of much more systematic and thorough random checks: these might detect or deter wrongdoers, although the vast majority of solicitors would be unlikely to risk their livelihoods for trifling amounts; ‘more importantly they would…allay public concern and  official suspicion about improper use of the green form scheme.’
Notwithstanding the various deficiencies, mentioned in this section, the overall view of the green form scheme expressed by Baldwin and Hill was encouraging:
‘…we have found ourselves at the end of the research thoroughly persuaded of its merits.
Notwithstanding the serious criticisms we have made in the report about certain aspects of the scheme, the results, taken as a whole, demonstrate that the green form scheme represents an invaluable social service and provides a source of immediate legal advice to those who need it….
[Many]more people are assisted under the…scheme than are assisted under all other forms of legal aid put together.
This is remarkable given that the…scheme makes up only about a fifth of the total legal aid budget.’
G. ADMINISTRATION AND POLICY MAKING
Until 1989, the green form scheme and the duty solicitor scheme were administered by the Law Society, as an adjunct to its responsibilities for civil legal aid.
The annual reports of the Law Society, and the comments and advice of the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Aid have been a valuable source of information and of recommendations for changes in policy (whether accepted or not).
Other sources of informed comment are the various national bodies with an interest in legal services: the Legal Action Group, NACAB, the Law Centres Federation, the Advice Services Alliance (an umbrella organisation for advice services), the National  Consumer Council and so on.
The decisive voice is, as one would expect, that of the Lord Chancellor's Department and the Treasury, given the resource implications of most proposals for change.
The Greater Manchester Legal Services Committee was established in April 1977.
It originally consisted of various types of lawyer and representatives of volunteer and statutory organisations, with the common objective of co-ordinating and improving legal services in Manchester.
It extended its boundaries in 1985, becoming the North Western Legal Services Committee, covering Greater Manchester, Cumbria and Lancashire.
The progress of the Committee has been charted in the Legal Aid Annual Reports and it has an impressive list of achievements.
It has stimulated duty solicitor schemes, including schemes at prisons; encouraged law centres; monitored the grant and refusal of legal aid in magistrates’ courts; provided training for volunteer workers at advice agencies; published a leaflet aimed at those who have suffered accidents; produced directories of advice agencies; and taken on other responsibilities connected with the stimulation and co-ordination of legal services.
Most importantly, it has shown what advances are possible given enthusiasm, goodwill and a full-time secretary paid for out of the Legal Aid Fund.
A North East Legal Services Committee was established in 1982.
To the disappointment of the Law Society and the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee, the Lord Chancellor declined to fund a full-time secretariat, claiming that it should be left to local or charitable sources.
As a result, its activities have been more limited than its counterpart in the North-West.
The Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee has proposed that a committee should be established for each circuit: ‘we remain convinced that these could inexpensively and effectively contribute to securing improvements across the country in the co-ordination and standard of legal services.’
The Legal Aid Board's attitude has been non-committal.
H. REFORM
‘In the last analysis, therefore, it is for Parliament to decide the extent to which legal services are to be provided at public expense to meet the needs of the majority of the population.
But, unless legal services are provided, the full benefit of our legal rights and safeguards cannot be realised.’
The preceding parts of the chapter have shown that the present diversity of sources for legal information and advice has resulted from piecemeal development, partly by lawyers, partly by non-lawyers, without any coherent structure or philosophy.
There is legal advice from non-lawyers, from salaried lawyers and from the private profession paid for by the client, the State, local government, charities or provided gratuitously — or a combination of them.
The case for the establishment of a coherent overall strategy for the provision of publicly-funded legal services is overwhelming.
An attempt to provide such a strategy was made by the Royal Commission on Legal Services, which reported in 1979.
Many of its recommendations were criticised and the government's response was dismissive.
Another was made by the Legal Aid Efficiency Scrutiny, a team of civil servants which reported to the Lord Chancellor in 1986.
Some of its recommendations were accepted and found their way into the Legal Aid Act 1988.
Major changes were, however, left to the new Legal Aid Board, to which responsibility for the management of the legal aid and advice schemes was transferred from the Law Society, and are still in the pipeline.
We will consider these in turn.
The other source of change in the provision of legal services is the fundamental reform of the legal profession effected by the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990; that is dealt with in Chapter 3.
1.
THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON LEGAL SERVICES
(a) Principles
The three basic principles identified by the Commission were unexceptionable.
They were all related to the general principle, said to have been established with the introduction of legal aid in 1950, that ‘…legal services should be available to those who need them but cannot afford to pay for them.’
Despite the acceptance of this principle the Commission found that a large number of people were not obtaining adequate legal services and set out the principles that should, in future, govern the provision of legal services:
(i)
Financial assistance out of public funds should be available for every individual (not corporations) who, without it, would suffer an undue financial burden in properly pursuing or defending his or her legal rights;
(ii)
All those who receive legal services are entitled to expect the same standard of legal service irrespective of their personal circumstances;
(iii)
The client, whether supported out of public funds or fee-paying, should always have a free choice among available lawyers and should not be required to retain an assigned lawyer.
In turning these principles into the means by which legal services were to be provided the Commission did not recommend any radical departure from the present ‘mixed economy’ in legal advice and information.
There would still be a place for amateurs, for salaried professionals and for private professionals, all of them supported in varying degrees by government funds.
(b) Proposals
The Commission's main proposals were
(i)
the establishment of an advisory council for Legal Services to keep under review the provision of all forms of legal services;
(ii)
the establishment of regional committees modelled on the Greater Manchester Legal Services Committee (as it then was);
(iii)
the encouragement of CABx as first-tier generalist advice agencies, with the development of rota schemes; they should not become over-specialised and required adequate government funding;
(iv)
the establishment of a new species of law centre, ‘Citizens’ Law Centres,’financed out of public funds, without involvement in general community work such as the mounting of campaigns or political or social work, with clients paying on the same basis as legally-aided clients of private practitioners, managed by a central agency and advised by a local advisory committee;
(v)
assimilation of the green form scheme with legal aid when the levels of eligibility and contribution could be made the same, with eligibility limits raised;
(vi)
provision for a free initial half-hour interview with a solicitor, available irrespective of means.
(c) Responses
The public response to the Royal Commission Report was largely predictable.
Particularly in its treatment of legal services the Report was alleged to be unduly supportive of the private profession and insufficiently imaginative in its proposals for the development of the public sector.
However, the critical response of organisations heavily involved in the current provision of legal services should be noted.
The Legal Action Group attacked the Report on all fronts, making particularly strong comment about the failure to recommend significant changes in the private profession and the ineffectual role assigned to the proposed Council for Legal Services.
Only a Legal Service Commission with executive powers could do the necessary research and co-ordination job.
The Law Centres Federation, not surprisingly, were entirely hostile to the proposed Citizens' Law Centres and their response was directed mainly to that topic.
The Federation was  especially opposed to the means-testing of clients and the prospect of central control.
Following this pattern, the Greater Manchester Legal Services Committee was also critical of the particular proposals which affected its area of concern and took the view that the regional committees proposed in the Report would not achieve what was required.
Despite receiving warm commendation from the Commission, the Committee's response was cool with further criticism of the proposals on law centres and practice in deprived areas.
The NACAB responses were less strident in tone but contained detailed criticisms of many aspects of the Report, again, with particular reference to its own area of operation.
The professions, by contrast, welcomed the majority of the recommendations with more than a hint of relief.
The Government response was belated and almost insulting.
The two volumes of the Commission's Report were dismissed in a very short document.
In particular:
(a)
the case for the creation of a Council for Legal Services was rejected;
(b)
the role of generalised agencies was endorsed, but with no additional funding;
(c)
the recommendations on Citizen's Law Centres were still under consideration;
(d)
eligibility limits for legal aid were to be retained, and the contributions currently payable are not unreasonable;
(e)
the ‘free half-hour’ of advice would not be introduced;
(f)
extension to the scheme for assistance by way of representation would be made when necessary.
2.
THE LEGAL AID EFFICIENCY SCRUTINY
Following the Benson Report, the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee continued to stress the desirability of an overall strategy for the provision of legal services.
It noted that the government's response to the Royal Commission ‘singularly lacked any commitment to a unified approach’ and that ‘lack of clear ministerial responsibility and direction for legal services is a chronic problem.
In January 1986, the government appointed a team of officials ‘to consider the determinants of expenditure on the legal aid scheme by looking at its operation and administration in practice, and make recommendations.’
The team reported in June 1986.
It concluded that there was a pressing need for action in four main areas:
(i)
legal aid procedures for handling applications, contributions and payments needed to be redesigned;
(ii)
improved value for money should be obtained by cutting down on unnecessary procedures,(e.g. committals, remand hearings), strengthening controls on the progress of legally aided proceeding, changing listing practices, and restricting legal aid to solicitors who have demonstrated competence by membership of an appropriate panel;
(iii)
the arrangements for legal advice represented a wasteful use of resources and did not guarantee a reasonable service to all who need it;
(iv)
the administration of the legal aid system should be reorganised to ensure that the systems were simple, that there were clear lines of responsibility and that one organisation had clear overall responsibility for the operation of legal aid and advice.
Many (but not all) of the specific recommendations under (i) and (ii) were accepted and have led or will lead to changes in law or practice.
They are dealt with, as appropriate, in the sections on legal aid.
As to the question of overall responsibility for the system, the Scrutiny team recommended that there should be a nationally based Legal Services Board responsible for all aspects of legal aid and advice, controlling all the necessary operations through the existing area offices directly and through agents in the courts.
The ensuing White Paper paid tribute to the work of the Law Society but proposed to transfer its responsibilities to a new Legal Aid Board.
Provision would be made for the possible transfer of other functions at a later date,(e.g. The assessments of means, decisions on the grant of criminal legal aid, and at least some of the determinations of bills now carried out in the courts).
The constitution and functions of the Board, established by the Legal Aid Act 1988, are considered below.
The Scrutiny team's proposals for legal advice were the most controversial.
Its diagnosis of existing weaknesses was unexceptional, with reference to the lack of co-ordination in the provision of advice agencies, overlap in the service provided by advice agencies and private practitioners and difficulties in obtaining advice in an emergency.
The proposals were startling.
In essence, the existing green form scheme should be abolished and replaced by a system of advice based on a much greater involvement of advice agencies.
Except in criminal areas, initial advice should be given by an advice agency, such as a CAB, rather than a private practitioner, and criminal cases would be limited to one hour's work.
Family cases should be only referred to a solicitor where detailed advice and negotiation about the arrangements to be made for financial provision and for the children were needed; other civil cases should only be referred once it was clear that court proceedings should be initiated.
The Area Directors should be made responsible the effective and co-ordinated provision of legal advice and tribunal representation in their areas.
The Scrutiny team estimated that this  would generate a need for an additional 500 lay advisers and 125 lawyers for the advice agencies.
The proposals were widely regarded as unrealistic, with adverse criticism (at varying strengths) from the Law Society, the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Aid, NACAB, the Legal Action Group and others.
The strong reservations of NACAB were particularly noteworthy given the proposal to switch responsibilities to CABx and other generalist advice agencies.
The 1986 NACAB AGM overwhelmingly passed a resolution expressing concern that the proposals might change the fundamental character of the CAB  service and might prejudice its independence, would cut legal services and reduce freedom of choice of legal service to the poor and would damage working relationships between CABx and legal aid practitioners, other advice agencies and law centres.
The White Paper accepted that there was force in some of the objections that had been made, and expressed the belief that the existing Green Form Scheme could be ‘improved to provide better service at lower cost.’
The only changes that would be put into effect immediately would be the removal of wills and conveyancing from the ambit of the scheme.
government was, however, ‘attracted to the principle of using the skills of advice agencies, especially to deal with those areas of work in which their special experience is likely to be greater than that of many solicitors in private practice.
The new Legal Aid Board would accordingly be given power to make alternative arrangements for the provision of particular categories of work.
For example, the Board might contract with advice agencies for the provision of advice on welfare benefits, which would then be removed from the scope of the green form scheme.
However, it would be left to the Board to consider whether and how this might be done.
The immediate threat to the green form scheme was thus liked, with a question mark left hanging over at least aspects of it.
3.
THE LEGAL AID BOARD
(a) The Board
The Legal Aid Board was established by Part II of the Legal Aid Act 1988.
It formally commenced operations in August 1988 after some three  months’ shadow existence, and assumed the Law Society's legal aid and advice responsibilities on April 1, 1989.
It comprises between 11 and 17 members appointed by the Lord Chancellor (one appointed by him as chairman), with at least two solicitors and two barristers (appointed after consultation with, respectively, the Law Society and the General Council of the Bar).
Its general function is that of securing that advice, assistance and representation are available in accordance with the Act and of administering the Act.
Some specific functions can only be conferred by an order made by the Lord Chancellor.
It has power to secure the provision of advice, assistance or representation by entering contracts, but only if the Lord Chancellor directs.
It is to publish information as to the discharge of its functions, supply information to the Lord Chancellor as and when required, make annual reports, and ‘have regard, in discharging its functions, to such guidance as may from time to time be given by the Lord Chancellor.’
A major focus of concern among commentators was how independent of the Lord Chancellor the Board would be.
The first Board had 12 members.
Its chairman (John Pitts) and five members had backgrounds in industry or commerce; there were two solicitors (both legal aid practitioners), two barristers, one person with an advice agency background and one academic lawyer.
The initial concerns of the Board were with the transfer of responsibilities from the Law Society and their subsequent management.
The Board took over the legal aid scheme's administrative structure and most of the staff.
It also took over all aspects of the duty solicitor scheme.
The Board reported that it had established management objectives and expressed confidence that the introduction of new management techniques, in many cases building on work in hand, would lead to significant improvements in the speed and quality of service and efficiency.
Among its aims are increasingly to devolve responsibility to area offices, to set performance targets and to secure that policies on the grant and continuation of legal aid are applied consistently.
The Board also has started considering matters where there might be change in the longer term.
It does not for the moment wish to take on additional responsibilities in respect of criminal legal aid, means assessments and determinations and taxations of costs, given that it is not  at present in a position to do the work more effectively.
Rather more attention has been paid to the future of the green form scheme and to multi-party actions.
The latter are considered elsewhere.
(b) The future of the green form scheme
Amongst the early tasks indicated for the Board by the Lord Chancellor was to consider whether the best use was being made of resources devoted to advice and assistance, whether better arrangements might be made by using advice agencies and other organisations, and whether any further exclusions from the green form scheme would be appropriate.
The Board gave indications of its thinking in its first Report to the Lord Chancellor and in a consultation paper issued in May 1989.
It was impressed with the usefulness and flexibility of the scheme, but needed to consider whether there could be a more effective use of resources.
It confirmed that the scheme should remain demand-led, with payment on a case-by-case basis.
Specific ideas on which it sought views were that preparatory advice given before the granting of a legal aid order should be claimed and paid for under that order and not the green form scheme, and that welfare benefit entitlement work should either be limited to a fixed fee or excluded altogether.
As to more general options for change, the Board referred to the possibilities of exclusive or semi-exclusive ‘contracting,’ and of ‘franchising.’
The idea of ‘contracting,’ with tendering for contracts, had been floated in the 1987 White Paper.
However, the Board was unenthusiastic: there would be either limited or no consumer choice, and restricted access for the public would cause difficulties arising out of conflicts of interest between parties; the Board was ‘far from satisfied that there is generally a sufficient spread of the skills to make any form of competitive tendering a realistic or worthwhile exercise now or in the near future.’
Instead, the favoured option was ‘franchising.’
This would involve identifying those who could satisfy criteria or competence and reliability, and encouraging them by removing some of the administrative restrictions now applying.
It would be open to any solicitors' firms, and (although there were difficulties, e.g. about funding) advice agencies and law centres, that satisfied the criteria.
The green form scheme would continue alongside franchise outlets until the access objective was met, with the aim of concentrating the majority of legal advice work on franchises.
Moreover, franchising had the potential of extending beyond the green form scheme to civil and criminal legal aid.
There could be two kinds, ‘general practice’ and ‘specialist’franchises.
The former, covering all or most categories of legal aid  work, would almost always be provided by solicitors' firms; the latter could be provided by solicitors' firms, law centres, advice agencies and national organisations giving advice to individual clients.
Prospective franchisees would need to demonstrate substantial involvement in the relevant work (in the case of general practice franchise, receipt of at least £40,000 p.a. from the Legal Aid Fund).
There would be mechanisms to enable the Board to monitor the quality of service provided.
Responses were mixed.
There was wide support for the continuation of the scheme, in the light of the endorsements provided by the Baldwin and Hill research project, and that it should operate on a demand-led basis.
Contracting was unanimously rejected.
Welfare benefit work should not be excluded from the scheme; on the contrary, it should be accorded a high priority.
There was some support for specialist but not for general practice franchising.
Respondents other than the Law Society thought that the supposed difficulties of including advice agencies in franchising had been exaggerated; their involvement should indeed be encouraged, and would require additional resources.
Any changes should only be introduced after proper research and costing, and after an initial experiment.
A number of respondents noted that franchising would probably be as, if not more, suitable for legal aid administration than the green form scheme.
The Law Society had greater reservations about franchising than the other bodies, except that it liked the administrative advantages and thought that they should be extended to all legal aid practitioners who satisfied quality control criteria developed by the Board and the Law Society.
In the light of the various responses, the Board has decided to concentrate on specialist franchising.
An 18-month pilot project is to be established, in an area of Birmingham, starting in July 1990.
All solicitors in that area will have the opportunity to apply for franchises, and the project will be subject to independent research.
Franchisees will have devolved powers on all green form matters except waiving the green form charge, ABWOR, and emergency certificates, and payments on account will apply to both green form and legal aid work.
Overall, the picture is less gloomy than might have been feared.
The flaws in some of the ideas put forward by the Board have been cogently exposed, but it has shown a welcome willingness to take account of criticisms and alter its position accordingly.
4.
CONCLUSIONS
We conclude this chapter as we started it.
It does not seem that we are any nearer the integrated approach to legal services long advocated by the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee.
In recent years, the Committee has noted, with disappointment, that the new Legal Aid Board was not ‘a Legal  Services Board with overall responsibility for legal aid and legal services’; that the present system could not be said to constitute a ‘comprehensive system of legal services offering good early advice’; and that in considering reform to the legal profession, there had been a failure by government ‘to examine the place that lawyers’ services should occupy in the field of legal services as a whole.’
The Committee has expressed concern that these reforms, particularly those concerning conveyancing and the Bar, may lead to a breakdown in the network of solicitors' offices, especially in rural areas, and a diminution in the quality of service to legally aided clients.
There are blueprints available for the comprehensive provisions of legal services.
One is provided by the National Consumer Council in its report Ordinary Justice, with a proposed network of general advice centres with access both to specialist advice agencies, with salaried staff and volunteers, and the legal profession.
In the end, it comes down to resources.
The argument is often heard that problems are not necessarily solved by throwing money at them; how are they solved if you don't?
PRE-TRIAL PROCEDURE
FEATURES OF LITIGATION
IN Part II we looked at advice and information.
Now we begin a Part called Pre-trial Procedure and it may appear that we are progressing inexorably towards the courtroom.
Yet between the recognition of a dispute which may end in a trial and its actual arrival before the judge lies a lengthy period of negotiation before or during the operation of the formal pre-trial procedure.
An understanding of the significance of these negotiations, which may sometimes more accurately be described as bargaining, and the resulting settlements is fundamental to civil litigation.
We concentrate on civil matters, even though in the criminal context there is the analogous feature of ‘plea bargaining.’
The other two topics we consider in this chapter, costs and delay, have significance in both civil and criminal litigation, and are inter-related with pre-trial negotiations.
Influencing both civil and criminal procedure before and at trial, the English adversarial approach permits the parties to dictate the issues to be resolved and to settle the pace of the action.
In civil cases, the court has had no role in directing the course of the proceedings except on the application of one or other party.
It has always been able to impose penalties on parties who break the rules without permission, by the award of costs against them, but it has not been able to enforce the rules of its own volition.
This all changes with the introduction consequent upon the Civil Justice Review of court management of litigation.
The parties select the issues on which to fight and the evidence with which to support their case.
Whilst it may be in the interests of the court and a ‘fair result’ for as much as possible to be disclosed in the early stages so that the matters really in dispute can be identified and the strength of the evidence assessed, it will often be in the interests of the parties to conceal what they know.
For them, negotiation, in the form of bargaining, can proceed more effectively through a process of bluff and ambush, which is inimical to the demands of justice.
Consequently, the Civil Justice Review recommends that there be greater openness in pre-trial procedure.
A. COSTS
1.
CIVIL CASES
The costs involved in civil litigation are of the utmost importance to the parties — they may prevent an action ever being brought, they may render a victory in court Pyrrhic when damages are swallowed up in costs, they may prevent a meritorious appeal and they will always be a factor in the risk of litigation.
Costs have to be looked at in two respects, first, the costs which may be ordered to be paid by one of the parties to the other in litigation, and, secondly, the costs which a client is obliged to pay the solicitor.
It is not necessarily the case that the successful party will receive costs from the losing party which will cover the whole of the solicitor's bill.
Costs payable in litigation
In deciding whether to begin or continue litigation, one major factor is whether a party will have to pay the costs or be able to recover them from the other party.
The principles in relation to the taxation of costs after a trial do not prevent the parties reaching their own agreement about costs where a settlement is effected before trial.
Indeed, in the majority of cases costs are agreed between the parties.
Nevertheless the taxation rules remain significant in providing the framework within which the parties can negotiate.
The steps are, first, that the judge must decide who should pay costs and on what basis, and, secondly, a ‘taxing officer’ must determine exactly what costs are to be paid.
The basic rule is that ‘costs follow the event,’ that is to say the successful party can expect the judge to order the loser to pay some or all of his or her solicitor's bill.
A judge may order that costs are to be taxed on one of two bases.
(a)
Standard basis, where ‘…a reasonable amount in respect of all costs reasonably incurred’ is allowed.
Any doubts as to questions of reasonableness in either respect are resolved in favour of the paying party.
As the terminology suggests, this is the usual basis upon which costs will be taxed.
(b)
Indemnity basis, where ‘all costs…except insofar as they are of an unreasonable amount or have been unreasonably incurred’ will be allowed.
Any doubts as to questions of reasonableness in either respect are to be resolved in favour of the receiving party.
Thus it is only in cases of debate about the reasonableness of costs incurred that the different bases of taxation produce any difference in the actual costs received.
From the point of view of the receiving party, the indemnity basis is the preferred basis, since then the burden of establishing that the expenditure was unreasonable lies upon the other party.
It appears that costs are awarded on the indemnity basis only in exceptional cases, for example‘major test cases’ and ‘cases in which the paying party's conduct is considered to have been wholly unmeritorious, oppressive or in contempt of court’and the court must expressly direct that costs be awarded on such a basis.
The subsequent procedure is for the solicitor to compile a bill of costs and send it to the appropriate officer of the court for ‘taxing.’
The preparation of a bill of costs for a taxation hearing is a very skilled and detailed task.
Specialists exist who undertake the drafting of the bill, usually for a commission calculated on the total amount of the bill or for a salary if employed by a large firm of solicitors.
This payment is allowable on taxation and so may be recoverable from the losing party.
The taxing officer hears the parties and decides any issues in dispute, either allowing the item in the bill to stand or disallowing or reducing it.
The total arrived at by this process is the total of ‘taxed costs’ and is that amount which the loser is required to pay.
Taxation is designed to ensure that the losing party only has to pay those expenses properly incurred and is not saddled with the cost of unnecessary or unduly expensive work.
The taxing officer must consider the directions of the court.
In a High Court action, the taxing officer, in exercising his or her discretion must have regard, amongst other factors, to the complexity, difficulty and novelty of the case, the skill, specialised knowledge and responsibility required of, and the time and labour expended by, solicitor and counsel, the number and importance of documents, the importance of the matter to the client, and the amount of money or value of property involved.
In a county court action, on the other hand, the amount of costs awarded, in general, is determined by the application of one of four scales with fixed costs.
Complexity is necessarily produced by such an approach.
Further, there is a natural desire to ensure that the case is a High Court action, since the recoverable costs will be greater.
Consequently, the Civil Justice Review recommended that there should be a single costs regime for High Court and County Court actions, except for county court actions below £3,000, since in such smaller cases fixed costs should be attractive and there would be less desire to seek to take such actions in the High Court.
This proposal is to be implemented by section 4 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
A more radical approach would have been to introduce scales of costs into the High Court.
The costs which may be ordered to be paid are limited to ‘fees, charges, disbursements, expenses and remuneration and, in relation to proceedings…, also…costs of or incidental to those proceedings.’
Such costs are unlikely to cover all the work that a solicitor has undertaken on behalf of a client.
There are some circumstances in which costs are not awarded to the successful party.
For example, in the various stages of pre-trial procedure the party who is ultimately successful may have caused undue delay or not followed the proper procedure and been penalised at that time by the award of costs against him or her in respect of a particular hearing.
These will eventually be disallowed on taxation.
Two other related matters should be mentioned.
First, the successful unassisted party in an action where the opponent is legally aided may be awarded costs against the Legal Aid Board where certain statutory conditions are met.
Secondly, since 1975, people who conduct their own litigation have become entitled to costs in respect of their own time and effort spent preparing and presenting the case.
In addition to costs incurred by such a person which would also have been incurred by a solicitor acting on  his or her behalf, the court can allow on taxation a sum not more than two-thirds of that which a solicitor would have been allowed for profit costs.
If the litigant in person has not actually suffered pecuniary loss in the preparation of the case (which this sum would compensate) the court will only allow up to £7.50 per hour for the time reasonably spent in preparation.
Costs payable to solicitor
The successful party will often receive money in payment of costs from the losing party.
However, it has to be considered whether this payment will actually cover what the successful party must pay to his or her solicitor.
Further, since most cases never end up in court, it may be that what the client will have to pay the solicitor will not be covered by the other party as agreed costs.
The obligation on the client of a solicitor is to pay the bill presented.
The relationship between solicitor and client is a contractual one and the solicitor can sue the client for ‘proper costs.’
What costs are proper may ultimately be determined independently by the process of ‘taxation.’
The costs payable by a client to a solicitor in a civil matter will depend upon whether or not the matter is classified as ‘contentious,’ that term only applying where an action has begun.
The negotiation of a settlement in a civil matter where no writ is issued counts as ‘non-contentious’ business.
If a client objects to the bill submitted by the solicitor in a contentious matter an application may be made to the High Court for an order for taxation of the bill.
If granted, taxation is carried out on the ‘indemnity basis’ but it is presumed that the costs (a) have been reasonably incurred, if they were incurred with the express or implied approval of the client;(b) have been reasonable in amount, if their amount was expressly or impliedly approved by the client;(c) have been unreasonably incurred, if in the circumstances of the case they are of an unusual nature, unless the solicitor satisfies the taxing officer that prior to their being incurred the client was informed that they might not be allowed on taxation of costs.
It appears  that this procedure is rarely used because of the ignorance and fear of disgruntled clients and because there appears to be a generally high level of satisfaction with the services provided.
As we have seen, where the business is contentious, the client is assisted in paying what is owed to the solicitor if he or she wins, since costs are then likely to be obtained from the losing party.
In non-contentious civil matters the client may be charged such sum as is fair and reasonable having regard to the circumstances of the case and, inter alia, its complexity, the skill and responsibility involved, the time spent, the number and importance of the documents, the amount or value of money or property involved, and the importance of the matter to the client.
The client must be informed of the rights to require the solicitor to obtain a certificate from the Law Society and to seek ‘taxation.’
If the client is dissatisfied, the right to request certification by the Law Society may be pursued.
The Law Society will peruse the bill and documents and certify that the sum charged is fair and reasonable or that a lower sum should be charged.
The client may then pursue the right to apply to the High Court for an order to have the bill taxed.
If granted, the taxing officer assesses the costs on the same basis as for costs in contentious matters.
Costs and settlement
The doubts as to whether costs will be available to a party and the possibility that what costs are payable by the other party will not cover the full costs of seeking legal assistance are powerful factors in decisions as to whether and when to settle.
There are also two procedures which can place a plaintiff in further difficulties.
The first procedure is the payment into court At any stage after an action has begun in the High Court or the county court, the defendant may make a payment into court in satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim.
The plaintiff may accept the payment in settlement or may continue the action.
If a sum greater than that paid in is not recovered at the trial, the plaintiff will be liable for the defendant's taxed costs from the time of the payment in, even though he or she has ‘won’ the action.
The judge in making an award of damages will know that a payment into court has been made, but will not know in what sum and so cannot ensure that the damages awarded are high enough to beat the payment into court, if minded to make an award similar  to that which the defendant has offered.
This rule has been criticised and adds considerably to the ‘risk’ element in litigation.
The second procedure is the use of Calderbank letters.
The defendant makes a written offer to compromise the claim, making that offer ‘without prejudice save as to costs.’
The court is unaware of the offer until the question of costs falls to be decided.
This procedure is not to be used if a payment into court would have protected the defendant's position.
2.
CRIMINAL CASES
To what extent can the ‘loser pays costs’ rule apply in criminal matters?
This rule is of lesser significance because of the existence of criminal legal aid and because prosecutions brought by the Crown Prosecution Service are funded by government.
Further, the defendant does not have the option of minimising the cost by deciding not to go ahead with the case!
Criminal courts do, however, have powers to make orders about costs in various circumstances.
A defendant's costs order may be made in favour of an acquitted defendant by the Crown Court or a magistrates' court.
These costs are awarded out of central funds.
The award covers what the court considers is reasonably sufficient to compensate the defendant for any expenses properly incurred by him or her in the proceedings.
Such an order should usually be made, unless there are positive reasons for not so doing, such as the defendant's own conduct in bringing suspicion on himself or herself or in misleading the prosecution, or where there is ample evidence supporting a conviction, but the defendant is acquitted on a technicality.
In many cases the acquitted defendant will have been receiving legal aid.
The principles for the making of a defendant's costs order still apply, although it would be simpler for the court to achieve the same object in those cases by ordering that no contribution need be made by the defendant to his or her own costs.
A defendant's costs order may also be made in the following circumstances:(1) by a magistrates' court where an information has been laid before magistrates but not proceeded with; or where the magistrates' court  inquiring into an indictable offence as examining justices determines not to commit the accused for trial;(2) by the Crown Court where the defendant is not tried for an offence for which he or she had been indicted or committed for trial; or the defendant who has been convicted of an offence before a magistrates' court appeals against conviction or sentence and, in consequence of that appeal, the conviction is set aside or a less severe punishment is awarded;(3) by the Divisional Court where it deals with any criminal appeal;(4) by the Court of Appeal where it allows an appeal against conviction or sentence or on such an appeal finds the defendant guilty of a different offence or imposes a different sentence;(5) by the House of Lords where it determines a criminal appeal, or application for leave to appeal.
Costs may be awarded to a successful private prosecutor out of central funds.
The costs awarded may not be the full costs incurred by the prosecutor, only such costs as are just and reasonable.
Such an order should be made save where there is good reason for not doing so, for example, where the proceedings have been instituted or continued without good cause.
An award of costs may be made against a convicted defendant.
The costs awarded will be those that the court considers just and reasonable.
The judge has a discretion to exercise in determining whether-to make such an order, taking account of whether the defendant chose to contest a strong case against him or her and if the defendant must have known the real truth of the matter.
3.
TRIBUNALS
We shall repeat elsewhere that it is difficult to generalise about tribunals.
Broadly, the parties to a dispute which is settled by a tribunal will bear their own costs, subject to any specific rules applicable to a particular tribunal.
We can merely give a number of examples.
In Social Security Appeal Tribunals, the claimant will receive only compensation for loss of earnings (if any) and travelling expenses.
These are payable whatever the outcome of the hearing.
No costs can be awarded against the claimant.
In Industrial Tribunals, the tribunal will not normally make an award of costs.
There is a power to make an award only where a party has acted frivolously, vexatiously or otherwise unreasonably, either for a fixed sum or for taxed costs.
In the Lands Tribunal, costs are within the discretion of the tribunal and it is interesting to note that of the 21 Lands Tribunal bills taxed in 1989, the average amount allowed on taxation was £18,385.
The last example is highly unusual.
Legal aid is not generally available for tribunals, they are intended to be cheap and both sides are clearly expected to bear their own costs.
4.
CIVIL PROCEEDINGS — WHAT DO THEY ACTUALLY COST?
As a part of the Civil Justice Review, the Inbucon Study examined the question of costs and the relationship between costs and damages.
The existence of a research study is significant, because in the past critics of the high cost of going to law have tended to support their views with horror stories.
The Inbucon Study analysed 232 cases by cost bands, separately for county courts, District Registries and the Royal Courts of Justice.
Consequently, the following results were discovered for plaintiffs' costs.
In some cases costs will be significantly higher than the bands above.
Even though these cases may be comparatively rare, it would still appear that such high costs present a problem needing resolution if people are to have access to justice as and when needed.
The Judicial Statistics contain a statement of the average amount at which bills are taxed in a particular year.
In 1989 the average amount of bills taxed in the 4,553 Queen's Bench actions or matters was £3,695, compared with £4,833 for 1988.
These are the costs of the successful party only.
These figures may be compared with both the average District Registry taxed bill at £3,083 where a solicitor was involved and £326 where there was a litigant in person and the average county court taxed bill at £1,261 where a solicitor was involved and £1,082 where there was a litigant in person.
It is not sufficient merely to know what costs are incurred by the plaintiff, even though such costs may be a deterrent to litigation.
It must also be ascertained what percentage of damages received is represented by the costs to be paid.
Consequently, it can be determined whether relatively the costs of litigation are too high when compared with the amount of damages awarded.
It is likely that the plaintiff will have to satisfy such costs from the damages award, subject to recovering some of the costs from the other party.
The Inbucon Study shows that, in their sample, in county court cases plaintiffs' costs were 98.8 per cent.
of the damages, in District Registry cases plaintiffs' costs were 23.9 per cent.
of damages and in Royal Courts of Justice cases plaintiffs' costs were 26.5 per cent.
of damages.
5.
CIVIL PROCEEDINGS — CAN LITIGATION BE AFFORDABLE?
Clearly civil litigation is often very expensive.
We want to examine possible ways of making litigation affordable, perhaps by diverting the cost from the parties (at least initially) so that those who would otherwise find payment difficult, impossible or off-putting might be enabled to bring or defend an action.
There are, broadly, three possible approaches.
Jurisdictional, procedural and administrative reforms
The first, with which we are not primarily concerned, is by undertaking jurisdictional, procedural and administrative reforms, as recommended by the Civil Justice Review, which are expressly designed to reduce delay, cost and complexity.
Parties enabled to pay more easily
The second approach is by examining ways in which the parties pay, but  without having to find such large sums at the time of the litigation.
One method is through support by an organisation.
Such support occurs either through membership of an organisation which happens to provide support for litigation, such as a trade union, or through membership of, or support by a pressure group, which is interested in dealing with only one issue, but which will support litigation if that litigation furthers the objectives of the group.
Of more importance presently is the possibility of legal expenses insurance.
The provision of such insurance is a recent innovation.
It defrays the cost of litigation by providing cover for individuals and members of families or groups.
Such insurance is common in Europe, particularly West Germany, and it has been launched in this country with the support of the Law Society.
As with other insurance policies, cover varies according to the company and according to the premium paid, but the approach favoured by the Law Society, and exemplified by Sun Alliance, is a blanket cover subject to specified exclusions.
It has been marketed through the profession but there was only a small response.
Currently, Sun Alliance provides such insurance through the Legal Protection Group, which advertises its services to the public.
A second method is through a contingency fee system whereby a lawyer agrees to act for a client on the basis that he or she will receive an agreed proportion of any damages recovered.
If no damages are recovered, there is no fee.
This is the way in which many accident cases are conducted in the United States.
There is in Scotland a long tradition of a lawyer acting on a ‘speculative’ basis, whereby the lawyer will be paid the normal fee if the case is successful, but if the case is lost he or she will be paid nothing.
Evidence was given to the Royal Commission on Legal Services advocating the introduction of a contingency fee system in England and Wales.
It was argued that it allows litigation which would otherwise not be brought, that the lawyers involved act more conscientiously on behalf of their client because of the mutual financial interests, and that it is a simpler method of payment.
The alleged undesirable consequences of the introduction of a contingency fee scheme would include an open invitation to unprofessional conduct, a tendency for lawyers to refuse to take on weaker cases, and increased pressure to accept an early settlement (when actual costs will have  been relatively low) rather than press on to trial and incur the heavy costs involved.
The Royal Commission accepted these arguments and recommended that the contingency fee arrangement should continue to be prohibited, as well as rejecting a related proposal from JUSTICE.
The JUSTICE proposal advocated the establishment of a Contingency Legal Aid Fund, financed by contributions from successful litigants, which would pay lawyers on a normal basis but recoup costs on a contingency basis.
Consequently, the lawyer would be paid whatever the outcome of the case.
Zander indicated that the major problem with such a scheme is the initial funding, particularly if the fund were to be established on a voluntary basis.
Zander was more sceptical about the rejection of contingency fee schemes, refusing, in particular, to believe that professional standards would be lost completely.
The Civil Justice Review, on examining the arguments, recognised the need to assist people who do not qualify for legal aid funding, drew attention to the major advances that had been made in regulation policy so as probably to be able to control a contingency fee system and, on the basis of competition policy, considered whether it would be more desirable to devise more limited schemes under which lawyers would have a stake in the outcome of a case as an incentive.
It recommended that the prohibition on contingency fees and other forms of incentive should be re-examined.
The outcome of this consideration is that section 58 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 introduces conditional fee agreements.
Such an agreement is an agreement in writing between a person providing advocacy or litigation services and the client, which is not concerned with certain matrimonial and children proceedings; provides for that person's fees and expenses, or part of them, to be payable only in specified circumstances; complies with any requirements imposed by the Lord Chancellor; and is not a contentious business agreement.
The agreement may provide for the amount of any fees to which it applies to be increased, but only if a  percentage is specified.
Such an agreement is not unenforceable by reason only of its being a conditional fee agreement.
A third method of making it easier on the parties is through the Fixed Costs Scheme proposed by the Law Society.
Zander describes this scheme as meaning that solicitors would pay a premium to an insurance company and the client would pay a fixed amount to cover the costs in the event of the case being lost.
A fourth method is to examine again the appropriateness of the rules restricting actions brought by groups of plaintiffs, which would mean that the costs were spread amongst a number of people.
At present English procedure only permits representative actions, whereby members of a group must have the same interest in the same proceedings; the action cannot seek damages, but only some other form of relief.
The Civil Justice Review recommended that the suggestion of Lord Donaldson M.R. That the subject be looked at in the round be taken up.
As an aspect of this approach, and recognising in particular the problems involved for victims of disasters or defective medicines, the Legal Aid Board, encouraged by the government, is examining how to fund multi-party actions through the legal aid scheme by directing legal aid cases to a single firm or small group of firms of solicitors.
The conduct of the case would then be the responsibility of the co-ordinating solicitor, whilst the solicitor first approached by the client would deal with the client on a day-to-day basis.
The Legal Aid Board is of the view that the disadvantages of such a scheme, that is the restriction on the applicants' choice of solicitor to have the main conduct of the case and a weakening of the direct link between the legally aided plaintiff and the solicitor, are far outweighed by the advantages.
The advantages would include
‘— a high quality of legal advice, experience and competence in conducting and managing cases of this sort;— the greater likelihood that all potential plaintiffs would be brought in from the outset, assisting the conduct of the case and giving greater certainty to defendants;— the co-ordinated organisation of claims, research, expert opinions and pre-trial procedures.’
Public funding of litigation
The current method of public funding is the civil legal aid scheme which already exists to assist litigants who fall within its limits.
It is discussed at the beginning of the following chapter.
It alleviates the burden of costs by  providing financial assistance to litigants who can satisfy a means test, and a merits test and provide the contribution towards their own costs which may be required under the rules of eligibility.
This scheme does not always divert costs away from the assisted litigant to the Legal Aid Fund — far from it.
More often it works as a way of postponing the cost to the successful assisted litigant until damages and costs are received from the opponent.
The costs incurred by the Fund on behalf of a successful assisted party are defrayed from costs awarded against the loser.
Any further outstanding amount is taken from the contribution levied on the assisted party (if any), and any amount still outstanding will normally be taken from any damages awarded in the action.
In the end the successful assisted party probably often pays the same amount as a private client would have done.
The benefits of the scheme are two-fold.
The responsibility for payment is assumed by the Fund, and if the total costs of the assisted party cannot be covered by costs awarded, contribution and damages, the liability of that party to the Fund is nonetheless limited to the original assessed contribution.
More importantly, liability is similarly limited in the event of the assisted party being unsuccessful.
The Legal Aid Fund bears the costs risk rather than the litigant.
Thus the legal aid scheme permits those eligible to take the risk of litigation at the possible expense of the Fund.
People who could not afford litigation (because they could not pay the difference between their costs and the taxed costs recoverable) or who could not afford the risk of litigation (because costs awarded might not be recoverable or because they might lose) might be assisted by the scheme.
However, the two substantial hurdles which protect the Fund mean many people will not benefit.
If an applicant fails to satisfy the means test, he or she will be totally ineligible, and the applicant must satisfy the Area Director that the case merits assistance.
The proposal to abolish the financial criteria made by the Royal Commission on Legal Services has not met with the agreement of the Government.
However, the Lord Chancellor wishes the Legal Aid Board to keep the arrangements governing eligibility and contributions for legal aid under review so as to fulfil the Board's overall aim, which is to ensure that legal advice, assistance and representation is made available to those who need it.
The Legal Aid Board is undertaking this review.
A further proposal which appears to have little, if any, current support, is for litigation to be financed from public funds irrespective of the means of the parties.
In particular this would support litigation which is not the fault of the parties to it, yet involves them in cost.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services considered a suitors’ fund which would indemnify litigants against the additional costs resulting from a successful appeal, the death or illness of a trial judge and the determination of an unsettled point of law of public importance.
The recommendation that costs thrown away as a result of the death or illness of a judge in the course of a trial should be paid out of public funds has been given effect by the Administration of Justice Act 1985.
It provides that the Lord Chancellor may ‘if he thinks fit’ reimburse the litigant's costs which are thrown away in these circumstances.
The possibility of funding actions which determine important points of law is particularly interesting, since civil justice has two possibly opposed objectives.
First, it is to assist people to resolve their disputes as easily as possible and, secondly, it should enable the making or declaring of law that applies in those disputes.
Considerable service is done by the taking of actions which resolve points of law, but public officials can rarely bring actions and the legal aid scheme will not support an action unless the case also passes the merits test.
Support for such a fund goes back to the Evershed Committee in 1953, which recommended that a fund should be available for actions at first instance and on appeal, certified by the Attorney-General as raising a question of law of exceptional public interest which it is in the public interest to clarify.
The Committee further proposed that the Attorney-General should be able to act on his or her own initiative and apply to intervene in an action or to pursue an appeal even where the parties had settled their differences.
The Law Society put forward rather wider proposals in 1964, which would have included cases in which on appeal it appears that the inferior court was precluded from reaching a just decision by virtue of the doctrine of precedent.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services supported the proposals of the Evershed Committee, with the proviso that the judge at trial or on appeal should also be able to determine eligibility in cases where the point at issue does not emerge until later.
In general these proposals have not been implemented, indeed the government has stated that it is not convinced that it is right to fund litigation out of public funds, other than through the legal aid scheme, where points of law of general importance are involved.
There have though been four related developments.
The Administration of Justice Act 1969 introduced the leap-frog appeal so that cases could go straight from first instance to the House of Lords when the Court of Appeal would be bound by precedent, thereby saving considerable costs.
The Criminal Justice Act 1972 provides for the Attorney-General to be able to refer a case to the Court of Appeal when he or she is concerned with the law applied by the Crown Court.
The defendant's acquittal is not affected.
The Criminal Justice Act 1988 provides for a similar Attorney-General's reference where a sentence which is thought to be too lenient is imposed.
In a different way, the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality are empowered by the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and the Race Relations Act 1976 respectively to render assistance to individuals alleging discrimination.
This assistance can include the provision of legal services.
Similar assistance is given to those who might become involved with Immigration Appeal Tribunals by U.K.I.A.S., who receive Government money for the purpose.
The JUSTICE report, A Proposal for a Suitors' Fund, advocates a more radical reform by suggesting that public funds should be used to indemnify litigants against ‘faults in the system’ amongst which it included appeals on fact or law.
At the moment it is the ultimate loser who pays the costs even if he or she happens to have won at first instance and in the Court of Appeal.
The report suggested that it was not the ultimate loser's fault that the judge at first instance and the Court of Appeal did not get the right answers, and that the loser should not be liable for the appellate costs.
The loser should remain liable for the first instance costs, which would have been incurred in any event.
This proposal was rejected outright by the Royal Commission, primarily on the grounds that the risk of a decision being overturned on an appeal is a risk inherent in all litigation and ‘should be taken into account by all who embark on it.’
B. DELAY
Delay causes problems in both civil and criminal matters despite the  existence of time-limits which are intended to expedite cases.
The reasons for delay differ in civil and criminal procedure, not least because in civil matters the conduct of the action lies in the hands of the parties, who may agree through their lawyers to delays in proceedings.
R is largely for the problems of delay that the Civil Justice Review recommended greater court involvement through court management of litigation.
1.
CIVIL MATTERS
‘Delay in the conduct of civil proceedings occurs at three main stages, namely:(i) before proceedings are commenced;(ii) between the commencement of proceedings and the point where the case is either settled or is ready for trial; and (iii) between readiness for trial and the trial itself.’
The reasons for the slow progress of actions at these stages are diverse.
At the outset, the plaintiff may be slow to contact a solicitor, negotiations for a settlement may drag on, the extent of the plaintiff's injuries may not become clear until the end of a lengthy period of treatment, investigations may have to be carried out to ascertain the evidence, expert opinions may have to be obtained, communication and action by both sides may be poor and slow, the advice of counsel may be taken, pleadings are often extended, the length of time spent waiting for the trial to begin can be substantial, and errors may be made by the professionals involved.
The problem of delay tends to be greater with regard to High Court proceedings, whether at the Royal Courts of Justice or not, than county court proceedings.
The Inbucon Study into Personal Injury Litigation concluded that the three principal causes of delay were:(1) the medical circumstances of the case;(2) the long waits for trials in the Royal Courts of Justice and provincial  trial centres, and (3) a lack of clear or prompt response from the other side.
Delay created by these reasons, both human and procedural, can prove extremely frustrating to the parties, most particularly to the plaintiff who will feel that delay amounts to a denial of justice.
The complexities of the law can add to the amount of time taken to resolve a case.
Saif Ali v. Sydney Mitchell and Co. provides an example of a remarkably prolonged action, complicated by the expiry of the limitation period.
It is clearly an unusual case, but there was still a considerable lapse of time while the normal procedures were being followed.
The timetable was as follows:
March 26, 1966 Mr Saif Ali, a passenger in a car driven by his friend Mr Akram, was injured in a collision with a car driven by Mrs Sugden.
October 16, 1966 Mrs Sugden was convicted of driving without due care and attention.
1967 Mr Ali and Mr Akram consulted a solicitor with a view to making a claim.
The solicitor took counsel's opinion.
October 1968 The solicitor instructed the barrister to draft the pleadings and to advise.
November 14, 1968 A writ and statement of claim was issued claiming damages against Mr Sugden only, alleging that his wife was driving as his agent at the time of the accident.
Mr Sugden was the owner of the car and he had insured it.
Later A meeting was held between Mr Ali's solicitor and the insurance company at which the company indicated that the agency question might be disputed, and that contributory negligence might be alleged against Mr Akram.
March 26, 1969 The limitation period expired without any  amendment to the writ, and without Mr Ali issuing proceedings against either Mr Akram or Mrs Sugden, the actual drivers in the collision.
August 29, 1969 The writ was served on Mr Sugden.
October 16, 1969 Mr Sugden entered a defence denying his wife's agency.
November 1969 The barrister advised that Mr Ali should be separately represented.
June 24, 1971 Mr Sugden amended his defence and admitted that his wife was acting as his agent.
January 21, 1972 Mr Sugden applied to the court for leave to withdraw his admission of agency with consent of the plaintiff's solicitors.
Leave was granted.
May 9, 1972 The House of Lords decision in Launchbury v. Morgans led Mr Ali's advisers to believe that it was impossible to continue the action.
April 22, 1974 The action against Mr Sugden was discontinued and Mr Ali's impregnable claim had disappeared.
September 19, 1974 Freshly advised, Mr Ali issued a writ against the solicitors who had represented him until November 1969 alleging negligence.
May 29, 1975 The defendant solicitors issued a third party notice against the barrister whose advice they had taken, asking that he should indemnify them on the grounds that they had acted on his advice.
July 26, 1976 The barrister successfully applied to have the third party notice struck out on the grounds that it disclosed no cause of action.
February 24, 1977 The solicitors successfully appealed to Kerr J. and the third party notice was restored.
The barrister successfully appealed to the Court of Appeal and the third party notice was again struck out.
November 2, 1978 The solicitors successfully appealed to the House of Lords and the third party notice was restored.
N. B. The third party action between the solicitors and the barrister did not decide that  he was negligent merely that if he was negligent he would be liable to the solicitors.
The question of whether he was negligent remained for trial if disputed by the barrister.
Prior to the Civil Justice Review, which considered the problem of delay generally in civil proceedings, two official committees had considered the incidence and causes of delay with particular reference to personal injuries litigation.
Much of the work of these Committees informed the work of the Civil Justice Review, which made numerous proposals to alleviate the problem.
Steps were taken before the Report of the Civil Justice Review to deal with the problem of waiting for trial with regard to the general list cases in the Queen's Bench.
In 1988 a High Court judge was given charge of the list.
Cases which had been settled or withdrawn were removed from it and sanctions for non-compliance were announced.
Non-personal injury cases involving claims below £20,000 were identified for transfer to the county court and three extra Circuit judges sat in the High Court for three months to take Queen's Bench cases.
It appears that in relation to non-jury trial cases these steps have had success.
The Civil Justice Review recommended that delay should be dealt with in a number of ways.
The first, since introduced by the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 Part I, is by a re-examination of the relationship between the High Court and the county court.
This involves increasing the number of cases heard in the county courts, thereby maintaining High Court hearings for public law cases, specialist cases and general list cases of importance, complexity and substance.
This is achieved by limiting the range of cases heard by the High Court, by extending the jurisdiction of the county court, ensuring that, in most cases, the same remedies are available in the county court as in the High Court, amending the transfer system, reviewing the costs sanction system that applies when a case is taken inappropriately in the High Court, improving the trial facilities at county courts by concentrating trials at centres where continuous trial facilities are available, providing new centres, creating a new tier of Circuit judges to take additional civil jurisdiction burdens, and increasing the number of people eligible for appointment as county court and district registrars or district judges.
The general concern expressed about the approach is whether the county courts are going to be able to cope with the significant extra workload.
The second approach is to amend civil procedure.
The Review proposed many changes to particular aspects of standard procedure which will speed up and streamline that procedure.
Detailed proposals were also made with regard to procedures in the area of personal injuries, small claims and the work of the Commercial Court.
In addition to, a number of major themes of change were identified.
One major theme was that a system of court management of litigation, that is court control over the progress of cases, should be introduced.
Courts would be involved in pre-trial procedure much more actively than at present in attempting to keep the parties to proposed new timetables, whilst allowing for a realistic degree of relaxation by the court, and permitting the parties to vary particular time limits by agreement, subject always to the obligation to have the case ready for trial and set down within the overall timetable.
The Review recommended that there be a fixed period within which the parties would be required to set down the case for trial or to report to the court.
Standard periods would be prescribed for different types of business, although it would be possible to apply for a special timetable at an early stage and for detailed variations of the timetable.
Consequently, there would have to be an efficient case monitoring system.
This, implicitly at least, demands the use of major computer systems, otherwise it would not be possible easily to carry out the necessary regular checks as to whether the various procedures have been undertaken within the prescribed time period.
If there is no good reason for delay, the sanction available would be the issue of a summons to the solicitors on one or both sides to come to the registrar or master to explain matters.
Once the parties had been heard, the master or registrar would have the power either to make an ‘unless’ order, that is that the case would be struck out unless particular steps were taken within a particular time, or the case would be set down for trial.
Ultimately the court would be able to strike out a case.
Such changes have major implications for judicial administration and training.
Further procedural changes should include improving the exchange of information between the parties, encouraging the issue of specific written  Professional Standards relating to the conduct of all principal types of litigation by the Bar and the Law Society combined with schemes to foster competence and experience, introducing new arrangements for trials, particularly so that the judge can read the case papers (including witness statements) before the hearing, and so be much better prepared when the hearing begins, and, in cases where there are many documents, providing a bundle of key documents, abuse of which would be checked by a personal costs sanction against the solicitors involved.
As has already been indicated, delay can be caused by professional errors.
Indeed the Lord Chancellor's Department figures draw attention to the fact that solicitors make mistakes in court documentation and evinces the hope that improvements can be made in this respect.
The Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, s.110 has begun to address this by providing a right of complaint against court maladministration to the Parliamentary Commissioner of Administration.
2.
CRIMINAL MATTERS
Although the delay in criminal cases is of a different order of magnitude, it still gives rise to concern.
The concern is expressed on behalf of defendants in custody because they may ultimately be acquitted or given non-custodial sentences, and on behalf of defendants on bail because of the uncertainty and unpleasantness of a pending criminal trial.
In addition there are difficulties associated with trials relating to incidents which happened in times long gone by.
Witnesses forget.
There is, in theory, an 8-week time limit between committal and trial on indictment, but that rule may be dispensed with by the Crown Court and the following figures indicate the present position.
In England and Wales in 1989, of the 89,316 defendants committed for trial who pleaded guilty 52 per cent.
were dealt with in less than eight weeks; of the 34,539 who pleaded not guilty only 24 per cent.
were dealt with in less than eight weeks.
Indeed, of this latter group (‘not-guilty pleas’), 41 per cent.
had to wait longer than 16 weeks for trial.
Delays for defendants in trials on indictment were giving cause for concern in 1975, when the James Committee reported, but at that stage over 70  per cent.
of cases were disposed of within eight weeks.
The overall figure for 1989 would now appear to be 45 per cent.
Those defendants awaiting trial in custody might seem to be the most seriously disadvantaged by delay and they do tend to take priority.
In 1989, 57 per cent.
of this group waited less than eight weeks for trial, and 84 per cent.
less than 16 weeks.
The figures for those defendants on bail were 41 per cent.
and 73 per cent.
respectively.
The situation differs around the country and the average length of time between committal and trial varies from 7.9 weeks on the Wales and Chester circuit to 17.4 weeks in London.
The national average is 12.4 weeks.
There is little information on waiting times in magistrates' courts.
The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure noted research which suggests that only 15 per cent.
of contested cases were dealt with in less than six weeks, and further noted the delay that can occur between the defendant's first contact with the police and the issue of the summons.
It concluded that, ‘The speed with which cases are brought to trial is in our view determined almost entirely by the volume of business and the resources available to deal with it.’
This distinguishes the criminal problem from the civil, but it sounds like a counsel of despair.
If there were more judges, more lawyers and/or less criminals, and/or more guilty pleas then the problem would diminish.
Indeed it would, but there may be more imaginative solutions to be commended.
The widespread adoption of a rigorous and effective pre-trial review?
C. SETTLEMENT
Cost and delay are just two of the factors which persuade the great majority of those in dispute to effect a compromise and settle their differences without trial.
The then Lord Chief Justice in 1980 commented that, If it were not that a high proportion of cases are compromised long before they reach court the administration of justice would soon grind to a halt; the courts would be overwhelmed by the volume of work.’
Indeed Jacob values settlements sufficiently to suggest that a power, or perhaps even a duty, should be imposed on the court to promote a settlement or compromise between the parties.
1.
WHO SETTLES WHEN?
The settlement of a dispute is achieved by an agreement between the parties to abandon any further claim in respect of the subject of the dispute.
It takes the form of a legally binding contract and the normal rules of contract apply to establish the existence, meaning and effect of the agreement.
In general the parties are completely free to negotiate the terms of the settlement.
A settlement may be arrived at more usually before proceedings have begun, but may also be arrived at after proceedings have begun.
Once agreement is reached, the settlement is just as final as a judgment and, unless the agreement has been improperly procured, the issues of fact and law raised in the original claim may not be the subject of further litigation.
There is no source of official information on settlements, since court formalities are rare, and thus deductions have to be made from the information available in the judicial statistics, supported by the available research.
Information from the judicial statistics
The judicial statistics inevitably provide an incomplete picture since the only information available relates to matters where a writ has been issued and many disputes may already have been settled by then.
The following figures are culled from the Judicial Statistics for 1989, and relate to the Queen's Bench Division: Clearly these figures are not entirely comparable because they relate to cases at different stages in the procedure.
Most of the cases determined after a trial would have been begun by a writ issued in 1985 or 1986.
However, the  figures do give an indication of the proportion of cases resolved by settlement rather than trial.
It will be seen that a high proportion of cases disappear after the issue of a writ, presumably either settled or discontinued.
A similarly high proportion end in a swift judgment because the defendant is in default or has no real defence.
About one case in 25 goes through all the pre-trial procedure and is set down for trial.
Even then, a large proportion are withdrawn, many settled, before a hearing.
A surprisingly high number of cases are settled ‘at the door of the court’ with the parties in attendance ready for trial.
A number of settlements require the formal approval of the court.
A high proportion of trials which begin will end in settlement rather than judgment.
By the end, we find that for every 184 writs that were issued in 1989, one case was determined by trial.
In 1988 about one case in 19 was set down for trial and for every 94 writs issued one case was determined by trial.
These statistics relate to all actions in the Queen's Bench Division.
A slightly different picture emerges if we sift out the figures relating to personal injury negligence actions alone — the category most discussed in relation to the efficacy of settlements.
Again from the Judicial Statistics 1989, the table now looks like this: From these figures we can see that a high proportion of the cases disposed of in 1989 were personal injury actions (9,820 out of 12,859) hence the attention paid to this category of cases, and that in such cases for every 49 writs issued in 1989, one case was determined by trial.
In 1988 for every 25 writs issued, one case was determined by trial.
Research information
The Judicial Statistics figures tend to confirm the conclusions of the Winn Committee, which reported in 19689 that ‘…of all personal injury claims asserted about 20–25 per cent.
reach the stage of proceedings being started, and only about 10 per cent.
of these reach the doors of the court, of which between one-third and one-half are then settled without trial.’
In the 1989 figures, 56,219 actions were started, 2,760 reached the doors of the court of which 1,610 were settled.
The studies conducted for the Pearson Commission produced figures of 86 per cent.
of cases settled without proceedings being started.
The Oxford Study reveals that of 169 people who reported receiving damages as a consequence of an accident suffered, only four received them as a result of a court order.
Of the 165 cases in which damages were received without a court order, 104 were on the basis of the acceptance of the first offer that was made.
We should by now have demonstrated to your satisfaction the enormous importance of the process of settlement.
It is the normal procedure in the vast majority of cases.
Is it fair?
2.
NEGOTIATIONS FOR A SETTLEMENT
‘The settlement process is very much a matter of bargaining, and it is bargaining of a difficult and expensive character.
As economists would say, the case involves a bilateral monopoly, since the plaintiff has to ‘sell’ his claim to one potential buyer — the insurer — and the insurer has to ‘buy’the claim from only one potential seller — the plaintiff.’
Having taken pains in Part II to point out that there are a number of non-legal sources of advice and assistance, we do not now wish to give the impression that the negotiation of settlements is exclusively the province of lawyers.
Other agencies are quite heavily involved, some in the capacity of mediator or arbitrator, others representing the interests of members in a more specialised field.
Settlements can best be examined by considering personal injury claims, in which they play a major role, and which have been the subject of research and critical assessment.
In such actions, it is clear that the analysis in the first paragraph holds good, whoever the parties actually are.
The plaintiff cannot shop around for the best offer, the two parties must deal with each other and strike an acceptable bargain through their own negotiating skill.
The defendant in a personal injuries action is likely to be represented by an insurance company, which takes complete control of and financial responsibility for the claim.
If the defendant is not insured, he or she is not likely to be worth suing.
The staff in the claims department of an insurance company will be skilful and experienced negotiators, with adequate resources to deal with claims.
The plaintiff in a personal injury action is the person hurt as a result of an accident.
He or she is unlikely to have any skill or previous experience in seeking compensation for injury and is, therefore, largely dependent on the legal advice sought and received.
The routes to seeing a solicitor vary.
Some accident victims seek legal advice through an agency, such as their trade union, who will place them in touch with an experienced solicitor.
Other plaintiffs will adopt the common, often haphazard, methods of seeking legal advice, which may result in a plaintiff seeing a solicitor who is not experienced in the field.
Once the plaintiff has found a solicitor, the problems that may face the plaintiff in the initial stages of negotiation must be discussed.
Two questions arise: first, the liability question, i. e. is the defendant liable in law? secondly, the quantum question, i.e. if the defendant is liable, how much should the damages be?
Proving liability will depend, if it is denied by the defendant, upon three factors.
First, there is the information which the client has about the accident.
It is likely that the client will see the solicitor some time after the accident, when memory may already have begun to fade.
Indeed there is evidence which shows that the longer the delay in seeing a solicitor, the less likely damages will be obtained.
Secondly, more may be discovered about the accident.
Research has shown that it is often the case that a plaintiff's solicitor either does not have the resources to undertake investigations or is loath to seek out all available reports.
On the other hand, much information may be available, from accidents reports and other sources.
Some help is given by section 33 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
This section establishes a  procedure whereby a plaintiff may seek an order requiring a defendant to disclose any documents which may become the subject matter of subsequent proceedings.
Unfortunately, the plaintiff must specify the documents believed to be in the possession of the defendant, but the power is still useful in assisting the plaintiff to evaluate the case.
Thirdly, there is the question of how good the witnesses will be when, and if, it comes to establishing a case in court.
Any witnesses will need to be contacted and the quality of their evidence assessed.
Overall, it may be difficult to discover whether there is enough evidence to pursue a claim.
If a possible action does emerge from the evidence available an attempt will be made to put a monetary valuation on the injuries suffered by the plaintiff.
At this stage negotiations are likely to begin.
The defendant, however, may well be in a much better position to assess liability, because insurance companies are often able to anticipate possible claims and have considerable resources available to investigate the circumstances of an accident fairly soon after its occurrence.
To establish the quantum of damages that may be available, it is necessary to obtain as much information as possible about the injuries which the client suffered, and the future effect of such injuries, in particular upon the client's earning capacity.
The client will, therefore, need a medical report.
Evaluating quantum is particularly difficult.
In an American experiment, 20 pairs of practising lawyers negotiated on identical information about a case.
The highest outcome was $95,000; the lowest $15,000; and the average was just over $47,000!
Since negotiation over figures is difficult, a practical suggestion is to ‘[l]eave it to the insurers to put forward figures in settlement….
[T]he insurer's representative…should be left to initiate the discussions, for it is not the plaintiff's role to make settlement proposals.’
One main reason for the difficulties considered here is that a settlement usually involves payment of one lump sum in the same way that damages consequent upon a successful court action are also paid in a lump sum.
It is, however, possible for the injured party and the insurance company to agree on a ‘structured settlement.’
Under such a scheme sums of money are paid over periodically either for a fixed period or until the death of the injured party.
These sums can then be varied over time to reflect changes consequent upon the damage caused to the injured party.
The orthodox view of civil pre-trial procedure is that the more the two parties know about the real issues between them the more likely it is that a ‘realistic’ settlement can be reached.
In the early stages, however, it may  not be in the plaintiff's interests to disclose too much.
As good a bargain must be struck as possible.
In setting out general guidelines for a solicitor negotiating on behalf of a plaintiff, Pritchard counsels caution.
Do not provide too much detailed information; do not disclose medical reports; do not indicate the financial status of the client or his or her willingness and ability to litigate.
This advice, along with other hints, emphasises that negotiations are conducted in an atmosphere of pressure.
The desire not to reveal too much information to the other side is, however, a major reason for delay in the civil justice system, as well as causing expense.
Consequently, the Civil Justice Review made a number of recommendations which will ensure greater openness in pre-trial proceedings.
The quality of the negotiators and their approach consequently plays a significant role in the settlement that is achieved.
Insurance company representatives are almost invariably skilled, but the levels of skill and experience of the plaintiff's solicitor varies considerably, and the research evidence suggests that this is a highly significant factor in the settlement process.
Further, there is a debate as to whether the best method of approach by the plaintiff's solicitor is confrontation or co-operation.
On the whole, the evidence and advice suggests that a combative approach is best, making clear that the plaintiff is prepared to litigate, and doing so swiftly by the issue of proceedings.
Clearly there is considerable pressure on the various parties to the negotiations.
Since the plaintiff is a prime contributor, it must be realised that whilst it is important to utilise what advantages are possessed, there is considerable pressure on him or her as well.
3.
PRESSURES
The pressure to conclude a settlement is almost always on the plaintiff who is placed at a considerable disadvantage against the skilled defendant.
Broadly, the pressures are attributable to delay, cost and the risk of litigation.
We have considered the delay likely to occur in a personal injury action which goes to trial in the High Court.
The incentive to settle and clear the matter up quickly is significant.
The plaintiff may be urgently in need of the money.
It is he or she who will be incurring additional expenses as a result of the accident and whose earning power may have been impaired.
Social  security payments are unlikely to be adequate compensation for loss of earnings and injuries.
Interest is payable on damages from the date of the cause of action to the date of judgment in all personal injury cases (unless there are special reasons to the contrary) and the court may order interest on that basis in other cases, but the plaintiff may still prefer to have the money in hand.
An interim payment may be ordered by the court on application, but an order will only be made when it is clear that the defendant will be held liable at trial.
There is some evidence that delay and associated anxiety can cause a recognisable psychological state of ‘litigation neurosis,’ a complaint which disappears on the resolution of the dispute.
It is almost inevitable that the circumstances associated with a legal dispute will cause worry and upset, but long delays weaken the spirit as well as the claim.
The plaintiff has little to gain by delay.
It may be that the injuries are such that their full effects will not become apparent for some time and a hasty settlement might lead to an underestimation of the damage, but generally delay is on the side of the defendant.
Apart from the interest charges involved, the longer a defendant can spin out the negotiations the better.
American evidence cited by Phillips and Hawkins demonstrates that delay can be used as a deliberate tactic either against unmeritorious or unreasonable claims, or to alleviate the cash-flow problems of smaller insurance companies.
Plaintiffs have cash-flow problems as well.
It is cash flowing on costs as the case progresses which provides another incentive to settle.
We need not elaborate on our earlier discussion of costs, save in two respects.
The rule that costs follow the event is important in negotiations because it adds another factor to the equation.
The more unsure the plaintiff is about winning the case, the more significant the possibility of a costs claim becomes, and the calculation of costs which would ultimately be awarded to the successful party complicates the estimation of the total value of the claim.
Secondly, the costs pressure can be greatly increased by a judicious  payment into court.
The mechanics of the payment in have been explained.
The tactical advantages to the defendant are considerable.
They accrue mainly from the uncertainty which surrounds the calculation of damages.
Solicitors and barristers experienced in personal injury litigation will have to estimate a sum for loss of amenity and pain and suffering based on awards in similar cases, their own practice and the published awards contained in specialist books.
A rather gruesome list emerges which indicates the value of a leg, arm or toe — but not a precise value.
The figure is almost always expressed as a range which will expand according to the seriousness of the injury.
When pecuniary losses are added the outcome of an assessment of the plaintiff's damage may be that it is worth, say, between £8,000 and £10,500.
If the defendant makes a payment into court of £8,250, the gamble is obvious.
Either the plaintiff will receive £8,251 + costs (if the judge's estimate tallies with that of the plaintiff's advisers) or a much lower figure (if it does not, and he or she has to pay costs).
Clearly this procedure could impose considerable pressure on plaintiffs.
Zander found that a large number of payments in were accepted and that it was a tactic well used by defendants.
However, the Oxford Study showed that in many cases it was not a factor, since very little use was made of this procedure, despite its obvious advantages to the defendant.
Does a payment in place unfair pressure on a plaintiff?
Both sides are gambling because the defendant may be paying more than a judge would award at trial.
The plaintiff is playing with higher stakes because the cost penalty is likely to be bigger than the amount by which the defendant might overestimate the claim.
Even if it is not used much the trenchant criticisms of it would appear to demand reform, as it appears to be a blunt instrument which ‘should be honed down to produce a greater quality of justice.’
However, the Civil Justice Review recommended no change, since the evidence suggested that, despite its bluntness, most people were broadly satisfied with payments into court.
The procedure saves costs and time and though it has been criticised, no better procedure has been proposed.
The third factor is the risk of litigation.
The onus lies on the plaintiff, if the dispute goes to trial, to prove the case on a balance of probabilities.
Uncertainties abound.
It may be unsettled whether the defendant is liable at law for the plaintiff's damage.
In the absence of a settlement the parties  have to litigate to find out.
Even if the law is clear, the case may be difficult because of lack of evidence.
Evidence depends upon witnesses and, to some extent, their credibility is dependent upon their performance in the witness box.
Some witnesses perform very badly.
Some witnesses are unavailable at the time of trial.
Assuming the case is proved, the judge's estimate of the injuries and the consequent amount of the award is uncertain.
After trial, there could be two appeals.
Looming large over all these doubts is the spectre of costs.
The plaintiff as an individual will feel the pressures much more keenly than the defendant, backed by the insurance company.
No one can be surprised that only one writ in a hundred comes to trial.
D. SETTLEMENT AND ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
Since settlement is a contractual matter, one wonders what can be done to achieve equality of bargaining power in the settlement process.
The option of settling a dispute rather than resolving it by going to trial can be described as a form of alternative dispute resolution, meaning methods of resolving a variety of disputes in ways alternative to court hearings.
The advantages of settling are clear.
So also are the disadvantages.
In particular, a difficulty stressed above in relation to settling personal injuries claims is the imbalance which often exists between the parties.
The defendant, through an insurance company, is often in a much stronger bargaining position than the plaintiff.
It was for this reason that it was made clear that the negotiations leading to a settlement might best be described as bargaining hence suggesting a somewhat aggressive method of resolving the matter.
The imbalance between the parties does not mean that all disputes ought to be resolved in court, rather it suggests that there may be methods of organising dispute resolution which are fairer for the parties involved.
A particular example of this approach is that of mediation or conciliation in family disputes, particularly in relation to custody of children upon divorce.
Other forms of alternative dispute resolution, some of which arise out of Government initiatives, include the involvement of the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service in many industrial disputes, the work of the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial  Equality in the settlement of disputes in their fields of interest, the role of ‘ombudsmen’ to deal with disputes in the banking and insurance worlds, as well as complaints against central and local administration and the National Health Service, the various alternative methods for resolving consumer disputes, and the use of arbitration to resolve commercial dispute in private.
Mediation or conciliation in such a context is frequently made available to a divorcing couple.
There are many models, some court connected others independent.
The object of mediation or conciliation is to achieve a resolution of the dispute by the parties agreeing on who should have custody and what access rights the other should have, as well as how to make decisions for the up-bringing of the children.
The function of the impartial mediator or conciliator may be described as to act as a catalyst to ensure that negotiation does take place and that the issues are confronted and as a facilitator to enable an agreement which both parties can perceive to be fair.
The prime advantage of a form of alternative dispute resolution such as family mediation or conciliation is that the parties are in charge of resolving their dispute in an atmosphere conducive to avoiding domination by one party or another.
If the view is taken that ‘civil disputes are a matter of private concern of the parties involved, and may even be regarded as their private property…and that the parties are themselves the best judges of how to pursue and serve their own interests in the conduct and control of their respective cases, free from the directions of or intervention by the court,’ forms of alternative dispute resolution must be considered as worth pursuing for the control that is provided to the parties over their dispute.
Such idealism is not the only reason why methods of alternative dispute resolution are supported.
It is often suggested that they are cheaper.
At first glance it might be assumed that this would always be the case.
If an expensive court, barristers and pre-trial procedure do not have to be paid for, it must be the case that permitting the parties to agree between themselves is cheaper.
Such an analysis might well apply where the court system is an expensive one and where little expenditure has to be spent on the method of  resolution.
This may be the case with personal injuries actions.
However, the relevant court system is not always so expensive and the methods adopted to enable the fair resolution of the dispute may not always be cheap.
The Conciliation Project Unit discovered that general adoption of a form of conciliation in family disputes would be more expensive than resolution through the various courts with family jurisdiction.
Undoubtedly many further proposals will be made for the use of forms of alternative dispute resolution in which case it will be important to assess their strengths and weaknesses on the basis of proper and specific evidence, if possible, and not rely upon anecdotal evidence or assumed propositions, in particular in relation to cost.
PRE-TRIAL CIVIL PROCEDURE
AT this stage, we move from a comparative approach, taking account of civil, tribunal and criminal procedure, and concentrate on civil procedure.
The procedures which must be followed before a trial in the High Court or county court should be used by the parties to expose the real area of difference between them and concentrate attention upon it.
Issues which are not in dispute should be eliminated and the scope of the disagreement narrowed.
Using the procedures in this way has the dual effect of preparing the case as precisely as possible for the trial judge and of encouraging a settlement by revealing to the parties the exact nature of their dispute.
It has been equally possible to operate the procedures in such a way as to leave all the issues open and so reveal very little to the other party about the case he or she would have to meet.
Such obstructionism is a major contributor to delay and the high cost of litigation.
The complexity of pre-trial procedure, particularly in the High Court, has been said to act not only as a deterrent to all but the most determined litigant, but also as a weapon for the recalcitrant defendant who may manipulate it so as to place the pressure of delay upon the plaintiff.
It may have been a factor in leading a plaintiff to sue in the county court rather than the High Court when his or her claim lay within its jurisdiction.
It was certainly used as an argument in support of the establishment of special courts with simplified procedure to deal with small claims.
The problems identified here of delay, cost and complexity have long been recognised as requiring to be redressed.
Indeed the terms of reference of the Civil Justice Review directed attention to these problems:
‘To improve the machinery of civil justice in England and Wales by means of reforms in jurisdiction, procedure and court administration and in particular to reduce delay, cost and complexity.’
It is hoped that implementation of the recommendations of the Civil Justice Review will make significant improvements in the machinery of civil justice.
The Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 has provided much of the statutory basis for many of the reforms and others are being introduced through changes in civil procedure rules.
Nevertheless, certain procedural complexities will remain and continue to necessitate the services of a lawyer in the pursuit of a claim.
The legal advice scheme may be invoked for initial advice and assistance, but the litigant who requires the services of a lawyer in civil proceedings must rely on the provisions of the representation element of the legal aid scheme or meet the cost himself or herself.
Since many people are unable to meet the costs of litigation from their own resources, the availability of representation under the legal aid scheme will often be the crucial factor in deciding whether the case goes on at all.
Therefore, we consider first the operation of the legal aid scheme.
A. OBTAINING LEGAL AID REPRESENTATION
1.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SCHEME
The modern legal aid scheme, which provides financial assistance (subject to eligibility) in connection with proceedings in most of our civil courts, has come a long way since 1495 when statute provided for poor people, at the discretion of the Lord Chancellor, to sue without payment to the Crown, and to have lawyers assigned to them without fee.
A more formal Poor Persons Procedure was established in 1914 and was put under the control of the Law Society in 1925.
The Law Society provided the necessary administrative structure.
Further, its involvement made more likely the necessary free provision by solicitors of their services.
Government money was only made available to meet the cost of the administrative work involved.
The Poor Persons Procedure, dependent upon the charity of the legal profession, could not cope with the increasing pressure of work in the 1930s and was supplemented in 1942 by a Services Divorce Department.
This department, consisting of salaried solicitors employed by the Law Society with government funds, dealt with the matrimonial problems occasioned by the Second World War.
It must have been in the minds of the members of the Rushcliffe Committee as they took evidence.
The committee was set up, with Lord Rushcliffe in the chair, in 1944, to review the provision of professional help for those who were unable to afford it, in both civil and criminal matters.
The Committee's report provided the basis upon which the Law Society was invited by the Lord Chancellor to undertake the task of organising a legal aid scheme, which resulted in the Legal Aid and Advice Act 1949 and the regulations made thereunder.
The legislation, later amended by the Legal Aid Act 1974, relied heavily upon the decisions of the  Rushcliffe Committee.
Subsequently, the major concern perceived with the system of legal aid was that confusion and inefficiency were created by too many people having the ability to decide whether or not to grant help.
Consequently, the administration of the scheme has been removed from the Law Society and placed in the hands of the Legal Aid Board by the Legal Aid Act 1988.
The 1988 Act otherwise maintains the same basic structure, but with some reforms.
2.
THE SCOPE OF THE SCHEME
The scope of the legal aid scheme is restricted in four respects.
It only applies in specified courts, for specified proceedings, and to those who fall within the financial conditions and have reasonable grounds for taking, defending or being party to an action.
If all the requirements are fulfilled, civil legal aid consists of representation for the purposes of proceedings, and it includes all such assistance as is usually given by a solicitor or counsel in the steps preliminary or incidental to any proceedings and all such assistance as is usually given by a solicitor or counsel in civil proceedings arriving at or giving effect to a compromise to avoid or bring to an end any proceedings.
The cost of such representation is met by the Legal Aid fund, which is administered by the Legal Aid Board, although a contribution may be required from the assisted party in accordance with the rules discussed below.
Taking the first two restrictions, section 14 and Schedule 2 of the Legal Aid Act 1988 prescribe the courts and the proceedings for which representation is available.
Representation is currently available for almost all cases in the House of Lords, the Court of Appeal, the High Court and county courts; the Employment Appeal Tribunal; the Lands Tribunal; the Restrictive Practices Court; and certain proceedings in a magistrates’ court.
The excepted proceedings, which are specified, are actions in defamation, relator actions, certain proceedings for the recovery of a penalty, election petitions, actions relating to judgment summons in the county court, actions in the county court where the only question is the time and mode of payment of a debt, and any incidental proceedings.
Representation is not available for most tribunals.
However, the advice and assistance scheme can be extended to provide some form of representation through the advice by way of representation scheme (ABWOR) which extends to certain domestic proceedings in a magistrates' court, urgent court applications, and other proceedings, that is hearings before Mental Health Review Tribunals and prison boards of visitors.
3.
MAKING APPLICATION — THE MEANS AND MERITS TEST
The overall administration of the legal aid scheme rests with the Legal Aid Board.
The Board operates, according to the Legal Aid Act 1988, through 15 Area Directors and area committees who work from area offices.
An application for a representation certificate is made to an Area Director.
It is recommended that a solicitor should assist in the completion of the appropriate application form, for which green form assistance is available.
On receipt of such an application, the Area Director will consider the financial conditions of the applicant and the merits of the applicant's case.
The assessment of the applicant's resources, which determines financial eligibility for representation, is undertaken by an ‘assessment officer’ at the Department of Social Security.
The two significant assessments are of the  applicant's disposable income and disposable capital.
These are calculated by reference to the regulations and allowance is made for dependants, income tax, national insurance, housing costs, and work expenses.
As from April 9, 1990, the levels of eligibility for actions other than personal injury cases, are as set out in the following table: The applicant must be eligible both in respect of income and capital.
These specific figures appear in the Assessment of Resources Regulations and not in the Act, and so can be easily uprated as necessary.
If an applicant is financially eligible, the Area Director must further be satisfied that he or she ‘has reasonable grounds for taking, defending or  being a party to the proceedings.’
This merits test is often expressed by asking the following question: ‘If this applicant were the private client of a solicitor would he or she be advised to take or defend the action?’
The regulations give some guidance by directing that an application may be refused where it appears that any advantage accruing would only be trivial, where the simple nature of the proceedings would not normally require the assistance of a solicitor, or where funds from another source were available but not pursued.
However, a good deal of discretion is left in the hands of the Area Director to determine the merits of the application, having considered ‘…all questions of fact or law arising out of the action, cause or matter to which the application relates and the circumstances in which it was made.’
Concern has been expressed about the delays in determining the merits test, especially as delay and refusal of legal aid appear to be related.
4.
THE REPRESENTATION CERTIFICATE AND THE APPLICANT'S CONTRIBUTION
If the application is approved by the Area Director, a representation certificate is issued, subject to the acceptance by the applicant of any conditions attached to it.
The certificate is likely to specify the extent of the aid available and will often be limited to the taking of particular steps in the action.
In the first instance, the certificate may be limited to the taking of counsel's opinion and another application may have to be made to the Area Director to amend the certificate for further action if counsel's opinion appears to warrant it.
In this way, the Area Director can keep an action under review at all the crucial stages.
If the application is successful and no contribution is payable, the Area Director issues a representation certificate to the applicant's solicitor, and a copy is sent to the applicant, now known as the ‘assisted person.’
If the applicant is successful but there are conditions attached or there is a contribution to pay, an offer of a certificate with a requirement to accept the conditions or pay the contribution is made.
The applicant has 28 days in which to signify acceptance of any conditions attached.
He or she must also make any capital contribution, which is normally payable forthwith, and pay the first instalment of any contribution from income, so that the whole sum will be paid off within 12 months.
Once payment is confirmed, a certificate is issued and forwarded to the solicitor.
The contributions payable are significant financial burdens, particularly for an applicant towards the top end of the financial eligibility range, and probably lead to rejection of the offered certificate by a number of applicants who cannot afford the contribution.
In addition, where the contribution is payable from disposable income, the limits set out above apply strictly, whereas there is a discretion to permit the grant of a certificate even if the applicant's disposable capital is over the financial eligibility limit.
‘Curiously for a legal aid system, this may favour the person with capital as against the person with income, the wage earner.’
Given that the level of eligibility for free legal aid is so low, it is interesting to note that in 1989–90, 79 per cent.
of the certificates issued granted legal aid without any contribution.
This figure may suggest that the requirement of a contribution acts as a serious deterrent.
The analysis of maximum contributions determined during 1988–89 contained in the first Legal Aid Board Annual Report (1989–90) contains the following figures relating to all courts:
Once a certificate has been issued there are wide powers vested in the Area Director to amend it.
The Area Director also has power to discharge or revoke it upon the happening of specified events including a request from the applicant so to do, or where the aid has been abused, or where the applicant is in arrears with contributions, or where the applicant's financial position improves so that he or she is able to afford to fund legal action.
There is a right of appeal to an area committee against a refusal to grant a representation certificate or upon discharge or revocation of a certificate.
Obviously there may be circumstances in which the normal procedure of application and issue cannot be followed because of the urgency of the  matter and a procedure exists for obtaining an emergency representation certificate in such cases.
5.
THE LIABILITIES OF THE ASSISTED CLIENT
When the provision of legal services for those who could not afford the normal fees was dependent upon the charity of the profession, the relationship between client and lawyer must have been somewhat awkward.
The object of the legal aid scheme is to ensure that the relationship between solicitor and assisted client is on exactly the same basis as that between solicitor and private client.
To that end, a client's financial obligations are to the Legal Aid Fund and the solicitor receives payment from the Fund.
The full financial obligations of an assisted party will, inevitably, depend upon the outcome of the case.
As has been seen, the assisted party is under no obligation to pay any costs to the solicitor whatever the result; but may be under a liability to pay costs to a successful opponent.
If the assisted party is successful, costs may be payable by the opponent in the normal way.
These costs are paid straight into the Legal Aid Fund and go to defray the actual costs of the action in the accounts rendered to the Fund by solicitors and counsel acting for the assisted party.
If the costs recovered are not sufficient to cover the cost to the Fund, the difference is recouped from the contribution made by the assisted party.
Any balance remaining from the contribution is returned.
However, where the contribution, if any, is not sufficient to make up the difference, the Legal Aid Board has a first charge on any property, including money, recovered or preserved by the assisted party in the proceedings.
This is the ‘statutory charge.’
The charge means that the Board is entitled to recover the shortfall on its expenditure out of the property that has been recovered or preserved by the assisted party in the proceedings.
Consequently, the assisted party will not receive the full amount of a money award, the Board retaining sufficient to cover the shortfall, or other property will come subject to a charge, which may be enforced by the Board.
However, the charges on both money and other property may be postponed or other property substituted, especially where the money or property is required to  provide somewhere for the assisted person to live.
It is, therefore, very important to establish whether the property was recovered or preserved in the proceedings, since only then does the statutory charge apply.
The Legal Aid Board will be concerned to resist any attempt to defeat the charge.
Further, there are certain exceptions to the charge, the best known being the first £2,500 recovered or preserved in certain matrimonial proceedings.
The charge generally ensures that the Legal Aid Board is not out of pocket.
This is particularly so when it is remembered that certificates are only granted in those cases where there are reasonable grounds for taking action.
In 1989–90, a statutory charge was imposed in 38,196 non-matrimonial cases, resulting in £5,316,286 being retained to satisfy the net liability of the Legal Aid Fund.
The average amount retained was £139.18, which, on average, was 2 per cent.
of the award made to the successful assisted party.
In matrimonial cases in 1989–90, a statutory charge was imposed in 22,431 cases, resulting in £24,230,968 being retained to satisfy the net liability of the Legal Aid Fund.
The average amount retained was £1,080.24, which, on average, was 7.73 per cent.
of the award made to the successful assisted party.
The figures for average amount and average percentage retained are slightly misleading because the average is arrived at by taking into account those cases where no monies are retained for the benefit of the fund.
Thus the averages would be higher in those cases where money was retained.
The statutory charge can be harsh, but account must be taken of the justification for its existence.
It is justified as ‘an important and essential part of a publicly funded legal aided system to prevent unreasonable conduct of legally aided litigation and to prevent assisted persons profiting at the expense of public funds.’
If the assisted party is unsuccessful, his or her liability to the Legal Aid Board is limited to the amount of his or her contribution and, in that respect, the Board bears the financial risk of litigation.
However, it is possible for the court to order an assisted party to pay the opponent's costs in the action.
The court must first consider whether, on normal grounds, an awards for costs should be so made.
If an award should be made, it can only order the assisted party to pay such of those costs as are reasonable having regard to all  the circumstances, particularly the financial resources of the parties and their conduct in connection with the dispute.
This is not likely to be an especially serious problem for the assisted party, since if no contribution has been expected, he or she is not likely to be able to pay much in the way of costs to the opponent.
This leaves successful unassisted parties in a rather unfortunate position.
6.
THE COSTS OF SUCCESSFUL UNASSISTED PARTIES
It is only since 1964 that a successful unassisted party has been able to obtain costs from the Legal Aid Fund at all.
It is not easy to obtain such an award.
Section 18 of the Legal Aid Act 1988 permits a court, on the application of a successful unassisted party, to award costs to be paid by the Legal Aid Board if:
(i)
an order for costs would be made on normal principles;
(ii)
the proceedings are finally decided in favour of the unassisted party;
(iii)
it is just and equitable that provision for those costs should be made out of public funds;
(iv)
as respects the costs incurred in a court of first instance, the proceedings were instituted by the assisted party.
(v)
the court has considered the personal liability for costs of the assisted party; and
(vi)
with regard to first instance proceedings, the unassisted party would otherwise suffer severe financial hardship.
The initial approach of the courts was to adopt a highly restrictive interpretation of these provisions, meaning that trifling sums were awarded in costs.
It took a bold decision of the Court of Appeal in Hanning v. Maitland (No. 2) to admit the error of the earlier interpretation and relax the application of the conditions.
In that case, Lord Denning M.R. said that the ‘severe financial hardship’ condition, applying to courts of first instance only, should not be construed so as ‘to exclude people of modest income or modest capital who find it hard to bear their own costs.
The courts have gone further than might be suggested by this statement.
They accept that, in principle, it is possible for private and public companies to suffer severe  financial hardship.
The courts look at the effect that costs will have on that person's financial position and decide on the facts whether severe financial hardship will be suffered.
In all cases, whether in courts of first instance or not, an award of costs must be ‘just and equitable.’
The courts have found that this requirement was satisfied by a building society, a person indemnified by the Automobile Association, an insurance company and a county police authority.
This relaxation of attitude has led to a significant increase in the annual amount paid out of the fund to the successful unassisted parties, but it still remains perilous to be sued by an assisted person.
This places an additional responsibility on an Area Director in deciding whether an applicant for legal aid has reasonable grounds for bringing an action as plaintiff — the Director may be protecting unassisted defendants as well as the public purse.
7.
THE LEGAL AID SCHEME — A CRITIQUE
The legal aid scheme is kept under constant review by the Legal Aid Board, which is required to report annually to the Lord Chancellor on the discharge of its functions.
The scheme has also been kept under review by the Lord Chancellor's Legal Aid Advisory Committee.
In the past, the Advisory Committee appended a report to that of the Law Society in which it commented upon the report and added comments of its own about the provision of legal services generally.
The two documents were published together and helped to ensure that attention was focussed upon any alleged defects in the scheme and its administration.
However, since the establishment of the Board, the future of the Advisory Committee has been uncertain.
A major concern is whether the financial conditions of eligibility for representation are too restrictive.
First, there is the question whether the limits when set are sufficiently generous.
Secondly, whether the eligibility levels are then allowed to drift downwards, thereby eliminating many people from the scheme.
The first matter is difficult to assess, since a judgment has to be made as to how many people ought to be in receipt of representation.
This depends upon many factors, amongst them political and moral viewpoints.
However, in assessing whether the limits are in principle too low, it may be worth considering the gross income of people entitled to representation.
This information is provided in the Legal Aid Handbook 1990 in tabular form: The second concern is easier to assess.
The starting position is that of eligibility set at a particular time.
It can then be shown whether or not fewer people are eligible for representation at some later stage.
Unfortunately, the legal aid statistics have not provided the direct evidence that the levels have been allowed to drift.
Nevertheless, the Lord Chancellor's Advisory  Committee was convinced by the indirect evidence that there was such a drift.
Independent analysis of Government statistics supports this view, as do the claims of one commentator, Cyril Glasser.
In response, the Lord Chancellor established a review of the financial conditions for legal aid in November 1989, which is expected to take three years to complete its work.
The Royal Commission on Legal Services took a more fundamental view with regard to financial conditions, which has not been accepted.
It took the view that the upper limit is arbitrary, and might operate unfairly, since a person just above the limit receives no assistance, whereas a person just below it might have to make a substantial contribution but would have the security of knowing that that contribution represents the maximum liability for costs regardless of the actual cost or the outcome of the case.
Some people are exposed ‘to a choice between abandoning their legal rights and accepting the risk of suffering an undue financial burden.’
Consequently, it recommended that the financial limits should be abolished.
B. THE COUNTY COURT
The county court has a wide jurisdiction, but most of the actions brought in the county court are claims based upon contract and tort. 2,615,508 plaints were entered in 1989. 2,358,583 (90 per cent.) of these were ‘money’ plaints.
In order to reduce delay, cost and complexity in the civil justice system, the Civil Justice Review recommended that the county court should be retained as a court separate from the High Court, but that the upper limit of county court jurisdiction should be abolished, that all civil proceedings, with a few exceptions, should be commenced by a document called a writ, which would be issued in either the High Court or a county court, and that there should be an improved system of transfer of cases between county court and  High Court.
In consequence, the High Court would handle and try public law cases, other specialist cases and general list cases of importance, complexity and substance.
In order to achieve such a streamlined system, the Review also recommended that there should be a single costs regime for High Court and county court cases, subject to an exception for county court cases below £3,000, that trial facilities should be improved at county courts, that remedies in county courts and the High Court should be harmonised, and that there should be a common core of procedural rules.
To the extent that statutory changes were necessitated by these recommendations, they have largely been made by the Courts and Legal Service Act 1990, Part I. Consequently, the relationship between the jurisdiction and procedure of the county courts and High Court will change over the next few years.
Before commencing an action in the county court under the existing system, the potential plaintiff must consider whether the claim is within the jurisdiction of the court and whether there are factors which might justify use of the High Court instead.
The jurisdiction of the respective courts is set out in Chapter 2 and it will have been observed that there is an overlap between them.
If an action is begun in the wrong court, that court may transfer it to the court with appropriate jurisdiction.
There are also advantages in a county court action, even though the core rules are being harmonised.
County court procedure may be simpler and, although there are some difficult aspects, the unrepresented litigant can handle it more easily than High Court procedure.
Special procedures have been devised to deal with small claims, that is those for below £500, encouraging use of what is known as the small claims court.
A county court action is likely to provide a quicker hearing and one which is more convenient to the parties than a High Court hearing.
Whilst there may still be a feeling that a High Court writ will have a greater threatening effect on a recalcitrant defendant than a county court summons, inducing him or her to settle the claim, the changes to the costs rules, and the harmonisation of remedies, will lessen the attractiveness of such action.
However, it may still be the case that higher damages will be awarded in the High Court and that enforcement procedures are better, and will remain so.
1.
COURT MANAGEMENT OF LITIGATION
In an attempt to reduce the delay common in civil litigation, the Civil Justice Review recommended that there should be court management of litigation.
Since the problem of delay was considerably greater in High Court than county court actions, this proposal is discussed in relation to High Court actions.
2.
COMMENCING AN ACTION
A county court action is classified as a fixed date action or a default action, depending upon the nature of the claim.
A claim for any relief other than the payment of money must be brought as a fixed date action — any claim for money as a default action.
The procedure for the two actions, though initially similar, is different, so it is important to observe the distinction.
To begin either action, the plaintiff must file at the court office a formal request to the registrar, now the district judge, to issue a summons to commence the action together with the particulars of claim.
There are different forms of the request available from the county court depending upon the nature of the action.
The forms require information to be provided which will establish that the court has jurisdiction.
There is no specific form for the particulars of claim, even though the object of the particulars is to inform the defendant with sufficient particularity of the claim against him or her.
The plaintiff must supply them.
If legal help is sought, the lawyer is likely to rely on the precedents which are published.
The litigant in person may just concoct a statement, in which case assistance as to the sort of things to say is provided in a booklet entitled Small Claims in the County Court.
A request for a summons against a defendant in a default action and the basic particulars of claim in the (imaginary) case of Wilkinson v. Walkertronic Super Hi-Fi-Vid are set out below.
Once the request and the particulars of claim have been filed and the appropriate fee paid, the district judge must enter a plaint in the court record and, for a fixed date action, fix a return day on which the pre-trial review is to take place or the action is to be heard.
The district judge must also prepare and issue a summons, together with the particulars of claim, and this is normally served by a court officer on the defendant.
Service of the summons does not have to be effected in person; postal service is likely to be sufficient and there are special rules for violent or threatening defendants!
Together with the summons, the defendant receives a form for admission, defence and counterclaim which must be returned to the court within 14 days of service.
In a default claim and some fixed date actions, failure to submit a defence will permit the plaintiff, on submission of the appropriate form, to have judgment entered against the defendant immediately.
Therein lies the advantage of the default action.
If the defendant in a default action does submit a defence in the prescribed time, the district judge fixes a date for the preliminary hearing, and the action proceeds in the same way as a fixed date action.
The defendant in a fixed date action is permitted to submit a defence at any point before the return day, but if it is outside the 14 day period he or she may have to meet any costs incurred as a result of the delay.
3.
DEFENCE
A defendant to any action may wish to dispute all or part of the liability asserted by the plaintiff, or may disagree with the amount claimed whilst admitting liability, or may wish to dispute the claim and make a counterclaim against the plaintiff.
The form served on the defendant permits all these possibilities and is much easier to follow than the old forms, which were criticised as being too complicated.
It is not necessary to use the form to make a defence, the defendant only needs to submit some document indicating that the claim is disputed.
The district judge must send a copy of the defence to the plaintiff.
The case will then proceed to pre-trial review.
As already mentioned, the defendant may submit a defence up to the return day and even at the pre-trial review if he or she is prepared to risk costs being awarded against him or her.
However, if a defendant delays submitting a defence unduly, the court has  power to order him or her to deliver a defence or risk being debarred from defending the action at all.
The defendant may request further and better particulars of the claim and the court has the power to require the plaintiff to supply them on pain of having the action dismissed.
In our imaginary case, Walkertronic needs no further information and indicates an intention to defend in the following terms.
The case will now proceed to pre-trial review.
4.
THE PRE-TRIAL REVIEW
This stage of county court procedure was introduced in 1972 and was part of the response to criticism that the county court did not cater adequately for the resolution of small claims.
The review can be used either (i) to give judgment for the plaintiff if the district judge thinks fit where the defendant admits the plaintiff's claim or fails to appear, or (ii) to give instructions for the future conduct of the action.
The function of the pre-trial review is made clear by the instructions to the district judge whereby he or she is required to ‘…give all such directions as appear to be necessary or desirable for securing the just expeditious and economical disposal of the action or matter.’
Also, the district judge ‘…should endeavour to secure that the parties make all such admissions and agreements as ought reasonably to be made by them….’
Further, the notice to the parties in relation to the pre-trial review indicates that the hearing is informal and in private and that ‘its purpose is to:
(a) make sure that all the parties and the court understand what the case is about;(b) see if there is any possibility of settling the dispute, and if not, decide how it is going to be heard and how long the hearing will last;(c) decide what documents or other evidence is needed from both sides.’
The approach of the district judge at this stage of the proceedings is clearly crucial, although, whatever approach may be adopted in practice towards the parties, the review does at least give them the opportunity to meet and survey the relative strength of their cases.
Applebey concluded that, whilst useful to lawyers, the pre-trial review in the county court civil action has not been of enormous assistance to the ordinary person trying to conduct his or her own case.
The plaintiff or defendant may, at the pre-trial review, ask for any necessary interlocutory order or any other direction or may request arbitration rather than trial.
As soon as practicable after the pre-trial review, a date for trial is fixed, if a hearing is necessary.
5.
SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR SMALL CLAIMS
About 68 per cent.
of money claims in the county court in 1989 were for less than £500, the small claims limit.
It is hardly surprising that special procedures have been devised to make provision for claims of this size, and that the way in which the county court handles such claims has been the subject of close scrutiny and criticism, not least during the recent Civil Justice Review.
The county court owes its establishment to the cost and complexity of civil procedure, which persuaded the government of the day to pass the County Courts Act 1846 against much opposition from parts of the legal profession.
With an original jurisdiction of £20, the court was intended to provide a cheap, accessible and simple forum for the recovery of small debts and demands.
It was the criticisms of costs and complexity in small claims, put most convincingly by the Consumer Council in Justice Out of Reach, which led to the procedural reforms of the early 1970s.
Further published evidence and public pressure have provoked more changes in recent years, in particular through the establishment of the Review Body on Civil Justice.
The changes in the early 1970s were modifications of existing procedure and did not represent a major shift in emphasis.
They were intended to make the procedure more attractive and less expensive than before.
The changes included the introduction of the pre-trial review (see above) with the object, in part, of assisting the litigant in person, the encouragement of the use of arbitration rather than trial to resolve the dispute at the request of one of the parties, and the introduction of a rule that solicitor's costs would not be awarded to the successful party where the claim was for less than £100.
More changes in 1981 were designed to facilitate further the procedures so that they could be used by the general public, making arbitration the normal method of settling disputes where the amount of the claim was  less than £500, amending the ‘no costs’ rule and amending the terms of reference for the conduct of arbitration.
The Civil Justice Review recommended that the small claims limit be increased to £1,000.
Whilst this change has not yet been made, the £500 limit is now calculated without reference to any sum claimed or amount involved in a counterclaim.
Further major changes were recommended by the Civil Justice Review, although these did not extend to the creation of a small claims court separate from the county court.
The recommendations were intended to ensure that the small claims court would be well used, especially by people without legal representation.
It recommended that the preliminary hearing be abolished, that the district judge be required to conduct the hearing on an interventionist basis, that he or she be required to give reasons for a decision and explain the rules of law and that specific guidance should be provided on the expenses recoverable for small claims.
The plaintiff must follow the initial procedure outlined above.
If the claim is for less than £500, the district judge of the county court will automatically refer the matter to arbitration, unless there are good reasons why the matter should go to trial instead.
The arbitrator, who may be the district judge, a judge or an ‘outside arbitrator,’ sets the date for the single substantive hearing of the dispute.
There is a standard set of terms for the conduct of an arbitration.
Representation under the legal aid scheme is not available for an arbitration hearing although the plaintiff and defendant may obtain legal advice and assistance if they meet the eligibility conditions.
It is expected that the parties will appear in person, but legal representation is not prohibited.
No solicitor's costs, nor costs allowed to a litigant in person in lieu, will be allowed in an arbitration except for those stated on the summons, those incurred in enforcing the award, and those incurred through the unreasonable conduct of the opposing party.
(If the case goes for trial rather than arbitration, solicitor's costs will be allowed subject to the normal rules).
Why arbitration?
The object of providing for arbitration rather than trial in small claims is to allow litigants to represent themselves at a hearing where their ignorance of procedure and adversarial techniques will not be a handicap.
It is intended that the hearing should be informal, and this is indicated by the following standard terms of reference.
The formal rules of evidence and procedure do not apply.
The arbitrator must conduct the hearing according to the circumstances of each case and will in the future be required to adopt an interventionist role.
This will mean that he or she will be able to assume the control of the questioning of the parties and their witnesses, requiring questions to be directed through him or her.
The arbitrator will be able, with the consent of the parties, to get in an expert witness or procure an expert report.
Hearings should normally be in private.
It is anticipated that this type of hearing will be much more appropriate for small claims and will prove to be fairer, simpler and cheaper.
The automatic reference to arbitration of a dispute involving a sum of less than £500 can be rescinded on the application of either party or on the motion of the district judge, but only on one (or more) specified grounds.
The district judge can order a trial instead of arbitration, if satisfied that a difficult question of law or exceptionally difficult questions of fact are involved, that fraud is alleged, that both parties agree to trial, or that it would be unreasonable to order arbitration in the particular case having regard to the subject matter, the size of any counterclaim, the circumstances of the parties or the interests of other persons likely to be affected by the claim.
pepper v. Healey shows that arbitration may not always be the ideal solution in small claims and provides an example of an arbitration being rescinded.
In that case, Mrs. Pepper alleged that Mrs. Healey had driven into her car causing damage amounting to £133.
Mrs. Healey denied that there had been any collision and proposed to call expert evidence to prove that any damage to the plaintiff's car could not have been done by her car.
Mrs. Healey, comprehensively insured, would have had her legal expenses met by her insurance company.
Mrs. Pepper, insured only against third-party claims, would not.
The registrar rescinded the automatic reference to arbitration on the grounds that the plaintiff needed legal representation in order to present her case properly and the costs burden on her in an arbitration would therefore be unfair.
Because the insurance company was paying the defendant's costs, the contest would be unequal.
The Court of Appeal upheld this view.
(It may seem ironical that the initial question of whether the case should go to arbitration or trial involved three hearings — two in the county court and one in the Court of Appeal.)
6.
REVIEW OF SMALL CLAIMS PROCEDURE
The small claims procedure is designed to ensure a relatively informal, inexpensive and speedy form of resolving civil disputes.
A review of the  procedure demands an assessment of whether these objectives are achieved, and, if they are not, a consideration of what reforms of the present procedure are necessary or whether a more radical approach is required.
Most of this was undertaken during the course of the Civil Justice Review, although the nature of the review excluded consideration of the possibility of a radical approach in the form of a new Small Claims Court.
The recommendations of the Review are being implemented and a consideration of the basis upon which those recommendations were made is appropriate.
Many of the recommendations of the Civil Justice Review relied upon the results of a factual study undertaken by Touche Ross Management Consultants.
Whilst the factual study produced considerable valuable information, there are gaps and some errors in methodology which mean that its conclusions cannot be relied on exclusively in an assessment of the present procedure.
On the positive side, the factual study indicated that, in general, the small claims procedure provided a suitable forum for use by the general public, although the comments on the procedure tended to be about details rather than an overall critique.
Sight should not be lost of the calls for a separate small claims court (see below) and care must be taken in considering the use to which the procedure is put by the private citizen, as distinct from businesses and other organisations.
On the face of it, the Judicial Statistics suggest that the procedure is extensively used.
In 1989, 1,574,130 money plaints valued under £500 were entered.
Whilst this suggests that a large number of people make use of the procedure, the recent research figures reveal that it is not only private citizens, but also ‘large organisations’ and other ‘small litigants,’who make extensive use of the procedure.
Even if a large number of private citizens do use the procedure, what is unknown is how many more people with a small claim never take legal proceedings.
Indeed, it is often suggested that a major problem with the procedure is its lack of accessibility to the private citizen.
The problem of accessibility arises in a number of different ways, but primarily in the general difficulty that the private citizen has in undertaking  litigation without representation, even though this is the intention behind the procedure.
Consequently, it is suggested that private citizens have difficulty with the forms, both in understanding what they say and in how they should be filled in, and with the hearings, which can be legalistic.
On the other hand, there is some evidence that comprehension of the various aspects of small claims procedure is quite high.
A number of specific problems have been identified which suggest that the objectives are not attained fully or consistently.
One of the criticisms is of the variations in approach adopted by the various county courts, court staff and registrars, resulting in a difficulty in providing advice of a consistent nature.
On the other hand, there may be real value in divergence of approach not only in terms of flexibility, but also in encouraging experimentation which may lead to overall advances being made, which might otherwise not be possible.
Consequently, it must be questioned, with Sir Jack Jacob, whether the present small claims procedure provides ‘a procedure which is simple, inexpensive and fair.’
Is it simple?
The experience of the Birmingham County Court when it established a separate office to deal with litigants in person would suggest that the answer is that it is not.
The office was established because court staff found it extremely time-consuming to assist litigants in person with processing a claim, and, in particular, with providing help with summonses.
C. THE HIGH COURT
The process of settlement or compromise referred to in Chapter 10 can continue throughout a civil action in the High Court, so that the procedural steps necessary to bring an action to trial may be taken in the knowledge that a hearing may yet be averted.
Indeed, some parts of pre-trial High Court procedure have the effect of increasing the possibilities for compromise at the same time as preparing the issue for hearing by a judge.
Much of the court involvement through the pre-trial procedures is through masters rather than judges.
Whilst the Civil Justice Review, as its recommendations are introduced, will produce considerable changes to the current High Court procedure in an  effort to reduce delay, cost and complexity, the current procedure nevertheless provides an insight to what happens to civil actions prior to trial.
We, therefore, provide an outline of the Queen's Bench Division procedure, indicating the changes that have taken place and specific recommendations for change made by the Review.
We begin, however, with an examination of a recommendation which, when introduced, will take much of the control of pre-trial procedure out of the hands of the parties and place it under the control of the court.
1.
COURT MANAGEMENT OF LITIGATION
The Civil Justice Review recommended that a system of court control of case progress should be introduced in an effort to reduce the delay produced by pre-trial procedure, which is the major area of delay.
Consequently the parties to an action will not be as free to use pre-trial procedure to their own ends, delaying trials where that is advantageous.
Once an action becomes defended there is to be a fixed period within which the parties will be required either to set the case down for trial, on the assumption that it has not been settled or been otherwise disposed of, or to report to the court.
Standard periods will be prescribed for different types of business.
It will be possible to apply, at an early stage, for a special timetable, although applications to the court for detailed variations of the standard timetable will be permitted.
The court will have an effective monitoring system, building upon the introduction of computerised methods of instituting actions.
The monitoring will be applied at either the commencement of the case or at the point where it becomes defended, and will require notice of the defendant's intention to defend.
The court record will show the date by which the case is due to be set down for trial.
The court file will record that setting down within the prescribed period if it takes place.
Plaintiffs will also be required to give the court notice of disposal by settlement or otherwise before that date, subject to a fixed penalty for failing to give such notice, which will be payable by the plaintiff's solicitor.
Three months before the due date for setting down the court will issue reminder cards to parties in live cases stating the date by which their case is due to be set down.
Regular record checks will enable courts to identify cases not set down or disposed of within the prescribed period.
In any such case the plaintiff's solicitor will be sent a reminder of the requirement to set down and will be invited to fill in a standard report form on the state of the case.
If no reply is received within 14 days, a further reminder will be sent to the plaintiff's solicitor.
If the second reminder produces no result or the reply to either  reminder seems to indicate the need for court intervention the matter will be referred to a master or district judge, who will have the power to issue a summons for the solicitors of one or both sides to come and explain matters.
Having given an opportunity to the parties to be heard, the master or district judge will be able to make an ‘unless’ order to the effect that the case be struck out unless particular steps are taken within a particular time, or will be able to set the case down for trial.
Intervention by the court will normally cure delay or give rise to an acceptable explanation.
In the last resort, however, the court will have the power, of its motion and after hearing the parties if they wish, to strike out a case, leaving it to the parties to resolve the matter themselves.
Failure to comply with a court summons, or to comply with an ‘unless’ order, will constitute grounds for striking out.
In such cases the court will, when giving reasons for striking out and after hearing the parties' representatives if they wish, indicate who in its view is to blame for the delay, thus assisting the process of professional disciplinary sanctions and the pursuit of compensation by litigants.
The new timetables will relate to the overall periods up to setting down for trial.
Within that period there will continue to be stated periods for exchange of pleadings and other interlocutory steps since these provide a guide to parties and a means by which they can keep one another up to schedule.
There is, however, room for a realistic degree of relaxation in the system and the present 14 day periods allowed for exchange of pleadings will be increased to 28 days, subject to compliance with the overall timetable.
It will also be permissible for parties to vary particular time limits by agreement, subject always to the obligations to have the case ready for trial and set down within the overall timetable.