

Soviet policy and neutralisation in the Third World
The Soviet attitude to neutralisation in the Third World has a direct bearing on Soviet policy.
Neutralisation has an established legal pedigree and in contemporary conditions it remains a possible political formula to resolve or dampen down certain regional conflicts or to stabilise regional conditions which otherwise could escalate into a superpower confrontation.
In this sense the neutralisation of a distinct country or region would be intended to lead to its withdrawal from the contest of interests between the Great Powers, at least in the military sphere, and would require assurances or guarantees from these powers to this effect.
It would require specific restraints on Great Power conduct with respect to the neutralised country or region.
Most Third World states would prefer these to be formulated at an international conference with the blessing of the United Nations.
From their perspective this would be the most ‘democratic’ procedure.
Neighbouring states and international bodies could also be brought into the settlement which would preferably be enshrined in a treaty.
Alternatively, in a more traditional diplomatic style, a country could be neutralised, preferably with its own consent (if a viable political force which can speak on behalf of the nation or territory concerned can be identified) through arrangements arrived at by the superpowers, perhaps at summit discussions, with or without the involvement of other Great Powers or regionally influential states.
This procedure would best suit states torn by civil strife which is fuelled by the support of the superpowers (or China) for rival political or military factions or by the involvement of superpower ‘proxy’ forces.
One Western analyst recently suggested political solutions based on neutralisation on these lines for Afghanistan, Nicaragua and Kampuchea.
Naturally such an arrangement would be politically most acceptable to Moscow and Washington where the balance  of local forces which bear upon a conflict appear to be stalemated and where the interests of the superpowers are not greatly asymmetrical.
American and Soviet leaders might also feel compelled to reach an understanding over a country/territory where the risks of direct military confrontation do not appear worth the pursuit of particular local or regional interests.
The regime established by the neutralisation of an entire region could be based on a framework of obligations undertaken by the Great Powers to desist or refrain from particular forms of military involvement in that region, in particular the maintenance of military bases, facilities and alliance systems.
Another requirement could be the removal of nuclear weapons from the specified region — denuclearisation.
The process could be halted here or it could be linked to a more comprehensive attempt at demilitarisation.
Certain guarantees could also be laid down.
This kind of regime involving broad mutual restraints in the military field would be the opposite of a superpower condominium.
It would be more attractive and viable in the late twentieth century, therefore, at least from the perspective of the Third World states involved, than the neutralisation regimes imposed on European states such as Switzerland, Belgium and Luxembourg in the last century.
The Soviet and American interest in schemes for regional neutralisation, like their promotion of the neutralisation of disputed states, is likely, however, to depend on an assessment of the regional balance or ‘correlation’ of political and military forces and interests in each case.
This accounted for Washington's disparaging view of various ‘zones of peace’ advocated by Soviet leaders in the 1950s and 1960s, which were intended for regions where the Western states remained militarily preponderant.
During the détente years of the 1970s when the USSR appeared as a revisionist power in the Third World its interest in neutralisation slackened.
Neutralisation still had conservative connotations; it would encourage the stabilisation of the political status quo in the country or region concerned and impose restraints on the unilateral pursuit of Soviet interests at a time when national liberation movements were achieving success with Soviet assistance.
In contrast the breakdown of détente and the new assertiveness characteristic of American policy in the 1980s induced Soviet leaders and foreign policy specialists to adopt a more realpolitik appraisal of the international scene.
The USSR had acquired substantial assets in the Third World, which for the first time were threatened by a combination of internal rebellion and external pressure.
These considerations and the  increasing deideologisation of Soviet foreign policy in this decade encouraged Soviet officials to pay greater attention to more status quo oriented categories in their security thinking.
One reflection of this shift was a renewed if selective Soviet interest in neutralisation and demilitarisation schemes for Third World regions.
At a time of Soviet retrenchment in the Third World such schemes could constrain American attempts to proclaim new Third World regions as zones of vital interest for the United States.
However, any arrangements which acted to endorse the Soviet presence in distinct Third World regions were likely to be resisted by the United States.
The Reagan Doctrine expressed an American unwillingness to legitimise Soviet interests or involvement in the Third World.
The American view of neutralisation in the Third World will continue to determine the efficacy of this concept for the resolution or limitation of conflict as much if not more than the Soviet view.
The Soviet view of neutralisation in the 1970s and 1980s has evolved from the legalistic and Eurocentric notion of neutralisation which Eastern and Western statesmen held in common in earlier decades and sought to apply to particular disputes.
The concept of neutralisation has often been used to describe the process establishing the neutrality or even non-alignment of an area through international guarantees or a multilateral treaty.
But under international law neutralisation originally referred to a more specific regime and it was in this sense that Soviet international lawyers in the 1950s understood it.
A Soviet legal specialist wrote in 1958, for example, that the neutralisation of a certain territory was formed by an agreement between two or more states not to transform the territory concerned, which was generally of strategic significance, into a theatre of military operations or a base for such operations.
The treaty neutralising a given territory would stipulate rights and conditions pertaining to wartime.
But in peacetime if the neutralisation were not accompanied by demilitarisation the states signing the treaty would not have any rights and obligations with respect to this territory.
The act of neutralisation would not depend on the will of the neutralised state.
Soviet studies underlined that historically neutralised and demilitarised territories had often been created on the basis of unequal treaties and had resulted from the inability of the colonial powers at a given period to agree to the direct partition of a colony.
Nevertheless, Soviet specialists accepted that in the past these zones had to a certain extent acted as a means of averting war.
But they regarded the simple wartime orientation of the neutralisation regime as insufficient in the post-Second-World-War era.
Soviet spokesmen began instead to identify peacetime benefits from neutralisation, to link this regime more explicitly to that of demilitarisation and the Soviet doctrine of peaceful coexistence, and correspondingly to advocate the creation of broad ‘peace zones’.
‘In the contemporary period’, a Soviet specialist asserted in 1963,
neutralised zones and zones of disarmament, which the socialist states and the neutralist states of Asia and Africa propose in Central Europe, in the region of the Mediterranean Sea, in the region of the Baltic Sea, in the Far East and on the African continent, are one of the means of securing the peaceful coexistence of states with different socio-economic systems.
Such zones were expected also ‘to assist the spread of political, economic, scientific, cultural and other contacts’ between states.
Numerous Soviet proposals for regional disarmament or nuclear-free zones were advanced in the late 1950s and 1960s, although generally these did not envisage the formal neutralisation of the regions concerned.
The Soviet interest in the demilitarisation of Central Europe was expressed in more explicit proposals.
In March 1952 Soviet statesmen suggested a unification of Germany in exchange for its non-participation in coalitions or alliances directed against any of the former wartime allies and in 1954 Molotov more clearly presented the idea of neutralising Germany.
Instead an agreement on Austria was concluded between the Great Powers in 1955 which provided the best European example of regulated neutrality, of a modern version of neutralisation.
However, since Austria voluntarily adopted this status she was not neutralised in the traditional sense.
The Soviet proposal in the early 1960s to turn Berlin into a ‘free city’ was closer to traditional concepts of neutralisation.
According to a Soviet legal specialist this status could be established by international agreements and would require the demilitarisation and neutralisation of the city.
Neutralisation in this context was understood as non-participation in military groupings and alliances, and the conduct of a policy based on good-neighbourly relations with all states.
But this proposal to transform Berlin into a ‘free city’ was politically loaded since according to Soviet interpretations it required the agreement of the government of the state on whose territory the free city would be created (the GDR).
Such an agreement in the Soviet view would include understandings over granting Berlin communications if necessary with the outside world.
The proposed arrangement did not concern Berlin alone since there were Soviet specialists who argued that ‘the creation of a neutralised and demilitarised city of West Berlin is estimated by the government of the GDR as the first  link in a chain of measures, the sum total of which should lead to a united, democratic, peace-loving Germany’.
In fact the prospects for some form of neutralised Germany, whether divided or united were no longer realistic in the 1960s.
Soviet leaders continued to encourage neutralism in West Europe (as a form of dissociation from the military policies of the Western alliance) but their formal proposals suggested the demilitarisation rather than the neutralisation of regions or states on this continent.
The two regimes have become difficult to distinguish in Soviet statements.
The Soviet Military Encyclopedia in 1978 defined a neutral or neutralised zone as a defined geographical region in which by international agreement (or the unilateral decision of a state to which this region belongs)‘the preparation of military operations’ is prohibited, and which ‘cannot be used as a theatre of military operations or a base for the conduct of war’.
This arrangement could be temporary or permanent.
But apart from the Antarctica Treaty of 1959 no examples were provided from the post-Second-World-War years.
The authoritative Soviet Diplomatic Dictionary published in 1984 provides no separate entry for neutralisation, but notes that demilitarisation ‘is frequently employed jointly with neutralisation’ to exclude the use of a territory as a theatre of military operations.
Demilitarisation is considered as the ‘international legal regime of a distinct territory forbidding its use for military goals in peacetime’.
While full demilitarisation prohibits military installations, the maintenance of armed forces, the conduct of manoeuvres or undertaking other military activity, partial demilitarisation either forbids a distinct form of armed activity or establishes a limited level of armaments.
This source observes that although demilitarisation generally extends over a limited zone with the goal of separating potentially hostile parties it may also cover regions and even continents, such as the Åland and Spitzbergen archipelagos and Antarctica.
If by neutralisation is meant establishing Great Power guarantees for the neutrality of states or regions, then Soviet interest in this process or regime certainly was not confined to Europe in the 1950s and 1960s.
Soviet leaders were prepared to confirm the neutrality of Cambodia and Laos in this way.
Soviet specialists approved of a statute adopted by Cambodia in 1957 which stipulated that it was a neutral state.
At the Belgrade Non-Aligned Summit in 1961 the Cambodian leader Prince Sihanouk proposed the creation of a ‘neutralised or buffer zone’ in the areas ‘most directly exposed to the confrontation of the two blocs’, which would require ‘persuading the two blocs to admit the usefulness of a chain of countries, whose neutrality they would solemnly recognise and guarantee, in order to eliminate the risk of conflict’.
This example of Third World interest in schemes for the neutralisation of regions between the blocs followed on Soviet acknowledgement of the legitimacy of neutrality and the desirability of ‘buffer zones’ in Central Europe in the 1950s.
But Soviet leaders had not yet conceived of extending such formally guaranteed zones, as opposed to the looser idea of ‘zones of peace’, to Third World regions.
Following the Cambodian example the government of Laos adopted a declaration of neutrality on 9 July 1962.
This had a greater impact on Moscow since it was followed by the declaration on the neutrality of Laos on 23 July adopted by the states which participated in the Geneva Conference.
In the Soviet view this created obligations to ensure and defend the neutrality of Laos.
Soviet legal specialists maintained that the neutralisation of Laos created a code of conduct applicable more broadly to neutralist states (see Chapter 1).
The Soviet interest in undermining Western military influence in the Southeast Asian states also ensured a positive Soviet reception for a proposal by Prince Sihanouk at the end of 1962 for an agreement on international guarantees of the neutrality of Cambodia on the model of Laos.
Cambodia suggested that an international conference be convened  analogous to the Geneva Conference on Laos which would fix Cambodian neutrality in a multilateral treaty and would provide recognition and guarantees for this status from the participants.
Moscow characterised the proposal for a neutralisation of Cambodia as ‘an important contribution to reducing international tensions and strengthening peace in Southeast Asia’.
The USSR and other Eastern bloc states declared their readiness to take part in such a conference on Cambodia but the Western powers opposed the idea.
Although Sihanouk had no communist sympathies Soviet leaders were prepared to provide the assurances he needed against the right-wing regimes in South Vietnam and Thailand in the form of multilateral neutrality guarantees.
The USA, however, would not respond in kind.
Soviet criticisms of American ‘violations’ of the neutrality of Laos and Cambodia persisted later in the 1960s.
Soviet writers claimed that the Western states were employing a whole range of devices to undermine the neutralism or proclaimed neutrality of the new states.
Cambodia was regarded as under pressure from offers of ‘assistance’, interference in its affairs and the organisation of incidents against its borders.
In July 1966 the Soviet Government specifically declared its recognition and respect for the ‘independence, neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia’.
The United States was accused similarly of conducting a subversive policy towards Laos despite the guarantees on the neutrality of this country.
The  American struggle against neutralism was presented as one of the objectives behind its involvement in the ‘dirty war’ in South Vietnam.
Soviet spokesmen underlined in this context the proposal by the National Front for the Liberation of Vietnam for the neutralisation of this region.
The neutrality of Cambodia and Laos certainly did not resolve the security problems of these states.
It was undermined by civil war and the ensuing involvement of the Great Powers.
But Soviet support for the neutralisation of Cambodia and Laos helped to stimulate a regional interest in neutrality in Southeast Asia which was developed by the ASEAN states in the 1970s.
It also created a possible precedent for Soviet conduct in other Third World regions.
Nevertheless, as the following studies indicate Soviet officials have regarded neutralisation in the Third World as a pragmatic compromise at best.
They have viewed the option of neutralisation cautiously, selectively and with an eye to the political and strategic implications of each particular scheme.
In those cases when Soviet leaders have favoured neutralisation it has been advanced as part of a broader Soviet strategy of political and military denial to the Western powers.
THE NEUTRALISATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIA
The idea of neutralising Southeast Asia originally developed in Malaysia.
It had been raised in international conferences in the late 1960s but was first officially presented by a Malaysian diplomat in April 1970 at the preparatory meeting of the non-aligned states in Dar-es-Salaam.
He expressed the Malaysian hope that the non-aligned countries ‘will be able to endorse the neutralisation of not only the Indo-China area but of the entire region of Southeast Asia, guaranteed by the three major powers, the People's Republic of China, the Soviet Union and the United States, against any form of  external interference, threat or pressure’.
This appeal was repeated at the Lusaka Non-Aligned Conference in September 1970 by Tun Razak shortly before his appointment as Malaysian Prime Minister.
But he specified later that the Five-Power Defence Arrangements, involving Malaysia, Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand, which had been formalised in London in April 1970 were ‘in no way incompatible with our neutralisation proposal or our non-aligned policy’ since the Arrangements were intended for current defence needs and were entirely defensive in nature, whereas the neutralisation was a ‘long-term solution’.
Malaysia sought support for its initiative in various forums and in  November 1971 succeeded in gaining a cautious endorsement for it from ASEAN in the form of a declaration issued by a meeting of ASEAN foreign ministers in Kuala Lumpur.
The so-called ZOPFAN Declaration agreed that the neutralisation of Southeast Asia was a desirable objective and committed Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand to ‘exert initially necessary efforts to secure the recognition of, and respect for, Southeast Asia as a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality, free from any form or manner of interference by outside Powers’.
The initial lukewarm Soviet reaction to the ZOPFAN proposal turned to qualified support within a year.
A Soviet official leading an AAPSO mission to Kuala Lumpur in the spring of 1971 affirmed that the USSR welcomed all policies of neutrality and non-alignment if they were ‘directed towards all countries’.
In November Pravda still viewed the ASEAN declaration for neutralisation as denoting a ‘far from easy task’ since it presupposed an end to US ‘aggression’in Indo-China, to China's ‘hegemonistic aspirations’and contradictions among Southeast Asian countries, and the removal of foreign military bases and foreign troops from the area.
Early in 1972 Izvestiya described the position of the ASEAN states in their declaration of the previous April as lacking in ‘consequences’ and observed that neutralisation was particularly difficult to equate with the Philippine and Thai adherence to Western military blocs.
But a few days later the Soviet Government organ admitted that ‘possibly neutralisation would be conducive to the creation of a system of collective security in Asia’ and that ‘the proposal for this system is cherished by all those who seek the normalisation of the situation in Asia’.
This uncertain response stemmed from initial Soviet concern that the ASEAN scheme would tend to counteract or displace Brezhnev's recent appeal for establishing a collective security regime in Asia; the Southeast Asian countries suspected the Soviet plan was intended to draw the Asian countries into a defence system with the USSR directed primarily at China.
By mid 1972 Soviet spokesmen adopted a more conciliatory tone.
One such writer considered the declaration on the neutrality of Southeast Asia to sound ‘in common with the Soviet proposal on setting up collective security in Asia’.
He referred to the opinion of the Indonesian Minister of Foreign Affairs, A. Malik, that the ASEAN initiative ‘echoes the Soviet proposal of Asian security in many respects’.
By September, a few weeks before an official visit to Moscow by the Malaysian Prime Minister, Tun Razak, the Soviet press described the ZOPFAN initiative as ‘an idea that cannot be underestimated’.
Malaysia was praised for following’ an independent and realistic' foreign policy course, in which the scheme to  neutralise Southeast Asia had evoked ‘an extensive response the world over’.
This raised Malaysian hopes that they could secure formal Soviet approval for the neutralisation idea during Tun Razak's visit to the USSR.
Speaking in Moscow Tun Razak denied that he had arrived to obtain the official approval of the USSR for the neutralisation of Southeast Asia ‘because the responsibility for this rests with the countries of Southeast Asia themselves, acting on a collective basis’ but he hoped that ‘according to the extent of progress of the countries of Southeast Asia on this path towards our goal the Soviet Government will show sympathy and understanding towards us’.
He informed Prime Minister Kosygin that the ZOPFAN proposal was ‘not directed at anyone and no one is excluded’, that its essence lay in the recognition and harmonisation of the legal interests of all the parties in Southeast Asia, of both the countries actually located in the region and of other powers.
But in meeting with Kosygin it became clear to Razak that the Soviet Union would prefer its own larger collective security agreement, which would embrace Japan, Pakistan and India as well as the smaller states.
Kosygin expressed his understanding of ‘the interest of Malaysia in the normalisation of conditions in Southeast Asia’ and told Razak that the USSR ‘respected many of the considerations contained in this plan’.
But he reiterated the Soviet scheme for collective security in Asia and underlined the Soviet readiness to cooperate with all states, including Malaysia, towards its realisation.
The final joint communiqué of Razak's visit to Moscow contained an agreement to differ.
While the Soviet side presented views on ensuring security in Asia on a collective basis the Malaysians ‘acquainted the Soviet side with the essence of the proposal on the neutralisation of Southeast Asia’.
Razak said afterwards that when Soviet officials told him that neutralisation was similar to collective security he replied that ‘he appreciated this, but added that Malaysia preferred a neutrality plan which would be applicable to a smaller region such as Southeast Asia’.
He was concerned that to include the large Asian countries in such a scheme would introduce problems that the small nations could find difficult to resolve.
Razak seemed to accept that the ZOPFAN and the Soviet proposals supplemented each other to some extent.
But Soviet leaders were primarily interested in the former as a means to promote the latter among the ASEAN states.
They favoured ZOPFAN as the kind of indigenous initiative they had hoped to stimulate under the umbrella notion of collective security, but in the absence of clear agreement in ASEAN over neutralisation they were loath to become committed to a proposal which could be turned against themselves.
As a contemporary writer observed, Moscow had no interest in an ASEAN-sponsored neutralisation that could act as a smokescreen for continued US control and influence or create a vacuum from which the Soviet Union is excluded but China, because of its location and ambitions is not.
Yet Soviet diplomats had to consider that should their collective security fail to gain acceptance neutrality would be preferable to them to a series of regional alliances in which the Western powers play even a marginal role.
In this respect some form of neutralisation could be ‘only the first step toward final acceptance of collective security Soviet style’.
The development of neutralist tendencies in Asia, along the lines of Malaysian policy, could act to nullify any defence component of regional organisations such as ASEAN and in the medium term reduce their resistance to the Soviet collective security scheme.
This could serve to bolster the Soviet ‘containment’ of China.
The Chinese were cautious in their initial approach to the ZOPFAN proposal, but by June I973 a Chinese Foreign Ministry official welcomed it.
He considered it in harmony with the Chinese wish to keep Southeast Asia free of interference, to prevent any power from dominating it.
During a visit by Razak to Peking in 1974 Chou En-lai appears privately to have ‘accepted and supported’ neutralisation, ‘provided foreign bases…were dismantled in good time’.
China may not have been unsympathetic towards the neutralisation of the region, but may have been doubtful about her capacity to act as a guarantor of such a regime.
In later years China sought to present her credentials as a regional power and encourage an interpretation of neutralisation which would be directed against the USSR as an external power and would underline the illegitimacy of Soviet support for Vietnamese actions in Indochina.
The ZOPFAN idea was also used to promote China's own acceptability in Southeast Asia.
Already by the mid 1970s it appeared, however, that neutralisation under Great Power guarantees as elaborated by Malaysia was acceptable neither to the majority of Southeast Asian states nor to the external powers that count.
There was agreement among the ASEAN states on the broad ZOPFAN principles, but they were reluctant to accept the limitations on their actions that being neutralised would entail.
The case has been made that neutralisation is potentially attractive only to relatively minor states that by virtue of their strategic position or symbolic political value have become or threaten to become the focal points of contests for control or dominant influence between principal regional or global rivals.
Kampuchea and Laos would correspondingly have welcomed Southeast Asian neutralisation in the early 1970s, while Indonesia regarded itself too  grand for a neutralised status.
Thailand and the Philippines had reservations stemming mainly from the disharmony between the Zone concept and their alliance relationships with the United States.
Singapore's doubts with the Zone idea reflected the view that its interests and the interests of Great Power equilibrium would be best served by the involvement of all major powers in the region so as to enhance the prospects for a balance.
Singapore has also been concerned about the role of Vietnam in Southeast Asia.
It could be anticipated that a new united Vietnam might regard neutralisation as a useful device to effect the transition from wartime dependence on external allies to a peacetime independent regional or subregional role.
But in the long term it could be predicted that Vietnam also would lose interest in a South Asian neutralisation since it was an ascending regional power.
A neutralisation would act to perpetuate the balance of forces that formalised the agreement to neutralise, which would not be in the interest of those parties to the agreement who expect to upgrade their relative involvement in the region over their current level.
Naturally, this consideration could also apply to China or other Great Powers external to the region whose military or political presence in Southeast Asia appeared likely to increase.
In fact, the failure of the ASEAN countries to issue a neutralisation blueprint in early 1975 resulted from the communist victories in Indo-China, which changed the political and social balance of forces in Southeast Asia.
When the heads of government of the five ASEAN countries held their first meeting for eight years in February 1976 in Indo-China they failed to agree on regional security and the communiqué of the meeting did not mention neutralisation.
The proclaimed ‘non-alignment’ of Vietnam, Kampuchea and Laos may have been reassuring to a certain extent to the non-communist five, but neutralisation as a strategic concept had been anchored on the assumption that the Indo-Chinese war would end with the survival of non-communist, neutral regimes in South Vietnam, Kampuchea and Laos and that the overall balance of forces in Southeast Asia would remain decisively in favour of the non-communist states.
Nevertheless, in the wake of the retreat of American power and the demise of SEATO neutralisation remained the regional strategic stance of Southeast Asia, if only because it was considered by the region to be the only plausible defence against becoming a Chinese sphere of influence.
The Malaysians hoped in particular that, once relations between Hanoi and Bangkok were normalised, the concept of neutralisation would gather new momentum because ASEAN would recognise the importance of detaching  Indo-Chinese communism from the communism of China and the USSR, and of merging it in the mainstream of Southeast Asian nationalism.
Vietnam gave greater emphasis to its regional diplomacy from about mid 1976 after the withdrawal of the United States' military forces from Thailand.
A programme to guide Vietnam's foreign policy was announced in March 1976, which included a point similar to the ZOPFAN Declaration on developing cooperation among the countries of the region ‘for the cause of independence, peace and genuine neutrality in Southeast Asia’.
In July after touring the states of the region Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister reportedly said that Hanoi was not interested in joining ASEAN or subscribing to the Zone of Peace proposal ‘for the moment’.
In his address to the Colombo Non-Aligned Conference Premier Pham Van Dong expressed support for ‘the Southeast Asian peoples in their efforts to achieve genuine independence, peace and neutrality’.
but Vietnam joined Laos to torpedo Malaysia's attempts to have the conference renew the endorsement of ZOPFAN previously made at the Algiers Summit Conference.
Laos was particularly opposed to the terms ‘ASEAN proposal’ and ‘the Kuala Lumpur Declaration’in the draft resolution.
Over the winter of 1977–8 the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Trinh, visited the region again and raised the idea of a new and broader organisation to that of ASEAN, which would embrace all the countries of Southeast Asia based on the principles of ‘peace, independence and neutrality’.
In July 1978 Vietnam pressed a proposal on the ASEAN states first made in New York in May of that year for discussions on the concept of a ‘zone of peace, independence and genuine neutrality’.
The idea was not elaborated and ASEAN leaders showed suspicion about what was meant by ‘genuine neutrality’.
This suspicion was enhanced by the close links which were developing between Vietnam and the Soviet Union.
Indeed, it is precisely this relationship between a Third World ‘socialist’ state and the USSR which makes an examination of Vietnam's view of a neutral or neutralised zone interesting.
This may shed light on Soviet views of such zones.
It does appear that the Soviet approach to a neutralisation of Southeast Asia has been strongly influenced by Vietnamese proposals and Vietnamese regional policy.
These proposals may illustrate the independent interest of a regionally influential pro-Soviet Third World state in some forms of neutralisation.
Alternatively, they could themselves reflect Soviet policy priorities.
In this vein a Soviet commentator maintained that Vietnamese initiatives advanced by Prime Minister Pham Van Dong during talks in the ASEAN countries in autumn 1978 were supported by Soviet diplomacy.
He noted that these talks showed that ‘the difference in social systems cannot be an obstacle in establishing in the region a zone of peace, independence, freedom and neutrality, a zone of stability and prosperity’.:
At approximately the same time the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Nikolay Firyubin, carried out official talks and consultations in three ASEAN states: the Philippines, Indonesia and Thailand.
Although he failed to endorse ZOPFAN, from the Soviet perspective this tour' confirmed once again the Soviet Union's readiness to treat any proposal prompted by the concern for peace and security in Asia with all attention, and to strive to ensure them by joint efforts’.
From 1978 Soviet officials began to show greater interest in the Vietnamese concept of a Zone of Neutrality in Southeast Asia despite their former lack of enthusiasm for the ZOPFAN proposal.
This change was reflected in Soviet publications.
An authoritative Soviet study on the diplomacy of the developing states, prefaced by Firyubin a couple of years before his ASEAN tour, had arrived at a definition of neutralisation on the basis of declarations by the statesmen of Southeast Asia.
Such neutralisation should provide for ‘the elimination of military blocs and foreign military bases, the withdrawal of foreign armed forces, the respect for sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the countries of the region, refraining from acts threatening the security of neighbours, the protection of economic interests against the interference of foreign monopolies’.
This was the kind of neutralisation which Soviet leaders could find attractive in Third World regions like Southeast Asia where the Western military presence considerably outweighed that of the USSR.
But this maximal definition went beyond the framework of the ZOPFAN scheme and assumed an anti-Western colouring in its talk of foreign monopolies.
In the late 1970s Soviet officials did not consider the ZOPFAN plan, however, to be realistic.
This was apparent from the views of the head of the Far East section (which covers Southeast Asia and Japan) of the International Department of the Soviet Central Committee, Ivan Kovalenko.
He observed initially that there were people ‘who believe that a neutral foreign policy would guarantee the security of the Asian peoples, and that it would at first stabilise the situation and then ensure peace and security on the Asian continent’.
He accepted the ‘desire to remain neutral’, interpreted as ‘the reluctance of one or other state to participate in military-political blocs set up by the imperialist powers’ as a ‘favourable phenomenon’.
He stated furthermore that ‘the Soviet Union supports the aspirations of the Afro-Asian countries to peace and neutrality and views neutrality in its modern interpretation and in practical policy as an important  factor of peace and international security’(my emphasis).
This was an unusually specific Soviet comment in the 1970s on neutrality in the Third World.
It implied that the USSR did not favour transplanting the more passive, traditional and legalistic forms of neutrality found in Europe into the Third World.:
Kovalenko cast doubts on the ASEAN proposal for a neutral zone since he imagined it ‘wrong to think that the ASEAN countries have already managed fully to break away from the influence of the imperialist powers and that they are free to pursue their own foreign policy’.
He pointed out that only Indonesia was not ‘affiliated with blocs’ and had ‘no foreign troops and military bases on her territory’.
He acknowledged the interest the Zone idea had raised in Southeast Asia, indicated by the fact that ‘representatives of the most diverse social groups advance many ideas concerning the organisational forms of translating the idea of neutrality into practice’, and by the regular meetings of a special ASEAN committee to formulate recommendations that could form the basis of a plan for neutralising Southeast Asia.
But he judged the search for means to ensure security on the basis of neutrality ‘in such a complex region as Southeast Asia’ as a ‘very difficult matter’.
Kovalenko concluded that it was ‘highly improbable that the five ASEAN countries, which lack adequate political, economic and military strength to force the imperialist powers to withdraw from Southeast Asia and thus make it possible for its people independently to determine their future, will be able to solve this question on their own’.
In this sense he presented the Soviet proposal ‘that collective security be established on an all-Asia basis’ as ‘all the more realistic and feasible’, since this envisaged ‘the participation of all countries of the continent, including socialist and non-aligned’.
This larger group would ‘have the ability to turn the whole of Asia into a zone of durable peace and universal security’.
This Soviet tendency to downgrade the ZOPFAN scheme for Southeast Asia in favour of their Asian collective security plan was a legacy of the early 1970s.
By the end of the decade it was clear that the Soviet initiative would not win the support of the major Asian states.
Even India, despite her animosity towards China would not countenance the Soviet plan, and Soviet intervention in Afghanistan dashed all remaining hopes of rallying the Asian states in a broad Soviet-sponsored security arrangement.
As tensions increased in Southeast Asia in 1978–9 in response to the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea and the confrontation between China and Vietnam Soviet leaders began instead to favour the less ambitious task of drawing conflict-prone Asia in the détente process.
The  indigenous Southeast Asian interest in neutralisation could be incorporated into this process.
Thus during a visit to Moscow by the Malaysian Prime Minister, Datuk Hussein Onn, in September 1979 Kosygin expressed support for the ZOPFAN resolution since its implementation ‘would establish a precondition for the widening of the process of détente over all the Asian continent’.
Two further developments had favoured the Zone of Neutrality scheme.
In the opinion of Soviet writers, a decisive influence had been exerted on the process of working out the ASEAN Zone concept by the ‘victory of the Peoples of Indo-China’ and the consequent ‘weakening position of imperialism’.
The new socialist regimes in Vietnam and Laos had undermined the military and political pre-eminence of the Western states in Southeast Asia and this counteracted Kovalenko's objections to the ZOPFAN idea, provided that Vietnam and Laos were included within its ambit.
The second development was the readoption of the ZOPFAN idea by the Non-Aligned Movement.
In the Soviet view ‘new aspects in the idea of neutralisation’ of Southeast Asia involved an emphasis on its ‘full conformity with the policy of non-alignment and the decisions of corresponding conferences on this problem’.
These two developments were fused in the actions of the Non-Aligned as a group and Vietnam separately towards a settlement of the tensions and hostilities in Indo-China.
The foreign ministers of the three Indo-Chinese regimes met on 5 January 1980 just before a visit to Hanoi by the Malaysian Foreign Minister.
The foreign ministers, naturally under dominant Vietnamese influence, met to discuss the establishment of ‘a region of peace, independence, freedom, neutrality, stability and prosperity’, and they issued their first joint communiqué since 1975.
This copied Soviet descriptions of Vietnam's Zone proposal in 1978, but in 1980 the proposal was specifically concerned with the crisis in Indo-China.
In the wake of the entry of Soviet troops into Afghanistan, Vietnam's first priority in Southeast Asia was to legitimise its role in Kampuchea and normalise its relations with the ASEAN states to offset renewed pressures as a result of the new hostility to the Soviet Union in international forums.
The Indo-Chinese ministers warned the ASEAN states that they would do well to accept the reality of Indo-China and offered to sign non-aggression treaties with them on a bilateral basis.
In 1981 the three Indo-Chinese regimes presented a joint initiative aimed at normalising conditions in Southeast Asia and creating a zone of peace, stability and good neighbourliness.
The Soviet Union considered the  essence of their proposals as an attempt to resolve the problems and differences in relations between the ASEAN and Indo-Chinese states ‘by means of a direct dialogue between them and without any outside interference’.
This was supported by the Political Declaration of the Conference of Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers in February 1981, which called for a dialogue between the Southeast Asian states to resolve their differences and eliminate the involvement and threats of intervention by outside powers.
The Non-Aligned also approved ‘the efforts being made for the early establishment of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in the region’ and called on all states to support these efforts.
Contemporary Soviet commentators were reticent on this reference to the Zone but they praised the Non-Aligned for condemning the attempts of ‘external forces…to aggravate tensions in the region and set one group of countries against the other ‘and for stressing the need for’ a comprehensive political solution of the problems of the present tensions in Southeast Asia’.
The Soviet priority had become the stabilisation of the Indo-Chinese regimes under Vietnamese control.
The establishment of a ‘zone of peace and stability’ in Southeast Asia was promoted in the 1980s as a means towards this end, as a diplomatic device to legitimise these regimes.
The Zone plan supported by Vietnam and the USSR would incorporate the Indo-Chinese states.
It would require direct negotiations between the ASEAN and Indo-Chinese states towards a resolution of the Kampuchean problem and the provision of guarantees against further external (interpreted as Thai and by extension American) attempts to unseat the Vietnamese-installed regime in Kampuchea.
Soviet and Vietnamese officials could not, however, simply replace the ZOPFAN proposal with one of their own since the Third World confirmed its support for a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality at the Delhi and Harare Non-Aligned Summits in 1983 and 1986.
Soviet writers tended to stress rather that, although this was not specified in the ZOPFAN declaration, it was clear from its ‘context’ that ‘the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality should be extended to all the states of Southeast Asia and not only to the members of ASEAN’.
They claimed that the ASEAN states which initiated the Zone plan intended it also to embrace other states located in the region.
Moreover, since the early 1980s they have tended to gloss over the ‘neutrality’ component of this plan.
The Soviet Union has failed to win ASEAN or general Third World support for the broader Zone concept.
The Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea has been the primary stumbling block.
By the mid 1980s Soviet writers were stating bluntly that ‘the real way towards the adoption  of true security measures’ in Southeast Asia requires ‘setting into motion equal cooperation between the ASEAN countries and Indo-China, without which the existence of any viable regional system of security is inconceivable’.
They decried the fact that the Non-Aligned Movement in its approach to the creation of a zone of peace in Southeast Asia ‘is very one-sidedly oriented to the initiative of the ASEAN member states’.
They blamed this on those circles who obstructed ‘the restoration of the legal rights of the Peoples’ Republic of Kampuchea as a participant of the Movement’and therefore an ‘objective approach’to the ‘zone of peace’.
The Non-Aligned were urged to adopt a ‘constructive role’ in creating this zone.
This required in particular a ‘correction’ of the word ‘neutrality’appearing in the ASEAN proposal, which was deemed incompatible with the goals and principles of the Non-Aligned.
The current Soviet aversion to the ‘neutrality’ component of the formula for a zone of peace in Southeast Asia follows the development of Vietnamese opposition to this aspect of the Zone scheme.
Since the beginning of the 1980s Vietnam has considered that its future policy in relation to the Zone idea would merely be a continuation of its course as a ‘non-aligned’ state.
Kampuchea, under the Vietnamese-installed regime, is also presented as a non-aligned state.
Since Vietnam and Kampuchea are heavily dependent politically and militarily on external sponsors such a concept of ‘non-alignment’ involves a very different emphasis to that of neutrality or neutralisation.
Soviet specialists argue that the Vietnamese believe that the insistence on neutralisation in the ASEAN Zone proposal is intended to isolate Vietnam, since it could not obtain sufficient guarantees against being isolated as a participant in a neutral zone.
This can be understood to mean that Vietnam is not prepared to renounce or  imperil her close ties with the Soviet Union.
Soviet specialists also maintain that neutrality or neutralisation would anyway be a regression for a ‘socialist’ state such as Vietnam.
The Soviet Union and Vietnam oppose the idea of a separate neutralisation of Kampuchea on similar grounds.
In September 1979 the Vietnamese Prime Minister Van Dong told the participants of the Havana Conference that ‘the victory of the Kampuchean people’(Vietnamese occupation) had created the conditions ‘for the construction of a peaceful, independent, neutral and non-aligned Kampuchea’.
But Kampuchea failed to acquire this status.
A Soviet initiative issued on 21 February 1981 called for an international conference on Kampuchea, including the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, which would be held after ASEAN and Indo-China signed non-aggression pacts.
ASEAN rejected the 1981 Soviet démarche , which was directed at ASEAN acceptance of the Heng Samrin regime in Kampuchea, despite the call in the same month by the Twenty-Sixth Soviet Party Congress for Asian participation in the settlement of regional disputes.
The ASEAN states presented their own plan in summer 1981 at the United Nations Conference on Cambodia convened at their instance.
It envisaged the disarming of all the Kampuchean factions and the creation of a neutral interim administration to organise free elections.
But it was opposed by Beijing since it required the Pol Pot group supported by China to lay down its arms.
An alternative proposal presented by the Indonesian Foreign Minister to his hosts during a visit to Moscow in April 1984 went to the heart of the matter in suggesting a phased withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea and the establishment of a neutral Kampuchea acceptable to the Great Powers including the Soviet Union.
Moscow did not change its standard position; it merely repeated its willingness to guarantee any agreement concluded between ASEAN and Indo-China alongside the other members of the UN Security Council.
In May 1984 and in March 1985 Sihanouk called for a neutralised Kampuchea with an international peacekeeping force guaranteed by the superpowers, ASEAN, Vietnam or Australia/New Zealand.
China was conspicuously omitted from this scheme since it had already rejected it.
Soviet leaders regarded this as an attempt to displace their initiative of February 1981.
Sihanouk's plan was unacceptable to Soviet leaders anyway since like the proposal for a neutralisation of contemporary Afghanistan it would  imperil the retention of the socialist structure of government in the neutralised state.
From the Soviet perspective a socialist government in Kampuchea has remained a sine qua non of any settlement of the Kampuchean issue, although Soviet resolve on this issue may weaken in the face of the current ASEAN commitment to a neutral Kampuchea (see below).
Soviet officials can not countenance any neutralisation of Indo-China.
But since the Vietnamese Zone of Peace and Stability has won little support they have been reluctant to reject out of hand the ZOPFAN proposal if this eventually could provide the basis of a long-term settlement of the disputes between Indo-China and the ASEAN states and encourage a military disengagement of the ASEAN states from the West.
In 1983 a Soviet writer listed the basic features of the ZOPFAN neutralisation idea on the basis of his reading of the documents and declarations of ASEAN statesmen.
These included recognition and respect for the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality by all states, in particular the Great Powers; abstention by the ASEAN states from participation in conflicts between the Great Powers; guarantees for the zone from the Great Powers — the United States, the USSR and China; securing the legal rights of Great Powers in the region; and observance of the obligation of the peaceful settlement of all disputed questions between the states participating in the zone.
The author noted that the zone should be extended to all the states of Southeast Asia and raised the question of its full demilitarisation.
But he noted that there had been great differences over the issue of securing international guarantees for the zone, and concluded that the practical realisation of the zone idea was a long-term task.
A recent specialist Soviet study on Southeast Asia argued that the term ‘neutralisation’ as distinct from the related terms ‘neutrality’and ‘neutralism’contained the idea of activity over a more or less defined period of time; it implied a process of gradual and progressive development.
In his view neutralisation as a concept concerned not only the attainment of the final goal but also the path towards it.
He identified the ‘main positive significance of the concept of creating a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality’, despite ‘its contradictions determined by the social-class nature of its ideologues’, in the gradual advance towards the accepted goal and in the realisation of the principle of peaceful coexistence which corresponds to it.
This emphasis on neutralisation as a process is intended to keep the notion alive as a long-term objective for Southeast Asia.
In the short term Soviet spokesmen need not feel that general support for the Zone idea will harm Soviet Vietnamese relations or act to isolate Vietnam.
Despite the Soviet interpretation cited above, the ZOPFAN proposals still have not been defined with any precision by the ASEAN states and the mechanism by which they would limit Great Power involvement in Southeast Asia remains vague.
Malaysia continues in general to place most emphasis on the scheme despite its continued participation in the Five-Power Defence Arrangements; Singapore and Malaysia retain New Zealand and Australian air and army bases.
Thailand and the Philippines remain reluctant to abrogate their formal security alliances with the United States in current conditions of regional instability.
The United States still has two of its largest overseas air and naval bases in the Philippines, and the Pentagon decided recently to establish an arms stockpile in Thailand.
Nevertheless, the concept of a zone of peace continues to represent a potential significant area of shared interest between the ASEAN states and Vietnam and this ensures that it will remain on the agenda for both parties although the terminology they use and the objectives they pursue may differ.
The emphasis will be less on the mechanics of neutralisation and more on the means to exclude certain forms of involvement in Southeast Asia by outside powers.
One possibility lies in the proposal for a nuclear-free zone in Southeast Asia, which has been promoted in particular by Indonesia and Malaysia.
Speaking before the ASEAN standing committee in September 1984, the Malaysian Foreign Minister declared that it would be a mistake to wait for a solution to the Kampuchean problem before making attempts to implement the idea of the zone of peace, freedom and neutrality.
In his view it was high time ASEAN made a serious study of proclaiming Southeast Asia a nuclear-free zone as a first step towards implementing the zone concept.
A Soviet writer regarded this as evidence of ‘positive elements’ in Malaysian foreign policy.
In contrast, before meeting ASEAN leaders in June 1986 the American Secretary of State, Shultz, stressed the need to maintain a balance of power against Soviet might and asserted that he could see no reason for a partial or regional ban on nuclear weapons.
The nuclear-free zone proposal was reportedly in the annual ASEAN discussions in 1986, and Soviet spokesmen underlined press reports at the close of the following annual ASEAN Conference in June 1987 that specific plans were being worked out to set up such a zone which would be examined at a summit level meeting of the ASEAN states in Manila in December.
The Soviet media noted that this meeting would also raise the issue of American military bases in the Philippines ‘where it is supposed the Pentagon has already been able to site nuclear weapons secretly’.
According to Soviet commentaries the United States' commitment to these bases underlay its warnings to the ASEAN countries against pursuing the idea of a nuclear-free zone in Southeast Asia.
The USSR perceived the zone proposal alternatively as directed against the creation of a nuclear weapons stockpile in Thailand.
It is not surprising that Moscow has pronounced its strong support for a nuclear-free Southeast Asia.
This new, specific ASEAN zone concept is also supported by Vietnam, Kampuchea and Laos, and the ‘convergence of views’ of the Southeast Asian states on this issue has inspired Soviet hopes that ‘the existing positive process’in favour of the zone ‘can be further developed’.
The emphasis on the exclusion of outside powers from Southeast Asia could also be linked to the search for a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean dispute, which would enmesh Indo-China into the arrangement reached.
This has become more of a priority under the Gorbachev leadership since the Kampuchean conflict continues to obstruct a normalisation of Sino-Soviet relations, a process which otherwise could  be expected.
But Moscow remains unwilling to depart from the Vietnamese conception of a settlement.
Hanoi's view was outlined recently by Foreign Minister Co Thach in March 1987 at a dinner to mark the close of an Asian tour by his Soviet counterpart Eduard Shevardnadze.
He expressed his intention to seek talks with both China and ASEAN on a political solution to the war in Kampuchea through establishing a zone of peace, stability and friendly cooperation in Southeast Asia.
When General Secretary Nguyen Van Linh visited Moscow a couple of months later Gorbachev praised Indo-Chinese efforts to create such a zone.
This reaffirmation of Hanoi's scheme was given despite the lobbying of the Thai Foreign Minister, Sitthi Sawtsila, who visited Moscow on behalf of ASEAN a week prior to Nguyen Van Linh.
Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze showed that the USSR had not forgotten the ZOPFAN impulse in informing Sitthi that ‘there can be no calm or stability in a region in which there exist foreign military bases and which is not protected from the military rivalry of non-regional powers’.
But Sitthi had a more specific brief.
He expressed his conviction that the USSR could play a leading role in the resolution of the Kampuchean conflict.
This settlement should entail ‘an early withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea, the exercise of the fundamental right of the Kampuchean people to self-determination and the emergence of an independent and neutral Kampuchea which poses no threat to her neighbours’.
Sitthi explained that the ASEAN countries had instructed him to communicate these principles for a settlement to the Soviet leadership.
But Shevardnadze failed to endorse this neutral formula for Kampuchea for fear of straining Soviet-Vietnamese relations.
Moreover he had doubts about the Soviet ability to press a settlement upon a reluctant Vietnam.
He merely reaffirmed Soviet readiness ‘within its capabilities and together with other states, including the countries of ASEAN and Indo-China’ to promote a settlement of the situation relating to Kampuchea and to guarantee ‘generally acceptable accords’with other permanent members of the UN Security Council.
In the late 1980s the ZOPFAN notion appears to have turned into a more abstract ambition for the ASEAN states, into a long-term goal.
In current conditions it is likely to be displaced by the search for arrangements to resolve the immediate destabilising conflict around Kampuchea.
This is the priority for ASEAN, Vietnam and the Soviet Union.
But the process of negotiation over the conflict around Kampuchea will keep the broader notion of neutralisation on the Southeast Asian agenda.
The ASEAN states are committed to a limited neutralisation of Kampuchea.
The Soviet Union  may eventually accept a loosely formulated neutralisation of this country if Vietnam proves tractable.
In this sense parallels may develop between the regional negotiation processes over the Kampuchean and Afghan conflicts.
THE NEUTRALISATION OF THE PERSIAN GULF AND THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA
In the 1980s Soviet leaders have proposed the neutralisation or demilitarisation of two specific regions involving Third World states: the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea.
As observed in the previous chapter, Moscow also set on record its continued interest in the demilitarisation of the Indian Ocean although this scheme had lost momentum by the turn of the decade.
In 1982 the Soviet Third World specialist Primakov asserted that ‘an understanding on the military neutralisation of a number of regions where an accumulation of armed forces and armaments is taking place would be of great significance’.
He specified such regions as the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea.’
The Soviet initiatives on the Gulf and the Mediterranean are the best statements of what neutralisation on Soviet terms implies for Third World regions, although the Mediterranean proposal was intended also to include European states.
In both cases they were related to earlier initiatives by the non-aligned states.
The Persian Gulf proposals were an outgrowth of the sponsorship of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean by the Non-Aligned, while the Mediterranean proposals were similar to ideas developed by the Mediterranean non-aligned states.
The Soviet leadership chose an official visit by Brezhnev to New Delhi in December 1980 to proclaim a set of principles to neutralise and demilitarise the Persian Gulf.
This venue enabled Brezhnev more effectively to link his proposals on resolving tensions in the Gulf and containing the Gulf War with the Indian interest in the Indian Ocean zone of peace idea.
During Brezhnev's discussions with Indira Gandhi both leaders condemned the buildup of military activity in the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf and spoke in favour of dismantling all foreign military bases in the former region.
In an address to the Indian Parliament on 10 December Brezhnev went further.
He accused ‘powers which are situated many thousands of kilometres from this region’ of having ‘concentrated a naval armada’in the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean and of ‘intensively building up armaments, expanding the network of their military bases and pressuring  and threatening small countries that do not follow their lead’.
He rejected attempts to justify these actions ‘with talk about the ‘Soviet threat’ to that region's oil wealth' and underlined that ‘we are not indifferent to what takes place in this region, which is so close to our borders’.
Brezhnev went on to propose a ‘doctrine of peace and security’ with respect to the Persian Gulf countries which would require the United States, the other Western powers, China, Japan and ‘all states showing an interest’to reach an agreement on a number of mutual commitments.
These were specified as follows:
— not to create foreign military bases in the Persian Gulf or on adjacent islands; not to deploy nuclear weapons of mass destruction there;
— not to use force or threaten the use of force against the Persian Gulf countries, and not to interfere in their internal affairs;
— to respect the non-aligned status chosen by the Persian Gulf countries; not to draw them into military groupings to which nuclear powers are party;
— to respect the sovereign right of the states of this region to their natural resources; and
— not to create any obstacles or threats to normal trade and the use of the sea lanes linking the states of this region with other countries of the world.
In Brezhnev's opinion an accord of this kind involving the states of the region as ‘full-fledged parties’, would act as a ‘reliable guarantee’ of their security.
The individual principles in Brezhnev's five-point doctrine were familiar to numerous Soviet proclamations on Third World regions.
Several of them had already been contained in a draft  proposal in 1957 on the principles to determine Great Power conduct on questions of peace and security in the Near and Middle East.
Nor did they differ essentially from the principles contained in Brezhnev's 1969 proposal on Asian collective security.
But it was the first time these five principles had been drawn together and proclaimed specifically for the Gulf.
Brezhnev's proposal could be viewed as an East-West non-aggression pact for the region in the form of a partial neutralisation and demilitarisation of the Gulf, which would also indirectly guarantee the Gulfs oil links with the West.
The region's arms purchases and commercial links with the Western states, Japan and the Soviet Union would not be affected.
Brezhnev's plan did not preclude regional defence agreements among the Gulf states.
Nor did it necessarily require the Great Powers to act as the guarantors of the regime established.
Soviet spokesmen expected the Third World states to form a strong constituency of support for Brezhnev's plan and they chose their arguments accordingly.
One commentator explained that this plan would enable the Persian Gulf states ‘to choose their foreign policy course and the means of resolving their internal problems in conformity with their needs and traditions, free of all outside pressures’.
The plan envisaged’ the equal participation of these states in all agreements relating to the Persian Gulf’.
The Soviet proposal was presented as a means to ease tension not only in the Persian Gulf ‘but also as a result of that in a much bigger area where militaristic actions aimed at the Gulf region have already increased tension’, especially in the Horn of Africa.
Moscow described the new Soviet initiative as ‘fully in line’ with the position of the Organisation of African unity.
Soviet officials hoped to tap the broad Third World commitment to the Indian Ocean zone of peace scheme.
Brezhnev's proposals for the Gulf were characterised as an ‘extension of the conditions which the Soviet Union set earlier on the normalisation of conditions in the basin of the Indian Ocean, on transforming it into a zone of peace’.
For states located in the Indian Ocean the Gulf plan would open out ‘new perspectives, strengthening their independence, safeguarding them against involvement in the arms race’.
At the conclusion of his speech in New Delhi on 10 December Brezhnev had called for understanding and support for his initiative in India.
It is plausible that on one level this new démarche was directed at Indian reservations about Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and the intensified tensions which ensued in the Indian Ocean.
Brezhnev's scheme for the Persian Gulf may have been intended to reassure India of the Soviet desire for peace in India's vicinity.
The primary object of Brezhnev's speech remained the United States and other Western states rather than India.
Moscow may have been concerned in particular about the global and regional repercussions of a prolonged Iran-Iraq war and the opportunities this provided the West.
Brezhnev had expressed unease in Delhi that ‘foreign military penetration’ in the Middle East was intensifying in the wake of this conflict.
A Soviet commentator explained that the Soviet programme unveiled at Delhi would provide ‘reliable guarantees of the legitimate interests, and only the legitimate interests of all countries, including the industrial capitalist countries’.
Soviet leaders were prepared to enter a broad-ranging understanding with the West over the Gulf, which would recognise Soviet interests in a region close to Soviet borders and of equal importance would help preclude an expansion of unilaterally proclaimed American interests in this volatile area.
This reflected a Soviet awareness that a fundamental strategic  reappraisal of this part of the globe was underway in the United States.
In his memoirs President Carter's National Security Adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, relates that he had urged Carter already in February 1979 to abandon earlier plans to demilitarise the Indian Ocean and to adopt a new ‘security framework’ to reassert American power and influence in the region.
By June 1979 Brzezinski was arguing in favour of American military preponderance in the Indian Ocean Persian Gulf region.
On 23 January 1980 Carter finally committed the United States to the security of the Persian Gulf region by proclaiming that: ‘any attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.’
Brzezinski considered the President's words to represent ‘a formal recognition of a centrally important reality: that America's security had become interdependent with the security of three central and interrelated strategic zones consisting of Western Europe, the Far East and the Middle East Persian Gulf area’.
The combination of the ‘Carter Doctrine’, the outbreak of the Iran Iraq war and the proclaimed American intention to establish a rapid deployment force for the Middle East added appreciably to the dangers of a superpower confrontation in the Persian Gulf.
On the day Brezhnev issued his proposals for this region in Delhi a Soviet statement condemned a speech by Brzezinski for setting forth ‘a large-scale programme for the further buildup of the US military presence in the Persian Gulf’.
Moscow claimed that Brzezinksi was planning a new military bloc in the region based on his proposed ‘structure of regional security’ composed of conservative regimes in the Near and Middle East.
Under these conditions Moscow predicted that ‘the Washington strategists are not going to respect the non-aligned status of the Persian Gulf states’.
The American administration was accused of ‘striving to draw those countries into a military grouping with the United States, which is a nuclear power, with little consideration for the threat this represents to the security of the Persian Gulf countries, to stability and peace in the region’.
If these were genuine Soviet apprehensions Brezhnev's proposal to neutralise the Persian Gulf can be understood as a crisis prevention regime on Soviet terms.
Some weeks after Brezhnev's initiative a Soviet statement quite explicitly linked it with the new American’ arc of crisis ‘strategy.’
The Transatlantic strategists’, it was claimed, ‘do not conceal the fact that from a military  point of view their aim is to create in the Persian Gulf a third centre — in addition to Western Europe and the Far East of military might outside the USA and covered by an atomic umbrella.’
This meant from the Soviet perspective that ‘large-scale military manoeuvres are being carried out near the Soviet borders, and the threat of a still greater proliferation of nuclear weapons and of expansion of the zone of confrontation arises’.
The USSR correspondingly’ counterposed to that dangerous game an extensive programme of neutralisation and demilitarisation of the Persian Gulf area’.
This neutralisation regime was intended to meet the interests of both the oil-producing and the oil-consuming countries,’ the interests of ensuring security and tranquillity in such a sensitive part of the world’.
These Soviet statements imply that the neutralisation scheme for the Gulf was largely a defensive reaction to newly perceived insecurities issuing from the volatile region to the south of the Soviet borders.
Soviet leaders wished to contain local conflicts in the Gulf and Middle East to their region of origin and avoid the risk of escalation towards a nuclear threshold.
They sought to define the limits of permissible conduct in an area where calculated ambiguity in policy carried too high risks.
But since the political and military access of the Soviet Union to the core Gulf states remained limited, the implementation of Brezhnev's proposals would have had clearly asymmetric strategic consequences for the Great Powers, to the detriment of the West.
Any arrangement for the Persian Gulf involving superpower guarantees would also legitimise a Soviet involvement in this region, a development which American officials have remained loath to accept.
These considerations ensured that the Soviet plan would be rejected by the West, a rejection confirmed once the new American administration under Reagan was installed on 20 January.
They also underlay the scepticism of other states such as Japan over such neutralisation.
The Soviet media explained Washington's rejection of Brezhnev's proposals as a reflection of its intention ‘to continue to maintain its strategic military presence in and around the Gulf’.
This was manifested in the development of bases in the Indian Ocean and the Gulf region and the creation of new ones.
Western, in particular American, statesmen were not prepared to forgo the strategic benefits derived from bases and military facilities in the Gulf region while the Soviet Union retained a military presence in the peripheral countries of South Yemen (PDRY), Ethiopia and Afghanistan.
Western strategists maintained that the proposal not to deploy nuclear weapons in the Persian Gulf would leave it under the umbrella of Soviet nuclear weapons deployed in the Soviet  Union.
Brezhnev's third proposal would require the Americans to renounce plans to sign bilateral security agreements with the Gulf states.
This again was unacceptable to the Western states since they were aware that the Soviet Union had little chance anyway of concluding such agreements.
The USSR had signed a Friendship and Cooperation Treaty with Iraq in 1972.
But the security provisions of this treaty had been translated into little more than cautious Soviet-Iraqi arms deals.
Although the USSR established diplomatic relations with Oman and the UAE in autumn 1985, only Kuwait of the Gulf Cooperation Council states had an ambassador in Moscow in the early 1980s.
A Western specialist concluded that Brezhnev's 1980 proposals ‘were a call for America to abandon the region, leaving the Soviet Union victorious in the field’.
The Soviet neutralisation plan for the Persian Gulf may have been intended to open up a strategic dialogue on a broad front to enable Soviet diplomats to introduce Western military preponderance in the Gulf region tacitly or explicitly into the negotiation process for the limitation of Soviet military influence in other regions.
This could apply specifically to negotiations on the proposed withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
The Western states had already linked Soviet intervention in Afghanistan with Soviet intentions towards the oil wealth of the Persian Gulf countries.
In his speech before the Indian Parliament in December 1980 Brezhnev denied that the Soviet Union posed a threat to the Gulf Soviet leaders proposed sureties for Western interests in Gulf oil and by 1981 expressed their readiness ‘to take part in a settlement of the situation around Afghanistan…linked with matters of Persian Gulf security’.
It became the standard Soviet line that an arrangement on the Gulf could be discussed ‘in connection with questions linked with Afghanistan’.
The new Soviet-dominated Afghan regime also linked its predicament with Persian Gulf security.
In a statement on 14 May 1980 the DRA Government asserted that it was necessary ‘in the process of a political settlement [around Afghanistan]to take into account the military-political activity in the region of the Indian Ocean and the Persian Gulf on the part of states not belonging to this region’.
DRA officials strongly supported Brezhnev's Gulf initiative.
At the Delhi meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned in February 1981 Foreign Minister Dost declared that these ‘realistic peace proposals concerning the demilitarisation of the Persian Gulf…deserve the greatest attention and thorough examination’.
However, he refrained on this occasion from explicitly linking them to the situation around Afghanistan.
Brezhnev's initiative for the Persian Gulf in all probability was also  linked to the broader stalemated negotiations over the demilitarisation of the Indian Ocean.
The Soviet media drew a connection between these two regions when elaborating the Gulf proposal.
Directly after Brezhnev outlined this proposal in Delhi he reiterated the Soviet readiness ‘to work actively with other interested states’ to transform the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
In this context a Soviet writer observed with chagrin that the United States administration, in calling into question the right-of the USSR to take part in measures to guarantee the freedom of navigation in the Persian Gulf in the aftermath of Brezhnev's initiative, had forgotten that America had for many years carried out negotiations with the USSR over the Indian Ocean, ‘of which the Persian Gulf is a component part’.
This link between the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf regions has been a consistent theme in Soviet statements.
More recently in May 1987 the Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs V. F. Petrovskiy held talks with the leaders of Iraq, Kuwait, the UAE and Oman during a tour of the Gulf.
He subsequently claimed that the Soviet Union had received great support during these meetings for its readiness to take part ‘in multilateral talks among all states which use the waters of the Indian Ocean with a view to formulating guarantees of the safety of maritime lines of communication, including the Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz, as well as guarantees of the littoral states’ sovereignty over their natural resources’.
The Soviet Government still promotes the convention of an international conference on the Indian Ocean in this context.
The contemporary Soviet emphasis, therefore, is on more pragmatic, piecemeal negotiations on the Gulf and Indian Ocean which address the immediate dangers which the increased naval presence of the superpowers in this region entail.
Brezhnev's neutralisation scheme for the Gulf in 1980 may have had an additional, more specific objective.
It could have been intended to foment differences between the Western powers over the American intention to set up Rapid Deployment Forces in the Middle East, and over the suggestion that the area of responsibility for NATO be extended outside Europe.
This is apparent from a Soviet broadcast a couple of days after Brezhnev's Delhi speech.
The commentator claimed that ‘most British papers agree that the Soviet peace plan…deserves due consideration’.
He expressed disquiet, however, over strong British government support for the ‘Carter Doctrine under which any part of the world can be proclaimed a sphere of vital American interests’ including ‘the oil-rich Persian Gulf region’.
This was indicated by the dispatch of British warships to the region, the construction of a major base on Diego Garcia, and the desire of the British cabinet ‘to set up its own rapid deployment corps, which will be used to support the  convenient regimes in that region and suppress the national liberation movements there’.
The Soviet broadcaster underlined that the most recent session of the NATO committee of military planning had decided on ‘an expansion of military activities outside Europe’.
In his view it was ‘in this general context that one has to consider the latest proposals advanced by the Soviet President’.
The Soviet initiative on the Gulf may also have been conceived as an inducement for the key countries of the Persian Gulf and the Arab world to take measures to limit Western military involvement in the region.
A Soviet commentator anticipated that Brezhnev's ‘positive programme’ could ‘only find the widest echo in the Arab world, especially in the Gulf’.
Soviet sources referred to a Kuwaiti Minister of State who ‘called on all Gulf countries to support the Soviet proposal’, to Syrian official circles where ‘the Soviet proposals were received with satisfaction’, and to the approval of the head of state and government of the PDRY for ‘the constructive Soviet initiative’.
According to Soviet claims the Brezhnev plan was also directed at Egypt's intention to establish its own rapid deployment force with American and Israeli assistance to be deployed against Libya.
Libya did not regard this claim as fully convincing.
The Libyan leader, Gaddafi, expressed his support for Soviet proposals to safeguard international peace during a visit to Moscow in April 1981.
But instead of openly endorsing Brezhnev's initiative he called for ‘more details of the ways to neutralise the Arabian Gulf and keep it out of international conflict’.
Soviet leaders anticipated that the Brezhnev plan could stimulate interest among certain key Red Sea states for their own ‘zone of peace’ aimed at excluding the Western military presence.
The USSR and South Yemen (PDRY) examined the situation in the Persian Gulf during a visit by the PDRY leader to Moscow in May 1980.
In their joint communiqué the two states ‘spoke out resolutely against the creation of military political blocs and military bases in the region’ and expressed themselves ‘in favour of making the Red Sea region a zone of peace’.
Ethiopia's concern over Western bases in Somalia ensured its support.for this scheme.
By 1984 North Yemen (YAR) was also in agreement with the USSR on the need to preserve the Red Sea region as a ‘zone of peace’.
Soviet leaders could not realistically anticipate a broader endorsement of this idea from Red Sea littoral states.
Many Third World states regarded it as a blatantly unbalanced proposal since it did not include an offer by Soviet leaders to close down their military and naval facilities in South Yemen and Ethiopia.
Soviet officials were gratified by the reaction of the radical Arab states to their plan for the Persian Gulf but they could anticipate a less forthcoming response from the conservative Gulf states.
Indeed Saudi Arabia openly opposed Brezhnev's proposals; the Saudis apparently wished to retain the option of an American presence in the Gulf The UAE were also critical of the Soviet plan, while a Foreign Ministry spokesman for Oman rejected it outright.
Muscat described it as ‘interference’ in the internal affairs of the Gulf states and portrayed the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as a demonstration of Moscow's hostile intentions toward the area.
Oman has also complained about the presence of Soviet naval vessels and aircraft in the vicinity of the Straits of Hormuz.
The Soviet plan was received more favourably in Kuwait.
It had been a deeply held tenet of Kuwaiti foreign policy that the military presence of one superpower in the Gulf will lead to the presence of the other as well, which could threaten a conflict between them  injurious to all the Gulf states.
Soviet naval forces have been present in the Gulf but they have by no means matched the American military presence in the form of a small naval force permanently stationed there and facilities in Oman and sometimes Bahrain.
Kuwait had been particularly concerned about the plans for an American Rapid Deployment Force.
When Kuwait's Foreign Minister visited Moscow in April 1981 he found ‘positive points’ in Brezhnev's proposal ‘to remove foreign military forces from the Gulf region and to neutralise the region’.
But even he objected to the idea of a security arrangement imposed by foreign powers.
Moscow could also expect Iraqi interest in Brezhnev's initiative since Baghdad had floated a ‘Pan-Arab Charter’ early in 1980, which inter alia had asserted the need to keep the Gulf free from all superpower bases.
The attitude of Iran to the Soviet plan was crucial.
Soviet Persian language broadcasts described the Soviet Gulf plan as aimed at the defence of the Persian Gulf countries against any foreign intervention and at securing the self-determination of the regional nations, including Iran.
Revolutionary Iran responded with the familiar accusation that the superpowers were uniting at the expense of Iran to secure their own interests.
The Soviet media observed with chagrin that the official spokesman of the Iranian government referred to ‘completely false facts’ and ‘assessed the Soviet proposals on the Persian Gulf negatively’.
These negative or unenthusiastic reactions from the primary Gulf states showed that the prospects for involving them in the proposed neutralised area were poor.
However, since Brezhnev's proposals for the Gulf were linked to the broader issue of the Indian Ocean ‘zone of peace’ Soviet  officials still made an effort to gain support for them from the Indian Ocean Third World states and the non-aligned nations in general.
Soviet writers contended that the Gulf initiative had been ‘positively appraised by the statesmen of the series of countries of the region of the Indian Ocean as corresponding to the vitally important interests of the developing and non-aligned states’.
They referred to the opinion of the Indian Foreign Minister that ‘the Soviet initiative deserved the most fixed and serious attention’.
Soviet officials also expected positive references to Brezhnev's Persian Gulf plan at the meeting of the non-aligned states in Delhi in February 1981.
The Soviet media linked the concern of the conference delegates over international tension in the ‘Arab Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula’ to ostensible American plans to set up a new military alliance in the Red Sea area.
Soviet writers claimed that the Non-Aligned ‘displayed significant interest’ at Delhi in the Soviet scheme for the Gulf.
In reality the non-aligned states could not agree on any formula endorsing the Soviet proposals to neutralise the Persian Gulf since the primary Gulf states remained opposed to any security arrangement imposed by foreign powers.
The Arab Gulf states were already working towards a mutual security arrangement to pool the forces indigenous to the area against internal and regional threats.
This was eventually formalised in February 1981 in the form of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), a body which was regarded initially with deep suspicion by Soviet officials (see Chapter 4).
The GCC was not originally intended as a military security organisation but it created the framework for non-bloc security cooperation which in principle meant rejecting both Western offers of military protection and the Soviet scheme for an international conference to transform the Gulf into a neutral zone.
In July 1981 the Secretary-General of the GCC specified that ‘the neutrality of the Gulf cannot be separated from the neutrality of the adjacent areas — the Arabian Sea, the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea’.
In his view ‘it would be futile to neutralise the Gulf while Soviet troops are in Afghanistan and Soviet naval forces cruise the Indian Ocean or maintain facilities in various Red Sea and Arabian Sea ports’.
This broader regional or extra-regional appraisal of the Soviet military presence underlies the consistent opposition of the Western powers and the core Gulf states to any renewed Soviet proposals for a neutralisation of the Persian Gulf.
In these circumstances the Soviet Union has pressed more recently for a more limited regime for the Gulf involving restrictions on the naval presence of the Great Powers in the region.
A Soviet Government statement on 3 July 1987 suggested that ‘all warships not situated in  the region be shortly withdrawn from the Gulf and that Iran and Iraq in their turn should keep from actions that would threaten international shipping’.
This proposal addressed the contemporary American naval buildup in the Gulf region to protect Kuwaiti oil tankers placed under the American flag.
In fact a more limited regime of this kind has been on the Soviet agenda for the Mediterranean for many years.
Soviet  initiatives for the Mediterranean in the guise of denuclearisation or the creation of zones of peace date back at least to the Soviet ‘Draft Declaration on Non-Intervention in the Middle East’ presented in February 1957.
Since the Soviet Union had no forces in the region, or only token forces in the 1950s and 1960s it is likely that Soviet leaders did not expect the Western allies to take these early proposals altogether seriously.
As in the case of Soviet proposals for zones of peace elsewhere they contributed, however, to the creation of inhospitable local conditions for the Western military presence and formed part of the Soviet policy of military denial.
In June 1971 Brezhnev called for mutual naval withdrawals by the Great Powers and he mentioned the Mediterranean Sea and the Indian Ocean specifically as regions of interest.
Soviet diplomats had already sounded this issue out earlier in the year.
This proposal received greater attention in the West.
The Mediterranean was no longer so necessary for Western strategic submarine deployments while the Soviet military presence in the region had grown substantially.
Some believed indeed that the original intention of Soviet Mediterranean deployments had been to induce a negotiated withdrawal of the United States' Sixth Fleet.
A Western specialist suggested a regime for the Mediterranean in 1973 which would involve restrictions on naval vessel deployments, the elimination of naval bases and facilities belonging to or operated by the signatories on the territory of littoral states and constraints on the land-based forces of the superpowers in the area.
He noted that this would reduce the risk of accidental or inadvertent conflict between the superpowers, aid the depolarisation of regional conflicts, and raise both states in the eyes of the non-aligned nations.
But he noted that the USSR would probably evaluate the military concessions granted by the United States as a result of such disengagement as greater than those conceded on their own part.
While the United States would yield a constant strategic threat to the Soviet homeland the USSR would yield only a first strike threat to the American fleet.
The United States would reduce its ability to impose pressure close to Soviet borders while the USSR would renounce rights far from American shores.
Moreover, the United States would be withdrawing a force with stated missions in support of NATO ground  forces while the Soviet fleet had only a derivative role in defending the Warsaw Pact.
Nevertheless, such an agreement on the Mediterranean would involve risks for the USSR.
For example, if the treaty breaks down and the Soviet Navy wishes to return to the Mediterranean rapidly it would have to bypass potentially hostile chokepoints at both ends of the Mediterranean.
In addition, the terms of the treaty would probably enable the Mediterranean to be dominated militarily by American forces based in Europe or by allies of the United States.
This equation of costs and benefits also applies to more recent Soviet proposals for the demilitarisation or neutralisation of the Mediterranean.
No progress was achieved on a superpower military and naval regime for the Mediterranean in the 1970s.
However, since the 1976 Colombo Conference the non-aligned states issued numerous appeals to transform the region into a zone of peace and cooperation.
When the foreign ministers of the Non-Aligned met in 1981 they deplored the buildup of foreign arms and military forces in the area.
They resolved that the idea of a European conference on disarmament should take into account the Mediterranean dimension and should involve ‘concrete measures which will lead not only to confidence building but also to the initiation of steps to lessen forces in the region’.
The Mediterranean non aligned states held their first regional conference in Malta in 1984 (see Chapter 2).
Malta had proclaimed itself a neutral state with a policy strictly founded on principles of non-alignment in 1981.
At the Delhi summit in 1983 the non-aligned states described the recognition of this status by Mediterranean and other states and their undertakings not to jeopardise it ‘as an effective means of lessening tension and strengthening security in the Mediterranean, which could be further extended in future’.
This fell short of an appeal for the Mediterranean states to follow Malta's example, which would have implied a neutralisation of the Mediterranean.
But the non-aligned states remain interested in a demilitarisation of the Mediterranean.
Malta endorsed a series of proposals in this field in the 1980s, which originated in the Soviet Union.
This reflected the successful Soviet cultivation of this small state and it helped the Soviet Union legitimise a number of its cherished initiatives for the Mediterranean.
In October 1981 when the USSR recognised Malta's new international status the two states agreed on a series of measures to reduce tensions in the Mediterranean.
Both states were in favour of an international conference to extend confidence-building measures to cover the region and an agreement to reduce armed forces in the region.
They proposed the withdrawal of ships carrying nuclear arms from the Mediterranean and  called for all countries to abstain from deploying such weapons in the territories of non-nuclear Mediterranean countries.
They also professed themselves in favour of the nuclear powers assuming a commitment not to use nuclear weapons against any Mediterranean country that does not permit them to be stationed on its territory.
In the early 1980s Soviet leaders repeated this call for a nuclear neutralisation of the Mediterranean, for the creation of a nuclear-free zone in this region, on a number of occasions.
But Western statesmen would not countenance the Soviet proposals since their implementation would require the withdrawal of the primary nuclear strategic asset of the West in the Mediterranean, the American Sixth Fleet, with no equivalent strategic loss to the USSR.
Early in 1986 the strategic sensitivity of the Mediterranean region was brought into sharper focus in East-West exchanges.
In March Spain voted to remain within NATO, which confirmed the status of the Mediterranean as a ‘NATO lake’.
Later in the month American aircraft carrier groups operating off the Libyan coast clashed militarily with Libya.
This highlighted Soviet naval facilities in Libya and Syria.
Against this background the Soviet leader Gorbachev chose a visit to Moscow by the Algerian President to seize the diplomatic initiative by calling for superpower talks on the nuclear and naval  demilitarisation of the Mediterranean Sea, for the transformation of this region in a military sense into a neutral zone for the naval forces of external powers.
In his speech on 26 March Gorbachev reiterated the Soviet proposals for the Mediterranean which had been issued previously following discussions with Malta.
He then conceded that ‘in principle there is no need for the Soviet Union to have its fleet in the Mediterranean on a permanent basis’.
He argued that the USSR ‘has to keep its ships there permanently for this sole reason: the US Sixth Fleet, armed with nuclear missiles and threatening the security of the USSR, its allies and friends, is in the immediate proximity of our borders’.
Gorbachev proposed that ‘if the USA, which is situated thousands upon thousands of miles from the Mediterranean, withdrew its fleet from there, the Soviet Union would simultaneously do the same’.
He stated that the Soviet Union was prepared to enter into talks on the issue without delay.
According to Gorbachev's proposal ‘at this first stage’ there would be no restrictions imposed on the ‘naval activities and naval arms of the coastal Mediterranean states themselves’.
Further steps to strengthen security in the region could, in his opinion, be determined by taking into account Soviet proposals on the abolition of weapons of mass destruction.
Finally, Gorbachev proposed the convention of a broad conference on the Mediterranean, similar to the  CSCE, which could be attended by the Mediterranean states, ‘the states adjoining the region’, the United States and ‘other interested countries’.
As in the case of the Soviet  initiative to neutralise the Persian Gulf this Soviet proposal for the Mediterranean was justified by a stated need to remove a strategic threat to the southern borders of the USSR.
But the implementation of both proposals would require the United States to renounce established military and naval capabilities and forgo a future expansion of these capabilities.
The Soviet Union in comparison would suffer no equivalent military loss.
The American Sixth Fleet is more powerful than Soviet naval groupings in the Mediterranean and as previously observed it fulfils a strategic role which is denied the Soviet navy in this region.
Soviet leaders could count on the support of most states in the region for a general demilitarisation and limitation of superpower military presence in the Mediterranean.
But such support was qualified since there remained ambiguity over whether the Black Sea and Soviet naval forces in those waters should be included within the ambit of the Soviet proposal for the Mediterranean.
It is likely that Gorbachev's Mediterranean initiative was not intended for serious negotiation.
Senior American officials were quick to dismiss it as propaganda which would not even warrant a formal reply since it had been issued through Tass.
A briefing by spokesman for the Soviet Foreign Ministry on the Algerian President's visit to Moscow repeated Gorbachev's proposals ‘aimed at turning the Mediterranean into a zone of stable peace and cooperation’ but failed to elaborate them.
The Soviet media was no more forthcoming.
Indeed it made very few references to the Mediterranean initiative unlike the heavy coverage of the Soviet scheme to neutralise the Persian Gulf.
The bombing of Libya by the United States followed soon after Gorbachev's offer for the removal of the Sixth Fleet.
The American administration also began to impose pressure on Syria — a state which had concluded a friendship and cooperation treaty with the USSR.
These events showed that the danger of superpower confrontation in the Mediterranean was far from illusory.
Since the early 1970s Soviet leaders had placed greater emphasis on the role of the Soviet navy as an instrument to deter Western intervention in the affairs of non-aligned and pro-Soviet countries.
Of course it could be argued that the unhindered American action against Libya indicated the ineffectiveness of this role and reinforced the benefits perceived by the USSR and the Non-Aligned in an agreement on superpower naval and military withdrawal from the Mediterranean.
However, given the clearly expressed strategic interests of the United States  in the region it is probable that the latest Soviet ‘neutralisation’ proposal was not a serious attempt to bring the Western states to the negotiating table.
Its primary function was to generate goodwill among the Mediterranean non-aligned states for Soviet policies and to encourage these countries in their search for effective measures for the demilitarisation of the Mediterranean region.
THE NEUTRALISATION OF AFGHANISTAN
If Third World states and the Soviet bloc promoted their ideas on the neutralisation of countries or territories in the Third World through their respective plans for Southeast Asia and the Persian Gulf, then the Western powers indicated the conditions under which they believed neutralisation was most appropriate in the Third World when they proposed the neutralisation of Afghanistan at the beginning of the 1980s.
An examination of Soviet attitudes to Western schemes to neutralise Afghanistan in the wake of Soviet military intervention in that country is particularly revealing since such Soviet attitudes are sharply at variance with those expressed in connection with the Soviet-sponsored Persian Gulf plan.
Soviet leaders have not accepted that the essence of the Brezhnev initiative for the Gulf could be applied to the different strategic and military environment in which Afghanistan lies.
This is the more paradoxical as Soviet leaders have expressed their readiness since the Twenty-Sixth Soviet Party Congress in February 1981 to discuss issues linked with the international aspects of the Afghan problem in connection with questions on the security of the Persian Gulf.
Afghanistan has had a long history of neutrality and non-alignment which Soviet leaders have assiduously fostered.
A treaty of neutrality and non-aggression was concluded between the young Soviet state and Afghanistan on 31 August 1926.
It bound the parties to observe neutrality in the event of war between one of them and a third state and to refrain from any kind of aggression against each other.
This treaty was enlarged and extended on 24 June 1931 and it was given material expression in Afghan neutrality during the Second World War.
According to Soviet legal specialists in the 1950s and 1960s the conditions of this treaty determined the peacetime foreign policy of Afghanistan, ‘which in essence differs in no way from a policy of non-alignment’.
They regarded it as necessary for Afghanistan to conduct a strictly neutral policy requiring non-participation in blocs and refusal to permit foreign military bases on its territory.
Soviet writers acknowledged, however, that the  1931 treaty only bound Afghanistan contractually to pursue such a policy in relation to the Soviet Union.
Afghanistan did not have a comparable legal obligation to third states predetermining its conduct in peacetime or war.
In addition, there existed no third party guarantors of Afghanistan's neutrality or non-alignment.
This meant that Afghanistan was not covered by a multilateral neutralisation regime.
Soviet spokesmen accepted that Afghanistan need not be neutral in relation to third countries engaged in a war which did not involve the Soviet Union as a party.
But they sought to argue that Kabul had an obligation to Moscow to pursue a policy of non-alignment in peacetime.
The ambiguity in Soviet interpretations of the 1931 treaty partly derived from Article 6 which permitted both parties full freedom of action to establish any relations and alliances with third parties provided that such links do not contradict the other provisions of the treaty.
Soviet-Afghan communiqués in the 1960s referred to Afghanistan's ‘policy of non-alignment and neutrality’.
Protocols prolonging the 1931 treaty for ten year periods were concluded by Soviet and Afghan leaders in December 1955 and August 1965.
The Afghan President Mohammed Daoud described the most recent adoption of such a protocol in December 1975 as indicating the ‘vitality’ of the 1931 document which remained ‘the stable basis of friendship and fruitful cooperation’between the neighbour states.
The 1931 treaty is automatically prolonged from year to year and each party has the right to terminate it after six months' notification.
The treaty appears to remain valid although no official protocol to extend it was adopted in 1985.
It has been referred to only rarely in official Soviet and Afghan statements in the 1980s since the Soviet-Afghan Friendship and Cooperation Treaty of December 1978 has replaced it as the contractual charter determining the relations between the two states.
After the coup by the Marxist PDPA in Kabul in April 1978 Soviet officials grew reluctant to acknowledge Afghanistan's legal status of neutrality in relation to the USSR.
They regarded the political category of neutrality similarly as inappropriate for a ‘socialist-oriented’ country.
Afghan neutrality was openly discounted in Moscow following the entry of Soviet troops into Afghanistan at the end of 1979.
In April 1980, for example, Andrei Gromyko noted that the word ‘neutral’ was sometimes used in relation to resolving the question of Afghanistan.
In his view ‘to be accurate one must say ‘non-aligned’ state' since ‘both we and the Afghan leadership proceed from the premise that Afghanistan should be a non-aligned state’.
In the 1980s Soviet and DRA leaders have persistently claimed that Afghanistan remains non-aligned whatever its bilateral links with the Soviet Union (and this is meant to imply more than  just membership in the Non-Aligned Movement).
In February 1980 the Afghan Foreign Minister argued that ‘the presence of foreign troops in a country, especially when it is requested by that country, is basically not against the principles of non-alignment’.
Such Soviet and DRA claims that Afghanistan can meaningfully still be described as non-aligned have been ridiculed by Western statesmen.
Various proposals have been made aimed at creating a legal framework to enable Afghanistan to revert essentially to its pre-1978 international status.
These proposals have generally assumed the need for international guarantees of this status.
But Moscow has consistently disparaged any initiatives for the formal neutralisation of the country.
When the Soviet Union intervened militarily in Afghanistan the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Carrington, rapidly proposed a plan for Afghanistan which was approved by the Council of Ministers of the EEC and adopted as a joint EEC declaration on 15 January 1980.
This plan provided for the withdrawal of Soviet troops in exchange for ‘guarantees of the neutrality’ of Afghanistan by the Great Powers and its neighbours and the creation of peace-keeping forces.
At a conference of the Foreign Ministers of the EEC states in Rome the following month Carrington made a general proposal for the conclusion of an international treaty guaranteeing Afghanistan's status as a ‘neutral’ state, which in his view would provide the Soviet Union the possibility of withdrawing its troops on a legal basis in light of the United Nations' resolution on this issue.
This idea was acknowledged in a declaration of the European Council on 30 June 1981 and subsequently adopted at an EEC conference in Luxembourg.
The reaction of the new Afghan regime to the West European initiative was unequivocally negative.
A discussion of this initiative was undoubtedly on the agenda of Soviet-DRA talks when the DRA Foreign Minister, Dost, visited Moscow in mid March 1980.
Dost accused the ‘imperialists’ of concocting ‘various ‘plans’with respect to Afghanistan, such as its ‘neutralisation’’, and promised to administer a firm counter-blow to ‘this outside interference’.
During this visit Gromyko defined the ‘political solution’ preferred by Moscow as one that would not ‘affect the state sovereignty of Afghanistan or ignore its lawful government’.
In the Chinese opinion this amounted to ‘telling those advocates of neutrality for Afghanistan that any political solution must conform to the Soviet condition of recognising the accomplished facts of the Soviet military invasion and the ‘legitimacy’ of the Karmal regime’.
The Chinese echoed Western views that the USSR had ‘in effect turned down the proposal of some Western countries for the neutralisation of Afghanistan’.
The Soviet-DRA rejection of neutrality for Afghanistan was confirmed  by the Afghan leader Babrak Karmal in an appearance on Afghan television on 21 March.
He roundly condemned the Carrington Plan and stressed that a full and unconditional end to ‘foreign interference and aggression’ against Afghanistan was a precondition to the withdrawal of Soviet troops.
In an interview for L'Humanité published on 5 April Karmal rejected ‘any plan aimed at the adoption of decisions in our stead’, including efforts ‘to bind us to a so-called ‘neutralisation’, which represents in fact only one of the forms of neo-colonialism’.
Soviet articles during spring 1980 confirmed Karmal's views.
One Soviet journal questioned why people ‘in certain Atlantic capitals…want to fasten the word’ neutrality’to Afghanistan's non-aligned policy' and concluded that ‘the ‘neutralisation’label conceals a course aimed at the elimination not only of the government now in power but also of the very system established by the April [1978]revolution’.
The ‘authors of the ‘neutralisation’ idea’were accused of trying to decide the Afghan people's fate for them ‘without asking the government of that country what its position is and what it thinks on this score’.
A normalisation of the situation in Afghanistan, according to this Soviet report, would require the United States and ‘those acting in concert with it’ to ensure the ‘complete cessation of outside interference in the affairs of Afghanistan and, together with that country's neighbours, effectively guarantee that such interference will not be resumed’.
This proposal for foreign guarantees against external interference in Afghanistan was intended to strengthen the current regime in that state by sealing off the contesting forces in Afghanistan from Western and Pakistani ‘assistance’ while legitimising the continuation of Soviet ‘assistance’.
It had nothing in common, therefore, with the much publicised Western idea of imposing a form of neutrality on Afghanistan.
In an attempt to maintain pressure on Soviet leaders Carrington explained his proposal to neutralise Afghanistan to President Ceausescu during an official visit to Romania in mid March 1980.
Romania had not in fact recorded a vote on the crucial resolution on 14 January in the United Nations' General Assembly on the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan.
Soviet leaders were concerned lest this Warsaw Pact state sanction the neutralisation of a state which had a socialist-inclined regime and was upheld by Soviet troops.
The Soviet media did not openly rebuke Ceausescu for his reception of Carrington.
But they argued on the basis of British press reports that despite the considerable identity of views of the participants to the talks ‘the Romanian leaders do not wish to be involved in any Western plan for the establishment of a ‘neutral’ Afghanistan’.
An additional source of pressure on the USSR was its southern neighbour Iran.
After discussions with the Soviet Ambassador to Iran in March the Iranian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ghotbzadeh, made a statement on the organisation of multilateral negotiations on Afghanistan, which aroused a strong Soviet protest.
Soviet sources charged that Ghotbzadeh had made ‘the totally unsupported claim that he had obtained Soviet concurrence in his proposal’ and had maintained that ‘an understanding had allegedly been reached between Iran and the Soviet Union on some kind of principles for a settlement in Afghanistan, including the imposition of ‘neutrality’on that country’.
The Soviet press stressed that during the Soviet Iranian talks ‘no agreement resembling what the Iranian Minister is now saying was or could have been reached’.
This was probably true.
It was a priority for Soviet leaders to limit the damage their intervention in Afghanistan had wrought on Soviet Iranian relations.
But they would not countenance the replacement of the pro-Soviet Marxist regime in Afghanistan by a regime that proclaimed itself ‘neither East nor West’ in a fashion similar to the Iranian theocracy.
Soviet officials believed that an EEC-style neutralisation formula would anyway be  unacceptable to the ‘counter-revolutionaries’.
A Soviet writer pointed out that this was the reaction of even a figure such as Sayyid Gailani, the head of the National Front for the Islamic Revolution, who was far more cosmopolitan than other resistance leaders and recognised the necessity of coexistence with the USSR.
Gailani reputedly stated in an interview in March 1980 that ‘as regards the West European initiative we support that part which provides for a withdrawal of Soviet troops’ but ‘we do not agree with the proposed neutrality of Afghanistan because it is imposed from outside’.
The impracticability of gaining the acceptance of the fractious Afghan groups opposing the DRA regime for a compromise formula based on the neutrality of Afghanistan certainly further discouraged Soviet leaders from taking proposals of this kind seriously.
Apart from this consideration, Soviet spokesmen implied that there was little difference between Gailani's stand and the essence of the Carrington Plan: both were directed at a thorough recomposition of the Marxist DRA government.
One Soviet writer argued in this vein that the EEC proposal was not directed at the neutralisation of Afghanistan at all but at hiding the ‘undeclared war against the Afghan people’.
‘The formal words about the necessity of the ‘neutrality’ of Afghanistan contained in the Carrington Plan’were described as ‘no more than a screen for the creation of conditions in which it would be possible to achieve a restoration of the  regime overthrown by the Afghan people’.
Afghanistan, it was argued, was anyway actively conducting a policy of ‘positive neutrality’ among the group of non-aligned countries, which was fixed in the ‘Basic Principles’of the DRA.
Afghan non-alignment remained unimpaired in Soviet eyes.
Soviet officials failed to respond, therefore, to Western attempts in 1980 to broaden support for the idea of creating a ‘neutral and non-aligned Afghanistan’ by enlisting the ASEAN states behind the proposal.
The framework of the Soviet-sponsored settlement of the ‘situation around Afghanistan’ was enshrined in a political programme advanced by the DRA government on 14 May 1980.
This established that a political settlement had to precede agreements between the Soviet and DRA governments on the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
The non-renewal of ‘intervention’ against Afghanistan also had to be reliable and guaranteed.
For Soviet officials such international guarantees should become a component part of a political settlement.
Soviet writers raised the idea that the guarantor countries, which should include the USSR, the United States, and other states acceptable to both Afghanistan and its neighbours which were negotiating with the former, could adopt an obligation to observe the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-aligned status of Afghanistan.
The DRA in turn would ‘confirm its  adherence to a policy of peace and non-alignment, its desire to develop friendly relations with all countries, in the first place its neighbours’.
The DRA was not expected to object to ‘a discussion of issues connected with the working out of international guarantees’, which would be initiated simultaneously and proceed parallel to bilateral or trilateral negotiations between Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran.
This Soviet DRA scheme for guarantees of non-intervention in and the non-alignment of Afghanistan sounded like a form of neutralisation of that country on Soviet terms.
In fact it was intended to legitimise the incumbent DRA regime whose genuine political non-alignment was not credible in the West and many Third World states.
Such non-alignment was far from the EEC proposals on Afghan neutrality.
On 30 June 1981 an EEC declaration formally approved the Carrington Plan.
Its essence lay in a proposal to create an international conference to resolve the Afghan problem by political means.
At the first stage this presumed the participation of the permanent members of the UN Security Council, Pakistan, India, the General Secretary of the UN and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference or their representatives.
Certain ‘representatives of the Afghan people’ would be admitted only at the second stage of the conference and they would need to accept the decisions  of the conference.
At this stage the future status of Afghanistan as an independent state would be discussed.
In particular, guarantees would be provided for the non-alignment of the country.
Both the American Secretary of State, Alexander Haig, and the Pakistani Foreign Minister, Agha Shahi, welcomed the EEC initiative.
But the Ambassador of the DRA to the Soviet Union, Habib Mangal, in reply to questions on the EEC initiative on 1 July underlined that his government did not accept ‘any policy, any manœuvres, any political subterfuges aimed at making the problem of Afghanistan international’.
In his view the events in Afghanistan were ‘entirely our internal affair, that can be resolved by our people under the guidance of our party’.
A Soviet statement three days later made it ‘absolutely clear’ that the proposal of the EEC states ‘cannot serve as a basis for talks and no-one intends to hold such talks with them’.
In the Soviet view ‘any proposal excluding the principal party, the DRA government, from the search for a solution to the problem cannot provide a foundation for any serious agreement and is quite unrealistic’.
This line was confirmed by Gromyko in a meeting with Habib on 10 July.
and echoed by the DRA Foreign Minister, Mohammad Dost, a couple of weeks later.
Dost stressed that ‘so far the Government of the DRA has not received from the EEC or from any other organ any proposal in connection with the so-called ‘conference on Afghanistan’’.
The uncompromising Soviet attitude on the question of the representation of the DRA regime in negotiations on Afghanistan predetermined the outcome of an attempt by Carrington to convince Soviet leaders of the merits of the EEC plan during a visit to Moscow in early July.
After Carrington's visit the prominent Soviet commentator Alexander Bovin set down two further Soviet objections to the plan.
He maintained that ‘the composition of the conference [on Afghanistan]arouses doubt since most of the proposed participants are clearly hostile to the present government’.
He also found it unacceptable that ‘although this has not been set down in black and white, the West is clearly inclined to have the conference discuss the regime existing in Afghanistan, and the character of Soviet-Afghan relations’.
Bovin believed that in place of such a conference ‘Afghanistan should conduct direct negotiations with its neighbours, above all with Iran and Pakistan’.
Soviet leaders had been prepared to consider international arrangements and guarantees only on the external aspects of the Afghan problem.
They were not prepared to subject Soviet-DRA relations and the legitimacy of the DRA regime, which they defined as an internal matter, to international scrutiny.
They realised that  they would be diplomatically isolated on these issues in any representative convention of the Great Powers and regional Third World states.
After a meeting of the leading Western industrial states in Ottawa approved the EEC initiative on Afghanistan the Soviet press described the idea that the DRA requires some kind of ‘neutralisation’ as ‘blasphemous’.
This hardening Soviet response ensured that further diplomatic activity by Britain on behalf of the EEC plan, such as during a visit by Prime Minister Thatcher to Pakistan in October 1981, made no progress.
The prospects of multilateral talks on Afghanistan including the Great Powers became dim.
Soviet officials in fact had expressed their suspicion all along, however, that the EEC scheme for Afghanistan had a strong propaganda function.
Soon after the EEC had adopted the plan a Soviet statement anticipated that this ‘patently unrealistic ‘initiative’ ' would be used ‘to launch another round of propaganda attacks on the USSR’by Westerners who simultaneously strike ‘a pose of peacemaker and champion of a settlement’.
Soviet writers subsequently argued that the EEC policy on the Afghan issue, coordinated in the neutralisation plan, ‘served as an additional factor strengthening the inconsistency of the policy of Pakistan in the ‘Afghan question’ and, consequently, postponing the prospects of a real settlement of the situation around Afghanistan’.
It is likely that Soviet leaders regarded the EEC plan as a frustrating obstacle to negotiations on their own terms.
They were unprepared to accept the structure of the initial conference proposed since it excluded and therefore tended to outlaw further the DRA regime.
Still less acceptable was the idea of introducing Afghan ‘representatives’ at the second stage of the conference since this would act to legitimise the resistance groups within Afghanistan.
Soviet leaders may have been more amenable to a plan for negotiations on Afghanistan developed in France, which did not incorporate the neutralisation element of the EEC scheme.
In January 1981 the French President, Giscard d'Estaing, proposed the creation of a ‘conference on non-interference in Afghanistan’.
Besides the permanent members of the UN Security Council he proposed to invite to the conference Iran, India and representatives of the Islamic community.
He did not envisage the participation of representatives of the Afghan government in such a conference, which he emphasised would be devoted not to the status of Afghanistan but to ‘terminating interference in Afghanistan’ as a condition for restoring its character as a non-aligned state.
Since France did not receive any substantial support for this scheme it did not try to propose it on behalf of the EEC.
In autumn 1981 France associated itself  instead with the EEC initiative on the neutralisation of Afghanistan.
Soviet reports on the French idea were factual rather than critical.
Alternative plans to neutralise Afghanistan surfaced in the early 1980s in the West and the Third World among academics and diplomats.
One of the least realistic was an Iranian proposal, the implementation of which would in all likelihood have turned Afghanistan into a pro-Iranian Islamic state distanced from both East and West.
In October 1981 Iranian leaders suggested the creation of ‘peace-keeping forces’ recruited from the armed forces of Pakistan, Iran and a third Islamic country, the construction of a ‘Constituent Council’formed of representatives of ‘responsible and militant clergy’of the Islamic world, and general elections in Afghanistan.
Iran wished all this to come under quadripartite negotiations between Iran, Pakistan, the Afghan mujahadin and the USSR.
Soviet officials were relieved when the Iranian government replaced this extremist plan in July 1982 with the view that a settlement of the situation around Afghanistan should be based on ‘the principles of Islam and non-alignment’.
In winter 1980–81 a Western specialist on South Asia, Selig Harrison, suggested that a formula involving the emergence of a provisional government in Afghanistan might win Soviet acceptance if could provide for arrangements under which Moscow could withdraw from that country in a phased fashion over several years and if the new Afghan government could return to the pre-1973 Soviet-tilted brand of neutralism.
He envisaged a regional security arrangement with firm guarantees of a timetable for Soviet force withdrawals from Afghanistan and of the functions of residual Soviet forces in this country.
Harrison argued that an enduring Afghan settlement would have to be accompanied by parallel understandings between the United States, the USSR and China designed to neutralise Pakistan and Iran as arenas of Great Power conflict, which would rule out military alliances and special military relationships.
A former Indian Foreign Secretary, J. S. Mehta, supported this contention in an article in 1982.
He argued that ‘the Kremlin's attitude toward withdrawal from Afghanistan will depend on whether Pakistan becomes a heavily armed, pro-Western ally or a neutral state between the superpowers’,
Both Mehta and Harrison referred to the historical example of Soviet troop withdrawals from Finland (the Porkkala base), and to the security pledges that Finland gave the Soviet Union.
In their view this Soviet withdrawal, and the policy of ‘Finlandisation’ which Finland ostensibly embarked on, had been enabled by Sweden's decision to remain neutral after the war.
In light of this, Mehta proposed a series of diplomatic steps  intended to create an outer belt of neutrality as a precondition for the ‘Finlandisation’ of Afghanistan.
Like Harrison, he expected that an earlier form of Afghan neutralism could still be resuscitated.
He believed that Soviet leaders in retrospect probably recognised that a genuinely non-aligned Afghanistan pursuing non-radical policies was a better guardian of Soviet security interests.
Mehta proposed initially the convention of a regional conference of countries ‘closely affected by the present situation in Afghanistan’.
Pakistan, Iran, India and the Gulf states having mostly refused military bases to the superpowers could in his view credibly affirm their opposition to the permanent presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan and endorse the objective of returning Afghanistan to a non-aligned status.
Since the conference would not initially focus on the problems inside Afghanistan Kabul need not be invited.
The meeting would seek specifically an agreement by which all countries reaffirm their neutrality and detachment from military blocs, as the first step towards the eventual ‘Finlandisation’ of Afghanistan.
Once this non-aligned buffer is established and had gained credibility in Mehta's view the conference could seek the addition of selected non-aligned countries from other regions to enhance its international standing.
This larger group would then choose an observer group of given countries to perform a peace-keeping role in Afghanistan, which would involve defusing the insurgency and  supervising general elections.
Mehta believed that the Afghan regime and the USSR would have a strong incentive to accept the group in Kabul.
Mehta's final proposal was that the newly elected government conclude an Afghan-Soviet treaty along the lines of the Soviet-Finnish treaty and negotiate the withdrawal of the remaining Soviet forces.
He believed that the treaty could be endorsed by the United Nations so that in the final instance all major powers would be committed to respect Afghan neutrality and non-alignment.
Unfortunately there are weaknesses in both Harrison's and Mehta's proposals to neutralise Afghanistan.
Their parallels with the case of Finland are unconvincing since Soviet policies towards Afghanistan and Finland have operated in quite dissimilar political and strategic environments.
Soviet leaders never committed themselves ideologically and politically to Finland in the manner they did in Afghanistan.
The USSR had limited military-strategic objectives in Finland; the country was never occupied by Soviet troops, except in the case of the lease of the Porkkala base, and this was returned once it became strategically redundant.
It was crucial that Soviet leaders came to trust non-Marxist and not necessarily  pro-Soviet Finnish political forces to abide by the military provisions of the 1948 Finnish-Soviet Friendship and Cooperation Treaty which met Soviet security needs in the direction of Finland comprehensively and permitted the expression of the Finnish brand of neutrality.
In contrast Soviet leaders committed themselves, at least until the late 1980s, to the maintenance of a Marxist dominated pro-Soviet regime in Kabul, to the ‘irreversibility’ of the process of ‘revolutionary development’in Afghanistan, with the future political and strategic implications this entailed for South Asia and the Persian Gulf.
For this reason the Soviet Union and the DRA regime were unwilling to accept an observer group in Kabul as proposed by Mehta, however worthy its non-aligned credentials.
Soviet leaders were interested only in a kind of ‘non-alignment’ for Afghanistan comparable with that of the radical pro-Soviet members of the Non-Aligned Movement; they did not hanker for Afghan neutralism of the pre-1973 variant.
Mehta's idea for a new Afghan-Soviet treaty comparable to the Finnish-Soviet treaty (presumably meaning the 1948 treaty) which eventually encouraged the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Porkkala is unlikely to impress Soviet officials since the USSR has already signed a bilateral security-oriented treaty with Afghanistan in the form of the 1978 Treaty of Friendship, Good-Neighbourliness and Cooperation.
Harrison and Mehta are more convincing when they argue that one precondition for a long-term settlement in Afghanistan based on a stricter interpretation of non-alignment could be a broad Great Power or regional understanding on the neutralisation of Southwest Asia.
The former Pakistani Foreign Minister, Agha Shahi, suggested similarly in December 1984 that the strict non-alignment of the countries spanning the Persian Gulf and South Asian regions, together with American willingness to concede the Soviet Union a role in a comprehensive Middle East settlement, might create a situation congenial to the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan.
According to a Pakistani commentary, Shahi appeared to be suggesting that once the neutrality of the area was ensured by the regional states pursuing a policy of strict non-alignment, the superpowers could perhaps be persuaded to work towards some sort of mutual accommodation.
A quid pro quo arrangement of the latter kind could prove attractive to Soviet leaders.
During an official visit to Moscow in April 1981, the Libyan leader, Gaddafi, spoke of the need to ensure the ‘independence and neutrality’ of Afghanistan alongside a halt in all forms of outside interference in its affairs.
Brezhnev responded with an appeal for the Great Powers to adopt certain norms in relations with Third World states  including respect for the status of non-alignment chosen by them and abstention from attempts to draw them into military-political blocs of powers.
So far Soviet officials have failed to link the notion of some form of neutralisation of Afghanistan specifically with understandings on the neutrality of the states around it.
But for many years Soviet statements have considered the DRA's ‘peaceful initiatives’ on settling the situation around Afghanistan (such as the regime's political programme of 14 May 1980)‘in the context of normalising the situation in the region as a whole’.
Moreover, the USSR has expressed itself ready to take part in such a settlement ‘linked with matters of Persian Gulf security’.
This could imply a link with Brezhnev's scheme in 1980 to neutralise the Gulf.
In this context it is interesting to note the unauthorised proposals advanced by an anonymous Soviet specialist on international and defence affairs in autumn 1984.
‘Colonel X’ proposed the establishment of ‘Non-Alignment Pacts’.
These would constitute treaties which ‘for each Third World country currently or potentially the focus of dangerous conflict, would guarantee the non-alignment of that country’.
He suggested that the signatories of the Pact ‘be all those world and regional powers with an interest in the particular country concerned’.
An ‘outside power’, whose objectivity could be equally trusted by all involved parties, would implement and supervise each Pact’.
The Colonel proposed that the signatory powers would form a ‘consortium, guaranteeing the non-alignment of the country’.
He accepted that each country presents different problems, requiring special solution, but believed that the problems of one country are linked to those of other countries in the same region.
He proposed Pacts, therefore, to cover regions as well as countries.
Examples given were Central America, the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Somalia), Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran, Kampuchea, Korea, and the Middle East (Israel, Palestine, Lebanon).
This Soviet specialist, whose views remain unofficial, proposed a Non-Alignment Pact for Afghanistan, ‘which would both guarantee the West against our continued presence there and guarantee us against a Western presence’.
The Pact would provide for the withdrawal of Soviet forces following the formation of a coalition government in Kabul.
The need to halt Pakistani aid to the insurgents in Afghanistan indicated the regional dimension to any neutralisation of this country.
‘Colonel X’ claimed that it would first be necessary to implement a Non-Alignment Pact for Pakistan, which would ‘create the preconditions of a Pact for Afghanistan’.
It is difficult to judge how far the views of this anonymous source  diverged from the mainstream of Soviet official thought reflected a more conciliatory approach to the Afghan problem among Soviet foreign policy specialists, an approach which is less dogmatic about the nature of the internal regime in Afghanistan and more appreciative of the benefits which the USSR derived from Afghan non-alignment in the past.
Such an approach may have become more widespread among the Soviet political elite since the death of Brezhnev.
Earlier Soviet statements in the 1980s only rarely referred to the Soviet interest ‘in having Afghanistan remain a neutral and non-aligned state and its good neighbour’(my emphasis).
In April 1983, however, the main features of a draft agreement on a comprehensive settlement of the Afghan question were worked out for the first time during the United Nations-sponsored talks in Geneva.
It was implicitly understood in this agreement that a political solution would ultimately involve the emergence of a coalition regime within the framework of a settlement; the Soviet Union indicated to a number of non-aligned states including India that it was not averse to such a development.
The views of ‘Colonel X’ become pertinent in this context.
He argued that to implement a ‘Non-Alignment Pact’ in a civil war between an incumbent government supported by one Great Power and insurgents supported by another Great Power ‘a coalition government must be formed comprising those elements of both Government and insurgent forces which are prepared to come to a compromise and work together in the context of non-alignment’.
He believed that the Great Powers would be ‘in a position to exert the pressure on their clients necessary to induce them to accept such arrangements’.
This foreshadowed the trend of Soviet policy towards Afghanistan pursued by Gorbachev.
In 1983, however, it seems that Pakistan did not seriously test Soviet terms for a withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan, and in May the Pakistani Foreign Minister failed to obtain the concurrence of the United States for the draft settlement reached the previous month.
The American Secretary of State, Shultz, would not accept the UN agreement without the prior replacement of the existing regime in Kabul by a more representative one.
This effectively destroyed any chance of progress at a crucial stage in the negotiations, it meant the collapse of the so-called ‘Finlandisation’ option.
The USSR had given the appearance of supporting the plan of the United Nations' negotiator.
Until this stage ‘it had been clearly understood and  implicitly accepted during the entire process by all parties involved that the recomposition of the regime in Kabul would occur in parallel with the phased withdrawal of Soviet forces’.
Little progress was achieved during the UN-sponsored negotiations  over the next two years.
In June 1985 there was a renewed effort to advance these talks.
Certain Western journalists claimed on the basis of Soviet sources that ‘Moscow would much prefer a negotiated settlement which would involve the ‘Finlandisation’ of Afghanistan along neutral lines' to a large increase in Soviet troops deployed in Afghanistan.
One Soviet specialist on Afghanistan reputedly maintained that ‘the option of ‘Finlandisation’ is still possible' and ‘it is to be preferred’, but ‘if the Geneva negotiations are obstructed, then Soviet policy will be one of ‘Mongolization’’.
Not too much should be read into this kind of loose terminology, since it is greatly at variance with the vocabulary customarily employed by Soviet diplomats, officials and academics.
Moreover, the descriptive value of the term ‘Finlandisation’ and even more the historical parallel with Finland, as previously observed, are questionable.
It is misleading to regard the Soviet withdrawal from the Porkkala base in 1955–6 as the final stage of a phased withdrawal of Soviet troops from Finland when Soviet troops had at no stage occupied Finnish soil.
This act certainly constituted a legal precondition to the proclamation of Finland's neutrality, but it coincided with a period in the mid and late 1950s when for various reasons the notion of neutrality in Europe suddenly gained a positive image among Soviet leaders.
These circumstances are not comparable to those which determine the Soviet outlook on Asia in the mid 1980s.
In addition, the Porkkala base was relinquished many years after Finland re-established the independent operation of her internal political processes.
It was not paralleled by any externally influenced recomposition of the political forces in Finland, and in the Afghan case it is precisely the issue of the internal composition of the Afghan regime which will determine whether Afghanistan will eventually embark on a more truly non-aligned path.
Influential Western figures encouraged a revival of plans to neutralise Afghanistan in the mid 1980s.
In autumn 1985 the former American National Security Adviser, Brzezinski, proposed the external neutralisation of Afghanistan combined with a Soviet military withdrawal, the introduction of Islamic peace-keeping forces for an interim period, and self-determination for the Afghans.
In a television interview in late December 1985 the British Prime Minister, Thatcher, suggested that a revival of the Carrington initiative for international guarantees for Afghanistan's neutral status ‘would perhaps be a possible way forward that might be pursued again’.
British Foreign Office officials were quick to caution, however, that these remarks did not mean that Britain was set to launch a new peace initiative.
In their view a Soviet troop withdrawal remained the key to a  settlement and the possibility of a ‘neutral Afghanistan’ could only arise consequent to that.
The new Soviet leadership under Gorbachev has evidently been more intent on extricating itself from Afghanistan through political accommodation.
In an address to foreign ambassadors at the end of 1985 Gorbachev underlined the Soviet readiness to search for ‘just solutions jointly with other countries’ to conflicts in various regions and ‘to participate where necessary, in respective guarantees’.
Greater Soviet flexibility on the nature of the Afghan regime was indicated by the decision of the DRA in December 1985 to admit a group of non-party (non-PDPA) figures into the DRA government.
The replacement of Karmal as head of the PDPA by Major General Najibullah (or Najib) on the eve of the reopening of the UN-sponsored peace talks on Afghanistan in Geneva on 5 May 1986 was intended inter alia to encourage the Kabul regime to broaden its power base as Moscow considered politically necessary.
In August Najibullah claimed that the PDPA would even countenance ‘settling up a government that would include representatives of the political forces now outside the country, but who sincerely want to participate in the nationwide process of building a new Afghanistan’.
In a New Year's Day report he told the PDPA that he did not wish ‘to exclude from the process of national reconciliation the various political groupings of a centrist or monarchist persuasion or the leaders of armed anti-government groupings operating abroad’.
He suggested the discussion of a draft constitution ‘so that representatives of the opposing side could express their proposals’.
In November Gorbachev for the first time conceded that Moscow stood not only for a ‘non-aligned, independent, sovereign Afghanistan’ but a ‘neutral Afghanistan’.
This term was also used by Najibullah.
Flexibility on the Pakistani side was shown by the Pakistani Foreign Minister's recognition of the Soviet Union's ‘legitimate interest in expecting that any Government in Kabul should be friendly towards it and should be mindful of its security interests’.
This meant in his view that the Afghan Government had to be ‘such as does not maintain a hostile attitude towards the Soviet Union and does not join anti-Soviet alliances’.
The Iranian attitude has also become more accommodating.
During talks in Moscow in February 1986 the Iranian Foreign Minister proposed a second conference on Afghanistan, independent of the Geneva conference, which would be attended by Iran, Pakistan, the Soviet Union and the Afghan mujahidin .
Previously Iran had sought an unconditional withdrawal of Soviet troops as a precondition of any discussion on Afghanistan.
Soviet  interest was aroused by the Iranian view that ‘there will have to be guarantees that neither the Americans nor American surrogates substitute for the departing Russians’, that the problem of Afghanistan should not be solved in the East/West context.
The difficulty in obtaining the compliance of the United States to an agreement on Afghanistan between the regional states involved in the conflict stemmed from a continued American reluctance to accept an unrepresentative pro-Soviet and Marxist-inclined (if not dominated) government in that state.
But in December 1985 United States’ officials indicated that they could accept a United Nations' agreement if it led to a ‘comprehensive and just settlement’, involving a short time frame for Soviet withdrawal and self-determination.
They showed greater flexibility over the regime which Pakistan could accept.
Real progress was made at the UN-sponsored talks on Afghanistan in May 1986 since it was agreed that Soviet troop withdrawals should begin simultaneously with the cessation of external interference and not after it as Soviet officials had previously insisted.
In November Moscow agreed on United Nations monitoring on both sides of the Afghan border.
A (Soviet) DRA proposal at the Geneva talks in February 1987 for the first time made public a time frame for Soviet withdrawal, eighteen months, with no conditions attached to the process of ‘national reconciliation’ in Afghanistan.
Pakistan countered with a proposal for a seven-month time frame.
Soviet officials calculated that a longer time frame would assist the USSR to stabilise a viable and desirable regime in Kabul.
In January-February 1987 separate talks were held in Moscow with Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran.
The discussions dealt not only with a Soviet withdrawal but with the structure of the government to remain behind in Kabul.
The United Nations' mediator, Diego Cordovez, admitted for the first time that a Geneva agreement on a Soviet troop withdrawal would only be the starting point for a settlement.
It would serve ‘as a catalyst to produce another process, which will be the post-settlement arrangement’.
Moscow was operating within the United Nations' scenario which would leave the present regime in place after the departure of Soviet troops.
Soviet leaders have given no indication, moreover, that they are prepared to abandon the PDPA and apparently expect its apparatus to be retained in post-settlement Afghanistan even if its role is reduced and its monopoly of power relinquished.
But this issue is an area of tension between Moscow and the PDPA leadership.
An interim regime could reduce the role of the PDPA but the USSR has not made the establishment of an interim government a precondition of a settlement.
It is precisely the role of the PDPA which frustrates a superpower accommodation over Afghanistan.
American policy on Afghanistan has been reactive and government spokesmen have been reluctant to define the permissible political bounds of the Afghan regime after a Soviet withdrawal.
More recently, certain United States government figures have ruled out a settlement which would leave the PDPA as the ‘backbone of the Kabul Government’ and they have indicated the unacceptability of the continuation of a ‘communist front government’in Afghanistan.
This leaves open the possibility of the inclusion of the PDPA in some format in a future settlement on Afghanistan, even though the principle of representation of the PDPA in an eventual settlement has not yet been accepted by Washington.
American and Soviet leaders could arrive at a compromise over the composition of the future Afghan regime, perhaps at a summit meeting, which would pave the way for subsequent international guarantees of Afghanistan's formal non-alignment.
But this would still fail to resolve the outstanding obstacle which to a greater or lesser extent was incorporated in earlier Western neutralisation plans — the attitude of the indigenous Afghan resistance groups.
In August 1985 the Supreme Council of the Afghan mujahidin Alliance, based in Peshawar, reiterated that its goal was the establishment of an independent Islamic state and declared that no power had the right to impose a political solution or a leadership on Afghanistan that did not satisfy the resistance fronts.
In May 1986 the spokesman of the resistance coalition proclaimed that any form of international guarantee which directly or indirectly recognises the Kabul regime would be unacceptable.
He promised that the resistance would not lay down its arms until the last Soviet soldier had left Afghanistan and that if a deal was made over their heads the guerrillas would continue fighting even if foreign help were withdrawn.
In March 1987 the Hizb-e-Islami party accepted that Afghanistan should be a truly neutral and non-aligned state after a Soviet withdrawal.
Its primary spokesman suggested that guarantees could be given that Afghanistan would not become a base for foreign powers.
But he reaffirmed that no ‘Finnish solution’ or ‘conspiracy of accommodation’made by the superpowers from outside would be acceptable to the mujahidin or considered binding on them.
This uncompromising line by the main resistance groups implies that the USSR would need to maintain a political and military commitment to any Afghan regime which includes a PDPA component and emerges out of an international settlement.
This would be incompatible with any form of neutrality or Western conceptions of non-alignment.
However, more
recently there have been indications that the mujahidin are moderating their expectations.
In March 1987 the seven-party mujahidin alliance indicated its readiness to consider a settlement formula as evolved in the UN-sponsored negotiations.
A spokesman pointed out that the alliance had agreed to the idea of an interim government in Afghanistan pending elections, and he observed that this could include ‘neutral’ personalities.
In April reports appeared that both the superpowers and Pakistan were actively promoting the idea of including Zahir Shah, the exiled former monarch, in a future coalition government in Kabul, although the mujahidin alliance were split on the issue.
Washington appeared to believe that Zahir Shah could act as a bridge between the mujahidin and the marxists in Kabul.
The recent terminology of Soviet and DRA leaders confirms the impression that some form of neutralisation of Afghanistan has become more acceptable to Moscow.
On the eve of the Geneva talks in February 1987 the DRA Foreign Minister claimed that Afghanistan was ready to reach a settlement leading to the establishment of a ‘free, neutral, non-aligned Afghanistan’.
The Pakistani Prime Minister, Mohammad Khan Junejo, and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain agreed in April 1987 that a peace settlement for Afghanistan should include a commitment to establish ‘a neutral non-aligned’ regime in Kabul.
In response to this meeting a Soviet newscaster asserted that ‘more than anyone else, the Soviet Union comes out in favour of an independent, neutral, non-aligned Afghanistan which maintains relations of friendship and good-neighbourliness with our country’.
In an interview in May, Gorbachev underlined that Moscow favoured Afghanistan remaining independent, sovereign and non-aligned and if it ‘also decided to be a neutral state, then that is the Afghan people's affair too’.
He described the view that ‘the Soviet Union would only accept a political settlement of the Afghan problem which would leave Afghanistan in its ‘sphere of influence’’ as ‘very mistaken’.
He denied that the Soviet Union had or sought spheres of influence and implied that Zahir Shah could be brought into an Afghan coalition government.
The following month Najib conceded that the Marxist authorities of the DRA were ready for contacts with supporters of Zahir Shah to promote a settlement.
He declared that ‘it is necessary to use the possibilities for entering into contact with monarchist forces, political activists of former regimes, and well-known and authoritative clergymen’.
In describing a future coalition government he promised that ‘we will not give representatives of the other side just two or three armchairs’.
He accepted  that ‘we will have to share power’.
Najib said the authorities were prepared to tolerate a multi-party system in Afghanistan provided that the new parties agreed inter alia on a policy of non-alignment and ‘the strengthening of the traditional historic friendship with the Soviet Union’.
Gorbachev underlined this proviso in discussing the Afghan problem with the UN Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar.
He declared that ‘our only wish is that Afghanistan should be a neutral and independent state developing in its own right and friendly to the USSR, and not a base for hostile activity threatening the security of neighbours’.
A few days later a Soviet commentary from Kabul indicated the limits of such ‘neutrality ‘in asserting that the PDPA’ will remain the chief mobilising and guiding force in the [Afghan]government of national unity, even after it becomes a coalition’.
A loosely formulated neutralisation of Afghanistan, involving superpower guarantees of that country's non-aligned status, mutual DRA and Pakistani pledges of non-interference and non-intervention, the withdrawal of Soviet troops (though perhaps not military advisers) combined with the cessation of external assistance to the mujahidin , and the retention of the PDPA as an important Afghan political force in a future coalition government, appears in principle acceptable to Soviet leaders.
Indeed, in a major speech on 8 February 1988, Gorbachev declared explicitly that the Soviet Union no longer expected agreement on the nature of any interim or coalition government before commencing the withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan.
He accepted that it was not the business of the Soviet Union to participate in talks on the issue of a coalition government, and announced a ten-month timetable for troop withdrawals.
However, it remains unclear how far the Soviet leadership may seek to influence the internal composition of the post-settlement Afghan regime in order to safeguard the minimal security and strategic needs of the USSR which, Moscow asserts, originally compelled the intervention of Soviet troops in Afghanistan.
Soviet policy and military alignment in the Third World
For many years Soviet leaders have anticipated military-political and strategic benefits for the Soviet Union from the shift in the global ‘correlation of forces’ represented by the spread of non-alignment in the Third World.
They understood that neutralism and non-alignment could impede or restrain the development of close military relations between many newly independent states and the Western powers.
In the 1950s and 1960s the American strategy of containment sought to integrate key Third World states in anti-Soviet (and anti-Chinese) coalitions and alliances in regions close to the Soviet borders.
In response Soviet officials strove to convince third World states that entry into such alliances and the concession of military bases and facilities to Western states were counterproductive.
The developing countries were urged to renounce such military links and embrace a policy of neutralism or non-alignment.
This Soviet strategy is analysed in the first section of this chapter.
The continent where coordination in questions of military security between the Western powers and Third World states aroused the greatest concern among Soviet leaders was Asia.
To counteract Western influence Soviet officials advocated a system of collective security.
The idea of collective security had emerged as a theme in Soviet policy in the 1950s.
Western statesmen had perceived it as a Soviet device to prise the United States and Western Europe apart.
A Soviet statement in March 1958 had called for the establishment of collective security in both Europe and Asia as a basis for destroying the Western-inspired pacts, NATO and SEATO.
In the 1970s Soviet promotion of the notion of collective security among Asian stateswas intended inter alia as a means to undermine SEATO, CENTO, ANZUS andthe bilateral pacts the United States had concluded with South Korea, the Philippines and Japan.
Moscow characterised it as a concrete response to Asian concerns about the vulnerabilities resulting  from close military association with the United States.
No doubt Soviet leaders hoped that a Soviet-inspired collective security regime could underwrite the decline of the American military presence in Asia, but the primary Soviet target was China.
As an organising principle collective security was expected to underpin an Asian ‘coalition’ of states under the Soviet aegis, which would constitute a barrier against the emergence of Chinese influence in the 1970s.
However, the Soviet initiative attracted only marginal support from the states in the region.
Soviet leaders were unsuccessful in their efforts to mobilise Asian states around the ill-defined principles of collective security.
However, they developed a measure of security coordination with non-aligned or pro-Soviet Third World states in the 1970s through the conclusion of bilateral treaties of friendship, cooperation and assistance and through the acquisition of new military facilities overseas.
Officials in Western and some non-aligned states have decried the tendency in the Non-Aligned Movement to criticise Western military bases and facilities located in Third World states whole glossing over the concession of military facilities to the Soviet Union.
This chapter outlines the Soviet characterisation of Great Power military bases and facilities on foreign territories and analyses Soviet efforts to implement a strategy of ‘base denial’.
Soviet friendship and cooperation treaties with Third World states were intended to displace or counteract the existing alignments and alliances between these states and the Western powers.
As the number of states contractually linked to the Soviet Union in this manner increased, it became apparent that Moscow hoped to construct a network of loose understandings on military security with Third World states and establish Soviet relations with them on a firmer institutional basis.
This could act to some extent as a rival system to the more traditional system of alliances and pacts in the Third World upheld by the Western powers.
Western analysts have frequently regarded Soviet friendship and cooperation treaties as defining relations of alignment between the treaty parties.
Soviet officials.have denied that these treaties have prejudiced the pursuit of non-alignment by the Third World states involved.
The final section of this chapter examines these contrary claims.
The primary intention of this chapter is to assess the Soviet strategy of military denial in the Third World in relation to the forms of military alignment outlined above.
ALLIANCES AND PACTS
In the decade following the conclusion of the Second World War the Western powers, and in particular the United States under the Truman and Eisenhower administrations, negotiated a whole series of bilateral and multilateral security treaties with Asian states, which in certain cases took the form of formal alliances.
These succeeded the foundation of the NATO alliance in Europe and were intended to constrain the influence of Soviet and Chinese communism.
(The collusion of the two communist powers was formalised by Moscow's conclusion of an alliance with the newly victorious Chinese communists in late 1949.)
The United States concluded bilateral mutual defence treaties with the Philippines in 1951, South Korea in 1953 and Taiwan in 1954.
Australia, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand, Great Britain and France came together additionally to sign the South East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO) Pact in Manila in September 1954.
SEATO was intended primarily to cordon off Communist China and North Vietnam.
The instrument chosen to contain the Soviet Union in Asia was the Baghdad Pact.
This military pact, signed in February 1955, included Iraq, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan and Great Britain.
When Iraq withdrew in 1958 the Pact was succeeded by the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO), which was reinforced by the conclusion of bilateral military agreements between the United States and respectively Iran, Turkey and Pakistan early in 1959.
The United States was not a signatory in the CENTO arrangement, but it became involved in CENTO planning and some of its military committees and virtually committed itself to a military response to an attack on any of its members.
Pakistan acted as a link between SEATO and CENTO, while Turkey performed the same function between CENTO and NATO.
The SEATO and CENTO pacts brought certain Asian states into pro-Western blocs and set them apart from a larger neutralist group.
But the political and military efficacy of the pacts was always open to doubt.
SEATO established no combined military  command or joint military force and relied merely on joint military manoeuvres for regional defence.
Its member states had joined for diverse reasons, and of the regional states perhaps only Thailand took the Pact seriously.
By the late 1960s Pakistan had ceased to participate in military exercises within the framework of SEATO and CENTO and it eventually withdrew from SEATO.
The SEATO Pact effectively became moribund in the wake of the American military withdrawal from Indo-China in the mid 1970s, and was not reinvigorated.
The Soviet Union initially regarded the ASEAN community as an American-devised SEATO-type alliance, but growing understanding of ASEAN led to a reversal of this stand (see below).
CENTO had already ceased to be a threat to the Soviet Union in the Middle East with the assumption of power by the Ba'ath Party in Iraq.
Much of the continuing Soviet obsession with CENTO was directed against Iran, whose position in CENTO was reinforced by the effective military guarantee from the United States contained in the bilateral agreement of 1959.
However, even Iran's interest in CENTO dwindled in the 1970s and the Pact finally collapsed at the end of the decade when both Iran and Pakistan withdrew.
Soviet leaders responded to the creation of the Baghdad Pact and SEATO with a vigorous campaign among the states of the Middle East and Asia in favour of neutralism and neutrality.
They were gratified by Egypt's resistance to Western pressures to enter the Baghdad Pact and by Iraq's withdrawal.
In his report to the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU in 1956 Khrushchev branded these two pacts as ‘not only aggressive military and political alignments but also instruments of enslavement; a new colonial type form of exploitation of the underdeveloped countries’.
He considered it ‘obvious to everyone that neither Pakistan nor Thailand in SEATO, nor Iraq, Iran or Turkey in the Baghdad Pact set the policy’.
In his view these blocs were part of a Western policy of ‘divide and rule’ in the Arab East and Southeast Asia.
As an alternative to this bloc policy Khrushchev offered to conclude treaties of non-aggression and friendship with the states concerned.
In February 1957 the Soviet Government sent the Western powers a note proposing the adoption of mutual obligations towards the Near and Middle East including an abstention from ‘all kinds of attempts to draw these countries into military blocs with the participation of the Great Powers’.
In January 1958 the Soviet Premier, Bulganin, deplored a NATO Council decision to establish close ties between NATO, the Baghdad Pact and SEATO.
He urged states such as India, Afghanistan and Egypt to join the European neutrals and the states belonging to the Warsaw Pact and NATO in a summit conference to end international tension.
Soviet leaders cited the examples of Afghanistan, Burma and India in Asia to urge Turkey, Iran and Pakistan to withdraw from multilateral and bilateral military pacts.
The former group of states was encouraged to campaign against these pacts.
A Soviet Government statement in March 1959 on the bilateral pacts the United States had concluded with Iran, Turkey and Pakistan claimed that military cooperation with the United States stimulated certain circles in Pakistan to prepare against India and  Afghanistan.
Prime Minister Nehru and Prime Minister Daoud, it was observed, had publicly admitted such concerns.
Moscow claimed that these agreements enabled the United States to take measures to prepare ‘the territories of these countries as a theatre of military operations in accordance with the plans of the American military’.
It followed that a de facto neutralisation of the Soviet southern flank was a primary strategic objective for the USSR.
At the beginning of the 1960s Soviet spokesmen expected dividends from indigenous neutralist opposition to CENTO and SEATO.
They claimed that ‘voices demanding Pakistan's withdrawal’ from these pacts were ‘increasing’, and that ‘the Iranian people are effectively campaigning for Iran's withdrawal from the aggressive CENTO bloc, the abrogation of the military treaty with America and for Iran's return to a policy of neutrality’.
Support for ‘neutrality’ was also detected in Turkey.
The Turkish leader General Gursel told journalists in 1961 that he favoured neutrality but because of Turkey's geographical position it could not remain neutral.
The Soviet media responded with the assertion that ‘this is evidently not inevitable’ and pointed to official Turkish neutrality during the Second World War.
In advance of the Belgrade conference of the Non-Aligned group in 1961 Soviet officials dwelt on the threat the existence of CENTO and SEATO posed to all neutralist states.
They asserted that the pacts were involved in plans for fighting a thermonuclear war.
At the Twenty-Second Congress of the CPSU Khrushchev attacked the Shah of Iran for having agreed ‘to turn almost half the country into a zone of death in the interests of the aggressive CENTO bloc’.
The Soviet media published ostensible ‘top secret CENTO documents’ proving that the authors ‘want to transform into zones of death not only their two allies in CENTO, Iran and Pakistan, but also the territory of neutral Afghanistan’.
A Soviet commentator speculated on the existence of ‘another top secret CENTO and SEATO plan which determines zones of death in the territories of India or Indonesia or Burma or other neutral countries’.
Soviet spokesmen naturally used various arguments to encourage the neutralists to work for the dissolution of CENTO and SEATO, but Soviet leaders may have recognised already in the 1960s that these alliances were operating more effectively as political symbols than as military structures.
The President of Pakistan, Ayub Khan, held discussions with Soviet leaders in April 1965 and explained that Pakistan's presence in CENTO and SEATO ‘was serving as a moderating influence, and in any case the pacts were not hurting the USSR’.
In response Kosygin admitted that ‘they may not be hurting us, but they give us no pleasure either’.
He told Ayub 
Khan that before this meeting ‘all we knew about you was that you were a member of certain pacts — even though paper pacts — and we were doubtful and cautious about you’.
Soviet leaders interpreted participation in SEATO and CENTO as a political commitment to the West and to anti-Sovietism.
At the same time the USSR managed to cultivate reasonable neighbourly relations with the Asian CENTO states and used this to dilute further the military cohesiveness of the CENTO Pact.
In the case of Turkey a further objective was a weakening of Turkish commitment to NATO membership.
There is some evidence that in pursuit of a ‘decoupling’ of Turkey from CENTO and NATO Moscow attempted to negotiate a Soviet-Turkish treaty of friendship and cooperation in 1976.
In the 1970s Soviet commentators accepted that despite Turkish participation in ‘imperialist blocs’, which acted to restrict joint Turkish actions with the non-aligned states in resolving international problems, such as over the Middle East and disarmament, Turkey and the non-aligned countries faced ‘very many similar problems’.
Turkey achieved observer status at the Algiers Non-Aligned Conference in 1973, but was unable to retain this status.
Rumours that Turkey and Pakistan would be proposed as candidates at the 1976 Non-Aligned Summit proved groundless.
However, Pakistan was accepted into the Non-Aligned Movement once it formally withdrew from CENTO in 1979.
This followed the example of Iran and confirmed the dissolution of CENTO.
At his first appearance in the Movement the Pakistani President, Zia Ul-Haq, accepted its general principles, including ‘opposition to hegemony or domination in any guise or form’, and was careful to avoid anti-Soviet expressions.
Soviet leaders considered the withdrawal of Pakistan from CENTO as long overdue.
They doubted that this act represented any substantial change in policy and did not regard it as sufficient to confirm Pakistani non-alignment in light of the continuation of strong military links between Washington and Islamabad.
The Afghan regime under Taraki, which was under military pressure from Pakistan and Iran, expressed its own doubts during the 1979 Havana Non-Aligned Summit.
President Taraki pointed out that ‘some of the countries joining the Movement as full-fledged members may have come after their dissociation from aggressive regional military pacts and alliances’.
In his opinion this entitled the Movement ‘to have as a matter of principle, assurances with regard to such countries, to the effect that they have no lingering military commitments with the major partners of these pacts against third countries’.
In light of such assertions, claims by the USSR and the new DRA regime that Afghanistan remained non-aligned after the Karmal regime was  installed by force of Soviet arms a few months later are disingenuous.
It was true that Afghanistan refrained from assuming open multilateral military commitments but the character and scale of Soviet-Afghan bilateral military relations could not be ignored in this context.
Indeed, the Soviet press supported a query by the Indian Foreign Minister, N. Rao, in May 1981 about whether to permit Pakistan to remain in the Non-Aligned Movement with the assertion that ‘Islamabad's policy of all possible military rapprochement with Washington and the huge shipments of American arms that have been promised cannot help but raise legitimate doubts among many member countries of the Non-Aligned Movement as to whether Pakistan is legally entitled to remain in their ranks’.
This played directly to Indian susceptibilities; Soviet spokesmen have not queried the prominent Indian position among the Non-Aligned when large-scale Indo-Soviet arms agreements have been concluded.
Nor did Moscow raise the principles of non-alignment when it transferred arms on a large scale to radical ‘non-aligned’ African states in the 1970s or to Afghanistan in the 1980s.
Soviet leaders considered Iran's renunciation of the CENTO Pact in early 1979 when the Shah was overthrown as a seminal event.
Soviet commentaries lauded the new ‘progressive’ policy of Iran which had resulted in its withdrawal from CENTO.
In an interview with Pravda in March 1979, the Iranian Minister of Information and Propaganda drew attention to measures such as‘the establishment of control over bases from which the Pentagon was carrying out electronic intelligence observations of the territory of the Soviet Union, the termination of the services of American military advisers in the armed forces, and a sharp cutback in the military budget’.
Moscow chose initially not to stress Soviet-Iranian relations at the expense of Iranian independence and non-alignment.
When the Iranian government abrogated its CENTO membership it branded any neighbouring country that remained in CENTO as a lackey of imperialism and as hostile to Iran.
As a result Iranian-Turkish relations deteriorated.
The preferred approach of Soviet officials was to confirm Iran's abandonment of a pro-Western political and military policy by encouraging its association in the Non-Aligned Movement.
The Soviet media observed in March 1979 that ‘the policy which Iran is pursuing today in many respects resembles the programme formulated by the Non-Aligned Movement which is being implemented successfully’.
The USSR noted ‘with satisfaction’ that ‘Iran is expressing its support for the world-wide democratic international Non-Aligned Movement’.
Iran took part in the summits of the Non-Aligned in 1979 and 1983, and the new Iranian constitution defined the basis of the  country's foreign policy inter alia as ‘ending any kind of domination,…practicing non-alignment with respect to the dominating powers and maintaining mutual peaceful relationships with non-belligerent nations’.
Despite Iran's avowed non-alignment Soviet officials in all likelihood expected that the tide of anti-Western sentiment which swept Iran out of CENTO would open the way for a closer political affiliation with the USSR as  practised by other radical states in the Non-Aligned Movement.
However, Iran came to regard the need for closer identification with the Third World as the counterpart to a progressive de-emphasising of ties with both superpowers.
At the Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Non-Aligned in February 1981 Iran pressed for a purist conception of non-alignment, which involved a rejection o£ all forms of dependency on the superpowers, an emphasis on self-reliance, and a purge of those who did not live up to this ideal.
This outlook emboldened Iran to repudiate the military provisions of the 1921 Soviet-Persian Treaty at the time it abrogated Iranian membership in CENTO.
In the 1980s Soviet leaders have remained unable to alter the Iranian posture of ‘neither West nor East’ in their favour.
The case of Iran has shown Soviet leaders that a Third World state may withdraw comprehensively from a Western sponsored military alliance in a strategically sensitive area and avoid subsequent alignment with the USSR.
It has underlined that Third World nationalism may frustrate zero-sum calculations by the superpowers.
The dissolution of CENTO left ASEAN as the primary multilateral body of states in Asia predominantly oriented towards the Western powers in its security outlook and ties.
At the time ASEAN was created in August 1967 Soviet officials had been anticipating an American attempt to construct a broader alliance to replace the decrepit SEATO.
In their view this new alliance would incorporate the neutral states of the region such as Malaysia and Indonesia, which refused to join SEATO.
Moscow expected that as in the case of the Baghdad Pact it would not include the United States by formal association.
Soviet observers interpreted the proclamation of the Nixon Doctrine as confirmation that the long-term American ambition was to create a larger military grouping embracing the entire region, and to employ ASEAN as a substitute military alliance.
However, ASEAN's promulgation of the proposal for a zone of peace and neutrality in 1971 and the effects of Vietnamese successes in the mid 1970s induced a change in the Soviet evaluation of ASEAN.
‘Neutralist’ tendencies were discerned among the ASEAN states, and these were regarded as long-term historical trends.
After 1975 ASEAN downgraded its security links with the West in order to adapt to the new regional  constellation of forces.
Soviet officials began to accept that ASEAN was not an American- or Western-controlled body, although they remained ambivalent about the developing emphasis on regional political cooperation within ASEAN.
Their primary concern was the possibility that the decline of American influence in Southeast Asia could still precipitate an American-sponsored military pact of ASEAN states directed at the Soviet Union.
The ASEAN states decided in 1976 not to form a multilateral security relationship but to confine security cooperation within ASEAN to the bilateral level.
However, ASEAN claims that this body is not a military organisation have failed to dispel Soviet suspicions.
These suspicions have some basis since the network of security relationships that were developing under ASEAN auspices increasingly amounted to a low-profile military association in effect, if not in name.
The goals of this association, like former SEATO and CENTO goals, include the maintenance of the existing political status quo and the containment of Communism.
From the Soviet perspective, therefore, ASEAN already displays certain of the features of a de facto security alliance.
It remains a Soviet priority to dissuade the ASEAN states from taking the final step that would transform ASEAN into a Western-sponsored security system.
The Soviet Union has been eager to support the demands of the non-aligned states for the dissolution of multilateral military alliances in the Third World such as CENTO and SEATO.
But Soviet leaders have consistently and unsuccessfully tried to convince the Non-Aligned majority of the difference in principle between the alliances in Europe, NATO and the Warsaw Treaty Organisation.
Before the first Non-Aligned Summit in Belgrade, the Soviet media tried to persuade the Yugoslavs that the Warsaw Pact member countries ‘have no military, naval or air bases in the territories of foreign states’, and that they ‘exert constant efforts for the relaxation of international tension and the suppression of the hotbeds of military conflict created…by imperialist states’ such as Suez.
It was considered incorrect, therefore, ‘to measure all the military groups by the same yardstick’.
During the Lusaka Conference in 1970 a Soviet commentary described NATO as a ‘collective coloniser’ which was used on many occasions ‘for reprisals against the liberating peoples’.
This was contrasted with the ‘defensive character’ of the Warsaw Pact.
Such assertions were developed in the 1970s into an onslaught on the theory of ‘equidistance between the blocs’.
Soviet leaders strove to convince the non-aligned states that Moscow had no objection to the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact or the imposition of restraints on it so long as these measures applied equally to NATO.
In  his message to the Havana Non-Aligned Summit in 1979 Brezhnev stressed the Soviet opposition to ‘the division of the world into military-political blocs opposed to each other’.
He pointed out that the USSR had repeatedly confirmed its readiness to disband the Warsaw Pact alongside a simultaneous dissolution of NATO.
This could be preceded by a mutual reduction of military activities.
A Soviet official argued at the same time that Warsaw Pact proposals on the non-expansion of military-political groupings in Europe and on limiting the scale of military exercises also involved the interests of the non-aligned countries since ‘the tendency towards expanding the NATO bloc directly affects the newly independent countries’.
The Soviet message to the Delhi Non-Aligned Summit in 1983 stressed recent initiatives by the Socialist countries ‘proposing that the zones of responsibility of NATO and the Warsaw Treaty should not be extended to any new parts of the world’.
This reflected the Soviet fear that even as CENTO collapsed the United States was preparing the construction of new alliance structures in the Third World and working for an extension of the geographic responsibilities of NATO.
Soviet commentaries pointed out that the foreign ministers of the non-aligned states had expressed their concern during a meeting in February 1981 over the aspirations of NATO to extend its activities outside Europe.
Moscow speculated over Western efforts to draw together new ‘groupings’ in various regions of the world such as Southeast Asia, the South Atlantic and the Red Sea.
Soviet spokesmen warned the non-aligned states against succumbing to Western attempts to secure their support for American Rapid Deployment Forces.
Reports were cited to the effect that during a visit to Argentina in January 1981 the Egyptian Foreign Minister handed the Argentine President, Videla, a message from President Carter proposing the creation of a South Atlantic Alliance of the NATO type involving Egypt.
Following the break with Moscow and the Camp David Accords the USSR also appeared anxious that Egypt could be drawn into a new Western-sponsored and Chinese-backed military bloc of conservative Middle East states.
Soviet commentators in the late 1970s warned Asian and African countries against Chinese pronouncements in favour of creating regional military blocs and alliances of Third World States to combat ‘hegemonism’.
Chinese support for CENTO activities in the Middle East was linked to its support for the idea of a ‘Red Sea bloc’ involving countries such as Saudi Arabia and Egypt as members.
Soviet officials considered the formation of this bloc to be a primary objective of the more assertive American policy in the Persian Gulf which followed the dissolution of CENTO and Soviet  intervention in Afghanistan.
When the foreign ministers of the non-aligned states assembled in February 1981 a Soviet commentary linked their concern over tensions in the ‘Arab Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula’ to the expansion of the American military presence in Oman and American arms sales to Somalia and Egypt.
These acts were described as part of a chain of military moves aimed at setting up a new alliance in the Red Sea area with the direct and active participation of the United States.
This alliance would ostensibly be used to suppress ‘national liberation movements’ in the Middle East and to exert political and military pressure on South Yemen (PDRY) and Ethiopia.
American strategists were accused of plans to involve Egypt, Oman, Somalia, Israel and if possible Saudi Arabia in this alliance.
Moscow exhorted the non-aligned states of the Middle East and Africa to resist these designs.
Such Soviet commentaries revealed deep unease about the implications of growing anti-Soviet sentiments in Southwest Asia early in the 1980s.
Moscow interpreted statements by Brzezinski on the need to construct an anti-Soviet Islamic coalition as proof of American intentions ‘to bring together reactionary regional coalitions on a religious basis’.
Soviet commentators accepted, however, that religion could also hinder American plans in the Middle East.
They have argued that the ‘contradictions’ between Israel and Arab states have for many years frustrated the attempts of American strategists to construct an alliance between Israel and the more conservative Arab states.
Washington has been accused of striving towards this objective by means of aligning Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon and other states to the Camp David process on a Middle East settlement.
The Soviet fixation-on Western-sponsored alliance formation in the Middle East induced great scepticism in the USSR towards regional plans for security coordination developed among the Gulf states at the beginning of the 1980s.
A Soviet statement at the end of 1980 accused the ‘reactionary regimes’ of the Gulf, ‘obviously promoted by Washington’of ‘nurturing plans of forming a certain ‘mutual security pact’, in other words a military alliance to fight against the national liberation movement’.
The USSR was unwilling to condone an arrangement primarily directed at preserving the conservative status quo among the Gulf regimes.
Nor did it believe in hopes expressed by Saudi Arabia that the six countries involved could become militarily self-sufficient, since it characterised all these states as ‘military clients of Western states’.
The former Shah's advocacy of a collective security pact was a further black mark against the Gulf scheme.
However, on 4 February 1981 the foreign  ministers of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the UAE and Oman decided to establish the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).
In response Pravda cited American press reports that the United States and its NATO allies were making active preparations towards ‘creating a security pact in the Persian Gulf zone, prepared to cooperate with the West’.
The Soviet press nevertheless refrained from describing the GCC as a military alliance and conceded that regional economic cooperation in the Gulf could be useful.
Although the USSR has hinted at the possibility of cooperation with the GCC over issues of Gulf security, its attitude to this body, especially over GCC plans for coordinated security arrangements, remained negative in the early 1980s.
This was influenced by Oman's wish for the GCC to act as a military alliance in conjunction with the West against a perceived Soviet threat.
In contrast Kuwait wished the GCC to remain neutral.
In the Kuwaiti view Moscow's greatest objection to the GCC has been the participation of Oman, which has strong military links with the West.
The USSR may become more tolerant of GCC security arrangements following the establishment of Soviet-Omani and Soviet-UAE diplomatic relations in autumn 1985.
Soviet spokesmen have characterised Western attempts to construct new military alliances and alignments in the Middle East since the end of the 1970s as part of a broad front of measures in different regions of the globe; In Southeast Asia they attacked Western and Chinese support for the addition of military clauses to the ASEAN instruments.
Plans for an Asian Common Market, which would include Iran, India, a number of South Asian and possibly Southeast Asian countries, were described as reactionary.
They claimed that the Western states hoped to use this scheme ‘to establish a new regional bloc, which would be torn away from the mainstream of non-alignment’.
Soviet spokesmen vehemently opposed American plans to establish a new strategic command, CENTCOM, which would include nineteen African and Asian countries in its zone of operation.
All these states were members of the Non-Aligned Movement.
CENTCOM formally came into operation in 1983.
Soviet accusations followed that Washington was trying to create the basis for a military alliance through strengthening mutual dependence between its regional partners in an arrangement over which it presided.
An underlying objective was perceived as the attainment of a ‘strategic understanding’ between the United States, Israel, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan.
Soviet spokesmen have remained aware of the existence of indigenous constraints on such American ambitions.
Religion, as noted above, would  limit the association of the Arab states with Israel.
In Africa, American attempts to construct blocs would be undercut by the fact that even the most pro-Western states in the region ‘in every way avoid tight (particularly formally established) association with the racist regime’ of South Africa.
Moreover, Soviet specialists point to the unresolved disputes and mutual claims over territory, and to the existence of national, tribal, religious, economic and other issues within and between the states of the Indian Ocean basin.
But they argue that since the leadership of President Carter the United States has sought to circumvent these constraints on formal alliances through the looser concept of ‘strategic understandings’ with key Third World states (see below).
In their view this approach does not preclude continued American attempts to construct new blocs.
The current Soviet contention is that ‘the USA has worked out a plan of knocking together an Indian Ocean Defence Organisation, INODO, that will include [at least]Pakistan, Egypt, Somalia, Kenya and Oman’.
A Soviet commentator explained that ‘officially the USA will not take part in the new military bloc, but it promises its participants all-round assistance by supplying them arms and training their military personnel’.
The Pentagon is still accused of organising attempts to construct ‘military coalitions of the littoral states of the Indian Ocean’ in place of the demilitarisation of this region.
Beyond Asia Soviet officials continued to attack American and South African attempts in the 1980s to construct a South Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
They were gratified by the communiqu é'; issued in January 1983 after a meeting of foreign ministers of the Non-Aligned in Managua which warned Latin American states against involvement in this plan.
Indeed, Moscow entertained some hopes that the growth in interest in non-alignment in Latin America, a phenomenon which had induced Soviet writers in the mid 1970s to talk of a ‘Latin American stage’ of the Non-Aligned Movement, could weaken or even undermine the military treaty system which bound this continent to the United States.
This system was formed by the Rio Treaty of 1947 and the related Charter of the Organisation of American States.
A Soviet writer argued in 1979 that the growing participation of Latin American states in the Non-Aligned Movement directly affected the character of relations in the inter-American system and set the question of its ‘basic restructuring’ on the agenda.
He maintained that Washington feared that the gradual shift of the states of the region into the political orbit of the Non-Aligned Movement could draw them away from the system of ‘inter-American treaties of mutual assistance’.
Soviet specialists believed that the shift towards non-alignment in Latin America was hastened by the political situation in the region after the Falklands War which resulted in ‘an open crisis of the inter-American system, including its military-political mechanism’.
At the conference of the Non-Aligned held in Managua in January 1983 the Cuban Foreign Minister, Malmierca, argued that the Falklands War ‘proved to Latin Americans that their instruments and means of collective defence with the United States, which were supposedly for protection against extrahemispheric powers, are nothing but mechanisms to be used when Washington's interests are threatened by pro-independence actions in any of our states’.
In place of the Organisation of American States and the Inter-American Treaty for Reciprocal Assistance he proposed that the Latin American and Caribbean states establish an agency of their own that would ‘create mechanisms for [mutual]consultation and cooperation in the political field’ and allow them ‘to join our efforts in the defence of our common interest’.
This proposal was stillborn.
The financial and economic hold of the United States retarded fully independent steps by the majority of the Latin American states in the security and defence fields.
By 1985 Soviet specialists acknowledged that taking into account the fact that the Latin American states were being ‘drawn into the inter-American system ever more significantly’ through ‘their economic and political dependence on the United States’the issue of their ‘full ‘dissociation’from this system, of the creation of their own intergovernmental organisation independent of the United States, will be difficult to resolve’.
Soviet officials have had to recognise that there is no immediate prospect of a major modification of the structure of alignments and alliances in their favour in Latin America.
The numerical growth of states participating in the Non-Aligned Movement in the 1970s reinforced the Soviet perception that the global ‘correlation of forces ‘was shifting away from the West and that Western-sponsored multilateral military alliances and alignments in the Third World were fragmenting or weakening.
The breakdown of CENTO and SEATO were regarded as part of a historical process which paralleled the emergence of the Soviet Union as a superpower with its own ‘legitimate interests’ in the Third World.
It was believed that Western military preponderance throughout most of Asia and Africa had been undercut by the balancing effect of the Soviet Union, which made formal American military alignment with Third World states both more hazardous and anachronistic.
Evidence of American interest in drawing together new alliances in areas of regional tension in the Third World in the early 1980s  and of extending the competence of existing ones came, therefore, as a shock to Soviet leaders.
In spring 1981 Brezhnev responded with his formal proposal for the West to accept certain norms in relations with the Third World, including respect for their status of non-alignment and ‘abstention from attempts to draw them into military-political blocs of powers’.
Similar understandings for specific regions such as the Persian Gulf were proposed by Soviet leaders.
In the Indian Ocean basin they sought to rally the non-aligned states against existing blocs being activated or the composition and sphere, of responsibility of these blocs being broadened.
Moscow tried to encourage the non-aligned states to commit themselves in this region to the ‘gradual curtailment of distinct forms of military-political cooperation…the non-creation of new forms of multilateral and bilateral alliances, the non-adoption of military functions by non-military regional organisations’.
It became a Soviet priority in the 1980s to prevent a whole series of Third World states from reverting back to military alignment or alliance with the West.
Soviet spokesmen accused ‘NATO circles’ of distorting the idea of non-alignment through relegating ‘to the number of the ‘non-aligned’states those few newly free countries whose leaders are presently…regarded as ‘friends of the West’and share the concept of the ‘strategy of a united front’, that is are in favour of setting up alliances with imperialist powers, first of all the United States’.
To some extent this accusation mirrored Soviet policy towards the Non-Aligned since Moscow had worked towards a ‘solidarity front’ with the Non-Aligned Movement, especially with the radical states participating within it.
Soviet spokesmen have interpreted such Western ‘alliances’ as ‘a system incorporating a ‘range of economic, political and strategic policies and understandings (which) may…be extended to the demand for military or communications bases’’.
Soviet specialists maintained that partnership based on ‘strategic understanding’, in distinction to the blocs and alliances of earlier decades, was offered by Washington in the 1980s to the broadest possible circle of states.
Such partnership was based not exclusively on military integration.
It presumed that the ‘partners’ of the United States, especially non-aligned countries, could also make a non-military contribution ‘in the common cause’.
This could take the form, for example, of ‘rejecting cooperation with the socialist states and curtailing relations with them, adhering to the capitalist path of development, broadening links with imperialist powers, and approving geopolitical concepts propagandised by the West’.
A Soviet writer recognised that there existed no obligation formally to codify such  understandings.
In his view, Washington reasoned that the absence of direct military alliances between Third World states and the West meant that the non-aligned status cherished by the majority of such states was not undermined in the formal sense and their participation in strategic partnerships with the United States was facilitated.
Nevertheless, this analyst concluded in 1984, the partnership of the United States with Israel, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Pakistan and Thailand was constructed on de facto alliances.
Soviet spokesmen claim that American ambitions in the 1980s are not confined to cultivating relations of ‘alignment’ on a bilateral basis.
They accuse Washington of exploiting regional trends among Third World states, of attempting ‘to emasculate the positive basis of such processes, to militarise the activity of regional organisations created by the developing countries, transforming them ultimately into pro-Western military blocs’.
This underlying concern still shapes Moscow's attitude to bodies such as ASEAN and it expresses a growing resentment over the limitations of Moscow's policy of military denial in the Third World in this decade.
Soviet spokesmen could argue that although the USSR had for decades proselytised the notion of a national liberation or solidarity ‘front’ of Third World states, aligned at least politically to the Soviet bloc, it had not created regional groupings or coalitions of states militarily tied to the USSR or the Warsaw Pact and it had supported the opposition of the non-aligned states to military blocs.
There has been an artificial element to such ‘restraint’ by Soviet leaders since the USSR has remained poorly placed to openly compete with the West in forming coalitions or alliances in the Third World.
However, as indicated by certain recent Soviet writings on the non-aligned states examined in Chapter 1, such closer multilateral East-South military integration is not a prospect the USSR would necessarily be averse to if the required opportunities arose.
The Soviet Union, with Cuban assistance, experimented with the idea of a left-leaning confederation of states in the Horn of Africa in spring 1977.
But intra-regional conflict destroyed this initiative and made Moscow reluctant to repeat this kind of experiment.
It is true that a military coalition of sorts has existed in Indo-China since the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea and Laos.
During an official visit by the Vietnamese leader to Moscow in May 1987 Gorbachev still hailed ‘the strengthening of the fraternal alliance of Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea’.
However, Soviet leaders have not shared the Vietnamese interest in a de facto Indo-China federation under Vietnamese control.
The Soviet aversion to this multilateral arrangement and the apparent Soviet-preference to deal  bilaterally with Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea reflects the Soviet opposition to the creation of blocs outside Soviet control, even if the blocs are constituted of states they accept as ‘socialist’.
The USSR influences, often rather ineffectually, rather than controls Vietnamese military policy in Indo-China.
It could be argued that the Soviet Union has offset the lack of pro-Soviet military blocs or coalitions in the Third World in some degree by the creation of a mutual strategic support system based on a network of bilateral treaties of friendship (see later in this chapter).
These treaties may well be perceived by Soviet strategists as fitting into the structure of collective security originally proposed by Brezhnev in 1969.
More recently the Soviet leadership under Gorbachev has attempted to revive the framework of Asian collective security through promoting a range of interlocking initiatives addressing military and security issues in the Asian-Pacific region.
This was the central theme of Gorbachev's  renowned Vladivostok speech in July 1986.
A year later the Soviet Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ivor Rogachev, called for movement towards this objective through ‘bilateral accords, sub-regional accords and finally, in the last analysis, if this becomes realistic with the passage of time, through the conclusion of a regional agreement on issues of security’.
In a discussion of Asian security on Soviet television a Pravda writer denied that Soviet initiatives for ‘pan-Asian security’ were intended by Moscow ‘to draw the countries of the region into some kind of Asian-Pacific pact, to make allies of them in its conflict with Washington’.
He admitted, however, that there had been ‘some people in countries such as India to whom it has occurred to ask whether this [Soviet policy]is in keeping with the principle of non-alignment, with a non-bloc policy’.
He claimed that such ‘unclear matters’ had been eliminated following recent high-level Soviet-Indian talks, and cited Rajiv Gandhi to the effect that the principles of non-alignment ‘provide a legal and political framework for an analysis of the complex and particular problems of peace and security in the Asian-Pacific region’.
But even if the majority of Asian states recognise a link between the political aspirations of non-alignment and the broader goals of the revived Soviet ‘pan-Asian security’ scheme they are unlikely to permit themselves to become drawn into a new structure of strategic accords in Asia presided over by Moscow which could enable the USSR to press for more direct relations of military alignment in the future.
BASES AND MILITARY FACILITIES
The Hague Conventions of 1907 explicitly prohibited the creation of military bases on the territory of neutral states.
In the period since the Second World War certain states in multilateral alliances also made commitments not to permit foreign military bases on their territory in peacetime.
Norway, for example, has assumed such a commitment since the mid 1950s despite its membership in NATO.
The renunciation of foreign military bases also became a sine qua non of neutralism and non-alignment in the 1950s and 1960s.
The neutralist and non-aligned states associated military base rights with bloc alignment and alliance structures and they were encouraged in their opposition to these rights by the Soviet Union which since the mid 1950s has consistently denied the existence of Soviet bases on foreign territories.
This question is complicated by the reluctance of host countries to acknowledge Soviet military and naval support arrangements of any kind.
Donor states are aware that by providing support for the armed forces of one superpower their territory could become a target in the military operational planning of the other superpower.
It is misleading to use the terms ‘military facilities’ or even ‘base facilities’simply as synonyms for military bases.
A base acts as an installation supporting the operations of a military force and serves as its point of origin.
In the case of overseas bases, the right of access for a specified period is secured by a treaty between the host state and the lessee.
In general the latter is conceded a judicial right of access and rights concerning the operation and security of the base.
Bases may be used for purposes such as naval and aerial reconnaissance, storing ammunition and supplies, training and the collection of intelligence and communications.
In distinction a ‘facility’ connotes ‘non-contractual, less extensive and ad hoc privileges’.
The nature of access may merely involve regular authorised visits by warships or it may include the permission to conduct repairs in port, without the use of onshore installations, and to load on fuel and supplies.
It is essentially the denial of access to extensive facilities on land and the need to seek permission prior to each naval visit that distinguishes these limited concessions from bases.
In the years following the Second World War the European colonial powers retained control over a large number of military and naval bases among their colonies.
The United States had entered the Second World War with a very limited overseas basing system, but by the close of the war had acquired a massive global basing network ‘derived from a  combination of conquests, agreements with allies, and temporary arrangements with neutrals and exile regimes that had at least the potential for post-war renewal and extension’.
The Soviet Union acquired and developed a structure of ground and air installations in Eastern Europe which were integrated in the Warsaw Pact.
Elsewhere the only substantial bases Stalin acquired out of the post-war settlement were those at Porkkala, Finland, and at Port Arthur in Chinese-controlled Manchuria.
Stalin's perception of the Soviet Union as encircled militarily was aggravated by the gradual development of an American policy of military containment of the USSR.
In the 1950s this involved the creation of a ring of military bases around the Soviet perimeter.
The Soviet Union had no equivalent forward bases for strategic deterrence or any other purpose until the Cuban revolution provided an opportunity at the beginning of the 1960s.
Until the mid 1950s, however, Soviet leaders were reluctant to engage in blanket denunciations of military bases since this could complicate their own policy in Eastern Europe.
The Soviet leadership openly proclaimed the illegitimacy of military bases on foreign territories only after the death of Stalin.
The principles of Soviet foreign policy were re-examined in the mid 1950s as was Soviet strategic thinking in Europe.
In autumn 1955 the decision was taken to withdraw Soviet troops from the military and naval base at Porkkala which the Soviet Union had leased from Finland under the terms of the 1947 Finnish-Soviet Peace Treaty.
In the same year Moscow also reached an accommodation over Austria with the Western powers which resulted in joint troop withdrawals from that country.
The issue of abandoning Soviet bases was disputed in July 1955 at a Central Committee meeting in the Soviet Union.
Molotov was opposed to the evacuation of any Soviet military bases for fear of setting a dangerous precedent which could apply to other similar and more important issues.
He may have had in mind the possible loss of East Germany as a military base area.
Khrushchev saw no objection to the withdrawal of Soviet troops from a non-Sovietized country as a part of a compromise agreement and he overruled Molotov on both Austria and Porkkala.
He regarded Porkkala as strategically redundant and politically burdensome.
Political considerations simultaneously led to the Soviet decision to abandon its rights, derived from the Yalta Agreements and specified in the Chinese-Soviet treaty of friendship of August 1945, to exclusive use of the naval base in Port Arthur and shared use of the port of Dairen in the Chinese People's Republic.
When Prime Minister Bulganin declared Soviet readiness to abandon Porkkala in September 1955 he suggested that ‘the removal of military  bases situated on foreign territory by other states also would significantly assist the further relief of international tension and assist the creation of conditions to end the arms race’.
In a statement on disarmament on 17 November 1956 the Soviet Government proposed the elimination of foreign military, naval and air bases over a two-year period.
This proposal was advanced as an important measure towards disarmament and the creation of zones of limited arms, but it was not taken seriously by Western leaders since it required in effect wholly asymmetrical concessions by East and West.
However, Soviet leaders continued to urge West European countries, such as Iceland and Italy, to renounce American or NATO bases.
In February 1957 Moscow suggested that the Great Powers accept certain principles to cover their behaviour in the Near and Middle East, including the elimination of foreign bases and the withdrawal of foreign troops from the region.
The following year when Eisenhower first proposed a ban on the use of outer space for military purposes the Soviet leadership insisted that such a measure be accompanied by the removal of foreign military bases from Europe, the Middle East and North Africa.
It was a Soviet strategic priority to prevent pro-Western Third World states from conceding new military bases to the Western powers in proximity to Soviet borders.
The United States acquired few significant military facilities between Southeast Asia and the Mediterranean during the buildup of its global basing system in the 1950s and early 1960s.
The American position in Turkey was an important exception.
Turkey had a critical location, along the Black Sea, astride the Bosporus and along the Soviet border.
In 1959–60 intermediate range ballistic missiles were located on sites in Turkey pending the development of reliable American ICBMs.
Bases for American fighters and facilities for American U-2 planes, surveillance and communications were also established in Turkey.
In 1957–60 U-2 flights also operated out of an American base at Peshawar, Pakistan.
In a note presented to the Pakistani Prime Minister in April 1958 Moscow accused Pakistan of constructing launching pads for guided missiles and airfields for strategic bombers on its territory.
A warning was given of ‘the grave consequences for Pakistan if military bases to be used for aggression against the Soviet Union and other peace-loving countries are created on its territory’.
Any aggressive actions against the USSR, the Soviet Government promised, would meet ‘a retaliatory blow at the aggressor, including the bases of the aggressor that are situated on foreign soil’.
Pakistan denied that any missile sites were under construction on her soil and pointed out that the Soviet Union had herself been supplying arms and building airfields and other military  installations in countries in the neighbourhood of Pakistan.
However, Moscow described Pakistan's military agreement with the United States of 1959 as turning it into a ‘foreign war base’.
After the ‘U-2’ American spy-plane incident in 1960 Pakistan was warned again that the USSR ‘possesses means to render harmless in case of need the war bases used for aggressive actions against the Soviet Union’.
The Soviet contention that military bases in the Third World could generate dangerous East-West tensions was forcibly and unexpectedly underlined by the crisis initiated by Soviet attempts to establish a nuclear missile base on Cuban soil in 1962.
The Cuban revolution had provided the USSR with numerous technical facilities, especially electronic listening posts which could to some degree counteract similar American installations which had encircled the Soviet Union since 1945.
The creation of these facilities was followed by a Soviet attempt to rectify the unfavourable strategic balance it faced through the introduction of intermediate range missiles into Cuba.
This tactic failed but the crisis was followed by the American withdrawal of IRBMs from Turkey.
The United States presented this as a quid pro quo for the Soviet failure to establish a missile base in Cuba.
In September 1962 the USSR was also gratified by a pledge given by the Shah of Iran not to permit the establishment of foreign missile bases of any sort on its territory.
But technological advances by this stage had altered the strategic planning of the United States; nuclear missile bases close to the territory of its adversary were no longer necessary.
The Cuban debacle dissuaded Moscow from further attempts to restore a nuclear strategic balance cheaply through basing agreements.
Soviet leaders resolved instead to develop ICBM technology.
In the 1960s Soviet specialists reinterpreted international law to bolster Moscow's declared opposition to foreign military bases.
M. I. Lazarev, the author of a comprehensive analysis in 1963, described ‘imperialist’ military bases as an important instrument for the preservation of colonialism or the maintenance of neo-colonialism, for interference in the domestic affairs and foreign policy of the states on whose territory they are located.
These bases were alleged to be incompatible with the principles of the peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems, to constitute an ‘international crime’ and to contradict the ‘most important principles of international law’.
Lazarev declared foreign military bases as illegal on the grounds that they violated the ‘criterion of the will of the people’ by which the legality of international agreements and foreign policy acts should be judged.
In his opinion the phenomenon of bases required ‘special defensive measures, not only of a military and political character but also  of an international legal character’.
He stressed the need to defend the ‘independent’ countries in this context.
This appeal to outlaw the military bases of external powers was issued largely for the consumption of Third World countries and the emergent group of non-aligned states.
Since there were few Third World states in the 1960s willing to offer the USSR the military facilities it desired it had little to lose from supporting the principled opposition of the non-aligned group to foreign military bases.
At the first summit of the non-aligned nations in 1961 the Cuban President had declared that ‘the peoples reject the installation in their territory of foreign military bases implying an imminent danger of war’ not only for reasons of principle ‘but by mere instinct of self-preservation’.
He had maintained that ‘some of these bases do not even answer to strategic necessities in connection with the possibility of a world war, but simply serve for the imperialist domination of the peoples concerned, the subjection of nations and the combating of movements of national liberation’.
The Cubans particular grudge was over the United States' retention of the Guantanamo base on Cuban soil against Cuban wishes.
The Belgrade Summit appealed to ‘those countries maintaining foreign bases to consider seriously their abolition as a contribution to world peace’ and referred specifically to Guantanamo.
In light of this appeal it was ironic that a superpower crisis developed from subsequent Soviet efforts to establish a missile base in Cuba.
In the 1960s the Non-Aligned Movement remained uncompromising on the issue of military bases conceded ‘in the context of Great Power conflicts’.
The Cairo Summit in 1964 described foreign bases more forcibly as ‘a threat to freedom and international peace’, strongly condemned the ‘expressed intention of imperialist powers to establish bases in the Indian Ocean’, and called upon ‘all states maintaining troops and bases in other countries to remove them forthwith’.
Soviet writers observed that these resolutions corresponded with resolutions on eliminating foreign bases in the Third World adopted in the UN General Assembly (for example at the Twenty-First Session in December 1965) and described them as part of the broader ‘struggle against imperialism’.
Moscow wished to cultivate this strand of the policy of the non-aligned states to strengthen their political dispute with the Western powers.
At the Twenty-Third Congress of the CPSU in March 1966 Brezhnev attacked the Western states for scattering ‘numerous military bases throughout the world’ and deploying ‘contingents of their armed forces on the territories of other countries’.
He committed the Soviet Union to a policy directed at removing the military bases and armed forces of outside  powers from foreign territories.
Soviet spokesmen brushed aside Western references to Soviet bases in Eastern Europe and stressed their clean record on bases in the, Third World.
In the early 1960s the American containment ring around the Soviet bloc had been seriously breached only by the Soviet acquisition of military facilities in Cuba.
Soviet capabilities for the long range projection of power in the Third World were comparatively ineffectual.
It followed naturally that in the absence of an effective base network Soviet leaders would adopt a base denial strategy directed against the West's military assets.
This strategy involved proposals for formal arrangements for joint Great Power elimination of bases and the encouragement of neutralist and non-aligned sentiment in the Third World against Western bases.
By the early 1970s it became apparent that the Soviet Union had become engaged in a much more competitive effort to acquire overseas facilities for similar functions to American ones.
The USSR had successfully cultivated military relationships founded on arms sales with a number of radical pro-Soviet or friendly regimes and states in the Middle East and South and Southeast Asia.
Western states had lost valued military facilities in the Middle East and Indo-China and were seeking new concessions to offset these losses.
To counteract these attempts and to shift the ‘correlation of forces’ further away from the West in these regions the USSR was tempted to seek facilities in the Third World to enhance its development of long-range air and naval capabilities.
At this point it should be underlined that there is no evidence that Soviet military access arrangements in this decade were ‘codified by anything resembling the leasehold treaties invariably associated with bases’.
This meant that the USSR did not have the security of tenure stipulated by such treaties.
This enabled Somali and Egyptian leaders unilaterally and abruptly to terminate Soviet access to their installations in the 1970s.
However, while Moscow has not possessed de jure foreign bases since the mid 1950s it has obtained at times such extensive control over certain installations that they have resembled extraterritorial enclaves and de facto bases.
Following the 1967 Six-day War the Soviet Union developed substantial military facilities in Egypt.
Nasser gave Soviet warships access to the port of Alexandria for servicing, and facilities for storage and repair were constructed ashore.
The USSR also began developing a second major naval support complex at the port of Mersa Matruh.
These facilities enabled a permanent Soviet presence in the East Mediterranean.
Nasser rejected the idea of granting the USSR bases in Egypt and he denied Soviet requests for permanent staging and overflight rights.
But Soviet piloted aircraft  operated, at times on an exclusive basis, from airfields at Cairo West, Aswan and elsewhere on reconnaissance flights.
Up to 15,000 Soviet personnel were stationed in Egypt.
In the case of these privileges the distinction between facility and base was blurred.
However, in 1972 Egypt retook control of all Soviet military facilities in the country and in 1975–6 the Soviet naval facilities were first curtailed, then closed down.
This followed clear indications, at least since 1974, that Sadat had attempted to use Soviet port privileges as leverage to obtain arms.
Moscow's main response to such attempts to apply reverse influence was to intensify its search for access elsewhere, especially in Syria.
But the denouement of the Soviet military presence in Egypt proved at least that the concession of military facilities to the USSR was unlikely in itself to induce a dependent alignment on that power.
In the 1970s Soviet leaders publicly denounced Western military bases in the Mediterranean, although this tended to undermine the legitimacy of their own military presence in Egypt.
Soviet spokesmen sought credit from the non-aligned states by attacking Western efforts to turn Cyprus into a NATO military base and by calling for a withdrawal of all foreign forces from the island.
Such attacks may have been counterproductive.
In 1973 the Libyan leader, Gaddafi, indirectly attacked Egypt for the concessions it had made.
He pointed out that his country had ‘liquidated the military bases which were in the Mediterranean Sea and…forbidden the entry of Soviet naval ships into its harbours’.
He characterised the denial of such access to both superpowers as ‘an act of non-alignment’.
Soviet leaders were willing to support such a conception of non-alignment when it hindered the Western states.
After the Egyptian leader, Sadat, granted the United States rights to use certain of Egyptian military facilities at the beginning of the 1980s, notably at Ras Banas on the Red Sea, Soviet writers described his ‘preparedness to allow military bases for the armed forces of the United States of America on his territory’ as being ‘in violation of the basic principles of the Non-Aligned Movement’.
This development particularly concerned Soviet leaders, although Egypt reserved for itself the right to exercise sovereign control over these facilities.
The strategic position of Egypt in relation to the Arabian Peninsula was decisive for American crisis planning under the Carter Doctrine.
Moscow hoped to rally the opposition of the Non-Aligned against these developments by linking them to the Camp David Agreement and to Israeli policy.
By this time, however, the USSR itself had gained non-permanent access to Libyan ports and airfields in return for the provision of arms.
Moscow  still has not acquired extensive onshore facilities in Libya, despite strong rumours that a Soviet delegation sought military bases from Libya during Soviet-Libyan talks in April 1981.
This was implied in Gaddafi's declaration that Libya ‘resists any attempt to reduce or cancel out its international role by imposing a situation which might oblige it to relinquish neutrality in compelling circumstances’.
A Soviet statement vigorously denied that a demand for bases in Libya had been made or that the Soviet Union strove for ‘concessions or military bases on foreign territories, including the African continent’.
But there is evidence that Soviet officials have unsuccessfully requested Algeria several times for permanent access to ports and short installations and for combined military exercises.
In return for military and economic assistance the Syrians, however, have provided the USSR access to the ports of Latakia and Tartus for the servicing of ships as well as to the airfield at Tiyas.
Tartus has become the primary maintenance facility for Soviet submarines operating in the Mediterranean.
Even non-aligned Yugoslavia enacted new legal regulations in 1974 which permitted within limits the provision of support services to any ‘non-aggressor’ navy.
Yugoslavia sought to reconcile the economic interest involved in supporting a foreign navy with the political injunction of the non-aligned world against granting base rights to foreign powers.
For the first time a non-aligned state provided not only support for Soviet warships on a commercial basis but did so without in the process tarnishing its non-aligned credentials.
Soviet leaders unsuccessfully attempted to gain greater access to Yugoslav facilities in 1976.
But Yugoslavia maintained restrictions which prevent the Soviet navy from coming ashore in Yugoslavia as it had in Egypt.
Since Yugoslav support for the Soviet navy is based less on coordination in security policy than on commercial interest it is not regarded by Belgrade as likely to lead towards a form of alignment with Moscow.
In this sense it could act as a model for ‘non-aligned naval support’ for the USSR.
Soviet officials have considered it necessary, however, to gloss over their search for naval facilities in the Mediterranean to encourage neutralism and maintain pressure on Western bases in other countries in the region.
Malta finally eliminated Western military bases from its territory in spring 1979 and the renunciation of bases became a principle of Maltese foreign policy.
Malta turned down the offer of an American security guarantee in 1981 for fear that this would require the concession of a military base.
The Soviet Union proposed instead an agreement on consultations on Maltese security, which would not involve the establishment  of a base and would include Soviet recognition of Malta's status as a neutral country pursuing a policy of non-alignment.
Soviet officials regard such an agreement as ideal also for Greece.
They are well aware that the status of the military bases leased by the United States on Greek territory has been a bone of contention in Greek-American and Greek-NATO relations in the 1980s.
In 1983 the Soviet media cited a New York Times report that in the absence of an agreement with the United States on the bases Greek officials were prepared simply to liquidate them and were ‘seriously considering taking up a position of neutrality similar, for example, to that adhered to by Sweden’.
This prospect had particular significance to the Soviet Union on account of Greek membership in NATO.
In fact a Greek-American agreement was concluded in 1983 governing the status of the United States bases in Greece until December 1988.
With this deadline in mind Gorbachev wrote to the Greek Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, on the issue of the American bases in May 1987.
He informed Papandreou that ‘we share your view that these bases, in accordance with the Greek people's unanimous demand, should be removed from the country’.
Gorbachev linked this to a broader requirement for states to reject ‘any military presence outside national frontiers’.
Soviet leaders have expressed no readiness, however, to withdraw Soviet base facilities in neighbouring Eastern bloc states to compensate for those they wish removed from Greece or for the adoption of neutrality by Greece.
Instead Soviet officials have called upon the other NATO country in the region, Turkey, similarly to renounce the United States' military presence.
In July 1987, for example, the Soviet Foreign Ministry expressed concern over the new Turkish-American ‘agreement on economic and defence cooperation’ which defines the American military presence in that country until 1990.
Moscow noted that the United States ‘was given the right to further use of some sixty military facilities, including big air force bases, nuclear arms depots and radio surveillance centres located close to the southern borders of the USSR’.
The Turkish leadership were urged to take ‘a fresh look at the situation’.
As in the Mediterranean region the Soviet Union has tried to ride the tide of hostility expressed by non-aligned nations to military bases in South Asia and the Indian Ocean.
This has been facilitated by the principled opposition of India, which developed firm political ties with the USSR, to Western bases in this region.
Nevertheless, the Soviet Union itself conducted tentative probes for military access in South Asia.
For example, in 1969 after a warming in Soviet-Pakistani relations the USSR was  willing to help Pakistan construct a naval base for submarines at Kwadar, which was near the Pakistani-Iranian border and the developing Iranian naval base at Chah Bahar.
Some Indians interpreted this as a response to India's refusal to offer bases to the Soviet Union.
But the project was dropped and reports began to appear in the Western press in the early 1970s of Soviet use of Indian port facilities, especially the naval base at Vishakapatna.
In reality the USSR did not ask India for bases but only sought limited facilities for berthing and recreation.
This has remained the case despite close Indo-Soviet military links in other respects.
In the early 1970s the United States decided to construct a large naval and air base on the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia.
This plan was initiated despite strong opposition from the nations bordering the Indian Ocean, which was expressed for example in a joint statement issued in 1974.
Western statesmen were inclined to link the military and naval facilities in the Indian Ocean to those found in its littoral states.
This tended to complicate the negotiations on the demilitarisation of the region and any development of the Indian Ocean zone of peace proposal.
The Soviet Union in turn demanded the elimination of Western military bases in the Indian Ocean as a price for naval arms control accords in this region.
In the Soviet view foreign bases in the Indian Ocean should be dismantled as the first step towards the establishment of a zone of peace in the region.
At the Twenty-Fifth Congress of the CPSU in 1976 Brezhnev stated categorically that ‘the Soviet Union has never had and has no intention now of building military bases in the Indian Ocean’ and he called on the United States ‘to take the same stand’.
Already in 1975, however, the American Defence Secretary, Schlesinger, had justified the need for the Diego Garcia base as a response inter alia to an extensive naval ‘facility’ built by the Soviet Union at the Somalian port of Berbera.
This facility allegedly commanded the strategic approaches to the Red Sea.
In 1972 Moscow had gained access to the ports and airfields at Berbera and Mogadishu as well as the airfields at Uanle Uen.
Schlesinger additionally alleged that storage facilities for Soviet missiles existed at Berbera.
This claim remained unresolved.
Although both the USSR and Somalia downplayed the Soviet presence in Berbera, there existed at least a long-range communications station for submarines at Berbera, which formed part of the Soviet nuclear strategic infrastructure.
This may have been a Soviet response to the American nuclear war base facilities under construction at Diego Garcia (and to a lesser extent to those at the Kagnew Communications Station near Asmara in Ethiopia which had declined in strategic significance and were slowly being wound  down).
These Somalian concessions certainly substantially strengthened the Soviet ability to support its permanent naval presence in the Indian Ocean.
However, the Berbera facility and Soviet access to Somalian ports, airfields and shore installations was lost in 1977 when the Soviet Union eventually sided with Ethiopia in the Somali-Ethiopian conflict.
Somalian pragmatism had already been indicated in October 1974 when the Somali leader Siad Barre had offered the United States naval-base facilities at Kismayu in the south, to balance the Soviet facilities at Berbera in the north.
The American administration turned down this offer for fear of weakening the case for constructing the new Diego Garcia base.
In August 1980 the United States assumed control of the naval facilities at Berbera for its Rapid Deployment Force.
Both the Soviet Union and the new Ethiopian regime denounced the use of these facilities, but the USSR simultaneously developed facilities off the Ethiopian mainland at the Dahlak Archipelago, including a floating dry-dock, and used Asmara to stage reconnaissance flights over the Red Sea.
The agreement on the Dahlak facilities apparently was reached in November 1980 during a visit to Moscow by the Ethiopian leader, Mengistu Haile Mariam.
It was not acknowledged in the joint Soviet-Ethiopian statement following this visit.
Instead the two countries asserted that ‘the creation of military bases in Somalia by the United States administration poses a direct and serious threat to Ethiopia as well as to the peace and security of the countries in that region’.
Although the USSR had originally developed the military facilities in Somalia the Soviet and Ethiopian leaders now condemned ‘the creation of such bases’ and called for their speedy removal.
This denouement in Somalia, following the debacle in Egypt, further discouraged the Soviet Union from seeking and constructing substantial military and naval facilities or bases in Third World states with a record of instability.
The concession of such facilities to the USSR had been shown as no reliable indication of genuine alignment with that power.
The establishment of more temporary and flexible facilities, such as floating docks entailed fewer risks when dependent on volatile regimes.
The Soviet Union became still more reliant on her facilities in solidly pro-Soviet ‘socialist’ regimes in the Third World.
Cuba hosts numerous Soviet facilities encompassing a large range of military functions.
Cuba's proximity to the United States has given it great value for Soviet intelligence, surveillance and communications operations.
Intelligence information is gathered by the USSR at the Lourdes installation near Havana, Moscow's largest and most valuable base of this kind outside the USSR.
Cuba also grants the Soviet Union facilities for deploying the Soviet  BEAR D long-range reconnaissance aircraft and naval combatants along the United States' East Coast and throughout the Caribbean.
In 1970 and again in 1970–80 there were diplomatic skirmishes between the United States and the USSR over Soviet attempts to emplace support barges at Cienfuegos clearly intended to allow for the operation of Soviet nuclear submarines out of Cuba.
These Soviet moves were frustrated, but facilities for a 2,800-man Soviet military brigade and 2,800 Soviet military advisers exist in Cuba.
In Vietnam the Soviet Union acquired the use of the former United States' naval and air facilities at Cam Ranh Bay and Danang under a military cooperation agreement which apparently accompanied the signing of the Soviet-Vietnamese Friendship Treaty in November 1978.
The Chinese attack on Vietnam in March 1979 gave the USSR the leverage to activate this agreement; a gradual extension of Soviet facilities in Cam Ranh Bay took place over the following years.
There is a tendency among American officials to classify Cam Ranh Bay as a fully  operational Soviet military base, and the Reagan administration has used this definition of the Soviet presence in Vietnam to press for increases in American naval deployments and military access in the Far East.
Even when American analysts admit that the USSR has access rather than base rights in Cam Ranh Bay and Danang they argue that the  apparent permanency of its presence in these ports means that this access has effectively provided the USSR with its only operating military base between Vladivostok and the East coast of Africa.
Cam Ranh Bay is regarded as having developed into the largest Soviet naval forward-deployment base outside the USSR.
Various Soviet military assets in Cam Ranh Bay are currently listed to support this contention.
These include a naval base, a composite air unit, a growing communications, intelligence collection, and logistics support infrastructure.
Attention is also drawn to the fact that since late 1984 a Soviet air unit composed of BADGER and BEAR aircraft and a squadron of FLOGGER aircraft have been deployed at Cam Ranh airfield.
It is prudent, however, to describe Cam Ranh Bay as a ‘permanent facility’ for the USSR.
Although reports indicate that the Soviet Union has exclusive control over Cam Ranh Bay there remains a difference in size between it and the Soviet ‘base’ in Alexandria until 1972 or the American base in the Philippines.
Moreover, the Soviet Union has constructed only limited installations and relied upon temporary docking facilities in Cam Ranh Bay.
In November 1982 two floating piers and a floating dry-dock were added.
As in the case of Soviet facilities in other Third World states these indicate a reluctance to make permanent investments or a major  military commitment.
This self-imposed limitation by the Soviet leadership probably reflects its unwillingness to subject a major base in Vietnam to the vicissitudes of Sino-Vietnamese relations; the lessons derived from Soviet experience in Egypt and Somalia have not been forgotten.
Moreover, for geographic reasons the strategic benefits of Cam Ranh Bay in peacetime are likely to turn into a liability during war.
The Vietnamese themselves do not accept Cam Ranh Bay as a Soviet ‘base’, although in 1982 Vietnam's Foreign Minister claimed that Vietnam was ‘leaving the door open’ to the possibility of Soviet bases on its territory if China continued to confront Vietnam.
This possibility conflicts with the nationalistic, independent strain in Vietnamese policy.
Vietnamese nationalism will probably act as a brake on further unrestrained Soviet development of Cam Ranh Bay and Danang.
The Soviet tendency to gloss over its military presence in Vietnam has been accompanied by denunciations of the agreement which permits the Americans to lease their most significant bases in Southeast Asia, Clark Air Base and Subic Bay in the Philippines.
Soviet spokesmen claim that the revised conditions governing American access to these bases since 1983 still permit the Americans ‘unlimited possibilities to use the bases for their operational goals’.
Most recently, however, Admiral Nikolay Amelko, the Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Soviet Navy and a former Commander of the Soviet Pacific Fleet, has been more frank about Cam Ranh Bay.
He described Cam Ranh port as a ‘material and technical supply point’ used jointly by Vietnamese and Soviet ships rather than a ‘naval base in the accepted sense with a full  infrastructure ’.
He contrasted this with Subic Bay where there exist ‘weapon stores, and big repair enterprises, docks, and…rented territory which Filipinos are not allowed to enter’.
In the Persian Gulf Soviet leaders have long demanded that an extensive American naval base in Bahrain be dismantled and argued that no comparable Soviet base exists in this region.
It is true that Moscow has failed to gain access to military facilities in Iraq, despite some ambiguity over the Soviet status in the port of Umm Qasr.
However, the Marxist regime in South Yemen has permitted the USSR the use of port facilities at Aden and numerous airfields for reconnaissance missions over the Indian Ocean and the Horn of Africa.
Moscow has also sought military access to port and air facilities in the Seychelles and built the Angolan port of Luanda into the main support facility for the Soviet Navy's West Africa Patrol.
Soviet assets in Luanda now include a floating dry-dock, a communications station and access for BEAR D aircraft which patrol the  South Atlantic sealanes.
But further concessions from these states to Soviet military requirements will in fact be difficult to justify while Soviet officials routinely castigate other developing states for their military concessions to the West.
Indeed, the Angolan constitution contains a provision prohibiting the installation of foreign military bases.
In the 1980s Moscow has endeavoured to expose new American basing networks and strategies.
At the beginning of the decade Soviet spokesmen sought to highlight the possibility of new NATO bases being established in connection with alleged plans for a South Atlantic Alliance.
They warned ASEAN against granting new bases to the United States.
They have also worked to rally Third World opinion, especially in the United Nations, against various island dependencies which remain in the American and Western orbit.
Much attention has been paid to Diego Garcia as an anti-American rallying point among the Non-Aligned.
The Soviet Union has concentrated its attacks on American military bases located in the Indian Ocean and its littoral states.
A detailed Soviet study of American policy in the Indian Ocean published in 1984 identified over thirty American military bases in the Indian Ocean basin.
The author defined the three primary tasks of American base policy in this region as follows: to help carry out plans for American rapid deployment forces in crises, to secure a permanent United States' military-naval presence in this region, and to transform this zone into a potential front of strategic nuclear war.
In January 1980 a Soviet commentator noted that according to the admissions of the American State Department ‘the leaders of Egypt, Oman, Somalia and Kenya have agreed to grant the Pentagon the right to use the ports and a number of military installations in their countries’.
Eschewing strategic analysis in favour of a more polemical approach he argued that these concessions were to be used as ‘trans-shipping points for American combat units that are to carry out punitive operations against the peoples of the Near and Middle East, as well as in Africa’.
In assisting the implementation of these Western plans these developing countries were ‘demonstrating their disregard for the principles of the Non-Aligned Movement’.
An appeal to the principles of non-alignment had formed one strand in the Soviet strategy of base denial.
But this tactic was seriously undermined by Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan at the end of 1979, which was widely deplored among non-aligned states.
A number of Third World states reacted to this assertion of superpower force against a weak non-aligned state by accepting the need for countervailing American military power.
Soviet spokesmen acknowledged that Washington explained the consent of Egypt, Oman, Somalia and Kenya ‘to  give in to the American military’ by ‘their concern for some kind of threat which allegedly comes from the decision of the Afghan leaders to rely on Soviet aid in repulsing outside intrigues’.
The American media, Moscow admitted, ‘claim that such a decision allegedly runs counter to the principles of non-alignment’.
It was precisely the massive Soviet military presence in Afghanistan, and the creation of a military infrastructure in that hitherto non-aligned country enabling a protracted Soviet ‘occupation’, which cast the principled Soviet opposition to foreign military bases in Third World countries under a cloud of cynicism.
In December 1978 the Premier of the new Marxist regime in Afghanistan, Taraki, declared on Soviet television that ‘Afghanistan and the Soviet Union resolutely condemn the creation of military bases on the territories of other countries’.
At the Non-Aligned Summit the following year in Havana he demanded ‘the termination of all imperialistic foreign military bases in the territory of others’ and described them as ‘being inconsistent with the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries concerned’.
Soon after this statement, in November 1979, Taraki's successor Hafizullah Amin reportedly rebuffed a Soviet request to establish an air base at Shindand near the Iranian border.
The USSR had linked this request to the developing situation in Iran and the danger of United States' intervention to rescue the American being held hostage.
Twelve days before Soviet troops entered Afghanistan Amin gave his word that ‘no Soviet military bases will be built in Afghanistan because we do not need them’.
But even before the establishment of the Karmal regime the USSR had acquired some control over the major military air base at Bagram near Kabul; this was the base Soviet troops were initially airlifted into at the end of 1979.
It is likely that Amin's known opposition to the idea of establishing Soviet military bases on Afghan soil influenced the Soviet decision to remove him from power.
After Babrak Karmal replaced Amin further construction began on an infrastructure and airfields for Soviet military operations within Afghanistan.
These may not have constituted bases in the fullest sense nor been intended as permanent strategic installations, but Western statesmen have focussed on their potential and the capabilities they give the Soviet Union.
Particular concern has been expressed over the construction of an air base at Shindand in western Afghanistan.
One scenario Western strategist feared was the possibility of the USSR basing Backfire bombers in Afghanistan, which could range widely across the Indian Ocean.
It is true that Soviet-controlled airfields at Bagram, Kabul, Kandahar and Shindand  have runways long enough for long-range strategic aircraft.
But these facilities were built before 1980 with earlier Soviet and American military and economic assistance.
Since then the USSR has not substantially lengthened their runways.
Soviet officials have been unwilling to specify the nature or duration of Soviet-constructed military installations in Afghanistan.
Western statesmen have accused the USSR of intending to turn this country into a forward military base aimed at the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean.
The typical Soviet response has been that ‘the Soviet Union did not and does not intend to turn Afghanistan into a base against other countries’.
The broad definition of a ‘base’ contained in such statements left open the possibility that a settlement of the Afghan conflict along Soviet lines would involve not only the retention of Soviet military advisers but a Soviet-DRA agreement on granting the USSR some form of military base rights in Afghanistan following the withdrawal of Soviet troops from that country.
Soviet sources allegedly aired the idea that Kabul should be prepared to grant Moscow such rights ‘possibly patterned after the Porkkala naval base precedent in Finland’.
This idea has not publicly been advanced by Moscow, and in November 1986 during a visit to India Mikhail Gorbachev told his hosts specifically that ‘we are not going to have any bases in Afghanistan’.
Moscow has attempted, rather unsuccessfully, to shift the attention of the Third World from Soviet forces in Afghanistan to the alleged use of Pakistani territory for military purposes by the United States and China.
The USSR has derided Pakistan's ‘non-bloc policy’ on this basis.
Soviet leaders have sought to exploit Indian hostility to Pakistan and Indian influence among the Non-Aligned to persuade the latter to denounce ‘American bases’ on Pakistani soil.
But only the radical pro-Soviet regimes in the Non-Aligned Movement were prepared to engage in such attacks.
Moscow has publicised a secret agreement allegedly signed between Washington and Islamabad in June 1982 which offered the United States the right to use Pakistani naval and air bases.
Pakistan ostensibly kept such ‘strategic cooperation’ secret to avoid the charge that it was violating the status of a non-aligned country.
Such Soviet claims have been consistently rejected by Pakistani officials.
In an address to the Pakistani National Assembly and Senate in December 1985 President Zia formally denied that his country had given any bases to the United States.
Despite the controversy surrounding Soviet military action in Afghanistan, Soviet spokesmen in the mid 1980s still try to direct the principles of non-alignment against Western military links with Third World states.
A Soviet specialist observed in 1984 that recent American agreements on bases scarcely mentioned the term ‘base’.
In order to hide the true extent of military-political cooperation the parties used instead formulations which would attract less attention such as‘understandings on access to facilities’.
Washington had agreements with a number of states in the Indian Ocean basin, he claimed, on the joint use of local military bases and installations by American and national armed forces.
Another Soviet writer specified that ‘United States and NATO military bases exist on the territory of distinct non-aligned states’.
He noted that ‘Somalia, Kenya, Oman, Zaire, Morocco, and Pakistan tightly cooperate with the USA and all of these continue to remain participants of the [Non-Aligned]Movement’.
In his view ‘one of the levers of pressure on the policy of the new states by the West is military cooperation, which expresses itself in rendering military assistance, the sale of modern arms, the dispatch of a significant number of Western military advisers to the developing countries and, finally, the creation of military bases on the territory of a series of non-aligned states’.
Although such military cooperation equally characterised Soviet-Third World relations it was described as ‘incompatible with both the principles and the criteria of non-alignment’.
However, by these Soviet standards of judgement not only Afghanistan but a number of African and Asian states in the Non-Aligned Movement have breached the principles of non-alignment in the 1980s through various forms of military cooperation with the Soviet Union.
Despite Soviet action in Afghanistan Soviet leaders believe that the ‘Non-Aligned World’ still associated the notion of military intervention in the Third World primarily with the Western powers.
With this assumption in mind Gorbachev told the Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in May 1985 that ‘the newly independent countries do not want to be regarded any longer as objects for profit-making and for installing military bases and strongpoints in their territories’.
He stressed that in this matter ‘these countries can and must be understood’.
The Western states have always possessed a more extensive range of military bases and facilities in the Third' World than the Soviet Union, and American strategists have relied on such facilities more than their Soviet counterparts to sustain regional and global commitments and military contingency plans.
The USSR lent its declaratory support to the principled opposition of the Non-Aligned to foreign military bases and this diplomatic aspect to the Soviet strategy of ‘base denial’ enabled Moscow to gain credit among non-aligned states.
An illustration of the arguments underpinning this strategy was provided by a Soviet commentator who compared the Soviet abandonment of its naval  base at Porkkala in 1955 with the American retention of its base at Guantanamo in Cuba.
He claimed that the military significance of Porkkala for the USSR had been similar to that of Guantanamo for the United States.
But he described the Soviet abandonment of bases on foreign territories as a demonstration to other countries of a ‘real way of alleviating international tension’, which had been grounded on the assumption that ‘the NATO countries, and the USA in particular, would follow its example’.
Instead, he claimed, the United States had access in 1985 to ‘forty-three naval bases and over seventy airfields, of which a considerable number are situated close to the Soviet border’.
In 1981 the Soviet military specialist Major-General Slobodenko wrote an exposition on the ‘bases strategy’ as a component of the post-war military doctrine of the United States.
He described the changes in the functions of American bases as corresponding to changes in military doctrine and military technology.
Their purpose, he concluded, was ‘to prepare and wage aggressive wars against the Soviet Union and other socialist states, and to suppress the national liberation and revolutionary movements in countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America’ Slobodenko ignored the fact that Soviet military facilities overseas performed ‘a multiplicity of military functions, somewhat but not precisely paralleling similar US requirements’.
These were adapted to the needs of the Soviet navy and air force.
Haselkorn has argued that the USSR has also established aerial staging networks which were used for the airlift of arms to Angola and Ethiopia in the 1970s and which are of paramount importance for Soviet access strategy in the Third World.
Furthermore, in connection with strategic missilry and associated surveillance operations, the Soviet Union has developed growing needs for facilities such as‘telemetry monitoring, ASW, nuclear test detection, communications and satellite tracking — many of which involve interconnected global or regional networks’.
Harkavy speculates that, as in the case of the United States, such requirements ‘may dictate an ever-escalating quest for new points of access, even if and when those-of aerial staging and naval replenishments should reach the point of virtual global redundancy’.
It should be emphasised that unlike the United States the USSR has not made extensive use of overseas ‘forward’ garrisons in the Third World.
These involve the stationing of combat troop units on a large scale and may well infringe upon the sovereignty of the host country.
In an assessment of the United States' principle of ‘forward basing’ Slobodenko observed that since the late 1960s the American leadership began to scale down the numbers of their troops abroad.
He argued that ‘the stationing  of large military contingents on the territory of other countries requires big expenditures and, most important, is connected with political complications caused by the growing dissatisfaction of the peoples of these countries and demands for the withdrawal of American troops from their territory’, The final reference to ‘American troops’ does not fully disguise this veiled reference to the problems raised by the location of Soviet troops in Afghanistan.The Soviet presence in Afghanistan in the 1980s has further undermined the credibility of Soviet appeals to withdraw military forces from overseas.
But since the USSR remains disadvantaged in respect of military facilities in the Third World the Gorbachev leadership may press for general negotiated limitations on superpower military and naval bases and facilities on foreign territories.
In an important speech on disarmament in February 1987 Gorbachev asserted that while it remained best ‘to revive the old idea of dismantling foreign bases and bringing the troops home’ in the short term it would be desirable to have inspection access to American military bases on foreign territories for verification purposes ‘to be sure that there is no activity going on there which is forbidden under an eventual agreement’.
This proposal implied a Soviet preparedness to offer its own facilities for inspection.
It primarily reflected nuclear strategic concerns.
This was confirmed by a further Soviet proposal in May 1987.
Gorbachev suggested that Soviet medium-range missiles in Asia could be abandoned altogether in return for the Americans giving up their nuclear bases in the Pacific.
Lev Mendelevich, head of the Soviet Foreign Ministry's Planning Department spoke of ‘huge American bases in South Korea, Japan and the Philippines’.
This initiative implicitly offered the possibility of a Soviet-American arrangement involving mutual restraints on bases on the Asian mainland and in the Pacific.
But it was not taken seriously in the West and Moscow did not persist in linking these American bases to the INF negotiations underway.
In the same month, in his letter to Papandreou on the issue of the American bases in Greece, Gorbachev proposed that foreign military presence on the territory of other countries should be renounced everywhere.
He accepted that ‘appeals for a reduction and, in the final analysis, a rejection of any military presence outside national frontiers concern us too’.
He referred to the withdrawal of Soviet units from Mongolia and Soviet preparations to withdraw from Afghanistan.
Gorbachev also reiterated his proposal for inspection access to foreign military bases.
The Soviet leadership could anticipate diplomatic dividends from these initiatives among the non-aligned countries.
But  Washington is not likely to abandon its ‘forward garrisons’ in the Third World simply in exchange for a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan.
These recent proposals reflect Moscow's current priority to retrench economically and militarily in the Third World.
Soviet military facilities in Africa and Asia had been acquired and retained only by diverting considerable resources into military assistance programmes and they encouraged demands for open-ended Soviet economic assistance.
A recent Soviet report from Kabul stated, for example, that ‘the Soviet Union is more than anyone interested in the return home of its soldiers [from Afghanistan].
In the first place this will save huge funds’.
In the political sphere Soviet military activism had soured the détente relationship with the West by infringing on areas which hitherto had not experienced Soviet military involvement.
The USSR had had a long-standing military relationship with Afghanistan but the scale of the Soviet military intervention in that country in the 1980s and the forms it took were quite unprecedented in Soviet-Third World relations.
The experience of Soviet military facilities in Africa and the Middle East in the 1970s discouraged Soviet leaders from attempting to invest substantial military commitments in remote and volatile Third World states elsewhere, especially when they were in areas of clearly proclaimed American interest.
This was forcibly underlined by the Soviet failure to exert effective military or political control over Afghanistan despite its geographical contiguity with the USSR.
An opinion expressed by Karen Brutents, the senior Soviet official and Third World specialist, is revealing in this context.
He described the views of some American politicians that ‘Nicaragua threatens US national security and that there are, or shortly will be, Soviet military bases there’ as ‘too fanciful’to merit much attention.
He similarly dismissed a statement by the American Secretary of State, Shultz, that Nicaragua ‘could become the source of another crisis similar to the Cuban crisis’.
The USSR is not prepared to expose itself in this fashion in Nicaragua.
Soviet facilities would be less exposed in bordering states.
But when ABC Television reported in March 1987 that the USSR and Iran had reached an agreement ‘to set up two super-secret Soviet electronic reconnaissance stations in Iranian territory’ to monitor American naval ships in the Persian Gulf Tass rejected this report as ‘utterly groundless’.
For the USSR broader political calculations currently outweigh the military rationale for attempting to gain a visible military presence in such strategically sensitive countries as Nicaragua or Iran.
Soviet policy towards military facilities overseas will continue to be  determined by a fluid assessment of the political and military losses and gains involved.
But Soviet leaders are now fully aware that the duration of the military gains achieved through agreements on military facilities in Third World regions is unpredictable.
Their experience shows that military facilities may be conceded by a Third World state to the USSR when there exists a coincidence of interests but that such concessions provide leverage on Soviet policy as often as they act as levers for Soviet policy in bilateral relations with the Third World party.
Such ‘alignment’ as is achieved will always depend on the vagaries of Soviet-Third World political relations.