

Five
Most of the aspiring artists and the students of language, literature and culture had fallen victim to the seductive somnolence of a hot afternoon.
Singly or in small clusters, they lay in chairs on the terrace or sprawled on rugs under the trees, some unashamedly asleep, others nodding over books, all as immobile as figures on a set of The Sleeping Beauty.
The exceptions were Dora Lavender, Rose Kettle and Dieter Erdle.
The former had taken a golf-club to a smooth, level patch of grass a short distance from the house which Philippe Bonard, anxious to cater for his clients' leisure needs as well as their thirst for learning, had laid out as a green; she had donned a pair of heavy-framed spectacles and was practising putting.
Rose and Dieter were watching from the shade of a chestnut tree, chatting in low voices and giggling.
From where she stood, Melissa could see them only in profile, but she had a shrewd idea that they were holding hands and that Dora's apparent indifference to their presence was concealing a mounting irritation.
‘Well done!’ called Rose after Dora had sunk six putts in a row.
‘Yes, well done indeed!’ echoed Dieter, ostentatiously clapping his hands.
‘Your friend is an impressive player,’ he said to Rose.
Dora retrieved her ball without a glance in their direction and marched to the far edge of the green.
‘She's a scratch player,’ said Rose, raising her voice slightly, as if anxious to appease her friend.
‘She plays in tournaments, you know.
Everyone says her swing is superb.’
Dieter bent to whisper something in her ear, at which she gave a squeal of laughter.
Watching Dora, Melissa observed her stiffen and tighten her grip on the putter, her arm muscles clenched below the rolled-up sleeves of her blouse.
She took her stance and struck the ball; it sped across the grass like a bullet, struck the rim of the hole and shot out again.
‘Bad luck, Dora!’ called Rose.
‘Perhaps you hit it a little too hard?’ suggested Dieter.
as if they were inaudible and invisible, Dora picked up her ball and stalked past them, heading for the car.
The two observers exchanged amused glances and then wandered away under the trees.
Undoubtedly they were holding hands.
‘I'll bet she'd like him to end up at the foot of the cliff,’ said a voice.
Turning, Melissa found Jack standing beside her.
‘Or put him there,’ she agreed wryly.
‘She thinks her friend is making a fool of herself and she's seriously worried about her.’
‘I'd say she had every reason to be.’
He spoke softly, with a hint of a West Country burr.
Dora flung open the boot of the Sierra and thrust the putter into her golf-bag.
She closed the lid; when the catch failed to operate, she slammed it a second time with a violence that made several of the slumberers lift their heads.
She marched across the courtyard into the house, her eyes stony and her jaw set.
Jack glanced at his watch.
‘Another half an hour before school starts again,’ he observed.
‘Shall we sit down?’
Melissa hesitated.
‘Well, actually, I was thinking of driving into Anduze,’ she said.
‘I want to visit the Protestant temple.’
‘Ah yes, I was forgetting.
You're researching a novel, aren't you?
And I believe you're a friend of Iris's?’
There was a studied casualness in his tone that made Melissa prick up her ears.
‘We're next-door neighbours.’
‘In Gloucestershire, isn't it?’
‘That's right.’
I'm a Somerset man myself.’
I'd never have guessed!’
He laughed, a warm, comfortable sound that reminded her of homely, rustic things like sleek cattle and woolly sheep grazing on a West Country hillside.
‘Can't disguise the accent, can I?
Iris spotted it at once.’
‘Where is Iris, by the way?
I came out here to look for her, but she seems to have disappeared.’
‘She said she was going off somewhere to meditate before the afternoon session.
I'm sure she needs a bit of time to recharge after giving so much of herself this morning.’
‘Oh, Iris swears by her yoga,’ agreed Melissa.
‘Did you have a productive session, by the way?’ she added, thinking that it would be nice to have some favourable comments to pass on to Iris.
‘Absolutely splendid!’
Jack's eyes glowed.
‘Your friend has so much talent and she's so…’ he waved his hands as if trying to snatch words from the air, ‘…she has this gift of firing one's imagination without talking too much.
Some tutors just love the sound of their own voices.’
‘That must be a relief,’ said Melissa, smiling at this positive tribute to Iris's minimalist use of language.
‘It sounds as if you've made a promising start.
By the way, when she reappears, would you mind telling her I'll be back to pick her up at the end of this afternoon?’
‘Of course.’
He appeared delighted at the prospect.
‘You're staying at the Auberge de la Fontaine, aren't you?’
‘That's right.
And you?’
‘The Lion d'Or.
Not exactly five star, but the food's okay and it's got a pretty terrace bar overlooking the river.
Perhaps you and Iris would care to join me there for a drink one evening?’
‘That sounds a nice idea.
Will you fix it with her?’
‘It'll be a pleasure!’ he said warmly and Melissa thought what an attractive smile he had.
‘Well, I mustn't keep you.
I hope to see you again soon.’
‘I look forward to it.’
Iris, you've got an admirer, murmured Melissa to herself as she got into the car.
Much more suitable than your precious Philippe Bonard, too.
The interior of the Protestant temple at Anduze was light, spacious and blissfully cool.
Melissa found its clean, uncluttered lines at once calming and uplifting, and she stood for a few moments just inside the door, absorbing the tranquil atmosphere.
A number of people were walking quietly to and fro, studying the architecture, referring to guide-books and conversing in low voices.
A small party had gathered round an elderly woman who had apparently been showing them round.
As Melissa entered, the guide stepped back with outspread hands that seemed to invite her small audience to scatter and enjoy the building at their leisure.
Then her eyes fell on Melissa and she came forward to greet her.
‘Bonjour, Madame.
Welcome to our temple.
Would you like to learn something of our history?’
From a plain wooden table spread with literature she picked up a booklet and offered it to Melissa, who took it with some hesitation.
‘Actually, I already know quite a bit about it from the guide-books,’ she began.
‘And this morning…’
‘Ah, the guide-books,’ interrupted the woman with a condescending smile.
‘They tell you only about the big names and the famous dates.
This lady has spent many years studying the life of the people who lived in these parts in former times.’
‘I learned a great deal from my visit to the museum this morning,’ commented Melissa, glancing at the booklet as she spoke.
The name of the author caught her eye.
‘Antoinette Gebrec — is that a common name round here?’
The woman looked at her curiously.
‘You mean Gebrec?
Not so common.
Why do you ask?’
‘There is a man called Alain Gebrec who works at the Centre Cévenol d'Etudes in Roziac.’
‘Alain?
But of course, that would be Antoinette's son!’
‘You know the family?’
‘I know Antoinette very well.
You are a student at the centre, Madame?’
‘No, not exactly.’
Once more, Melissa explained her interest in the region.
‘But you must visit Antoinette!’ exclaimed the guide.
‘She will love to assist you in your researches.
It is a passion of hers, the history of the Camisards.
She lives not far from here, in Alès.
Let me give you her address and telephone number.’
She rummaged in her handbag, found a pencil and notebook, and began scribbling.
‘Are you sure she won't mind a total stranger calling on her?’ asked Melissa doubtfully as she took the proffered piece of paper.
‘But of course not.
There is nothing she enjoys more than to talk on her favourite subject.
Tell her Gabrielle Delon sent you.
You wish to buy her book?’ the woman added hopefully.
‘Yes, of course.’
Melissa took out a fifty-franc note.
‘And please keep the change as a donation to your temple.’
‘Oh, thank you, Madame.
Excuse me, here come more visitors.’
With a bobbing movement that was almost a curtsey, Madame Delon hurried away.
‘Had a good day?’ asked Iris as she settled into the Golf to be driven back to the auberge at the end of the afternoon.
‘Very interesting indeed.’
Melissa gave a brief account of her activities but without reference to her conversation with Juliette.
‘How about you?’
‘Super.’
‘Jack seems a nice man.’
‘They're all nice.
Going to be a good week.’
After a pause, Iris added smugly, ‘Philippe's delighted.’
‘So he should be — he's getting your services for peanuts.’
In an unguarded moment, Iris had let drop that, while Bonard was paying her expenses, she was receiving no fee to run the course.
‘New venture,’ Iris reminded her.
‘Doing what I can to help it off the ground.’
‘Philippe doesn't give me the impression of being exactly hard up,’ retorted Melissa, thinking of the designer suits and the new luxury Peugeot in the garage.
‘Capital at risk,’ Iris insisted.
‘Stands to lose a lot if things go wrong.’
Melissa abandoned this unsatisfactory topic and reverted to her original one.
‘I was chatting to Jack after lunch.’
There was no response.
‘He said something about our having a drink with him one evening.’
Iris's expression did not change as she murmured, ‘Who did?’
‘Jack, of course.
Didn't he mention it to you?’
‘Said something about it.’
‘And?’
Iris yawned, put her hands behind her head and gazed out of the window.
‘Maybe later this week.
Too tired this evening.’
As soon as they were back at the auberge, Iris vanished into their minuscule en suite bathroom.
She emerged a couple of minutes later clad in her black leotard, unfolded a blanket and spread it on the floor in the far corner of the bedroom.
They had been given a family room, from which Monsieur Gauthier had obligingly removed one of the three single beds in order to provide the space Iris required for her daily yoga session.
‘So good of Philippe to organise this for me,’ said Iris, sinking gracefully into a supine position.
‘Went to endless trouble to organise my diet as well.’
‘He's a businessman,’ Melissa pointed out, having heard this eulogy several times already.
‘He knew your name would bring in the customers and…’
‘Going into relaxation now,’ murmured Iris, closing her eyes and spreading her arms and legs like a starfish.
‘Don't worry, I shan't disturb you.
I've got notes to write up and Madame Gebrec's book to read.’
A couple of hours later, having showered and changed, they went downstairs to dinner.
As they passed through the reception area on their way to the restaurant, they caught a  glimpse of a dark green car with a German number plate driving away.
‘Seen that before,’ commented Iris.
‘Guess who won't be dining here this evening.’
The guess proved accurate.
Dora appeared late, alone and in obvious ill-humour.
The two friends tactfully refrained from enquiring after Rose, but Monsieur Gauthier had no such reservations.
‘Your friend, she is not with you?’ he enquired, with a solicitous bob first at Dora and then towards the door.
‘She is not unwell, I hope.’
‘She is perfectly well, but she has gone out,’ said Dora in a tone which discouraged further comment.
She took the menu, scowled at it as if every dish carried a health warning, chose a couple at random and handed it back.
When her food arrived, she appeared to eat without appetite, made little or no response to any attempts at conversation and left the table without taking dessert or coffee.
‘Poor Dora, she can't wait for this week to be over,’ Melissa remarked.
Iris, tucking into her slice of Tarte Tatin, waved her fork in agreement.
‘Bet she wishes it was the dashing Dieter who'd gone over the cliff!’ she said cheerfully.
‘Funny you should say that.
Jack made a similar comment earlier on.’
‘Oh, yes?’
‘He thinks you're a great teacher, by the way.’
‘That's good.
Perhaps he'll recommend the course.
Philippe wants me to run it again in October.’
‘Well, I hope you'll charge him a proper fee next time.
I'll bet he can afford it.’
Melissa was becoming more and more irritated at the constant references to Bonard.
‘Just on a point of interest, what's his main line of business?
It must be pretty lucrative to enable him to buy Les Chatâigniers.’
‘Wholesale fruit and vegetables.’
‘That would appeal to you, of course,’ said Melissa dryly.
Iris ignored the taunt.
‘Family business — never really  wanted to do it, but father made him.’
She leaned on an elbow and stirred her coffee, an absent expression softening her sharp features.
‘Lifetime ambition, setting up this school,’ she said dreamily.
‘So you keep telling me.’
‘Don't like him, do you?’
Iris faced Melissa with an accusing glint in her eyes.
‘What's he done to you?’
‘Nothing.
And you're wrong.
I do like him, I think he's charming.
It's just that…you seem a bit too keen on him…’
Iris flushed.
‘So what's wrong with that?
Think he likes me too.’
There was a wistful note in her voice that went to Melissa's heart.
Despite the strength of her misgivings, she could not bring herself to voice them.
At least the art course looked like being a success.
Not that Melissa cared two hoots whether it was making money for Bonard or not — whatever Iris might claim, he was certainly not strapped for cash — but it was essential for Iris's self-esteem that it should go well.
So she kept her doubts to herself, merely remarking that everyone knew what Frenchmen were like and turning the whole thing into a rather laboured joke in which Iris eventually joined.
They were sitting on the terrace admiring the sunset when Monsieur Gauthier announced with distaste that ‘that flic’ was in reception and had requested a word with Melissa.
She found him behind a tall potted plant in the far corner where, she suspected, he had been deliberately steered by the proprietor in order that as few people as possible should be aware of his presence in the establishment.
The precaution seemed unnecessary, since Hassan was evidently off duty.
Instead of the blue uniform, which sat well on his big frame, he was sporting a hideous shirt patterned with palm trees and his plump buttocks were compressed into a pair of fawn slacks, the cut of which would have flattered a slimmer figure but was less than kind to his own.
With a gallant wave of one hand he invited Melissa to sit down and with the other placed a small pile of well-thumbed paperbacks  on a table in front of her.
He spread them out in the manner of a dealer displaying merchandise for inspection by a client and then sat down facing her, his huge mouth stretched in a smile of pure delight.
‘As you see, Madame, I have your complete oeuvres,’ he said proudly.
‘And I have read all the stories many times.’
He picked up the books one by one, opening them at the title page, watching every movement of her pen as she signed them and commenting on the brilliance of each individual plot.
‘How I should enjoy meeting your Inspector Nathan Latimer, Madame!’ he sighed when she had finished.
‘We who work in the provinces rarely have the opportunity to encounter detectives of such distinction!’
‘I'm very glad that my books give you such pleasure,’ responded Melissa with total sincerity.
‘By the way, how is you own case progressing?’
‘You mean the death of Monsieur Klein?’
Hassan's face fell.
‘Alas, Madame, I have no case.
My commandant accepts the conclusions of the médecin légiste and instructs me to abandon my enquiries.’
His liquid eyes were sorrowful and the ends of his moustache drooped.
‘That must be rather frustrating for you,’ said Melissa politely.
But what a relief for Juliette and for Fernand, she thought.
‘For the moment, yes, but…’
He began gathering the books together, handling them with exaggerated care and opening them a second time to gaze at Melissa's signature.
He placed them in a neat pile, patting them into position with his large hands, frowning slightly.
She had the impression that he had something on his mind and was uncertain whether or not he should speak of it.
After a moment he lifted his eyes from the books, leaned forward and spoke in a lowered voice.
‘In my opinion, we have not seen the last of this matter.’
‘Whatever do you mean?’
He pursed his lips and wagged his head.
‘Things are not as they seem…
I have an instinct,’ he said.
Any moment now, thought Melissa, he'll be tapping his nose and giving mysterious glances.
It was a struggle to hide her smile as he fulfilled her expectations.
‘An instinct,’ he repeated.
‘Oh dear, I do hope there aren't going to be any more…accidents,’ she said.
From the corner of her eye, she spotted Iris hovering by the entrance.
‘Will you please excuse me now?
My friend is waiting for me.’
‘But of course.’
He scrambled to his feet, clutching the books to his chest.
‘It's been a pleasure seeing you again, Officer,’ said Melissa.
‘Assuredly, we shall meet again soon!’ he said meaningfully and marched out, bowing to Iris as he passed.
‘Like something out of a kid's lesson book, isn't he?’ chuckled Iris.
Melissa agreed, but behind her smile lay a certain unease.
It was illogical, but she had a premonition that Officer Hassan's instinct would prove correct.
Six
The following morning, after dropping Iris at Les Châtaigniers for the second day of her course, Melissa returned to the auberge and telephoned Antoinette Gebrec.
As Madame Delon had predicted, her enquiry met with a cordial response followed by an unexpected invitation to lunch.
It promised to be another brilliant day.
There was little traffic on the picturesque road from Roziac to Alès and Melissa drove slowly, stopping once or twice along the way to contemplate the magnificent scenery.
There was something about this part of France that made a powerful appeal to her imagination and emotions.
The people were so strong in the faith for which their forebears had fought and suffered; their steadfastness and courage, handed down through the ages, lived on in the men and women who only a few years ago had defied the invader of their homeland.
She thought of Juliette and Fernand and their martyred brother, namesake of their hero, and in some indefinable way felt at one with them.
She arrived in Ales with an hour in hand and left the Golf in a car park alongside the Gardon, which encircles the city centre on three sides in a broad loop.
She leaned for a few minutes on the stone parapet overlooking the river, shading her eyes against the glitter of sunlight on the water and feeling its warmth soaking into her bones, before crossing the road and plunging into the narrow streets of the old town.
She found a bookshop and browsed for a while.
On impulse, she bought a recently published history of the region under the Occupation and took it to a pavement café, where she sat under a gaudy sunshade, idly sipping coffee and glancing  through her book, but finding the passing show around her far more diverting.
Brightly-dressed children sat licking ice-creams or noisily sucking highly-coloured liquids through straws, while their parents drank coffee and ate pâtisserie.
Evidently there was a market not far away, for there were plenty of housewives with shopping bags bulging with fresh vegetables and fruit, while here and there a businessman hurried through the crowd clutching his briefcase or sat scanning a newspaper over his coffee or cognac.
But it was the students who appealed most strongly to Melissa, sauntering past with enormous packs on their strong young shoulders, clear-eyed, tawny-limbed and confident.
Her own son, now an engineer with an oil company in the States, had back-packed round Europe while at university and she remembered his homecoming, his hair bleached by the sun, seemingly taller and more mature, full of tales of the people he had met along the way.
Youngsters from a dozen different countries, some of whose grandparents had fought one another in the war…youngsters not much older than Roland Morlay when he met his death before the terror-stricken gaze of his nine-year-old brother.
A man appeared with a guitar, wearing a black vest and the briefest of denim shorts over a deeply tanned body.
He began playing a sad, haunting melody while singing of love and death in a rich Spanish tenor.
When the song ended, he moved quietly among the tables, holding out his wide-brimmed black hat and coaxing money from the customers with a flash of white teeth and a sparkle of peat-brown eyes.
As Melissa dropped a coin into the hat, receiving in return a courtly bow and a murmured, ‘Muchas gracias, Señora’, a nearby clock struck eleven.
It was almost time for her appointment.
If Melissa had wished to create the character of an elderly Frenchwoman for one of her novels, she would surely have chosen Antoinette Gebrec as her model.
Petite and vivacious, beautifully coiffured, discreetly made-up and dressed with  simple elegance, she conformed in all respects to the universal concept of Gallic womanhood.
When the Golf pulled up outside her house in a quiet suburb of Alès, she was sitting beneath a pergola on the terrace overlooking the road with a book on her lap.
On seeing the car, she rose immediately and came tripping down the drive to unlock the tall iron gates.
‘Welcome, welcome!’ she cried in English as Melissa stepped from the car.
‘I trust you found the house without difficulty?
May I offer you a glass of wine?
Or do you prefer the citron pressé?’
‘Not wine, thank you,’ said Melissa with a smile, glancing back at the car.
‘Of course, of course …not during the driving.
Please, take a seat.
The citron is already prepared — I will fetch it.’
She vanished into the house and was back within seconds with iced lemonade in a tall glass jug.
Her carriage was graceful, her movements quick and deft; there was animation in her face and a slight catch in her voice that hinted at suppressed laughter.
She reminded Melissa of champagne, full of fizz and sparkle, and thought that her son had inherited neither her looks nor her personality.
She poured the drinks, handed one to her guest and raised her own glass.
‘Santé!
I am so happy to make your acquaintance.
I understand you know Alain?’
‘Ah, you've spoken to Madame Delon?’
‘She telephoned this morning to say I might expect to hear from you.
I said you had already called…she will join us for the lunch.’
‘That will be lovely.
Yes, I have met your son, although only briefly.’
Melissa explained her connection with the Centre Cévenol d'Etudes.
‘I expect he has told you of the tragedy?’
Madame Gebrec nodded, her mobile face registering sorrow and concern.
‘Alain was present when we found the body — he seemed very distressed.’
‘He is very sensitive…so like…’
For a moment her thoughts seemed far away and by no means happy, but she  quickly recovered and gave Melissa a captivating smile.
‘Now, tell me about this book you are writing.
It is very exciting to meet a real author.’
‘But you also have written a book.’
‘Bah!
That little thing, it is nothing!
I indulge myself, it is my hobby.’
‘It's very interesting.
I'm really fascinated by this period in your country's history.’
Pleasure shone in the expressive eyes.
‘And I want to use it in the plot for my new novel,’ Melissa continued.
‘I should so appreciate your help with the background.’
‘I shall be enchanted.’
As Melissa explained her ideas, her hostess put down her glass and listened intently, hands clasped, head cocked on one side, now and again interjecting a word of encouragement and approval, occasionally wagging a manicured finger with an emphatic, ‘Non! Ça ne va pas!
But it could be like this perhaps,’ illustrating her point with some jewel that she had quarried from her years of research in the mines of history.
The time flew.
Both women looked up in surprise when the sharp ring of a bell from the gate announced the arrival of Madame Delon.
The two Frenchwomen greeted one another with affectionate kisses and Madame Gebrec promptly went off to organise the lunch, leaving her two visitors to chat.
They had barely exchanged the time of day before she was back with a trolley laden with plates of charcuterie and cheese, a basket of bread and a bowl of salad.
The conversation proceeded in French, since Madame Delon knew no English.
The contrast in appearance between the friends was almost comical — the one so slight and elegant, the other homely, dowdily dressed and plump.
Yet they had the same energetic manner of speaking: their metallic voices swooped and dived, their eyes rolled, their shoulders bounced, their hands flew in the air like birds performing a courtship dance.
Melissa, struggling to follow the staccato bursts of speech that punctuated their intake of food, was so fascinated by their mannerisms that more than once she lost the thread of  what they were saying and had to beg them to speak more slowly, which they did with great good humour and shrieks of tinny laughter.
The time flew and at three o'clock Madame Delon rose, saying that she must leave now to catch her bus.
‘I can drive you back to Anduze,’ said Melissa.
‘Ah, but that is so kind!’ declared Madame Gebrec before her friend had a chance to speak.
‘That will be so much more comfortable for you, Gabrielle, and there is no need to hurry.’
She seemed reluctant to allow her guests to go.
Madame Delon was equally determined to stay no longer.
‘Just the same, I should be leaving soon,’ she said firmly.
‘Henri will be home for his supper at six o'clock and I have to do the shopping.’
She turned to Melissa.
‘If that does not inconvenience you, Madame?’
‘Not at all.
I have to be back at Les Châtaigniers in time to collect my friend.
Perhaps I could use the toilet before we go?’
‘Of course.
Gabrielle, you will show Madame Craig?’
Madame Gebrec began stacking plates on to the trolley.
‘But certainly.
This way.’
The door from the terrace led directly into a long, somewhat overfurnished salon, cool and dim after the heat and brightness outside, its deep window-sills shaded by closed shutters and crowded with knick-knacks.
The walls were covered with pictures; near the door was an original oil painting of the Porte des Cévennes and Melissa paused to look at it.
‘Do you know who did this?’ she enquired.
Madame Delon glanced over her shoulder before replying.
‘An old friend of Antoinette, many years ago,’ she said guardedly.
Melissa pointed to the small light above the picture.
‘May I?’
Madame Delon shrugged.
‘I suppose.’
Melissa pressed the switch.
The yellowish lamp gave the illusion of sunlight flooding the canvas and she stood back to admire the effect.
‘It's good,’ she said after a few moments.
‘My friend is an artist — she would like it.’
Madame Delon made no comment.
She ushered Melissa out of the room into a small entrance hall and indicated a door on the other side.
‘That one,’ she said.
On the way back from the bathroom, Melissa stopped in front of a cabinet laden with framed photographs.
Most were of Alain at various stages of childhood and adolescence, some on his own, some with his mother.
There was a wedding photograph as well; the passing years had faded the picture, but not the radiance of the bride's smile.
Her groom, a soldier in uniform, stood stiffly at her side.
‘Is Monsieur Gebrec still living?’ asked Melissa softly, although she felt she already knew the answer.
‘Alas no, Madame, he was killed in the war.’
Madame Gebrec accompanied them to the car.
The book that Melissa had bought earlier lay on the passenger seat; as she went to remove it, it slipped from its wrappings.
Madame Gebrec gave a sharp exclamation.
‘You buy that book?’
The black eyes that had been sparkling with good humour a moment before had become hard, almost angry.
‘Yes, I got it this morning in Alès,’ said Melissa, surprised at the reaction.
‘Do you know it?’
‘I know it.’
‘Perhaps you don't recommend it?
The assistant in the bookshop said…’
‘Bah, it is well enough.’
Madame Gebrec screwed up her mouth and made a dismissive gesture, as if to avoid contact with something unpleasant.
‘The author is an historian respected by many but his so-called facts, he does not always verify them.
I too am writing a book about this period…it will be more accurate than this one, I assure you.’
‘I shall make a point of buying a copy.’
Melissa hastily pushed the book back into the crumpled wrapping and put it out of sight, then held out her hand.
‘Thank you very much  for your help, Madame, and your hospitality.
It's been a great pleasure to meet you.’
‘It has been a pleasure for me also,’ said Madame Gebrec.
She spoke warmly, but her smile of farewell did not reach her eyes and there were hard lines round her mouth.
Any hope Melissa might have entertained of learning from Madame Delon what lay behind Madame Gebrec's outburst came to nothing.
The discreet feelers that she put out during the drive back to Anduze met with monosyllabic replies that indicated, firmly but politely, that the matter was no concern of hers.
She would have liked to know just which passages in the book her hostess found objectionable, but it was plain that the only way to find out was to study it for herself.
Even so, she had no means of recognising them and to wade through three hundred-odd pages in search of some unidentified reference would be a formidable task and probably not worth the effort.
It was an unsatisfactory conclusion to an otherwise profitable visit.
She dropped her passenger in the centre of Anduze and made her way back to Roziac.
There was still an hour left before the classes finished, so she parked the Golf in the courtyard and picked up the book, then changed her mind and took her camera from the glove compartment instead.
She had not had it with her on Sunday during the walk to the belvedere and although it might now be too late in the day to catch the best of the light, it would be useful to have a few shots to help with descriptions of the scenery when she came to write her novel.
It had turned somewhat cooler, with a light but refreshing breeze.
She soon found the path and began the climb.
The way was now wide enough for two people to walk abreast and the largest of the loose stones had been thrown aside.
Here and there, a fragment of plastic ribbon fluttered from a low branch, a mute reminder of the recent tragedy and the police activity that had followed.
Ahead, a series of clattering bumps that sounded like wood falling against wood echoed through the trees; no doubt Fernand  was once more busy with the task of repairing the guard-rail.
Shortly after she became aware of the sounds, they stopped; a moment later she came to the clearing where she had first seen and spoken to him.
The tractor was there with the trailer attached, its tailboard unfastened.
A few sections of rail were lying on the bottom, several more were scattered on the ground and one was propped against the end of the trailer as if whoever had been in the act of loading or unloading had abandoned it in a hurry.
There was no sign of Fernand.
Melissa stopped short, uncertain what to do.
Perhaps he had stepped behind a tree to relieve himself.
If she went on, there might be an embarrassing confrontation.
She stood for several seconds, fingering her camera, staring up at the trees, glancing down the path and listening for the sound of trampling in the undergrowth that would herald Fernand's return to his task.
Nothing.
No human movement.
Apart from bird calls, the rustling of leaves in the wind and the faint sound of rushing water in the distance, there was silence.
Turning, she found Fernand at her side, as if he had risen out of the earth.
She gave a startled gasp; he laid a warning finger on his lips and put a hand on her arm.
‘Were you seen?
Were you followed?’ he asked in a whisper.
Melissa shook her head, suppressing a smile.
‘No,’ she whispered back.
‘Are you sure?’
His grip tightened a shade.
Melissa glanced down at the powerful fingers with the powdering of sawdust round the nails and then up into the fierce black eyes, and her heart began to thump.
No need to be scared, just play along with him, she told herself.
As long as he believes you're on his side while he acts out his fantasy, he won't harm you.
But if he gets it into his head that you're a spy….
She glanced back down the path and then leaned forward so that her lips almost touched his ear.
‘I took every precaution…
I saw no one.’
‘It is well.’
He thought for a moment, then tugged at her arm.
‘We must take no risks…let us go to the refuge.
If  anyone should come, we shall hear them, but they will never find us.
Tread quietly!’
Before Melissa realised what was happening, he had led her off the path and in among the trees.
He moved lightly over the rough ground, dodging round bushes, avoiding every loose stone and broken twig.
Melissa recalled Juliette's words: ‘He could slip through the forest as silently as a cat.’
Hardly aware of what she was doing, she tried to do the same, thankful that her shoes had soft soles.
Soon there were no more trees and the sound of tumbling water grew louder.
A wooden rail at waist height barred their way; they must be very close to the edge of the cliff.
Fernand let go of Melissa's hand, vaulted over the rail and beckoned urgently to her to follow.
It was her opportunity to escape from this crazy and possibly dangerous game of let's pretend.
But even as the idea occurred to her, she dismissed it; from the athletic way Fernand had cleared the rail it was likely that his legs were as strong and muscular as his sinewy arms and he would probably catch her long before she reached the house.
Her flight would have convinced him that she was on her way to betray him and who knew what it would enter his confused mind to do to her?
Without a word, she clambered over the rail, rather awkwardly because of the camera dangling from her wrist.
Now the sound of the river seemed to come from beneath their feet.
They must be almost at the edge of the cliff.
She remembered Alain Gebrec's warning that parts of it were unstable; a vision of the shattered body of Wolfgang Klein swam before her eyes, her stomach contracted and her legs turned to cotton wool.
When, without warning, Fernand dropped on to all fours beside a huge outcrop of bare rock, she all but fell on top of him.
He glanced back as if looking for signs of pursuit.
‘We must move quickly now, before we are seen,’ he whispered and began to crawl forward round the rock.
His head and shoulders disappeared; only his backside and his long legs in the coarse blue trousers were visible.
Melissa felt a wild  desire to laugh at the thought of herself, a sane Englishwoman in her forties, playing a sort of eighteenth-century game of cops and robbers with a simple-minded Frenchman suffering from delusions.
It was utterly ludicrous.
It scared her to death.
Fernand had completely vanished, giving her a second chance to escape, yet, almost without hesitation, she began to follow.
She felt certain that he intended her no harm and her fear began to recede, its place taken by a surge of excitement and anticipation.
She was being led to a place that many people had heard about, but only a handful of desperate, hunted souls had actually seen.
Reaching the point where Fernand had disappeared, she crawled round the angle of rock.
Before her was a narrow ledge, scarcely more than a metre wide.
On the left was the overhanging face of the cliff, beneath which it would be impossible to stand upright.
On the right was a sheer drop into nothing.
‘Don't look down.
Come to me!’
Almost transfixed with terror, Melissa dragged her eyes from the edge.
Fernand was crouched in a cleft in the rock, a little above her and less than three metres away.
Her entire body was shaking, yet the sight of his brown arm reaching out towards her and the confident ring in his voice gave her courage.
She began inching towards him, hugging the face of the cliff, praying that the rock beneath her would hold.
She almost wept with relief as his strong fingers closed round her hand and guided her to the safety of a broad platform of stone, where at last it was possible to stand upright.
He bowed ceremonially and gestured into the black cavern behind them.
‘Welcome to the secret refuge!’ he said proudly.
Seven
A few years previously, Melissa had been in the Cévennes on a motoring holiday with her parents-in-law.
Margaret and Arthur Craig were, strictly speaking, her parents-out-of-law, since their son, Guy, had died in a car accident without even knowing that she was pregnant, let alone considering marriage.
Distraught with grief and shock, rejected by her own mother and father, Melissa had been taken by the warm-hearted Craigs into their own home; the small matter of illegitimacy had been discreetly dealt with by a statutory change of name and a wedding-ring, and the bereaved parents had found consolation for the loss of their only child in caring for his son.
It was during that holiday that the notion had first come to Melissa of setting a novel in the region.
They had been visiting Trabuc and their guide had made reference to the use of the famous grottoes as a meeting-place by the Camisards.
At the time, the term meant nothing to her, but she had been intrigued, read the references to the religious wars in the regional guide-book and mentally filed the information for future use.
The grottoes themselves she had found disappointing.
She had been reminded of a school outing, with the guide leading the party in a crocodile down man-made stairways protected by iron railings, stopping every few yards to bombard his audience with statistics or manipulate the complex lighting and communication system.
There had been high spots, of course— particularly the grand couloir, with its subterranean lake and its vast stalactites overhanging the uncannily still green water — but the presence of so much technology and the  chattering tourists had the effect of reducing a natural wonder to the level of a modern theme park.
She recalled trying to imagine the feelings of the fugitives in those far-off times as they waited — perhaps round a guttering lamp, perhaps in total darkness — while a rapacious enemy combed the countryside above their heads, thirsty for blood.
For once, her imagination had failed her, stifled by the chorus of predictable questions, the exclamations of wonder and admiration, the admonitions of anxious parents to over-venturesome children.
Now, standing beside Fernand in the mouth of a gash in the cliff, with the river raging beneath their feet and an ink-dark cavern ahead, she experienced a tingle of awe and anticipation that swept away the fear and the vertigo.
‘Wait here a moment!’
Fernand disappeared into the cave; an instant later there was a click and a powerful torch drove a beam into the darkness.
Slowly, it moved upwards among jagged folds of rock hanging like petrified curtains above their heads; it swung to the right and travelled downwards, glistening on a myriad crystalline particles in the rock face; it moved across to the left and traced a black line where the stone floor ended abruptly just short of the far wall.
‘Never go over there,’ warned Fernand.
‘That way, it is death!’
Like a pebble in a well-shaft, the words fell into the void and then came rushing back from invisible walls, echoing above the roar of the water: ‘it is death…is death…is death!’
Melissa closed her eyes and swallowed the knot in her throat.
‘I'll remember,’ she said faintly.
‘Come!’
He moved forward, shining the torch ahead of them.
Glancing over her shoulder, Melissa saw that the entrance had already shrunk to a slit.
With an effort, she drove from her mind the thought of the return journey, filling it instead with the experience of the moment, absorbing the sights, the impressions and sensations, storing them in her brain, wishing  she had a notebook with her so that she could record them in all their vividness and immediacy.
Fernand stopped and set the torch upright on a ledge.
There was a scraping sound, the flare of a match and a whiff of paraffin, then the soft yellow light of a storm lantern replaced the harsh electric beam.
‘Now, we can penetrate to the refuge itself!’
His voice was hushed, almost reverent.
Melissa felt as if she were about to enter a church.
They moved beneath an archway of stalactites.
There were no corresponding accretions on the floor, no moisture dripped from overhead.
Aeons ago, the waters must have taken a different path and the men who discovered the cave had chipped away the stalagmites to make a passage into the gallery beyond, the gallery where Melissa and Fernand now stood.
She stared incredulously about her.
The place was furnished; there were chairs, a deal table, a couple of mattresses.
There was even a worn rug spread on the uneven stones and a heap of blankets and pillows.
For a full minute, neither of them spoke.
The sound of the water had become muted; like background music, it receded from consciousness, becoming almost a part of the stillness and the silence.
Fernand set his lantern on the table and indicated one of the chairs.
‘Will you sit down, Madame?’
He might have been receiving her in the best parlour on a Sunday afternoon.
Facing him across the bleached wooden plank, Melissa became aware of an extraordinary change in his manner.
His dark eyes no longer burned with fanaticism, nor were they watchful or mistrustful, but warm, friendly, almost humorous.
‘I regret, I cannot offer any refreshment, Madame,’ he said with a smile.
‘I was not expecting a visitor!’
‘Please, don't apologise,’ she murmured, wondering if this was another phase of the game, yet sensing that it was not.
Her pulse rate had slowed to somewhere near normal; she sat back in the creaking wooden chair in a deliberate effort to appear relaxed, and returned his smile.
‘I would never have  believed such a place existed,’ she continued, glancing round the cave.
‘When was it discovered?’
‘It has been known to our people for centuries.
The Camisards took refuge here from the Catholic armies…and the Maquis used it as a hiding place for their weapons during the Occupation.’
‘And the Germans never found it?’
‘Never.
Sometimes, when the Gestapo came in search of one of our refugees, the men of the Maquis were able to conceal him here until the danger was past.’
‘Your refugees?’
Melissa remembered what Rose had said.
‘Do you mean foreigners?’
‘But yes.
Before the war, they came from many lands to escape from the Nazis — Czechs, Poles, Hungarians, Yugoslavs, even some Germans who were against Hitler.
Many went to Paris to find work, but after the fall of France they began making their way to the cities of the south, where they could live in safety.
But, in 1942, the  Wehrmacht moved into the whole of our country and things changed.’
‘And the refugees fled to the mountains?’
‘Not at first.
At first, things were not so bad.
The Germans were more interested at that time in hunting Communists, but later came the Gestapo and then things became much more dangerous.
It was then that the city pastors began asking their brethren in the mountain villages to organise sanctuary for the refugees.
We gave them food and shelter, and in return they worked on our farms, helped tend the flocks, bring in the harvest…’
‘You mean, they lived here openly?
Didn't anyone inform on them?’
Fernand drew himself erect in his chair and lifted his head.
‘That is not our way,’ he said simply.
‘The people of the Cévennes have always given refuge to the oppressed.’
‘And they lived here in safety throughout the war?’
‘Alas, not always in safety.
Among the so-called refugees, there were spies sent by the Germans.
One such betrayed some of our best men.’
A shadow fell over his face and he became silent, as if at some disturbing memory.
Recalling the tragedy of which Juliette had spoken and which had had such a devastating effect on his mind, Melissa felt uneasy.
She sensed that it might take but a tiny jolt to send him back into his fantasy world.
She glanced at her watch; already it was well past four and Iris would be expecting her at five.
‘Perhaps…’ she began, but Fernand was speaking again.
It was as if she was no longer there; his eyes were unfocused and his voice expressionless.
‘Many died because of his treachery, some of them his own countrymen…and Roland…
Roland!’
His voice broke and a spasm of pain contorted his face.
Overwhelmed with compassion, Melissa put out a hand and laid it on his arm.
A single tear fell on it before he regained control and said with quiet pride, ‘The traitor escaped our justice, but our refuge remained a secret.’
‘Thank you for bringing me here,’ she said.
‘I feel very privileged.’
‘I bring you because I know you to be one of us.’
The final words, and something in the tone of his voice, sent a chill up Melissa's spine.
Up to now she had been so enthralled by the adventure that, despite being clad in only a cotton shirt and slacks, she had hardly noticed the cold.
She shivered and rubbed her arms, trying to conceal her rising agitation.
Fernand stood up.
‘Forgive me, Madame.
I regret, the central heating does not work!’
He was back in the present, outwardly rational, with a flash of wry humour.
‘We must return.’
He picked up the lantern and led the way.
When they reached the next chamber he extinguished it and exchanged it for the torch.
In silence, they made their way back to where the sunlight pierced the cliff.
The cleft in the rock made a dramatic framework to the distant mountains, reminding Melissa of her initial reason for this expedition.
She glanced at the automatic camera attached to her wrist; all this time she had been clutching it without giving it a thought.
Leaving the torch on its ledge, Fernand moved towards the entrance and then stopped, half-turned and gestured to the far wall and the sinister shadow that marked the emptiness below.
‘Remember my warning, if you should ever have need to return here.’
‘I'll remember,’ faltered Melissa, aware once more of the sound of the river echoing round the cavern.
Her head swam; she shut her eyes and pressed herself against the wall, fighting to steady herself for the return trip, struggling to contain an urge to vomit.
When she opened her eyes, Fernand had gone.
She peered out and saw him crawling on hands and knees along the ledge.
It took more courage than she knew she possessed to follow him.
With clenched teeth, keeping her head low and her eyes half-closed, she hugged the cliff-face and inched her way along.
Her outstretched hand disturbed a fragment of loose rock, sending it tumbling over the precipice; for one hideous moment she fancied the entire ledge was on the move and about to hurl her into the chasm.
When at last she was able to stand upright in safety, her knees buckled and her body was drenched with sweat.
She heard the distant sound of the tractor starting up, which meant that Fernand had no intention of waiting for her.
It was no matter; she knew the way back.
She stopped for a moment to brush the dust from her hands and clothes and set off back to the house.
It was a quarter to five when she reached it.
There was still no sign of the others.
Melissa slipped indoors to wash her face and hands; it was important to appear normal, as any hint of agitation would be pounced on by Iris and lead to a cross-examination.
She went back to the car, put away the camera, fetched her book and settled in a chair by the pool to wait.
A few minutes later she heard the tractor clattering into the yard.
Through the archway she saw Fernand jump down, open the door of the shed, then climb up again and drive in.
She wondered if he would tell Juliette of  their visit to the refuge.
Perhaps the memory was already buried in some corner of his mind.
She began idly turning the pages of the book.
Moments later a shadow fell across it.
Philippe Bonard was standing beside her.
‘You permit?’
He gestured toward an empty chair.
‘Of course.’
‘Thank you.’
He pulled the chair round to face hers and sat down.
It was easy to see why Iris found the man so attractive.
He had a magnetic quality which would have drawn attention even without the good looks, the hand-made clothes and impeccable grooming.
It was impossible not to respond to his smile.
‘Where are your students?’ she asked.
‘Surely you haven't deserted them?’
‘by no means.
They are in the library, preparing for tomorrow's exercise.’
‘What exercise is that?’
‘I have made arrangements with certain people in the neighbourhood — a pastor, a doctor, business people, a local historian and so on— to receive my students from time to time and talk about their work.
It helps to give my students’— he reiterated the words with an almost fatherly affection —‘an insight into the minds, the outlook, the culture of the French people…and, of course, it provides excellent opportunities for them to improve their French.’
Hands and shoulders swam to and fro, emphasising each point.
‘I'm sure it's very useful experience,’ said Melissa politely.
‘It is a good principle, you know,’ Bonard continued, warming to his theme, ‘especially for mature students, to leave the classroom and work in the environment.’
His eyes shone with the enthusiasm of a man who has found his vocation.
‘Your good friend Iris, she shares my philosophy.
Each day, she takes her class out of doors to experience Nature and learn from her wisdom.
Today, for example, they are down by the river, observing the wildlife, the vegetation, the reflections in  the water.’
He sat back in his chair, beaming with pride as he added, ‘The pure water of our French rivers is unsurpassed in the entire world!’
‘You almost make me wish I had enrolled on your course,’ said Melissa, with a certain lack of sincerity.
Patriotism was all very well, but she felt this was going over the top.
When mounted on his hobby-horse, Philippe Bonard had the makings of a thundering bore.
‘It would have been a privilege to have you as a student…ah, but your French is already of so excellent a quality…and you are occupied with your researches.
Have you had a profitable day?’
‘Very, thank you,’ she said, wondering what his reaction would be if he knew how she had spent the past hour.
‘By the way, you mentioned a local historian.
Would that by chance be Antoinette Gebrec, Alain's mother?’
‘But yes!
She is one of several on whose services I may call from time to time.
You know her?’
‘I met her today.
She has very kindly been helping me with my research.’
‘But that is so delightful!
Alain will be enchanted when he hears.’
He glanced round as the throb of a diesel engine sounded in the yard.
‘There he comes now.
He went to fetch Iris and her class in the minibus.’
‘He seems to have been quite badly affected by the tragedy,’ said Melissa.
‘Was Wolfgang Klein a close friend?’
Bonard waved a dismissive hand.
‘They were drinking companions, that is all.
But Alain, he is so sensitive, he has taken the affair to heart.
He insisted on being the one to break the news to the young man's family, despite his own distress.’
He spoke almost apologetically, like a father excusing the whims of a favourite child.
He got to his feet.
‘Will you kindly excuse me for a moment?
I must go and enquire if the artists have had a successful afternoon.’
He went to meet them as they scrambled from the bus, hand extended in welcome, greeting them individually by name and exchanging a few words with each one.
He spent a short time  in conversation with Iris, who looked at him in a way that made Melissa want to shake her.
Eventually she managed to catch her friend's eye; Iris waved and mouthed, ‘Five minutes,’ before following the others into the house.
Gebrec returned from putting the bus away and Bonard took him by the arm and led him to the terrace.
‘Your charming mother has been helping Melissa with her researches,’ he said.
‘Is not that delightful?’
‘Really?’
Gebrec smiled politely, but Melissa had the impression that the announcement gave him no particular pleasure.
‘I did not know you were acquainted with Maman.’
Briefly, Melissa explained how the meeting had come about.
‘She very kindly invited me to lunch and she has given me a lot of useful information.’
‘I am pleased to hear it.’
Again, the flat tone that seemed to contradict his words.
His eye fell on the book on her lap and his expression darkened.
‘She did not recommend that!’ he exclaimed.
‘No, I found it for myself,’ she said, trying not to show her irritation.
Mentally, she was demanding: who do you people think you are?
First your mother, now you, trying to dictate what I should read.
Aloud, she said: ‘I have your mother's book on the Camisards as well, of course — that is the period that interests me particularly — but I want to learn about more recent history as well .’
‘Maman is writing an account of that period.
It will be much better than this…rubbish!’
‘I'm sure your mother's book will be excellent,’ said Melissa crisply.
‘When it is published, I shall order a copy.
It will be interesting to make comparisons.’
Gebrec was not placated.
‘My advice to you is not to waste your time reading that one,’ he said rudely.
‘Alain!
Melissa will make her own decision about what she will read.’
The mild reproach in Bonard's tone did not match the anger in his eyes.
Gebrec stared coldly back at him and Melissa sensed that they were on the verge of a confrontation, but Bonard's attention was diverted by the approach of the  members of his class, who had begun to emerge from the house.
At their head was Dieter Erdle; Melissa guessed from the gleam of amusement in his eye that he had overheard the rather heated exchange.
‘I see you have been studying local history, Melissa,’ he observed, indicating the book.
‘It is a fascinating subject, is it not?’
He had not asked if he might use her first name, but it seemed to be the practice here and she had no reason to object.
‘It certainly is,’ she agreed.
‘Rose tells me it is one of your interests.’
‘That is so.
I have learned many things I did not know about events in this region.’
The glance he directed at Gebrec held a hint of malice and was greeted with an angry frown.
‘Perhaps we can have a talk some time?’
‘Yes, why not?’
It might be interesting; he was obviously intelligent and well-educated, and the fact that both Dora and Iris had written him off as a fortune-hunter caused her no particular misgivings.
‘Tomorrow?’ he suggested.
‘We missed you at lunch today…we understood you might be joining us.’
‘Philippe very kindly gave me an open invitation, but today I was in Alès, as the guest of Alain's mother.’
She half-turned towards Gebrec, who was still standing beside her, glowering.
‘Ah, yes, the famous local historian.
But that is not one of her works, I think.’
Erdle indicated the book that had caused the recent controversy, still clutched in Melissa's hand; now, he was smiling, openly taunting Gebrec.
‘You'll find that interesting reading, Melissa.
There is one passage in particular…may I?’
He reached out for the book, but before Melissa could give it to him, Gebrec snatched it from her.
‘It is rubbish, I tell you!’
He flung the book to the ground and stormed back towards the house, leaving Melissa open-mouthed.
‘Tut-tut!
Böse Junge!’ murmured Erdle with undisguised glee.
He retrieved the book and handed it back to her.
‘We  will talk more tomorrow.
Your friend awaits you, I think,’ he added, nodding towards the courtyard where Iris was standing beside Melissa's car, and speaking for the first time in faultless English instead of French.
‘You're quite a linguist,’ she said.
‘It is necessary for business purposes that I speak the major languages of Europe.
I have tried to persuade our excitable friend that he should do the same.’
His smile was contemptuous.
‘Until tomorrow!’
Eight
‘So what have you been doing today?’ asked Iris.
Melissa fastened her safety belt and reached for the ignition.
‘Having lunch with Madame Gebrec.’
She backed the Golf round and headed for the exit.
Jack Hammond, who was walking towards his car, smiled and raised a hand in greeting as they passed.
‘How's he getting on?’ she asked.
‘Very well.
A real nature-lover…has an original eye.’
After a pause, Iris added casually, ‘Invited us both for a drink after dinner.’
‘That's nice.
Did you accept?’
‘Didn't see why not.
You seemed all for it.
What's Madame Gebrec like?’
‘Absolutely charming, bubbling over with enthusiasm.’
Iris grunted.
‘More than you can say for her son.’
‘He is a down-beat sort of character, isn't he?’
‘Perhaps he takes after his father.
Did you meet him too?’
‘Hardly.
He was killed in the war.’
Iris tilted her head back and yawned.
‘Learn anything useful from Mum?’
‘Oh yes, she's very clued up about the Camisards.
She's writing another book, by the way, about the Occupation.’
Melissa gave a chuckle.
‘I'd unwittingly bought one by a rival historian and you should have seen the way she turned her nose up at it.
Her son reacted even more strongly — he was downright rude.’
‘Professional jealousy, I suppose.’
‘I guess so.
I got the impression that there's one bit they particularly object to.
Dieter Erdle must have read it — he seems to know what it is.’
‘Blowing the gaff about a black marketeer in the family?’ suggested Iris with a mischievous grin.
‘That's a thought.
I've only glanced through the book, but it contains a lot of personal recollections.
Maybe some people took the chance of paying off old scores.’
‘Not easy after so long to guarantee accuracy.
Where is it anyway?’
‘The book?
In the glove compartment.’
They had reached the auberge; Melissa turned into the car park and switched off the engine.
Iris rummaged.
‘Your camera's here as well.
Want it?’
‘Might as well.
The view from our balcony's worth a shot.’
They went up to their room.
Melissa kicked off her shoes, dumped her handbag on the floor, flopped on her bed and closed her eyes.
It had been quite a day.
Iris was moving around, opening and closing drawers.
‘Hullo, what happened to this?’ she demanded suddenly.
Melissa opened her eyes.
‘What happened to what?’
‘Your camera case.’
Iris held it in front of her nose, showing the scratches and scuff marks it had collected during the nerve-racking passage to Fernand's cave.
The memory made her heart skip a beat.
‘I…
I must have dropped it,’ she said weakly.
‘Now pull the other one!
You've been up to something.
And how did you get them so filthy?’
Like a heat-seeking missile, Iris's gaze homed on the knees of Melissa's blue cotton slacks and the smudges of grey dust which had resisted her hasty brushing.
‘Taken up bird-watching?’
‘I went up towards the belvedere to take some pictures, that's all.
I…tripped on a rock and fell over.’
She wasn't in the habit of lying to Iris and knew she wasn't making a particularly good job of it.
Iris cocked a sceptical eyebrow.
‘Saw the nutter, didn't you?’
‘If you mean Fernand, he was working up there, yes.
He didn't try to rape me, if that's what's worrying you!’
Iris ignored the feeble attempt at humour.
‘You promised you'd stay away from him,’ she scolded.
‘For goodness’ sake, Iris, stop banging on about Fernand.
We had a very interesting chat and he was as normal as could be.
There's no harm in him at all.’
‘That's what you think.
Never know what goes on in a nutter's mind.
Don't say I didn't warn you!’
Iris yanked her leotard from a drawer and headed for the bathroom.
‘Going to get changed and do my yoga.’
‘I'll have a shower when you've finished in there.’
With the noise of the water splashing round her head and drumming into the bath, Melissa found herself reliving the time she had spent with Fernand in that dark, echoing cavern.
Despite her confident assertion, she knew that Iris had a point.
It was not only physical wounds that left scars; damage to the mind could throb and fester in secret over many years, and some flash of memory could trigger unexpected, possibly violent reactions.
Yet Fernand had spoken openly of the war and of his brother's death without showing a trace of rancour or a desire for revenge.
She recalled, with a lump in her throat, the slow tears gathering, glistening in the light of the lantern as they slid down the furrows in his cheeks.
There had been suffering, but no hatred, in those eyes.
Just the same, she had experienced an uneasy moment when he spoke of the unnamed traitor who had brought about his brother's death.
There was no doubt that the tragedy was as fresh in his mind as the day it had happened.
So, what if Wolfgang Klein's innocent enquiries about hidden caves and grottoes had churned up bitter memories of accounts still unsettled?
Hadn't Monsieur Gauthier hinted as much, spoken of how Fernand was always ‘looking over his shoulder for Germans’?
And what about Dieter Erdle — could he possibly also represent a threat in the mind of someone suffering that kind of delusion?
Should she forget her promise to Juliette and tell Hassan what she knew?
‘No!’
She spoke the word aloud as she turned off the water  and began rubbing herself furiously with a towel.
Fernand had witnessed death, but he was not a violent man.
She recalled his sister's words: ‘Even in our childish games, he would never be the one to take a life.’
If she were to break her word, the big gendarme would go rushing off to his commandant with his ‘fresh evidence’, demanding to be allowed to treat Klein's death as murder; he would harass and bully brother and sister, tearing open wounds that at best were only half-healed, forcing them to relive the pain and terror of the past.
‘Not if I have anything to do with it,’ she muttered as she plugged in her hair-dryer.
‘Fernand might have the odd screw loose, but I'd swear he'd never hurt anyone.’
At dinner that evening, Rose and Dora were full of their ‘projects’ and the appointments arranged for the following morning.
It was obvious that Bonard had been to considerable trouble to arrange for the members of his class to meet people with similar interests to their own.
Dora had asked about sporting facilities in the region and been promised an interview with the manager of a leisure complex in Alès; Rose, who belonged to an amateur drama group in Carshalton, was to meet the director of a forthcoming performance of ‘son et lumière’ whose office was in Anduze.
Since they would be going in different directions and at different times, Dora would use their car and another member of the group would give Rose a lift.
‘It all sounds highly organised,’ said Melissa, piling whipped cream on her fromage blanc and pretending not to hear Iris's scathing comments about cholesterol.
It had been a good dinner and the réserve maison had sent pleasant messages around her system, signifying that after the adventures of the day, all was now well.
‘Oh, it is,’ agreed Dora.
‘I must say, Philippe Bonard has some excellent ideas.
He deserves to make a success of his school.’
‘Glad you think so.’
Iris glowed as if she had received a personal compliment.
‘I imagine Dieter Erdle is doing some sort of history project?’ said Melissa unthinkingly between mouthfuls.
Dora stiffened and made no comment, but Rose reacted with enthusiasm.
‘No, actually, he's got a meeting with the manager of some factory or other.
He's got to polish up his business French for his job, you know.
History is just a hobby for him.’
‘Yes, you told me.
As a matter of fact, I was talking to him briefly this afternoon and we agreed we'd have a chat some time.
Alain Gebrec seemed less than enthusiastic, though.’
‘Why was that, do you think?’
‘Some disagreement as to whose version of something or other is the authentic one.
Alain was getting quite hot under the collar and Dieter seemed to be winding him up on purpose.’
‘Oh, I'm sure he didn't mean it.’
Rose was quick to defend her young admirer.
Dora sniffed disdainfully.
‘I'm quite sure he did.
He's that sort of person.’
Rose flushed with annoyance and seemed about to make a sharp retort.
‘We have to go,’ said Iris, getting to her feet.
‘Come on, Melissa, I told Jack half-past eight and it's nearly that already.’
‘Made a hash of that, didn't I?’ said Melissa when they got outside.
‘You did give things a bit of a stir,’ Iris agreed.
‘Shouldn't let it worry you.
They've probably had words before now.’
‘I suspect they'll be having a few more.’
‘More than likely.’
After the business of the day and the more important business of the evening meal, the inhabitants of Roziac were enjoying a few hours of leisure in the open air.
On their way to the Lion d'Or, where they were to meet Jack, Iris and Melissa passed old women knitting and gossiping in doorways or leaning out of windows, young women sauntering along with babies in perambulators, and leather-clad youths astride shiny  motorbikes parked at the kerbside while they chatted up their mini-skirted girls.
In the central square a game of boules was in progress under the critical gaze of a group of shirt-sleeved men in baggy trousers, cropped heads enveloped in the pungent smoke from their Gauloises, glasses clutched in brawny fists.
In between swigs they expressed approval or disparagement of the play with drawn-out exclamations of ‘Ooooh!’ and ‘Aaaah!’and — from those whose hands were not otherwise encumbered — the occasional burst of applause.
Moths fluttered in the light of lamps hanging from the trees as if dancing to the soft, rhythmic jingle of the cicadas.
‘Picturesque!’ commented Iris.
‘Unspoilt, too.
Not like the Côte d'Azur.’
‘It's a lot colder than the Côte d'Azur in winter,’ Melissa reminded her as they strolled on.
On the terrace of the Lion d'Or, Jack was sitting alone at one of the round white tables, a spare chair tilted forward on either side of him.
When he spied his guests, he jumped to his feet and called a greeting, straightening the chairs and holding them one after the other to steady them on the uneven gravel while they sat down.
Melissa had the distinct impression that he held Iris's chair for a fraction longer than her own.
He asked what they would like to drink and they asked for coffee, declining his offer of liqueurs.
They sat sipping the strong, dark brew and chatted idly about nothing in particular, enjoying the warm velvety air, the star-dusted turquoise sky slowly changing to amethyst and the heady-sweet scent from a clump of yellow broom.
Immediately below the terrace was the Mauzère, wider and deeper here than at Les Châtaigniers and flowing less swiftly.
A flotilla of ducks paddled past, their wakes forming arrowheads on the darkening surface of the water.
‘How's that for one of ‘Nature's Designs’?’ suggested Jack.
Iris gave a nod of approval.
‘Funny you should say that.
Thought I might make the next course ‘Patterns of Light and Shade’.’
‘You're giving another course?’
Jack leaned forward, his eyes alive with interest.
‘When?’
‘Not sure.
Philippe mentioned October, but it's not definite.
Would you come?’
‘Sure, if I can.
I might bring one or two others from my art club.
When I tell them what a great teacher you are, they'll be dead keen to join.’
Iris beamed.
‘That'd be splendid.
Philippe'd be delighted.’
Her train of thought was now firmly targeted on Bonard.
She turned to Melissa.
‘Has he said anything to you about giving a creative writing course?’ she asked.
‘I did suggest…’
‘No, and I doubt if he will.’
Melissa set down her empty cup and began fiddling with her necklace.
She felt suddenly irritable.
‘When it comes to purveying language and literature, he's only interested in the home-grown variety,’ she declared.
‘He's very charming and all that, but he really is an out-and-out chauvinist.
Besides,’ she added, cutting short a protest from Iris, ‘I doubt if he'd be willing to pay the sort of fee Joe Martin would insist on.’
‘That agent of yours is a money-grubber,’ Iris complained.
‘Can't you stretch a point for a friend?’
Melissa was about to retort that as she had only known Bonard for three days he could hardly be described as a friend of hers, when a surprised, ‘Well, what do you know?’ from Jack made them both glance round.
Dieter Erdle had just arrived with Rose Kettle clinging to his arm.
They waved across before making for an empty table in the far corner.
They did not immediately sit down, but leaned on the low parapet and gazed out over the river and the mountains, she with her head inclined towards his, he with a hand resting on her shoulder.
‘Rosie and the toy-boy!’ commented Iris.
‘Bet Dora's fuming!’
Jack gave a disapproving shake of the head.
‘A young chap like that shouldn't play on an older woman's susceptibilities.’
‘Maybe he really likes her,’ suggested Melissa.
She thought such a possibility unlikely, but she was feeling perverse.
She  had a shrewd notion what Iris's views on the subject would be — a notion that lady promptly confirmed.
‘Rubbish!’ she said stoutly, with a glance of approval for Jack.
‘Agree absolutely.
No business to lead her on like that.’
Melissa, detecting a spark of comradeship between them, decided to fan it a little.
‘He may not be leading her on.
Young men do sometimes fall for older women,’ she said.
‘Sometimes,’ Jack agreed, ‘but not in this case, I think.’
‘You can't be sure.’
‘Course he can.
You're quite right, Jack.
Tell me,’ Iris leaned forward in her seat, ‘this ‘Patterns of Light and Shade’thing…do you think…?’
Melissa sat back and let her mind wander elsewhere while they talked shop.
When Iris announced that it was time for them to return, Jack insisted on walking them back.
After a few minutes Dieter's car overtook them; when they arrived at the auberge, it was parked in the shadows a short distance away with two dim shapes close together in the front seats.
Nobody commented; after brief thanks and farewells, Jack departed and the two friends went indoors.
Madame Gauthier was perched on a stool at the reception desk, making up her accounts.
They were exchanging goodnights when Rose came in looking flushed and happy, but a trifle agitated.
‘Had a good evening?’
Iris's voice was heavily laced with irony, but Rose either did not notice or was too excited to be offended.
‘Oh, lovely, thank you!’
She looked enquiringly from one to the other.
‘I don't suppose…
I mean…could I possibly have a word with you?’
Iris's response was immediate and uncompromising.
‘If it's advice about your love life you want, pack him up before he ditches you!’
Melissa saw Rose wince.
‘Iris,’ she admonished, ‘let Rose tell us what she wants to talk about.’
‘I…
I…’
Rose was floundering.
Iris stifled a yawn.
‘If you don't mind, I'll leave you to it.
No need for two agony aunts.’
She marched down the passage towards the staircase.
‘Don't mind her — she doesn't mean to be hurtful,’ said Melissa.
‘How about seeing if there's anyone in the salon?
We could talk there.’
They sat on a couch in the empty room and Rose stared at her feet.
‘Your friend doesn't approve of me, does she?’ she said.
‘She thinks the same as Dora, that Dieter's only interested in me because I've got money.
But it isn't like that, he really cares!’
‘How can you be sure of that?’
‘I just know!’
Rose lifted her head and looked Melissa full in the face.
Despite the lines round her mouth and the flecks of grey in her hair, there was a bloom in her cheeks and her eyes shone like those of a girl who has fallen in love for the first time.
Melissa's heart went out to her.
If only it were true.
‘How long have you known him?’ she asked gently.
‘Ten days.
This is our second week at the centre.
That's the problem…you see, Dieter's enrolled for a third week and…
I'd like to stay on as well.’
‘But aren't you and Dora supposed to be visiting friends in Antibes next week?’
‘I don't really want to go.
They're her friends, not mine, and they talk about nothing but golf.
They bore me stiff.’
‘I thought you were keen on golf too.’
‘I'm not half so keen as she is — she's absolutely dedicated.
You've probably noticed how she spends every spare minute practising her putting.
Anyway, I'm not all that good — I just play to keep her company.
She's…not an easy person in some ways.
Apart from her golf, she hasn't got many interests.
I persuaded her to come on this course because I thought it would be a change for us both.’
‘I see.’
‘I just don't know what to do.
I'd much rather stay here another week, but I don't suppose she'd hear of it.’
‘Well, if that's what you really want, you'll have to tell her.
You could always join her later.’
‘That would be the sensible thing, wouldn't it?
The trouble is, I know she wouldn't go without me.’
‘She does rather manage your life, doesn't she?
Or perhaps I shouldn't have said that…’
Melissa half expected a vigorous defence of Dora's protective friendship, but the reaction was precisely the opposite.
‘How right you are!
I let her share my house because she could only afford a tiny flat of her own, and she bosses me around as if she's the one with the money .
Melissa was beginning to wish the conversation had never started; the last thing she wanted was to become embroiled in a dispute between two women she hardly knew, but Rose was looking her squarely in the eye as if demanding a response to her outburst.
‘Well, it seems to me you'll have to talk it over with her,’ she said, determined to be non-partisan.
‘After all, if Dora wanted to change her plans, you'd expect her to discuss them with you, wouldn't you?’
It was doubtful if Rose heard the last part of her remark.
She was on her feet, wearing a look of steely determination that sat oddly on her girlish features.
‘You're right.
I'm going to tell her this minute what I've decided.
Thank you for your advice, Melissa.
Goodnight.’
She almost ran from the room, as if afraid that her newly found resolve would melt away if she did not immediately put it into practice.
Melissa made her way slowly upstairs, wondering whether or not she had inadvertently made matters worse.
She found Iris in her pyjamas, sitting cross-legged on her bed and scribbling in a notebook.
She was looking distinctly pleased with herself.
‘Some ideas for ‘Patterns of Light and Shade’,’ she explained without looking up.
‘I noticed you and Jack brain-storming.
Did he come up with anything useful?’
‘Quite a bit.
Can't wait to talk to Philippe.’
She put notebook and pencil aside.
‘Was I right?’
‘About what?’
‘You know what.
Rosie and her German gigolo.
Wanted you to tell her to follow her heart, or some such rubbish.’
‘You're a fine one to talk.’
Iris's smug expression vanished.
‘Meaning?’
‘Meaning you're just as soft about your Philippe as Rose is over Dieter.’
I wish I hadn't said that, thought Melissa, seeing Iris flinch.
The two cases are quite different.
Iris has known Philippe for quite a long time.
Some people would say they had a lot in common and no doubt in some ways they have…except I'm sure that Philippe…
Iris was staring in front of her with a set expression, making no response.
After a minute she uncrossed her legs, stood up and made her way past Melissa to the bathroom without meeting her eye.
There followed several minutes of unusually energetic teeth-scrubbing, loo-flushing and hand-washing before she returned, lay down and switched off her bedside lamp, still without uttering a word.
In an effort to mend her fences, Melissa asked, ‘So what are you doing tomorrow?’
‘Taking the class to the bamboo forest,’ muttered Iris with seeming reluctance.
‘Well, that should bamboozle them.’
It wasn't much of a joke and it didn't get a laugh.
It didn't get any response at all.
Feeling weary and depressed, Melissa got ready for bed.
The evening had started so well and ended so badly.
She wondered if things were any better between Rose and Dora; if anything, she thought, they were probably worse.
As she switched off her own lamp she called, ‘Goodnight,’ but Iris did not reply.
‘Oh blast!’ she mumbled into her pillow.
‘Tomorrow's going to be one hell of a day.’
Nine
Melissa slept fitfully and awoke with a headache.
Iris was already up and splashing in the bath.
When she emerged, she responded with a grunt to Melissa's, ‘Good morning,’ and began wrestling with the bar that controlled the window shutters.
Mechanical things were not her strong point; after watching her for a couple of minutes, Melissa could stand it no longer.
She got out of bed and marched across the room.
‘Here, let me do that before you bust a gut!’
Iris relinquished the handle without argument.
Melissa began turning it and the heavy metal blind inched upwards, admitting a broadening band of sparkling light.
Outside, the early sun slanted across the mountains and filtered through the delicate green tracery of the forest.
‘Isn't that bliss!’
Forgetting for a moment the strained atmosphere of the previous evening, Melissa slid back the glass door and stepped out on to the balcony.
It was only seven o'clock, yet the air was mild enough to stand there in her nightdress.
‘Just come and look at these clouds — they've got to be one of Nature's perfect designs!’
‘Hmm?’
Iris, seated at the dressing-table, paused in the act of brushing her short, mouse-brown hair, glanced briefly through the window and turned back to the mirror without comment.
Melissa sighed and went into the bathroom.
When she came out, Iris was on the balcony doing her morning routine of breathing exercises, straight-backed, the sleeves of her cotton robe falling away from her thin arms as they rose and fell in time with the rhythmic and somewhat noisy intake and  expulsion of air.
By the time she had finished, Melissa was fully dressed and busy with her make-up.
‘I'm going for a walk before breakfast,’ she said as Iris stepped past her to reach the wardrobe.
‘I'll see you on the terrace.’
Iris, rummaging for clothes, muttered, ‘Right,’ without showing her face.
This was ridiculous.
They'd snapped at one another before — more often than not, Melissa recalled, over the involvement of one with a man considered unsuitable by the other — but any irritation had always been short-lived and apologies barely necessary.
This time, it seemed, was different.
‘Look, Iris, I'm sorry…’ she began.
‘Forget it.’
‘I didn't mean to hurt your feelings.’
‘Don't want to talk about it.’
‘All right then.
See you later.’
There was no reply.
Perhaps it hadn't been a good idea after all to come on this trip together.
They weren't used to the cheek-by-jowl contact it entailed; the notion of living in the state of interdependence that bound Dora Lavender and Rose Kettle would have horrified them both.
As next-door neighbours in their snug Cotswold cottages, they enjoyed a comfortable, undemanding relationship: discussing their work, exchanging local gossip or swapping recipes and gardening tips over coffee-breaks and the occasional meal, but always respecting each other 's privacy, never invading each other 's space.
It was the realisation that Roziac lay in the heart of Camisard country that had revived Melissa's idea for a novel set in the region.
She had casually mentioned it while glancing through Philippe Bonard's brochure.
Iris, who had spoken in glowing terms of the man and his ambitious undertaking, revealed that she had agreed to tutor a week's art course for him and immediately suggested that Melissa should accompany her.
Melissa had been intrigued to know what kind of man could  persuade Iris to leave her beloved garden for the best part of a fortnight at the height of the growing season.
This curiosity, as much as the prospect of a week's field research in one of the wildest and loveliest parts of France, had helped to make up her mind.
Mulling it over as she strolled along in the morning sunshine, passed occasionally by a battered Renault or a woman on a pushbike with a basket of baguettes swinging from the handlebars, Melissa felt more and more uneasy at her friend's obvious emotional commitment to Bonard.
It wasn't that she had anything against him personally; he was a charming and clever man, dedicated to his school, an entrepreneur who was using the fruits of his success to fulfil a lifetime's dream — and good luck to him, she thought.
But Iris, so shrewd in some ways, was hopelessly unworldly in others.
The notion that Bonard's sexual inclinations were more likely to be directed towards Alain Gebrec than herself might not enter her head.
Returning to the auberge, Melissa went straight to the terrace for breakfast.
She had hoped for the opportunity of a quiet word with Iris, of trying to smooth her ruffled feelings before the day's work, but to her surprise and annoyance she found Rose Kettle at their table and Brigitte laying a third place, while Dora, stony-faced, was sitting alone in the farthest corner.
‘I do hope you don't mind,’ pleaded Rose, while Brigitte bustled off to fetch more croissants.
‘She's still cross with me and the atmosphere is quite unpleasant, so I asked Iris if I could join you.
And I wonder,’ she went on as Melissa murmured a polite and hypocritical response, ‘if you'd be so kind as to give me a lift to the school this morning?
Dora's appointment isn't till eleven so she says she isn't in a hurry.
She's doing it on purpose, of course— I know she's planning to do some more of her wretched putting practice.
There are times’— Rose's face took on the fierce expression of a schoolgirl talking about her most hated teacher —‘when I'd like to brain her with one of her own golf-clubs!’
‘Shouldn't talk like that.
She's only thinking of your good,’ said Iris, helping herself to apricot jam.
‘Oh, I know — I don't mean it, of course.
Only, I do wish she wouldn't be so horrid about Dieter.
I expect she's jealous really, because it's me he's interested in and not her.’
‘Of course we'll give you a lift,’ said Melissa hastily, noting the contemptuous curl of Iris's lip and anxious to forestall any blunt comment that might sour the atmosphere still further.
‘But I do hope you and Dora soon settle your difference.’
She did not ask the outcome of last night's argument and was relieved when Rose did not offer to tell her.
Just at the moment she had her own anxieties without being expected to worry about other people's.
When the three of them got up to leave, Melissa glanced across at Dora and met a look of concentrated malevolence that took her by surprise.
She probably thinks I encouraged Rose to defy her, she thought uneasily as she followed the others to the car park.
When they reached Les Châtaigniers, most of Iris's class were already assembled.
Their enthusiastic welcome brought a smile to her face for the first time that morning.
She immediately fell into conversation with Jack as they waited to board the mini-bus that stood in the centre of the courtyard, ready to transport them to the Parc de Prafance with its famous forest of bamboo.
Alain Gebrec was standing at the entrance to one of the outhouses, hectoring someone inside.
After a moment Fernand emerged, an expression of sullen resentment on his face and a heavy crowbar in his hand.
For a few minutes there were heated exchanges between the two; Melissa could not catch the words, but it appeared that Gebrec was giving instructions which Fernand appeared reluctant to carry out.
Both men were making angry gestures and at one point Fernand brandished the crowbar under Gebrec's nose before flinging it to the ground in a melodramatic gesture of apparent capitulation.
Meanwhile, Philippe Bonard had emerged from the house  and was greeting Iris and her group, now installed in the mini-bus and waiting for Gebrec to drive them.
He saluted Melissa with a smile that faded as he became aware of the argument going on across the yard.
When Gebrec approached, he took him by the arm and murmured something which Melissa took to be a mild reproof.
Gebrec began expostulating and pointing in Fernand's direction; Bonard patted his arm and wagged a finger, glancing towards the bus as if saying something like ‘Not in front of the children’.
Gebrec shrugged, climbed aboard, started the engine and drove out of the yard.
Most of the other students had foregathered by this time and were awaiting their final briefing from their tutor.
It seemed that the appointments were at varying times, some quite early, others later in the day.
It had already been arranged that Eric and Daphne Lovell would drive Rose to her destination before going on to their own and would pick her up later for the return trip.
Several other people had arranged to share cars and after a good deal of last-minute discussion and instructions, they were at last on their way.
Dora Lavender had still not appeared, nor had Dieter Erdle.
Melissa was about to get back into her car when Bonard called her name and came over to speak to her.
‘What plans have you today, Melissa?’
There was a warmth in his manner that invested the polite enquiry with a genuine interest.
‘I'm going to Alès to work in the municipal library,’ she replied.
‘Madame Gebrec has recommended some books.’
Bonard nodded approvingly.
‘I am sure her advice is excellent.
Will you be joining us for lunch?
I have to instruct Juliette.’
Melissa hesitated.
‘I've no idea what time I'll be back.
Perhaps I'd better say no for today, thank you all the same.’
‘There is no need for thanks.
My house is at your disposal.
If you wish at any time to take a swim in the pool or use the library — it is always quiet, ideal for writing — you are most welcome.’
‘You are very hospitable.’
‘But it is a pleasure to entertain a lady from another country who has such a love of France and of the French language.’
There followed another brief eulogy of his mother-tongue, of its pre-eminence in the civilised world and of the importance of preserving its purity, during which Melissa felt her smile glazing over.
‘And of course,’ he finished, reverting to his normal voice, ‘as you are such a close friend of dear Iris…’
‘Yes, Iris is a very dear friend of mine.’
Involuntarily, Melissa spoke with an emphasis that took her by surprise.
She sensed that Bonard was aware of it; although his smile did not waver, his eyes registered in quick succession a question, a realisation and a reassurance.
‘Believe me, I too value her friendship,’ he said with obvious sincerity.
‘I value it most highly.’
He stood back and gave a little bow.
‘It is always a pleasure to talk to you, but I must not detain you.
I wish you a profitable day.’
It was as if a subliminal message had passed between them; as if she had said aloud, ‘Look, I understand how things are between you and Alain Gebrec, but Iris doesn't seem to and I don't want her upset,’ and as if he had responded, ‘Do not worry, I will not say or do anything to hurt her.’
She set off for Alès feeling comforted.
In the municipal library, after consultation with an assistant, Melissa settled at a table in a quiet corner with two or three of the books that Antoinette Gebrec had recommended.
She soon became absorbed, oblivious to the passage of time, and was startled when she was politely informed that the doors would shortly be closed for the midday break.
She gathered her pages of notes and went out into the sunlit streets.
Every clock in the city seemed to be booming the hour.
Crossing the Place Henri Barbusse, Melissa went in search of somewhere to eat.
She was studying the menu outside a restaurant when someone called her name.
Looking round, she saw Madame Gebrec waving from the other side of the narrow street.
Nimbly dodging cars, vans and packs of youngsters  on bicycles streaming homewards for their midday meal, the Frenchwoman skipped across and shook Melissa energetically by the hand.
‘You seek lunch?’ she said in English.
‘Bah, do not go there!
The cooking, it is execrable.
Come, I show you.’
She steered Melissa round a corner, along a narrow passage and through a net-curtained door.
In no time they were installed at a table by the window and being attended by a stately woman with an enormous bosom and a monument of granite-coloured hair.
She was evidently an old acquaintance of Madame Gebrec, who addressed her as Huguette and made solicitous enquiries about her varicose veins before the two of them began a lively discussion of the menu.
Eventually, and after due consultation with Melissa, the plat du jour of lamb spiced with juniper was agreed upon and a bottle of mineral water requested, whereupon Huguette moved majestically towards the kitchen.
‘Always I eat here when I have business in town,’ Madame Gebrec explained.
‘The chef is the husband of Huguette.
His cooking is superb.’
She lowered her voice and leaned towards Melissa.
‘Madame Craig, I am so happy to have this opportunity to speak to you.’
‘I'm happy to see you, too.
I've just been in the library, studying some of the books you recommended.
I'm so grateful for your help.’
‘But it is nothing.
It is a pleasure to be of service.’
Madame Gebrec's face became serious; she took a sip of water, put down her glass and fiddled with the stem as if she had something on her mind.
After a moment, she said, ‘I wish to apologise, Madame, for Alain's rudeness to you yesterday.
Oh, yes, I am sure he was most impolite,’ she hurried on as Melissa murmured a conventional disclaimer.
‘He telephoned to tell me about it…he was very angry when he saw you with that book and I could tell that he had said things he should not have said.’
‘Look, it doesn't matter…’
‘I ask you to believe that in normal circumstances he would  not behave like that, but he is still not quite himself…the death of his friend, you know…’
‘Please,’ Melissa urged, ‘there's no need to say any more,’but Madame Gebrec continued as if she had not spoken.
‘The Occupation…it was a bitter time for us all…even though Alain was not born until shortly before the Liberation, he did not escape unscarred.
The times that followed, they were almost as bad…and as he grew older, he became aware of the deep wounds his mother had suffered.
Anything that causes me distress…’
Her voice trembled and almost broke.
‘Don't upset yourself,’ said Melissa.
‘I quite understand.’
Madame Gebrec shook her head.
‘But no, Madame, it is impossible that you understand.
You have not known, you could not know, what it was like to live under the Occupation.
One was always afraid, there were spies everywhere and one could never be sure who were one's friends.
Not everyone was patriote, and when it was finished and the enemy had left our soil, there were those who did not speak the truth about what happened.’
‘I can well believe that,’ said Melissa.
Madame Gebrec gazed earnestly at her across the table.
Her dark eyes, which seemed almost too large for her small features, held an expression of great sadness.
She hesitated for a moment before asking in a low voice: ‘The book you bought yesterday — you have read it?’
Melissa shook her head.
‘I've hardly had time to open it yet.
When I do get round to reading it, I'll remember what you've been saying.’
She was burning with curiosity and would have liked to question Madame Gebrec, but it was obvious that to do so would arouse painful memories.
There was an awkward silence, relieved by the arrival of Huguette with their food.
She laid the plates before them, wished them ‘Bon appetit’, clasped her hands and stood in an attitude of expectation, awaiting their comments.
‘It's delicious,’ Melissa assured her after the first mouthful.
‘Your husband is a true artist of the kitchen,’ declared Madame Gebrec and Huguette withdrew, beaming.
‘Speaking of artists,’ said Melissa, ‘I think I mentioned that my friend is a well-known painter and textile designer.’
‘Yes, indeed.
How is it going with her course?’
‘Very well, I think.
I hear very favourable reports from her students.
I wonder,’ Melissa hesitated, unsure of how her request would be received, ‘Iris is always interested in the work of little-known artists and I believe…
Madame Delon mentioned that the person who painted that view of the Porte des Cévennes, the one hanging in your salon, is a friend of yours?’
Once again the great eyes grew sombre, but this time the sorrow was mingled with love and pride.
‘He was, indeed, a very dear friend,’ she murmured.
‘Alas, since many years he is no longer with us.’
‘Have you any more of his work?’
‘Just a few canvases.
They are not for sale,’ she added sharply and Melissa was at pains to reassure her.
‘No…no, I don't want to buy them…it was just…that is, would it be possible for us to see them?’
‘But of course— I should be delighted!
When would you like to come?
They are best seen in daylight, naturally.’
‘Perhaps one afternoon, after the class is finished?’
‘Why not?
Let us say tomorrow?
You will take an apéritif with me, no?’
It was an occasion to look forward to.
Neither could have foreseen the circumstances under which it would take place.
Ten
After parting from Madame Gebrec, Melissa returned to the library with the intention of working there for the rest of the afternoon, but time and again she found her mind straying from the accounts of former religious wars and the acts of unbelievable cruelty committed by both sides to the more recent clash of ideologies which, it seemed to her, differed from the old in little but the relative sophistication of the weaponry.
Even the deeds of valour, so proudly recorded, only added to her depression as she reminded herself that each was committed in response to yet one more example of man's inhumanity to man.
After an hour or so, wearied — as the combatants themselves had at last become — by the futility of it all, she abandoned her task and drove back to Roziac.
The afternoon was hot and still.
Remembering Philippe Bonard's invitation to use the pool whenever she wished, she decided to call in at the Auberge de la Fontaine and pick up her swimming costume.
She calculated that there would be time for a quick dip before afternoon tea, which Juliette normally served at a quarter to four.
She arrived at Les Châtaigniers shortly before half-past three, expecting to find the garden and the pool deserted.
Instead, several members of Bonard's class, including Rose, Daphne and Eric, were already in the water; others were sitting on the terrace making notes.
Presumably, after carrying out their assignments, they had been returning at irregular intervals and were now preparing their reports for the final session of the afternoon.
There was no sign of Bonard or his assistant.
The water was cool and refreshing; Melissa found it a relief to stretch and exercise her limbs after the hours spent poring over books.
After swimming a few lengths of the pool, she turned  and floated on her back, enjoying the warmth of the sun on her half-submerged body, listening to the splashing of the other swimmers, their laughing voices, the harsh cries of magpies in the nearby forest, the occasional insect droning past.
The vague sense of depression that had settled over her in the library began to slip away.
She decided that she had done enough research; it was time to start detailed plotting of her novel.
Somebody called, ‘Tea's ready,’ and the bathers scrambled out of the water and began drying themselves.
Rose picked up a tube of sun-cream and held it out to Daphne.
‘Will you do my back for me?’ she asked.
‘Certainly.’
Daphne took the tube, squeezed a white worm of cream on to Rose's shoulders and began spreading it with her large, plump hands.
The contrast between the two as they stood one behind the other struck Melissa as comical.
They're like the ‘before’ and ‘after’pictures in an advertisement for a slimming programme, she thought.
Daphne's huge bosom and vast posterior looked as if they were about to burst from her too-tight black costume; Rose, small-boned and slender, looked remarkably young and pretty in an aquamarine bikini that suited her fair colouring.
Melissa, remembering the events of the previous evening, was beginning to believe that it was not impossible for Dieter Erdle to be genuinely attracted to her.
She wondered idly why Rose had not asked him to apply the sun-cream and then realised that he was not among the swimmers.
Perhaps he had not yet returned from his interview.
Her reflections were interrupted by Dora, whom she had vaguely noticed rummaging in the boot of their car when she arrived and who now came striding towards them.
‘Rose, my nine iron is missing,’ she said.
Receiving nothing but a blank look, she raised her voice and repeated impatiently, ‘My nine iron, I can't find it.’
‘I'm not deaf,’ said Rose pettishly.
‘Well, have you taken it?’
‘Oh, for goodness’ sake!’
Rose took her tube of cream from  Daphne and began anointing her arms and legs.
‘Why do you suppose I'd do that?
You must have left it at home.’
‘I tell you I didn't.’
At that moment, the art group emerged and headed for the tea-table.
Iris spotted Melissa and came straight across to her.
‘Has Gebrec come back yet?
Have you seen Philippe?’ she asked.
‘I haven't seen either of them but I've only been back a little while,’ replied Melissa.
‘Is there a problem?’ she added, seeing the anxiety in her friend's face.
‘Gebrec's taken off.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Supposed to pick us up at lunchtime and never turned up.
Philippe's very worried.’
‘Hasn't he any idea where he's gone?’
‘Seems not.
He didn't take his car or the mini-bus.’
‘There's Philippe now.’
Bonard had just emerged on to the terrace.
It was evident from his preoccupied expression and the abstracted way he ran his fingers through his thatch of silver hair that Gebrec had still not returned.
The news that something was amiss quickly spread to the rest of the group, who gathered round him to hear the latest developments.
‘I am most concerned,’ he was saying in French as Iris and Melissa joined them.
‘He was in a somewhat distressed state when he came to see me after taking Iris and her students to the Parc de Prafance.’
‘He seemed all right to me,’ commented Chrissie, after Melissa had interpreted.
‘Did you notice anything, Merv?’
‘Mmm…he seemed a bit quiet,’ said Mervyn.
‘I wouldn't have said distressed…more preoccupied.
He certainly didn't have much to say for himself.’
‘He had a slanging match with Fernand before we set off,’ said Jack.
‘Perhaps that upset him?’
‘Oh, that is nothing extraordinary.’
Bonard's shoulders lifted dismissively.
‘They have many differences.
Fernand was employed by the previous owner and does not always see eye  to eye with Alain on the way the estate should be managed, but no…’
‘So what do you suppose it was?’ asked Chrissie.
‘He would not tell me.
We had some business to discuss, but his mind seemed to be elsewhere: I asked if there was anything wrong and he said ‘No,’ but I could tell that he was keeping something back.
So I asked him again, asked if I could help, and he became very agitated.
He said, ‘No one can help’, and rushed out of the room.
I have not seen him since.’
‘Is he in his room, perhaps?’ suggested Mervyn.
‘He is not in the house.
I have searched thoroughly.’
There was a pause, during which Dora was heard to mutter, ‘A lot of fuss about nothing.
Why do the French have to make such a drama out of everything?’
In the uncomfortable silence that followed, while the others were trying to think of something tactful to say, the sound of a car pulling into the courtyard sounded unnaturally loud.
A door slammed, footsteps approached, and Dieter Erdle walked through the archway on to the terrace.
His arrival seemed to break a spell.
The group fragmented and re-formed in twos and threes, speculating on possible reasons for Gebrec's disappearance.
Rose went scuttling off to intercept Dieter; she grabbed him by the hand and drew him towards the tea-table, her bird-like voice rising above the general chatter as she told him what had happened.
Hearing what sounded like a muttered exclamation of fury at her elbow, Melissa looked around and saw Dora turn on her heel and march off into the orchard, where she stopped under an apple tree and stared up into the branches as if inspecting its heavy crop of fruit.
Even at that distance, her stance indicated suppressed rage and frustration.
The men of the party were discussing the situation and it was plain that, unlike Dora, they were taking it seriously.
Melissa was intrigued to notice that Jack Hammond seemed to have taken charge, with Dieter Erdle as his lieutenant.
Together with Iris and several others, she moved closer to listen.
‘Wherever he went, he was on foot,’ said Jack.
‘His car, Philippe's Peugeot and the 2CV that Fernand uses are all in their usual places.
We don't even know which direction he took.’
‘Didn't anyone at all see him go out?’ asked Mervyn.
‘Fernand or Juliette, for example?’
‘Apparently Fernand was out too.
He went to the supermarket to do some shopping for Juliette.
She doesn't know anything either.’
‘What about Philippe's secretary?’ asked Dieter.
‘Never thought to ask.
I don't think I've ever set eyes on her,’ said Jack.
‘Marie-Claire,’ Dieter explained.
‘She works in a cubbyhole next to his office in the turret.
She hardly ever shows her face downstairs.’
‘Has Philippe talked to her about Gebrec's disappearance?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Would you care to ask him?’
‘Sure.’
Dieter went off and returned a few minutes later with the information that Marie-Claire never came in on a Wednesday because her children's school was closed on that day.
‘So she's no help,’ said Jack.
‘Wasn't anyone here at all, besides Philippe and Juliette?’
‘It seems not.’
‘So, what do we do?’ asked Mervyn.
‘If Gebrec was upset or worried about something and just wanted to be alone to think things over,’ said Jack, ‘he might have gone up to the belvedere, or down by the river where we went yesterday to do our painting.’
‘You'd think he'd be back by now,’ said Mervyn.
‘Unless he's had an accident or been taken ill.’
‘D'you think we should form a search party?’
‘I've just had a dreadful thought,’ said Chrissie, her eyes wide with foreboding and an ominous throb in her voice which seemed for once totally natural.
‘Supposing he's ill…really ill, I mean, with something awful…something incurable?’
She slipped her hand into Mervyn's and moved closer to him, as if for protection against some unnamed horror.
‘Suppose he felt he couldn't face it and…’
The temperature seemed to fall several degrees as the implication sank in.
‘I think,’ said Jack, ‘we'd better get on and search.’
Everyone looked at him, waiting for instructions.
‘Dieter, will you come with me?
We'll go up to the belvedere.
Mervyn, I suggest you, Eric and the rest of the men go down to the river.
Split into two parties when you get there and look a reasonable distance in both directions.
Perhaps the ladies could check the gardens and the outhouses, although I doubt if you'll find him there.’
‘I'm staying with Merv,’ Chrissie declared, clinging firmly to his hand.
‘I'll go and tell Philippe what we're doing,’ said Iris.
Jack nodded.
‘Good idea.
All right, everyone?
See you later, back here.’
They scattered and Melissa found herself left with Rose, Daphne, and the two girls Sue and Janey.
Just as the men had turned to Jack for leadership, so these four seemed to expect her to take charge of them.
‘Where do we start?’ asked Rose.
‘Some of us could try the woods on either side of the track leading down to the road — away from the belvedere.’
‘You mean, near the clearing where Fernand was unloading his rails?’
‘That's right.’
‘Where is Fernand?’ asked Daphne.
‘I don't know,’ replied Melissa uneasily.
‘I heard Alain this morning telling him to clear some dead timber.
That was when they had the argument.
I haven't seen him this afternoon.’
‘I heard a chain-saw going a while ago,’ said Daphne.
‘Is that what it was?
It sounded like a motor-bike,’ said Janey.
‘Fernand went off in the tractor soon after lunch,’ said Sue.
‘I saw him getting it out when I went to the car to get a book I'd left there.
Listen, that sounds like him now.’
As she spoke, the tractor came snorting into the yard in a  cloud of fumes with the trailer, piled high with logs, rattling and bumping behind it.
‘Well, it looks as if he did what he was told after all.
I'll go and have a word with him.’
Melissa crossed the yard and waited while Fernand backed the trailer into a corner, switched off the tractor engine and jumped down.
His face lit up when he saw her.
‘Madame, ça va?’
‘Fernand, have you seen Monsieur Gebrec?’
‘Yes, at nine o'clock this morning.
He ordered me to cut this lot immediately’— he laid heavy stress on the word, his mouth twisted in a sardonic grin —‘and I told him it would have to wait till this afternoon.’
Fernand seemed in a high good humour at the thought of putting one over on Monsieur Gebrec.
He unhitched the side of the trailer and a quantity of logs fell clattering to the ground.
‘Monsieur Gebrec has not been seen since nine-thirty this morning,’ said Melissa.
‘Do you know where he might be?
Monsieur Bonard is very concerned.’
‘No idea, Madame.
Perhaps in Ales, visiting his mother?’
‘I don't think so.
His car is still here.’
Fernand indicated with outspread hands and a jerk of his shoulders that the whereabouts of Monsieur Gebrec were a matter of total indifference to him.
He went into the shed where he kept the tractor and came back with his crowbar, with which he began levering more logs from the trailer to the ground.
The sun was pouring into the courtyard and his brawny arms glistened with sweat.
Melissa watched for a few seconds as he worked, apparently impervious to the heat, then turned back to where the others were waiting.
‘He doesn't seem to know anything,’ she told them.
‘Let's get started.
Daphne, will you take Janey and Sue and search the woods?’
Obediently, the three set off.
Melissa turned to Rose.
‘Shall we check the gardens and outhouses?
Where's Dora, by the way?’
‘How should I know?’ said Rose with a shrug.
‘She's hardly  speaking to me at the moment — except to accuse me of stealing her golf-clubs.’
‘Because of Dieter, I suppose?’
‘Why else?’
They crossed the courtyard and went into the garden.
From the far side of the swimming pool they caught sight of Dora sitting on the terrace, reading.
She lifted her head and stared across, her face expressionless.
‘One of us should go and tell her what's happening, don't you think?’ suggested Melissa.
‘It'd seem a bit rude to walk past without saying anything.’
‘She'd only have herself to thank,’ said Rose waspishly, then added, with a smile suggestive of a cat with newly sharpened claws, ‘anyway, I doubt if she'd know who it was with her reading glasses on.’
‘Just the same, I think I'll put her in the picture.’
Dora, her eyes hard and her face wooden, received the information with a curt nod.
‘Well, she didn't exactly overreact,’ said Melissa as she rejoined Rose.
‘All these years I've known her and I never realised what a nasty temper she has,’ said Rose.
‘Perhaps you've never crossed her before?’
Rose gave a gleeful chuckle.
‘That's what Dieter says.
Do you know what she said last night, after I'd told her what Dieter and I were planning for next week?
She said, ‘I'd like to break that bloody Kraut's neck!’
She actually swore — and she makes out she's such a lady!’
She turned to Melissa with a beseeching expression.
‘I'm entitled to another chance of happiness, aren't I?’
‘I…well, yes, I suppose so,’ said Melissa, reluctant to be inveigled into taking sides.
‘Perhaps for the moment we'd better get on with this search.’
‘Yes, of course.
I was forgetting.’
Their tour of the gardens and orchard revealed nothing.
They had just returned to the courtyard and were about to examine the various outbuildings when they heard the sound  of running footsteps.
The next minute, Jack and Dieter appeared, streaming with sweat and obviously agitated.
‘Something's happened!’ said Melissa, hurrying to meet them.
‘We think…we've found him!’
Jack's normally ruddy face was the colour of putty.
‘Oh, dear, where?’ faltered Rose.
Dieter, looking even more shaken, struggled to regain his breath.
‘On the rocks…close to where we found Wolfgang Klein,’ he panted.
‘Is he dead?’
‘It looks like it.’
‘My God!’
Melissa stared in horror.
‘Perhaps Chrissie was right!’
The period that followed seemed to Melissa to have an unreal, almost nightmarish quality.
It was like some ghoulish rerun of Sunday afternoon, as if the same sequence in a film was being shot for a second time under a different director.
Rose burst into tears and was escorted indoors by Dieter.
Dora was summoned; her appearance, announcing that she was taking her protégée back to the auberge without delay, did nothing to help matters.
Rose clung to Dieter's hand and refused to budge; there followed a heated altercation between Dora and Dieter until Jack intervened and managed, using a quiet diplomacy that further increased Melissa's respect for him, to persuade them both to withdraw.
Meanwhile, the second search party returned and joined the others on the terrace.
It was there that Philippe Bonard learned the news of Gebrec's death.
At first, he appeared stunned and unable to grasp what had happened.
Then, he let out a groan and sank into a chair, his hands over his face and his shoulders heaving as he made superhuman efforts to contain his shock and grief.
After a few minutes he raised his head and was now sitting motionless, pale and haggard but controlled, while Iris, her eyes moist with sympathetic tears, stood silently and helplessly by.
‘The police must be informed,’ said Jack.
‘My French isn't up to it, I'm afraid — will you phone them, Melissa?’
‘Yes, of course.’
She went into the house and made her way to the small suite of rooms that Bonard and his staff of two used as offices.
She put in an urgent call to the local gendarmerie, wondering as she did so whether Officer Hassan would take charge of the case.
She pictured him, tapping away at his nose and almost gleefully saying, ‘I told you so,’ and felt sick.
Her heart went out to Antoinette Gebrec, as yet happily ignorant of the fate of her son, and to Philippe Bonard, whose long-cherished dream had turned to a nightmare, while the man they both loved was lying in a broken, bloody heap at the foot of the cliff.
She left the room and plodded wearily back.
On her way she passed the kitchen.
The door was open and she saw Juliette standing alone by the table with a tray-load of crockery in her hands.
She appeared mesmerised, as if unable to put it down; her eyes were staring and her face deathly white.
Melissa went and stood beside her.
‘Juliette, this is terrible news.’
Juliette started violently and several cups toppled to the floor and smashed to pieces.
Melissa took the tray from her and carried it to the buffet, while Juliette covered her face with a towel.
‘There is a curse on this place!’ she moaned.
‘What is to become of us?’
She began rocking to and fro, whimpering softly.
‘Try not to distress yourself,’ said Melissa.
‘You shouldn't be alone…shall I find Fernand and ask him to come to you?’
The suggestion seemed to agitate Juliette still further.
‘Oh, Mon Dieu, the flics will be here again with their endless questions.
Who knows what my crazy brother will say to them?’
She grasped Melissa by the hand.
‘Madame, you will not betray our secret?’ she implored.
‘Of course not, but surely…’
‘If the police knew, they might imagine…’
‘Juliette, don't worry!
Why should anyone suspect your brother of harming Monsieur Gebrec?
What connection could there possibly be between him and what happened to Roland so long ago?’
‘None at all, Madame, but you know what the police are like, especially that idiot Hassan.
After Monsieur Klein's death he asked Fernand a lot of stupid questions, just because of some village gossip.’
‘But that was because Monsieur Klein was German, and everyone knew Fernand was suspicious of Germans.’
Juliette bent down and began picking up the smashed pieces of china.
‘Perhaps you are right, Madame.’
‘Monsieur Gebrec's death was probably nothing more than a tragic accident,’ Melissa went on, ‘but’— she hesitated for a moment before saying —‘there is some talk of suicide.’
It might not have been her place to reveal such a suspicion, but it could help to relieve Juliette's fears on her brother's behalf.
In any case it would soon become common knowledge.
Juliette appeared bemused by the suggestion.
‘Suicide?’ she repeated.
‘Why would he do such a thing?’
‘It is, of course, only a suspicion and I'm sure you will say nothing until we know for certain .
Monsieur Bonard told us that Monsieur Gebrec left the house in some distress this morning.
He never came back — that's all we know at present.’
Juliette picked up the tray of crockery and carried it to the dishwasher.
‘I must not detain you any longer, Madame.’
It was plain that she had said all she was going to say.
Melissa went outside to rejoin the others.
‘The police should be here soon,’ she told Jack.
‘They'll want to talk to you and Dieter right away, of course, as you found the…as you found Alain.’
Just in time, out of consideration for Philippe Bonard's feelings, she checked herself from saying ‘the body’, although it was doubtful if he would have heard.
He was still sitting in the same chair, staring into space like a man in a trance.
‘What about the others?’ asked Dieter.
‘Rose is still very upset — shall I take her back to her hotel?’
His eyes sought Dora as if throwing down a challenge and Melissa saw her  draw herself upright, her nostrils flaring.
Like a war-horse about to charge into battle, she thought.
Any minute now and they'll be at each other 's throats again.
‘I can't see any need for everyone to wait around,’ said Jack hastily.
He too had read the signals.
‘If we get them to write down their names and where they're staying, they might as well go back to their hotels.
Will you see to that, Dieter?
If the police want to talk to any of them, they'll know where to find them.’
There was a moment's hesitation before Dieter said, ‘Okay,’ and went indoors to fetch pen and paper.
Dora glared after him for a few seconds before turning away and striding across the garden towards the orchard.
The minute they were both out of earshot, Melissa said, ‘Jack, what are we going to do about Rose?
For some reason or other, she won't have Dora near her at present.’
‘Perhaps you could take her back to the auberge?’
‘Yes, of course.
Should I have a word with Dora first?’
‘I suppose you ought to, but,’ Jack gave an unexpected grin and for a moment the atmosphere of gloom lightened a little, ‘let's make sure we keep Dora and Dieter apart or we'll have a third death on our hands!’
Eleven
After the trauma of the discovery of Gebrec's body and Dora's subsequent clash with Dieter, the exit from Les Châtaigniers was accomplished with minimum fuss, thanks to Jack's decisiveness and air of quiet authority to which everyone willingly submitted.
Melissa drove a pale and silent Rose back to the auberge, and Dora followed a few minutes later.
Iris elected to remain with Philippe Bonard for the time being and Jack undertook to drive her back when she was ready.
As soon as they arrived at the auberge, Rose announced her intention of having a long soak in the bath followed by a lie down.
She also made it clear that she preferred to be alone.
Sensing that Dora was about to protest, and to avoid further argument, Melissa said hastily, ‘Come along to my room and we'll have a drink.’
Monsieur Gauthier obligingly produced a bottle of Côtes du Rhône from his cellar and Melissa led Dora upstairs and installed her in a chair on the balcony.
The auberge was built on a knoll and the tops of the nearest trees were below eye level, their foliage a green sea ruffled into waves by the breeze, the rugged backdrop of the mountains softened to a warm gold by the evening sunlight.
It was a view to inspire a poet, but its beauty was entirely lost on Dora who, between mouthfuls of wine, stared moodily down at her feet.
‘We should never have come,’ she muttered after a long silence, ‘and if I had my way, we'd leave here tomorrow.
No, tonight…right away.
I feel as if there's a curse on this place.’
‘That's exactly what Juliette said,’ replied Melissa.
‘I  suppose it's a normal reaction in the circumstances.
Have some more wine.’
‘Thank you.’
Dora held out Iris's tooth-mug, which was doing duty as a wine-glass.
‘This is very kind of you, Melissa.’
‘Not at all.
I felt in need of a snort myself.’
‘We should never have come,’ repeated Dora.
‘What made you decide on this trip?’
It was an idle question; Melissa's mind was far away but, for the second time in three days, she recognised Dora's need to confide.
‘It was Rose's idea, but I went along with it willingly enough.
How was I to know she'd meet that wretched man?
The minute she set eyes on him, she seemed to take leave of her senses — and he's been playing up to her the whole time.
Can't she see what a fool she's making of herself?’
‘I agree it doesn't seem an ideal relationship, but surely, the more you oppose it, the more…’
‘She's always taken my advice before.’
Dora's mouth compressed into an aggressive wedge.
‘I've never known her so obstinate.
And now this absurd notion of staying at the centre for an extra week, just to be with him!
Well, after this latest upset, I'm going to be firm with her.
We'll leave in the morning.
The course can't possibly go on after what's happened today, so we shan't miss anything.
I'll speak to Bonard before we go about a refund for tomorrow and Friday.’
Melissa stared at her in disbelief.
‘You're not serious!’ she protested.
‘You can't pester the poor man about money just after he's had such a dreadful shock!’
‘Business is business,’ said Dora.
‘His fees are steep enough to start with and two days out of ten means we're losing twenty per cent of our course.’
Melissa was fast running out of sympathy with the redoubtable Dora.
No doubt Bonard was as hard-headed as the next man in matters of business, but to tackle anyone so obviously grief-stricken on such a comparatively trivial point seemed to her nothing short of callous.
She found herself pleading on his behalf.
‘Don't you think, in the circumstances…perhaps if you  were to write when you get home…
I mean, Gebrec wasn't just a colleague, he was a close friend.’
‘Yes, and we know what sort of friend, don't we?
Oh, I can read the signs as well as anyone,’ Dora went on in a sudden surge of indignation as Melissa's eyebrows lifted.
‘If you ask me, that story about Gebrec having something on his mind was just a cover-up.
There's more to this than meets the eye.’
‘Whatever do you mean?
You're not suggesting…?’
‘That Bonard killed Gebrec?
Of course not, he might soil his expensive suit!’
Dora's lip curled; her eyes were savage.
It was plain she begrudged Bonard his affluence.
‘What I mean is, they probably had some sort of…lover's quarrel, Gebrec went storming out in a rage and charged up to the belvedere to cool off.
Either he was so upset that he didn't look where he was going, or he really did jump on purpose.’
‘You could be right.’
Melissa, at first sceptical, saw that there might be some truth in Dora's theory.
‘Maybe Bonard was trying to end the relationship altogether.
We may never know for certain.’
‘No, I don't suppose we shall.’
Dora's tone was dismissive, as if the cause of Gebrec's death was of only passing interest.
She stood up and began pacing restlessly to and fro along the balcony.
‘I wonder how long Rose is going to be.
I could do with a bath myself before dinner.’
‘Would you like me to pop along and see if she's finished?’
‘Would you?
I'm afraid, if I go, she'll only get upset again.
It's so unfair — she knows I always have her best interests at heart.’
The grim set of Dora's features belied the hurt in her eyes.
‘I'm sure it's only the shock,’ said Melissa, aware that it sounded unconvincing.
‘No, it's all this wretched business over Dieter Erdle.
I've made up my mind — I'm going to tell him myself that this nonsense has got to end once and for all.
I tried to catch him this morning, before we went to our appointments, but he wouldn't speak to me.
I called to him but he didn't even turn round…pretended not to hear!’
‘From what I've seen of him, I'd say he's got rather a perverse sense of humour and enjoys winding people up,’ said Melissa, remembering in particular his brush with Alain Gebrec the previous afternoon over the controversial book.
‘Well, he's not having any more fun at my expense,’ said Dora flatly.
‘I know where he's staying and I'm going to tackle him this evening.’
‘It's up to you, of course,’ said Melissa doubtfully.
She got up and went to the door.
She was on the point of saying that interfering could do more harm than good, but, knowing it would be pointless, she kept silent.
She was thinking, as she went on her errand, less of the Rose-Dora-Dieter triangle than of Iris and her hapless devotion to Philippe Bonard.
Rose, apparently calm and relaxed, greeted her with a smile.
‘Do come in,’ she said.
‘How are you feeling?’ asked Melissa.
‘Much better, thank you.
Where's Dora?’
‘She's in my room, having a drink.
I felt we both needed it.’
‘Poor Dora, I'm afraid I've been rather beastly to her.
Is she very upset?’
‘I think she is a bit.’
‘I can't think what got into me.
I felt suddenly…afraid of her.’
Rose's face crinkled in bewilderment.
‘When we heard about poor Alain Gebrec being dead, I had a sudden vision of Dora looking furiously angry…you know how she sometimes glares at Dieter…and I thought for a moment…supposing it had been Dieter who'd been killed…it might have been Dora who had…oh, I know it's dreadful of me to think these things, but she hates him so much.’
‘Don't worry about it.
Shock plays funny tricks on people.’
‘We were so looking forward to this trip and it's been awful,’ Rose whispered, sadly shaking her head.
‘First poor Wolfgang and now Alain.
They ought to shut the path up to that terrible cliff for good.’
‘Perhaps they will.’
‘What will happen now, do you think?’
‘Much the same as before, I suppose.
A police enquiry, formal identification…’
Melissa bit her lip at the thought of the ordeal facing Antoinette Gebrec and wondered who, if anyone, would be there to give comfort and support.
‘I mean about us?
Will the course go on?’
‘Dora thinks not.’
Melissa tried to keep her voice even.
‘She was talking about leaving here first thing tomorrow.’
‘But we can't do that!’
Rose showed signs of renewed agitation.
‘I have to see Dieter…we've got a lot to talk about.’
‘I'm sure he'll get in touch with you as soon as he can,’ said Melissa, trying not to allow her irritation to get the better of her.
‘The best thing you can do is stay quietly here with Dora for the rest of the evening.
Shall I go and fetch her?
She's really very concerned about you.’
‘Oh, yes…
I suppose so,’ said Rose sulkily.
‘And do try not to have any more unpleasantness.’
There was an uncompromising set to Rose's mouth as she said, ‘That's up to her.’
‘All clear,’ said Melissa when she rejoined Dora.
‘At least she isn't going to throw another wobbly the second she sets eyes on you…but she's not going to like the idea of leaving tomorrow.’
‘You told her?’
Dora's expression was accusing.
‘Really, Melissa, that would have been better coming directly from me.’
‘I'm sorry, but she raised it herself.
Do give her the chance of a night's rest before you have it out with her.’
‘I'll make up my own mind about that, thank you very much,’ Dora snapped and flounced out of the room.
The telephone rang; Jack was on the line.
‘We're leaving now,’ he said.
‘Iris is all in and I'm taking her back to the Lion d'Or for dinner.
I've checked that they do vegetarian dishes.
Will you join us?’
‘Oh, yes, please!’ said Melissa fervently.
‘What time?’
‘Say in half an hour?’
‘I'll be there.’
‘Iris says to tell Monsieur Gauthier not to expect you this evening.’
‘I'll do that.’
Melissa smiled fondly as she put down the phone.
How typical of Iris to think of such a detail at a time like this.
The dining-room at the Lion d'Or had a modern, glass-walled extension which, like the terrace, overlooked the Mauzère.
On this warm, sunny evening the sliding doors were pushed back and the scent of broom drifted in, along with the cooling freshness of a sprinkler turning merrily in the centre of the geranium-filled garden.
Music played softly in the background, haunting melodies of old Charles Trenet songs that soothed the senses, softening the harshness of chattering voices and the clinking of glass and crockery, insinuating themselves into the mind as stealthily as an incoming tide seeps into crevices between rocks.
Melissa recalled the words of one: Je tire ma révérene — I take my leave of you.
A few hours ago, Alain Gebrec had taken his leave of everything and everyone.
The thought made her skin prickle.
‘It's very good of you to include me,’ she said when she, Iris and Jack were installed at a table, sipping apéritifs and making a show of studying the menu.
‘I was dreading getting caught in the fall-out from this evening's episode of the Rose-and-Dora show.’
‘Iris insisted she wouldn't leave you on your own,’ said Jack.
Melissa cocked an eyebrow.
‘Meaning, if you wanted Iris's company you had to put up with me as well?’
Jack looked disconcerted for a moment, then laughed.
‘That could have been put more tactfully, couldn't it?
I didn't mean to imply…’
‘It's all right, we're not normally inseparable,’ said Melissa reassuringly.
She glanced at Iris, who appeared absorbed in the menu.
‘What happened after we left?’
‘Much the same as last time.
They sent a chopper and an  ambulance to recover the body and there was the usual swarm of gendarmes rushing around.’
‘Banana Split was in charge,’ said Iris, without a trace of a smile.
‘Very subdued, very low key.’
‘Banana Split?’
Jack looked from one to the other with a blank expression.
‘Ask her.
She coined the name.’
Iris jerked her menu in Melissa's direction.
‘He wasn't doing much smiling this afternoon,’ said Jack when Melissa had explained.
‘He seemed almost as shaken as everyone else.’
‘Last time I spoke to him, after Wolfgang Klein's death, he almost prophesied that something else would happen.’
‘You mean he was expecting another accident?’
‘I'm not sure what he was expecting and I don't think he was either.
He was very mysterious…and rather ridiculous.’
Melissa smiled faintly at the recollection.
‘He said, if I remember correctly, something like, ‘We haven't heard the last of this’ while beating his nose black and blue with his Biro.’
‘Whatever could he have meant by that?’
‘At the time, he thought — no, it was almost as if he was hoping — that someone had pushed Klein off the cliff.
He was chuntering on very grandly about an ‘investigation’ and ‘interrogating the personnel’.
He seemed quite miffed when it was established that it was an accident and his commandant called him off.’
‘He wanted it to be a murder?
That's a bit sick, isn't it?’ said Jack, frowning.
Melissa shrugged.
‘I imagine his very own murder enquiry is every newly promoted police inspector's dream.’
Jack shook his head, evidently finding such cynicism distasteful.
Iris lowered her menu and said, ‘At least, he didn't hassle Philippe.
Saw what a state he was in.
Left his ‘interrogation’ till tomorrow.’
‘Yes, how is poor old Philippe?
Is anyone with him?’
‘Only the servants.
Wouldn't let anyone else stay.
Said he  wanted to be left alone.’
Iris's expression gave nothing away and Melissa could only guess how she was feeling.
The waiter was hovering by their table.
‘Perhaps we'd better order,’ said Jack.
The food was excellent, but none of them was hungry.
When they had finished, they went out on to the terrace to drink their coffee.
Already several other groups and couples were out there, the penetrating French voices and cheerful laughter sounding sharp and clear in the still air, untouched by any hint of tragedy or death.
‘So, what's the state of play between Rose and Dora?’ asked Jack.
‘By the time I left, they were both huffy with me,’ said Melissa ruefully.
‘I seem to have said all the wrong things.’
‘Were they on speaking terms?’
‘Just about, but there's probably blood on the walls by now .
Dora's talking about leaving tomorrow.’
Iris reacted sharply.
‘Can't do that, the course isn't finished.
It'd upset Philippe no end.’
‘You mean, he's prepared to carry on, after what's happened?’
‘Determined to.
Told him people would understand if he didn't, but he said, ‘They've paid their money, they're entitled’.’
‘Brave man, Philippe,’ said Jack warmly, earning a look of gratitude from Iris.
‘If he feels up to it, it's probably the best thing for him,’ said Melissa.
‘It'll help to take his mind off the tragedy.’
She turned to Iris.
‘Does he agree it might have been suicide, by the way?’
Iris stared into her empty coffee cup.
‘No idea what he thinks.
Hardly said a word to me.’
She was working hard to conceal her distress, but the tremor in her voice was unmistakable.
‘Would you like to go back to the auberge?’ said Melissa gently.
‘You look very tired.’
Without a word, Iris got to her feet.
She stumbled over her  chair and would have fallen, but Jack caught her arm and steadied her.
‘Would you like a lift back?’ he offered.
‘It's all right, thanks, I brought my car,’ said Melissa.
They settled Iris in the passenger seat of the Golf, where she sat with closed eyes.
Jack hurried round to hold open the driver's door.
Before getting in, Melissa put out a hand and he took it in a firm clasp.
‘You'll excuse us, running off like this, won't you?’ she said.
‘This business has knocked her for six.’
She hesitated for a moment before adding in a lowered voice, ‘She's known Philippe for quite a while, but I don't think she ever realised…’
‘I understand,’ he said quickly.
‘It's hit her pretty hard.’
‘She'll get over it, but she'll need a lot of support.’
He gave her hand an extra squeeze before releasing it.
‘You can count on me.’
Iris held up until they were back in their room.
The minute the door was closed she sat on the edge of her bed, covered her face with her hands and wept.
‘How could I?
How could I have been such a fool?’ she wailed through her tears.
‘I really thought…
I hoped…he was always so charming to me…so nice.’
‘But he is nice.
Gay people often are,’ said Melissa.
‘More often than not, they're kind and gentle to everyone.’
‘Know that.
Met lots of them before.
Just didn't like to think that Philippe…’
‘It isn't that obvious.
I don't think I'd have spotted it myself if I hadn't seen the way he reacted the day we found Wolfgang Klein, when Gebrec got so upset.’
‘Saw that too.
Suppose I'd already guessed, but didn't want to know.’
Iris had stopped crying and was sitting with hunched shoulders, tear-stained and dejected, but calm.
She shot a glance at Melissa.
‘You never said anything.’
‘You were in enough of a state as it was over doing your course.
I didn't want to upset you.’
Iris managed a tremulous smile.
‘You're a good friend, Mel.
Glad you're here.’
‘Me too.
Now you'd better get some rest.
I imagine it's business as usual for you tomorrow as well?’
‘Of course.
If Philippe can go on, I can.’
‘Good for you.’
‘What about Gebrec's mother?
Hope someone's with her.’
‘Her friend, Madame Delon, is.
I checked before coming out.
Oh, Lord!’
Melissa put a hand to her mouth.
‘I've just remembered.
She invited us — you and me — to see some pictures tomorrow evening.’
‘Forget that.
Poor creature won't be in the mood for social visits.’
Iris picked up her pyjamas and headed for the bathroom.
Compassion for Antoinette Gebrec had for the time being taken her mind off her own disillusionment.
Twelve
The following morning Melissa drove Iris as usual to Les Châtaigniers, where they found a state of confusion.
All the students — even Rose and Dora, whom they had glimpsed sitting silently over their breakfast and deliberately avoiding everyone's eye — had turned up early, wanting to know what was going to happen.
A pale young Frenchwoman, who turned out to be the normally invisible secretary, Marie-Claire, was assuring the assembly in a shrill voice that everything was to proceed as normal.
If the group of Madame Ash required transport, Fernand would drive the mini-bus.
Monsieur Bonard's students would please await him in their classroom.
As soon as he was free — she gave a glance of distaste towards the police car discreetly parked in the farthest corner of the courtyard — Monsieur Bonard would proceed with their lesson.
Marie-Claire then vanished into the house, followed in a straggling line by the students of French.
The artists were left in the courtyard, where they stood clutching their equipment with the anxious, uncertain air of a group of refugees.
Chrissie sidled up to Iris.
‘What are we doing this morning?’ she asked in a forlorn voice.
With her long hair drooping round her face and her large, mournful eyes, she looked like a lost basset-hound puppy.
Iris passed a hand over her forehead.
She had slept badly and the flesh seemed to be drawn too tightly over the bones of her face.
‘I was planning to look at some rock formations,’ she said wearily.
‘Strata lines and so on.’
‘You mean, like the ones in the cliff face, opposite the belvedere?’
Chrissie looked horrorstruck.
‘We couldn't possibly go up there, not now!’
‘There are other places.’
Heads were already beginning to shake.
No one, it seemed, wanted to know about rocks, no matter what cunning designs Nature had created in them.
‘We don't have to stick slavishly to the programme do we?’ said Mervyn.
‘Perhaps a complete change would be a good idea.’
‘How about a train ride?’ suggested Jack.
‘There's a little steamer that chuffs to and fro between Anduze and St-Jean-du-Gard.
It goes through some wonderful scenery and St-Jean itself is quite picturesque, plenty of things to paint…not exactly designed by Nature I know, but…’
He glanced round the small ring of faces, by now registering quickening interest.
‘What do you think, Iris?’
‘Does everyone agree?’ she asked.
Heads nodded vigorously.
‘Fine!’ said Jack.
‘All aboard the bus everyone; I'll go and find Fernand.’
Five minutes later they had gone and Melissa was standing alone in the middle of the courtyard, wondering what to do next.
She had intended to spend the day working on a preliminary plan for her novel, taking advantage of Philippe Bonard's invitation to use his library.
That was out of the question now; concentration would be impossible.
Eyeing the police car, she wondered whether it belonged to Officer Hassan and whether it was worth hanging around for a word with him.
In the light of his melodramatic prophesy, it would be interesting to learn his reaction to this second death.
Could there possibly be a link between the two?
A serial killer, perhaps?
It was a chilling thought.
She glanced at her watch; it was only twenty past nine.
A bit too early to call Madame Gebrec.
In half an hour maybe.
as if the time would make any difference to a woman whose only son had just been killed.
She mightn't welcome the intrusion.
On the other hand…
Perhaps Marie-Claire would let her use the office phone.
She was still undecided when Officer Hassan came out of the house, marched straight across to her and saluted.
‘Good morning, Madame Craig.’
His voice was subdued  and his smile of greeting a pale reflection of its normal radiance.
‘This is a terrible tragedy.’
‘Terrible.’
‘I warned, did I not, that something of this nature might occur?’
That's not quite as I remember it, Melissa thought, but let the inaccuracy pass unchallenged.
‘You did indeed,’ she said.
‘Does that mean that there will be a further investigation into Monsieur Klein's death?’
Rather regretfully, it seemed, Hassan shook his head.
‘The facts are very simple, Madame.
The death of Monsieur Klein was, as the médecin légiste maintained at the outset and,’ he coughed in some embarrassment, evidently recalling his earlier insinuations, ‘as subsequent enquiries proved, a most tragic accident.
This time, I fear, there can be no doubt— Monsieur Gebrec took his own life.’
‘Have you any idea why?’
‘I believe so, Madame.’
He cleared his throat and looked down at his feet as if assessing the shine on his boots.
‘It seems there was a…relationship between Messieurs Klein and Gebrec.’
‘You mean a homosexual relationship?’
‘Yes, Madame.’
He looked up and met her eye in obvious relief at her matter-of-fact response.
‘It would appear that the death of his friend was, for Monsieur Gebrec, an insupportable loss.’
‘You think he killed himself out of grief?’
‘Exactly so, Madame.’
‘But according to Monsieur Bonard, they were scarcely more than acquaintances…occasional drinking companions.’
‘I suggest that it is not a matter which a man wishes his employer to know about.’
‘No, I suppose not.
So what does Monsieur Bonard say about the suicide theory?’
‘He is, I think, now prepared to accept it.’
‘Monsieur Bonard knew that something very serious was  on Alain's mind, but he said he had no idea what it was.
Some of us wondered if he had an illness that no one knew about.’
‘That possibility has already been explored.
His own doctor had recently examined him and found him perfectly healthy.’
Melissa sighed.
‘That seems pretty conclusive, I suppose.’
‘That is my assessment of the case, Madame, as I intend to report it to my commandant.’
‘Poor Madame Gebrec.
She will be heartbroken.’
‘Alas, yes, Madame.
A very brave lady.
It was my unhappy duty to break the news of her son's death, which she bore with great fortitude.
Now, I have to visit her one more time.
It will be painful, I fear.
Au revoir, Madame.’
He saluted again and marched across the yard to his car.
Melissa turned and went sadly into the house.
The kitchen door stood open and on impulse she went in.
She found Juliette bending over an ironing-board, busy with sponge and pressing-cloth.
Behind her, on the buffet, was a tray already loaded with cups and saucers for the mid-morning coffee.
‘Bonjour, Juliette,’ said Melissa.
‘Do you need any help?’
Juliette lowered the iron on to a pair of trousers laid out on the ironing-board, producing a hissing cloud of steam through which she stared solemnly at Melissa.
In contrast to her outburst of yesterday, her manner was entirely composed.
‘Thank you, no, Madame,’ she replied.
‘Everything is prepared.
Will you take lunch here today?’
‘Yes, if it's no trouble.’
‘No trouble at all.’
‘I have just been speaking to Officer Hassan.
He confirms that Monsieur Gebrec's death was suicide.’
‘Indeed?’
Juliette finished her task, put the trousers on a wooden hanger, hooked it over the back of a chair and unplugged the iron.
It was obvious that she had no wish to discuss the opinions of Officer Hassan.
‘So there is no need for you to concern yourself on your brother's behalf.’
‘Quite so, Madame.’
There seemed nothing else to be said, and Melissa went out of the room and upstairs to the secretary's office, where, in response to her request to use the phone, Marie-Claire grudgingly pushed the instrument across her desk.
‘Kindly be brief, I have a number of calls to make,’ she said sourly.
‘I shall be no longer than necessary,’ said Melissa.
Anxiety made her speak more sharply than she had intended; she was not looking forward to telling Madame Gebrec just why Officer Hassan was about to pay her another visit and it was a relief when Madame Delon answered her call.
‘I'm afraid what he has to say will cause considerable distress,’ she said, after explaining her reason for telephoning.
‘What could be more distressing than the death of her son?’
Madame Delon wanted to know.
Conscious that Marie-Claire was listening to every word, Melissa hesitated for a moment before saying, ‘It is believed that he took his own life.’
Not a muscle moved on the secretary's pallid face.
Perhaps she already knew.
On the other end of the line there was a shocked gasp.
‘But this is dreadful news!
Antoinette will be in despair,’ whispered Madame Delon.
‘Why do they think that?’
‘I cannot go into details.
Officer Hassan will explain.
I just want to be sure that your friend is prepared.’
‘That is very considerate of you, Madame.
Will you come and see her soon?
She is in great need of comfort.’
‘I'll come whenever you like.
I shall be here at Les Châtaigniers this morning…’
‘Perhaps I may call you there?’
‘Please do.
Goodbye.’
Melissa put down the receiver.
‘Thanks for the use of the phone.
I'll be in the library for the next hour or so, if there should be a message for me.’
The secretary gave no sign of having heard.
She reached across the desk, grabbed the instrument and began tapping out a number with the angry, impatient air of someone who has been kept waiting for an unacceptably long time.
With a  shrug, Melissa left the office, fetched notebooks and a writing-pad from her car, and tried to settle down to work.
At half-past ten, the sound of voices below the library window indicated that the first lesson of the day was over and that coffee was about to be served.
She went down and found Philippe Bonard with his students on the terrace.
The hand that he gave her in greeting was ice-cold and his expression grave, but his appearance was as immaculate as ever and his bearing composed and dignified.
‘Good morning, Melissa.
May I pour you some coffee?
We have been discussing The Outsider by Camus.
You have read it, no doubt?’
‘I studied his work at university,’ she replied, thinking that the story of a man condemned to death for murder after failing to show proper grief at his mother's funeral was not the happiest choice in the present circumstances.
Yet, judging by the earnest discussions going on around her, the melancholy theme seemed to have had the effect of switching everyone's thoughts away from the actual tragedy that had happened in their midst.
The quality of the French was improving too, she noted with interest, remembering how often Iris had praised Philippe Bonard's skill as a teacher.
Dieter was deep in conversation with Eric and Daphne, and Rose was talking to Janey and Sue.
Only Dora stood aloof, silent and inscrutable.
Melissa wondered what was passing though her mind and whether she and Rose had resolved their differences.
A sulky-looking Marie-Claire appeared and grudgingly informed Melissa that there was a telephone call for her.
Madame Delon was on the line.
‘Please, could you come to see Antoinette as soon as possible?’ she pleaded.
‘She is in great distress and needs your help.’
‘My help?
What kind of help?’
‘She will explain, Madame.
When can you come?’
‘I'll leave in a few minutes and be with you in about half an hour.
Tell Madame Gebrec I will do whatever I can.’
Although what that could possibly be, I have no idea, Melissa thought to herself as she put down the phone.
Melissa was prepared for signs of strain and grief, but the change in Antoinette Gebrec's appearance came as a shock.
Everything about her seemed to have shrunk except her eyes, which were huge, inky pools that dwarfed her small features.
In twenty-four hours she had aged ten years.
The moment Melissa entered the house, she clutched at her with both hands.
‘Madame Craig, please help me!
You must help me!’ she begged in a voice cracking with grief and fatigue.
Melissa put an arm round her and, at a sign from Madame Delon, led her into the salon, pushed her gently on to a couch and sat down beside her.
‘Yes, of course I will help you if I can,’ she promised.
‘Tell me what you want me to do.’
‘You know what they are saying…that Alain killed himself?’
‘Yes, Officer Hassan told me.’
‘It is not true!’
The small hands on Melissa's arm tightened their grip.
‘Never, never would he do such a thing!’
‘I can understand how you must feel,’ said Melissa, thinking of Simon and wondering how she herself would feel on learning such terrible news, whether she could bear it, how she would cope.
‘I am the mother of a son myself,’ she went on.
‘The thought that he had come to that state of despair would break my heart.’
‘Do you not hear what I am saying?
It is not true, I tell you!
Alain did not take his own life, someone murdered him!’
She released Melissa's arm and began beating with her fists on her lap.
Melissa took hold of the flailing hands and held them still.
‘Please, calm yourself,’ she begged with an anxious glance at Madame Delon, who responded with a grave nod.
‘I share my friend's doubts,’ she said.
‘I have known Alain all his life and I find it impossible to believe that he would commit suicide.
He had too much to live for.’
‘Have you any idea who would want to kill him, and why?’
Madame Gebrec raised her head and looked straight at Melissa.
The intensity of her gaze was almost hypnotic.
‘That is what I ask you to find out, Madame,’ she whispered.
‘Me?’ said Melissa in alarm and astonishment.
‘Why me?
Surely, if you have serious reasons for doubting the police conclusions, you should approach them?’
‘Reasons?
Does a mother need reasons?
I know my son and I tell you, Madame, that he did not kill himself.’
‘Then, perhaps it was an accident?’
‘Accident?
Bah!’
Madame Gebrec flung her arms in the air.
‘He knew every inch of that path, and how dangerous the cliff was in places.
It was on his recommendation that the guard-rail was rebuilt, and he constantly reminded everyone visiting the belvedere of the hazard.’
Melissa shifted in her seat and looked down at her hands.
‘Madame Gebrec,’ she said hesitantly, ‘you know, of course, the reason why the police believe Alain killed himself?’
‘Grief over the loss of his friend?
Yes, I know.’
The small, mobile mouth trembled slightly.
‘Oh, I do not deny that my son was homosexual, nor that he and Wolfgang Klein were lovers.
Alain was greatly distressed by his death, but,’ she hesitated for a moment before continuing, ‘he would have got over it in time.
Never, never would he consider such an event so insupportable as to…’
Her voice tailed off; it was her turn to appear uncomfortable.
‘What she means,’ interposed Madame Delon, ‘is that Alain had a hard, one could almost say, a ruthless side to his nature — oh yes, he did!’she insisted as her friend was about to protest.
‘He was a good son to his mother and generous and loving to his…companions,’ the word was chosen with obvious care and uttered with thinly-concealed disapproval, ‘but he was very ambitious.
Since becoming assistant to Monsieur Bonard, he has progressed rapidly in the business and only a week ago he told us of his hopes of being made a partner.
So far from killing himself over Wolfgang, he would  not have hesitated to end the liaison if it interfered with his plans.’
Melissa turned back to Madame Gebrec.
‘Did he ever say anything to suggest that he felt threatened, or that his life was in danger?’ she asked.
‘No, never, but…’
‘So, all you have to go on is a…’
Melissa trawled her mental lexicon for a French equivalent of ‘gut reaction’, failed to find one, and finished rather tamely with, ‘a mother's instinct.’
‘Exactly so, and is not that sufficient?’
Melissa was beginning to feel out of her depth.
Without thinking, she had promised to give any help that lay in her power.
That undertaking seemed to be developing into a commitment to conduct a private murder investigation in a foreign country.
It was out of the question; she must end this bizarre interview here and now by telling Madame Gebrec, gently but firmly, that the person to whom she should confide her doubts was Officer Hassan.
Yet, stirring at the back of her mind and insistently pushing its way to the fore, the ungovernable curiosity that had in the past led her into strange, sometimes dangerous but often exciting situations was threatening to override her common sense.
Common sense made one last stand and she heard herself asking, ‘Didn't you tell Officer Hassan of your suspicions?’
Madame Gebrec's lip curled.
‘Naturally, but I could see that he was merely dismissing them as the ravings of an hysterical woman.
No, I can hope for no help from that quarter.
That is why I ask you…
I beg you, Madame Craig, to try and find out who murdered my son.’
‘I'm not a private detective, you know,’ Melissa pointed out, but already her mind was buzzing with possible lines of enquiry.
‘But you solve crimes in your books,’ pleaded Madame Gebrec.
‘Surely…’
‘Creating fictitious crime is one thing, solving it in real life is something else,’ said Melissa patiently.
‘Madame Gebrec, I know I said I would help you, but that was before I understood  what you wanted of me.
I don't see that I can do very much, but there may be some questions that, in the circumstances, the police have not thought it necessary to ask.
If so, I'll try to find the answers for you.
That's all I can promise for now.’
Madame Gebrec put out a hand.
‘Thank you, thank you a thousand times,’ she said huskily.
The look of relief and gratitude on her face brought a lump to Melissa's throat.
‘I must leave you now,’ she said.
‘I promised to return to Les Châtaigniers for lunch.’
‘You will come again?
To see the pictures as we arranged?’
‘Not this evening, surely?’
It had not occurred to Melissa that Madame Gebrec would even remember her invitation, let alone wish it to stand, but there was no doubt of her sincerity as she said, ‘No, not this evening, but another time, please.
I wish to show you the work of…my friend.’
‘I'd like to see it.
I'll be in Roziac for a few more days.’
‘And you will tell me as soon as you have news?’
If I have news, Melissa corrected mentally.
Aloud, she said, ‘Of course, but you must not hope for too much,’ and made her escape.
You're quite mad, she told herself as she drove back to Roziac.
You're supposed to be working on a book, not chasing around after a murderer who probably doesn't even exist.
And yet…she thought of Officer Hassan and his belief that there had been skulduggery in the case of Wolfgang Klein.
He had been proved mistaken and had probably suffered a somewhat humiliating rebuff from his superior officer.
Now he was equally certain that Alain Gebrec's death was suicide.
Could he once again be barking up the wrong tree?
Lunch was already served when she reached Les Châtaigniers.
Immediately, she felt a change in the atmosphere.
There was no buzz of conversation; most of the students had scattered with their plates of food and were sitting around eating in silence.
Iris and her group were absent, it having been  agreed before they set off that they would have lunch in St-Jean-du-Gard and telephone for the mini-bus from the station at Anduze on their return.
Philippe Bonard was also missing.
‘He's having a working lunch in his office,’ explained Daphne, who had returned to the table for a second helping.
‘Poor man, he's got a heavy load to carry with Alain gone.’
‘I must say, I admire the way he's soldiering on with the course,’ said Melissa.
‘Oh, yes, he has terrific strength of character.’
That's what Iris always said, thought Melissa wistfully.
Poor old Iris.
At least she's got Jack to lean on.
He seems really smitten with her.
Dora looked up from her chair and caught her eye.
Her expression was almost welcoming and Melissa ventured to sit beside her.
‘How are things?’ she asked.
With a slight nod, Dora directed her glance towards the opposite side of the pool, where Dieter Erdle stood staring down at the water as if engrossed in his own reflection.
Rose, looking distinctly unhappy, was hovering uncertainly a few feet away, but he took no notice of her.
‘Have they had words?’
Dora's smile reminded Melissa of a contented tigress.
‘Not exactly.
He's had to change his plans, that's all.
His office wants him back on Monday so his final week here is postponed indefinitely.’
‘That would seem to have solved your problem.’
‘It has.’
Dora put her empty plate on the ground and picked up her glass of wine.
‘We leave here as arranged on Saturday morning.
I just hope this glorious weather holds.’
She looked up at the flawless blue sky, dotted with a few drifting white clouds.
‘I'm looking forward to some really good rounds.’
‘Did you find your missing golf-club, by the way?’
‘No!’
Dora stiffened and her look of self-satisfaction vanished.
‘My goodness, I'd quite forgotten…all the drama put it right out of my head.
I can't think what's happened to it.
I was doing some putting practice yesterday morning,’ she went on reflectively.
‘My appointment wasn't until eleven, so I had  a bit of time to spare.
After a while I thought I'd go into the orchard and practise some chip shots so I went to get my nine iron.
I couldn't find it.’
She glared at Melissa as if holding her partly responsible.
‘Could you have put it in Rose's bag instead of your own?’
It seemed unlikely that anyone so competent as Dora would make such an elementary mistake, but under that fierce gaze Melissa felt bound to make some suggestion, however implausible.
Dora dismissed the notion with a sniff of contempt.
‘Most unlikely!’ she snapped.
‘Did you check?’
‘Not at the time,’ admitted Dora grudgingly.
‘My watch had stopped and it was later than I thought.
I'll go and look now.’
She strode off, returning later with a face of thunder.
‘I can't find it anywhere,’ she fumed.
‘Someone must have stolen it.’
‘Would anyone take a single club?
I'd have thought any normal thief would make off with the whole bag.
Unless…’
An alarming possibility shot into Melissa's mind, but Dora could think of nothing but her own predicament.
‘They might just as well have done,’ she said despairingly.
‘That iron belongs to a matched set I bought several years ago.
It's irreplaceable — if it doesn't turn up, it means buying a whole new set.
Of course, you're not a golfer, you wouldn't understand!’
She was becoming more and more agitated.
‘It's that wretched boot lid, it doesn't always shut properly.
I remember now, it was open when I went back to the car.
It would have been easy for anyone to reach in and yank a club out of the bag.’
So it would, thought Melissa, her excitement mounting.
A golf-club makes a nice handy weapon if you want to attack someone.
And if your victim happens to be conveniently close to the edge of a tall cliff, by the time he's bounced down a couple of hundred metres on to the rocks, he'll be in such a mess that the injury from the blow stands a good chance of  being overlooked.
Was that how Alain Gebrec had died?
And if so, whose hand had struck him down, and what had become of the weapon?
Thirteen
After lunch Melissa went back to the library, ostensibly to work on her novel, but in reality to mull over Madame Gebrec's dramatic allegations, the possible motive for an attack on Alain — if indeed, such an attack had taken place — and the significance, if any, of the missing golf-club.
The afternoon tea-break arrived without her having reached any useful conclusions, despite several pages of scribbled notes well peppered with question marks.
Catching sight of Philippe Bonard, who had uncharacteristically detached himself from his students and was standing alone at the far end of the terrace, she went over to him.
He was staring across at the distant mountains; he seemed to be in a reverie, unaware of her presence, and she hesitated for a moment before saying, ‘Could I have a word with you, please?’
‘But of course.’
He swung round, instantly at her disposal, his head courteously inclined towards her.
‘I know how upset you must feel about losing Alain,’ she began.
He sighed heavily.
‘It is a great loss, both professionally and personally.’
‘I understand.’
‘Yes, I think you do.’
There was gratitude in his faint, sad smile.
‘What can I do for you, Melissa?’
‘For me, nothing, but for Alain's mother, perhaps there is something.’
‘Ah, yes, the poor lady.
I must visit her and present my condolences.
She may be in need of advice — or perhaps financial help.
I know Alain was more than generous to her.’
‘It wasn't money I had in mind.’
‘Indeed?’
‘She is absolutely convinced that his death was not suicide.’
Bonard bit his lip and turned his gaze once more to the horizon.
‘I have to admit, I too found the police version very difficult to accept,’ he muttered.
‘But it seemed inconceivable that it could have been an accident.’
‘She doesn't believe that either.’
He looked startled.
‘What are you saying?’
Even as he spoke, she saw the dawning horror in his eyes.
‘Do you mean…?’
He shook his head and made a movement with his hand, as if warding off some invisible threat.
‘She believes he was murdered.’
‘Murdered?
Alain?
Ah, no, no!
Who would kill my dear Alain?’
His voice became as thin and insubstantial as a trail of smoke.
‘That is what she has asked me to try and find out,’ said Melissa, acutely aware of how absurd it must sound.
‘You?
Why you?’
Melissa felt her cheeks grow warm.
‘I know it sounds ridiculous, but the police officer wouldn't take any notice of her —; he just thought she was being hysterical.
She thinks that being a crime writer makes me a detective as well.
People often do,’ she added lamely.
‘So you are going to play Sherlock Holmes and go around with a magnifying glass looking for footprints?
I hardly think you will find many on the rocks.’
His tone was gentle, almost indulgent; it was plain that he considered the whole idea farcical, but was too polite to tell her in so many words.
‘No, I wasn't planning anything quite like that.
The fact is, I sort of got conned into this.’
Briefly, she ran through the details of the morning's interview with Madame Gebrec.
‘I see.’
Bonard nodded gravely.
‘Well, ask your questions, Melissa, but I doubt if I shall be able to help.’
‘How long have you know Alain?’
‘About five years.
He came to work for my company in Avignon as an assistant in the overseas purchasing department.
He very quickly became an invaluable member of the organisation and after two years I made him manager.
He  and I became…very close.’
Here Bonard broke off and studied his well-kept fingernails.
‘I…
I'm not trying to pry into your personal relationship,’ stammered Melissa.
This was becoming embarrassing; she wished she hadn't started.
‘It's all right.’
He transferred his attention to his gold wristwatch and began fiddling with the bracelet.
‘I confided to Alain my ambition to establish a school such as this.
I had already made an extensive study of the various methods of language teaching, purely as a hobby, and run a few short courses from my home during the holiday season.
Alain was fascinated by the scheme and when at last it became a reality, he asked if he could take an active part.
He has been entirely responsible for the administration of the school…he will be very difficult to replace.’
‘Was there anyone who might have felt jealous or resentful of this appointment?’
‘Not that I am aware of.
He was the one to approach me — none of my other employees expressed that kind of interest in the project.’
‘What do you know of his family history?’
‘Very little.
His father was killed in the war and, so far as I know, his mother is his only living relative.’
‘I have several times noticed a certain…animosity between him and Dieter Erdle.
as if Erdle knew something about him, or his background, that he did not want generally known.
Have you any idea what it was?’
Bonard shook his head.
‘You will have to ask Erdle that question, I'm afraid.’
‘Yes, I'll do that.
By the way, did you know that Dora Lavender is claiming that a golf-club has been stolen from the boot of her car?’
He frowned.
‘I overheard her say to her friend that she had lost something, but she has not reported it to me.
What of it?’
‘It occurred to me that a golf-club can be a pretty lethal weapon.’
Bonard's jaw dropped.
‘Melissa!
What are you suggesting?’
‘The boot of Dora's car, where she keeps her bag of clubs, has a defective catch.
Anyone could have opened it, stolen one of the clubs and gone after Alain when he left the house.
You said he was in a distressed frame of mind, so he probably wouldn't have noticed he was being followed.
A single blow on the back of the head would have stunned him, might even have killed him outright.’
‘Yes, I see what you mean.’
Bonard's look of amazement had changed to one of bewilderment.
He licked his lower lip.
‘But the body was found at the foot of the cliff.’
‘He might have been standing near the edge and fallen after being struck.
On the other hand, he wasn't all that heavily built and a strong man — or woman, come to that — could have dragged him a short distance.’
‘I suppose so.’
He covered his eyes with a hand that shook.
His voice was not quite steady as he asked, ‘Is there anything else you want to know?’
‘Just one thing more.
Do you really have no idea at all why Alain left your office in such distress?’
He made no reply, but the pain on his face told her what she wanted to know.
‘I mustn't take up any more of your time,’ she said gently.
‘Do I have your permission to go up to the belvedere and look around?’
‘If you wish, but what do you hope to find?
The police have already carried out a search.’
‘They weren't looking for a weapon.
If that golf-club was used to attack Alain, the killer would want to get rid of it as quickly as possible.’
‘He might have thrown it over the cliff.’
‘Not if he was smart.
He'd know that someone would have to go down there and recover the body and it could easily have been spotted.
No, my guess is that he or she hid it somewhere in the undergrowth.
That's where I'll start looking.’
‘Are you sure it wouldn't be better to tell your suspicions to the police?’
‘Much better, if they'd take any notice of me,’ said Melissa  with a grin.
‘From what I've seen of Officer Hassan, it would take more than a missing golf-club to prise him away from his suicide theory.’
‘Do you want to ask the students a lot of questions?’
‘If you have no objection, I'd like to know where everyone was at the critical time.
Iris and her group are eliminated straight away, of course , and most of the others had appointments which would give them alibis.’
‘Alibis?’
He looked dismayed, as if the word conjured up a vision of a formal enquiry, with everyone being grilled about their movements and the happy atmosphere of his beloved school fouled by dark suspicions.
‘You will try not to alarm them?’
He glanced round at the groups of people on the terrace, by the pool, strolling in the garden.
His student family, the men and women who were the living embodiment of his dream.
‘Already much damage has been done,’ he said sorrowfully.
‘I'll be as discreet as I can,’ she promised.
Melissa slipped out behind the house, through the gate in the perimeter fence and up the path leading to the belvedere.
Looking at the tangle of bushes on either side, she soon realised that to make a thorough search of the undergrowth was out of the question.
It was the kind of operation that needed a squad of policemen with metal detectors to carry out.
Unless the hypothetical killer had been careless enough to leave part of Dora's golf-club visible, her chances of finding it must be virtually nil.
Just the same, she had made a promise and would do what she could to keep it.
She reached the clearing where she had first seen Fernand.
It was deserted; evidently, the work of repairing the safety barrier was complete.
There was no sign of anything untoward: grass and a few bushes flattened by the weight of wood recently heaped on them; some traces of sawdust lying on the ground; nothing more.
There had been no rain for several weeks and the earth was hard, barely showing marks of the tractor wheels.
She decided that her best hope was to go up to the belvedere and see if she could find any indication at all that someone else had been involved in Gebrec's death.
It was unlikely; any obvious signs of a struggle would have been noted by the police.
On the other hand, if foul play had not been suspected, even the overzealous Hassan might not have examined the spot too closely.
It was worth a try.
She was getting close to the river; the sound of the tumbling water increased steadily from a gentle rushing to an insistent roar.
She felt a nervous spasm in her stomach as she passed the point where Fernand had led her from the path to show her his secret refuge.
She wondered now, in cold blood, just how she had found the courage to undertake the terrifying trip along that narrow ledge and told herself that nothing would ever induce her to go near it again.
Reaching the head of the path, she inspected the new safety barrier.
It followed an arc some two metres from the edge of the cliff and was a simple structure of uprights and a double row of horizontals, about waist-high to a person of average build.
The wood was roughly finished; Melissa ran a hand along one of the top rails, collected a splinter in her thumb and stood sucking it while considering the possibilities.
Jack and Dieter had stated quite clearly that Alain Gebrec had been lying on the rocks below the belvedere.
Therefore, if he had killed himself, he must have either climbed over or through the barrier somewhere near this point.
The searchers had probably done the same as, from where Melissa was standing, only the middle and the far side of the river bed were visible.
On the other hand, from a different vantage point they might have seen the body without having to go right to the edge.
She was wasting her time; without knowing exactly where it had been lying, there was no means of identifying the spot from where it had fallen.
Nor was there anything to be gained by a closer look but…all the same, as she was here…she might as well …before she knew what she was doing, Melissa ducked through the rails.
As she straightened up, something caught her eye: a wisp  of blue thread clinging to one of the tiny plants that somehow managed to exist in the thin soil on top of the cliff.
She picked it up, laid it on the palm of her hand, and considered.
Gebrec had been wearing blue slacks yesterday morning.
If this thread had come from them, it could have happened in two ways.
If he had crawled under the rails in order to throw himself off the cliff, then he could easily have caught his slacks on something and left the thread behind.
If, on the other hand, someone had dragged his unconscious body after slugging him with Dora's missing golf-club, there might be other shreds of cloth lying about.
Keeping well away from the edge and steeling herself against a spasm of vertigo, Melissa searched for several minutes, but found nothing further.
Then, remembering her damaged thumb, she went back and examined the top rail, exclaiming aloud in excitement as she found a second thread clinging to the rough wood.
With a feeling of triumph she placed both threads inside a paper tissue, folded it carefully and put it in her pocket.
Conscious that she had been crawling around in the hot sunshine for some time without a hat, she retired a short distance to the shade of some trees, sat down on a convenient boulder and tried to conjecture how Alain Gebrec might have spent his last moments.
If he had indeed come up here determined to end his life, then he might have climbed over the guard rail, leaving a scrap of thread behind as he did so.
Perhaps the second fragment had become detached at the same time and simply fallen to the ground where she had picked it up.
From there, two or three strides would have taken him over the edge and into oblivion.
But if he had been murdered?
Perhaps he had been standing at that spot, gazing out over the river towards the mountains or maybe with bowed head, grieving for his lover.
If an assailant had struck from behind, he would have toppled forward over the rail.
What then?
To make it look like suicide, the killer would have to get the unconscious — or possibly already dead — man across two metres of rough, stony ground.
First, take the legs and heave them up and over; then grab the body by the arms or legs and drag it to the edge…no, that wouldn't be practicable, that way the killer would be moving backwards and be the first to fall.
He would have had to roll the body away from himself until he was close enough, with one final shove, to send it plunging down.
To do a proper search, Melissa would have to follow his tracks and simulate that gruesome task.
Swallowing hard, she crawled once more under the rail and inched forward, keeping her eyes on the ground as she went.
The noise from below battered her eardrums until it felt as if a high-speed train was roaring through her head.
All the nerves in her chest and stomach tightened into one solid knot that seemed about to burst out of her throat.
She recalled Alain Gebrec's warning that the edge was unstable in places; panic threatened to take over; she was on the point of abandoning the whole insane exercise when, almost at the very edge of the cliff, she spotted something that gleamed in the sun.
She stretched out a hand and retrieved a small pearl button.
Fourteen
By the time Melissa reached the house, it was nearly a quarter past five.
Iris and Jack were in the courtyard, talking to Philippe Bonard; everyone else seemed to have left.
Iris hurried to meet her.
‘Got worried about you!’ she said reproachfully.
‘What kept you so long?’
‘Sorry, I forgot the time.’
‘Jack wanted to leave a message and take me back to the auberge.
Wouldn't go without you.
You all right?’ she added, with a keen look.
‘Of course I am — why shouldn't I be?’
‘You look very hot.
Should wear a hat in this sun.’
‘I'm quite all right, really,’ Melissa insisted.
‘But empty-handed, I see,’ said Bonard.
‘I'm afraid so.’
She gave him an enquiring glance, uncertain as to how much the others knew of the reason for her absence.
He gave a nod of reassurance.
‘I told our friends here the gist of our conversation — no doubt you will fill in the details.
I presume your next unhappy task will be to inform Madame Gebrec that you have found nothing to support her contention?’
‘Not just yet.
I've still got some other ideas to follow up.’
‘You will tell me if you learn anything significant?
If I can be of any help…since we had our talk, I too have begun to have doubts.
I should like to know for certain how…
Alain died.’
His voice wavered.
Iris put a hand on his arm.
Jack cleared his throat and looked from one to the other.
‘Perhaps we'd better leave you now, Philippe,’ he said.
‘We'll see you in the morning.’
‘Yes, of course.’
Bonard drew himself upright and shook  hands with everyone, once again the courteous, attentive head of the establishment.
‘I wish you all good evening.’
Back in their room at the auberge, Melissa took the tissue from her pocket and spread it with its contents on the table.
Iris stared with her mouth open as she described how she had found them.
‘Why didn't you tell Philippe?’ she demanded.
‘Because they might not have come from Alain's clothing at all and I didn't want to upset him unnecessarily.’
‘Where else could they have come from?’
‘Several places.
Alain wasn't the only person to wear blue yesterday.
Fernand wears his bleu de travail every day and he must have handled that rail umpteen times — the threads could have come from him.
And Dieter — I've seen him in similar clothes to the ones Alain wore yesterday, blue slacks and a white shirt.
He might have lost those threads when he climbed over the rail during the search.’
‘He was wearing fawn slacks yesterday,’ said Iris.
‘Are you sure?’
‘Positive.
Noticed when he came back in the afternoon, while he was talking to Rose.
Her dress was almost the same colour, sort of café au lait, only hers had flowers on it.’
‘That narrows it down a bit, but we'd need a forensic scientist to establish whether the threads came from Alain's slacks or not.’
‘Hmm.’
Iris sat on the edge of her bed with her chin in her hands.
‘What about the button?’
‘If Alain was murdered and pushed over the edge the way I figured, then it could easily have been torn off.
On the other hand, it might have been loose anyway and just fallen off.
It's all very circumstantial.’
‘It's a very ordinary button.’
Iris examined it thoughtfully.
‘Might not be from his shirt at all.’
‘The only way to find out would be to get the police to check it against the one he was wearing when they found him.’
‘You're going to the police?’
Melissa rewrapped the tissue and put it in a drawer.
‘I haven't decided yet.’
Iris gave her an appraising look.
‘Planning a bit more private sleuthing, are we?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Wish you wouldn't.
Could be dangerous.’
‘I'll be careful,’ promised Melissa.
‘It's just that I don't want Officer Banana-Split Hassan to start harassing Fernand unnecessarily.’
‘Fernand?
Why should he be involved?’
‘Hassan strongly suspected that he had something to do with Wolfgang Klein's death.
He was mortally disappointed when it was officially declared an accident and there's nothing he'd like better than to find some excuse to start ferreting round and upsetting everyone with his ‘interrogations’.’
‘Philippe would hate that,’ said Iris, as if this was sufficient reason for leaving Hassan with his suicide theory for the time being.
‘Anyway,’ she said with a frown, ‘I don't see how there could be a connection.
It's Germans that get Fernand's goat.
Now, if Erdle had been the victim…’
‘Dora Lavender would be suspect number one!’ said Melissa dryly.
‘And that would have been ironic, wouldn't it, now he's been posted back to HQ.
I wonder if Rose will be down to dinner?’
‘Dressed in mourning?’
Iris gave an unsympathetic cackle.
‘Can't say we didn't warn her.’
The atmosphere at the dinner table could have been worse — for most of the meal, at any rate.
Dora, naturally, was in good spirits and with Fortune on her side she could afford to be magnanimous.
She made no reference to either Dieter's recall or the coming week of golf in Antibes; instead, in response to a question from Melissa, she gave an account of her visit to the sports centre the previous day and then encouraged Rose to talk about her experiences in the world of son et lumière.
Rose responded bravely, but her manner was artificially bright and brittle.
Like Dora, she too avoided any mention of  Dieter.
It was a chance remark that caught her off guard.
‘Your interviews seem to have been a great success,’ said Melissa casually as she helped herself to cheese.
‘Did everyone fare as well?’
‘I think so,’ said Dora.
‘Everyone seemed very pleased with the arrangements Philippe had made, didn't they, Rose?’
‘Dieter was a bit put out.’
Rose had evidently spoken without thinking.
Her colour deepened and she bit her lip and looked down at her plate.
‘Why?
What went wrong?’ asked Dora gently.
‘Nothing really…
I mean, it was a good interview.
It was just that the man he went to see kept him waiting from nine o'clock until almost ten.
Something to do with a piece of machinery breaking down.’
‘These things happen,’ said Dora.
‘Monsieur Tollet at the sports centre had to leave me several times to deal with queries.’
‘Just a minute,’ said Melissa.
‘Dora, didn't you say something to me about trying to have a word with Dieter yesterday morning, before you went off to your interview?’
Dora thought for a moment.
‘That's right, I did.
He was in the garden and I called out to him, but he didn't answer.
Wouldn't answer, more likely,’ she added tartly, forgetting her role as peacemaker and earning a resentful glance from Rose.
‘What time would this have been?’
‘Oh, I don't know.
Half-past nine, perhaps.
I didn't look at my watch, but I found out later it had stopped so it would have been wrong anyway.
Everyone else had gone and I was practising on the putting green.
I saw him go through the gate into the woods…’
‘You couldn't have done,’ Rose interrupted.
‘He was waiting to see that man at the factory long before then.
Anyway, why did you want to speak to him?
You usually avoid him like the plague.’
The cordial atmosphere was crumbling fast.
‘Does it matter?’
‘Of course it matters.
You were going to interfere, weren't  you?’
Rose's voice shook, the pitch growing higher with each word.
‘Trying to come between him and me?
Well, it won't work.
And don't imagine that just because he's got to go back on Saturday, we shan't be seeing one another again.’
She leapt to her feet and glared at Dora, her chin thrust forward, her eyes hard and angry.
‘Rose, do calm down.
Everyone's looking at you.’
‘Let them look.
I'm not staying here with you another minute!’
Almost in tears now, Rose rushed out of the dining-room, narrowly avoiding a collision with Monsieur Gauthier bearing a loaded tray.
Dora was about to follow, but Iris stopped her with a gesture.
‘No point,’ she said laconically.
‘Only lead to another bust-up.
Have a liqueur with your coffee.’
She beckoned to Monsieur Gauthier, who came bobbing across to their table.
When he had gone to fetch their order, Melissa said, ‘Dora, are you absolutely certain you saw Dieter Erdle in the garden yesterday morning?’
‘Of course I am.
He was going into the woods.’
‘Did you happen to notice what he was wearing?’
Dora looked surprised, thought for a moment and said, ‘Blue trousers and a white shirt, I think.’
Iris opened her mouth to contradict, but Melissa nudged her under the table.
Dora looked at them curiously and said, ‘Why do you ask?’
‘I just wondered…you said this was about nine-thirty.
Would that have been about the time you went back to the car to look for your nine iron?’
‘No, that was later.
I went back and carried on with my putting practice for a while.
What did I do next?’
Dora traced an abstract pattern with her finger on the table-cloth, as if she felt it would help the process of recall.
‘Oh, yes, I thought perhaps I'd try to intercept Erdle on his way back.
I hung around for a while…now I come to think of it, I walked a short way along the path, looking for him.’
‘But you didn't see him?’
‘No, I came to the conclusion that he must have gone the other way, along the track leading to the road.’
‘Weren't you surprised to have seen him in the first place?
I mean, didn't you know he was supposed to be in Anduze at nine o'clock?’
‘Why should I?
We were given the details of our appointments individually.
I simply assumed his was for later on, like mine.’
‘So, when you failed to find him, you gave up and went back to the car to look for your nine iron?’
‘That's right.
I couldn't find it, but I didn't search thoroughly just then.’
‘Because you realised your watch had stopped and it was later than you thought?’
‘Yes.
I checked the car clock and it was twenty past ten.
My appointment was in Alès at eleven and I wanted to give myself plenty of time to find the place, so I decided to leave straight away.
Why are you asking all these questions, Melissa?
Do you suppose it was Erdle who stole my iron?’
‘I've no reason to think so, but I'm trying to consider all possibilities.’
Remembering her promise to Bonard and anxious not to excite any alarmist speculation, Melissa kept her tone casual, but the damage had been done.
Dora jerked her head like a horse shying at a pheasant.
‘Well, I have every reason to think so!’ she declared.
‘I see it now — it's that stupid young fool's idea of a joke, to pay me out for objecting to the way he's been behaving towards Rose!
Just wait till I get hold of him!’
Her face registered gathering anger and her tone a blistering contempt.
‘I've a good mind to go and have it out with him here and now.
I know where to find him — he's staying at the Lion d'Or.’
‘Hang on a minute,’ said Melissa, restraining Dora in the act of leaping to her feet.
‘What proof have you got?’
‘What proof do I need?
Who else would play a trick like that on me?
I wouldn't be surprised if Rose put him up to it!’
She was becoming increasingly agitated, glaring at Melissa as if in some way holding her responsible.
‘Take it easy,’ said Iris.
‘This is getting out of hand.’
Dora ignored the intervention.
‘There's something funny  going on,’ she insisted.
‘What was Erdle doing in the woods, I'd like to know?’
She stabbed the air with her forefinger.
‘I'll tell you what he wall doing.
He was looking for somewhere to hide my iron.
He might even have thrown it over the cliff.
If he has, it'll be ruined!’
‘Please, Dora, be reasonable!’ urged Melissa.
‘According to Rose, he was at a factory in Anduze by nine and spent the rest of the morning there.
He couldn't be in two places at once.’
‘His contact didn't show up till nearly ten.
He had plenty of time to come back.’
‘But Rose said…’
‘Rose will believe anything that man tells her,’ fumed Dora.
‘All I know is, I saw him, I followed him, but he disappeared into the woods.
What he did after that, I've no idea.
Unless,’ her hand shot to her mouth and her eyes dilated, ‘unless he was going after Alain Gebrec.
Perhaps that poor man didn't kill himself after all!’
Her voice faded to a barely audible whisper.
‘Perhaps Dieter Erdle murdered him…with my nine iron!
Oh, how dreadful!’
‘If I were you, I wouldn't go spreading accusations like that around,’ said Melissa, alarmed at the turn the conversation was taking.
‘You could find yourself in serious trouble.’
‘I don't need your advice on how to conduct myself, thank you,’ said Dora through her teeth.
Further acrimony was prevented by the arrival of Monsieur Gauthier with the liqueurs.
Immediately, Dora put her expression to rights, even squeezing out a polite smile of thanks as he set her glass in front of her, the epitome of a well-bred Englishwoman who never reveals her feelings before servants or foreigners.
‘Your friend, she does not return?’ he enquired, with a bob towards Rose's empty chair.
‘She is tired and has gone to her room.
I'll go up and see how she is.
I'll take this with me.’
Dora stood up with the glass in her hand.
‘Will you get another one, please?’
‘Well, what do you make of that?’ murmured Melissa as soon as Dora was out of earshot.
‘Couldn't have been Erdle she saw,’ replied Iris.
‘Wrong colour trousers.’
‘He might have changed them.’
Melissa's brain was in overdrive.
‘Suppose Dora's right and he did kill Gebrec?
Crawling about disposing of the body, he could have got them dusty.’
‘Suppose so.
Or bloodstained.
A bash on the head with a golf-club'd make a nasty mess.’
‘In that case there'd have been blood on the ground,’ Melissa pointed out.
‘The fuzz would have been on to that straight away.
No, if there's anything in the golf-club theory, it's more likely the victim was merely stunned.’
‘So you reckon Erdle might have done it?’
Melissa shook her head doubtfully.
‘There is the problem of time.
If what he told Rose was true, he couldn't have been at the belvedere after about a quarter to nine.
We know Gebrec was alive at least half an hour after that.
It should be the easiest of alibis to check .
‘Oh, yes?
Like how, Madame Poirot?’
Melissa shrugged.
‘You tell me.
I've got no authority to go asking questions of complete strangers.’
Iris's eyes sparkled.
‘Knowing you, you'll think of something!’
Melissa grinned back at her.
‘I'm delighted to know you have such faith in me!’
They clinked glasses and sipped their liqueurs in a companionable silence, forgetting for a minute or two the gruesome nature of their discussion.
Then Melissa said, ‘Motive.
Let's think about motive.’
‘Any ideas?’
‘Nothing very positive, but Erdle was constantly needling him, wasn't he?’
‘More like a motive for him to bump off Erdle than t'other way round.’
‘That's a point.
And there's that book I bought — gosh, I keep forgetting about that!
Both Gebrecs were furious about something in there, and Erdle knows what it is.
He offered to  show me, but Alain nearly went berserk and then we got interrupted.
I started to flip through it, but I didn't know where to begin.
It's got over three hundred pages, all heavily annotated.’
‘Tried the index?’
‘Of course.’
Melissa looked pained.
‘First thing I did.’
She finished her drink and got up from the table.
‘There's only one person who can answer this.’
‘You mean Erdle?
Not going to tackle him about this business of Dora's golf-club, are you?’
‘Of course I'm not.’
‘What about Madame G?’
Slowly, Melissa sat down.
‘Yes, of course, she knows,’ she mused.
‘But when I asked her if she knew of anyone who might have a motive for killing Alain, it didn't seem to ring any bells.’
‘Revenge?’ suggested Iris.
‘Long-standing grudge…one generation settling the previous one's accounts?’
‘Mm, could well be.
I can't bother Madame Gebrec this evening, she's far too upset.
But I can talk to Erdle.’
Melissa stood up again.
Iris did the same.
‘I'll come with you.’
Melissa eyed her with something like suspicion.
‘This is a change of heart for you, isn't it?
You usually do your darnedest to talk me out of getting involved in this sort of thing.’
‘Learned my lesson, haven't I?
Can't stop you poking your nose in, but I can keep an eye on you.’
‘Okay,’ sighed Melissa.
‘Come if you insist — but please, let me do the talking.’
When they reached the Lion d'Or, the first person they saw was Jack Hammond sitting in a corner of the terrace.
He hurried across to greet them, his ruddy face alight with pleasure.
‘I was just thinking about you,’ he said.
His glance briefly included Melissa, but settled, beaming, on Iris.
‘Will you have a drink with me?
Dieter said he'd be along presently.’
Iris hesitated, but Melissa jumped in quickly.
‘You two wait here for me and I'll join you in a minute or two,’ she said.
Over Jack's shoulder, she caught her friend's eye and put a finger to her lips.
There was no particular reason why he should not know what she was up to, but she instinctively felt an urge to keep it quiet for the moment.
She intercepted Dieter just as he was emerging on to the terrace.
He looked surprised at her request for a word in private, but readily agreed and led her across the hotel reception hall, out through a door at the rear of the building and into the garden.
There was no one about; the swings in the children's play area hung motionless and the only sound from the swimming-pool was the hum of the filtration plant.
The reflections of a string of coloured lanterns danced in an ever-changing pattern on the rippling surface of the water.
‘Isn't that pretty!’ exclaimed Melissa.
Dieter raised an eyebrow.
‘You did not come out here to admire the lights, I think?’
‘No.’
‘Then let me guess.
You bring a request from Dora not to deprive her of — what is the English expression — her meal ticket?’
His grin held the same hint of mocking, almost insolent provocation as when he had taunted Alain Gebrec.
Melissa was about to retort that Dora had every right to be concerned about her friend, but reminded herself that it was no business of hers and that in any case, Dora was quite capable of fighting her own battles.
‘I'm quite sure Dora can do without the services of an emissary,’ she said coolly and his laughter echoed across the empty garden.
He was quite outrageous and she knew she should not have so much as smiled, but she found herself laughing with him.
He was a handsome animal with a charm that was hard to resist; his brown hair sprang from his scalp in crisp waves, his speech was brisk, his carriage erect and his movements  athletic.
It was easy to see why Rose found him so attractive; whether he cared for her was another matter and nothing to do with Melissa or her present mission.
‘So,’ he said, smiling in obvious delight at having so easily disarmed her.
‘What can I do for you, gnädige Frau?’
‘You remember how angry Alain became when he saw me with that book?’ she said.
‘Of course.’
The recollection appeared to cause him further amusement.
‘There's something in it that upset both Alain and his mother very much.
You know what it is, don't you?’
His smile faded.
‘Why do you say that?’
‘You offered to point it out to me.
You must remember — Alain snatched the book from my hand before you had the chance.’
He gave an uneasy laugh.
‘Just an example of my unfortunate sense of humour, I fear.’
‘You mean, you don't really know at all?’
He avoided her eye as he replied, ‘I have no idea.’
‘So why all the snide remarks?’
He looked at her in apparent perplexity.
‘What does this mean, ‘snide’?’
‘I think you know perfectly well,’ said Melissa impatiently, suspecting prevarication.
‘Teasing him about speaking German, wisecracks about spies…that sort of thing.
What were you getting at?’
‘Getting at?’
This time, his look of puzzlement was far too exaggerated to be genuine, but she kept her voice even as she said, ‘What…did…you…mean?’
‘Ah, I understand.
Well, I meant nothing at all, I assure you.
Just a little joke.
I told him last week that he looked more like a German than a Frenchman and he became very cross.’
His short laugh sounded slightly hollow.
‘It was quite funny.’
‘He didn't seem to think it was funny.’
Dieter thrust his hands into his pockets and traced with the  toe of one foot the outline of a damp patch on the concrete surround of the pool.
‘I like to make jokes, but some people have no sense of humour, that is all,’ he said defensively.
‘Why do you ask me all these questions?’
‘Alain's mother doesn't believe he committed suicide and I'm inclined to agree with her.’
For a moment, the foot hesitated in its rotation, then completed one more cycle and came to rest.
He continued to stare at the ground as she added, ‘I'm just wondering who might have had a motive for killing him.’
‘So,’ he said without looking up, ‘you play the real-life detective for a change?’
‘I promised to ask around a bit, and it occurred to me that the book might contain a clue.’
‘I am sorry, I cannot help you.’
‘That's a pity.
I don't want to have to question Madame Gebrec, because I think it would upset her.
Since you won't tell me, I suppose I'll just have to plod through the whole book.’
He shrugged.
‘In your place, I would not waste my time.
Have you any other questions for me?’
‘No, that's all.’
As they walked back through the hotel he remarked casually, ‘I said I'd meet Jack on the terrace for a drink.’
‘Yes, he told me.’
‘Perhaps you would care to join us?’
‘As a matter of fact, he's expecting me.
My friend Iris is there with him already.’
‘Aha!
Another romance, to keep the score…’
He moved his hands up and down, simulating a pair of scales.
‘Gleich?’
‘Even,’ she translated and added, ‘I don't follow you.’
‘Well, we have had two deaths, so why not two love affairs — or, perhaps I should say, flirtations?’
The words were spoken with a provocative, sidelong glance and Melissa was sure that, just for the hell of it, he was trying to trick her into questioning him over his relationship with Rose.
She declined to be tempted.
And it had not escaped her  notice that he had allowed the words, ‘since you won't tell me’ to pass unchallenged.
It might have been a weakness in his command of the language, but she did not think so.
Fifteen
Iris and Jack were seated at a table with a book of glossy coloured plates lying open in front of them.
Iris was discoursing with animation, her hands describing sweeping patterns in the air, her whole attention focused on her subject.
From the way her companion was looking at her it was easy to see that only part of his mind was concerned with art.
Glancing at Dieter, Melissa read ‘What did I tell you?’ in his smile as he made a great pantomime of clearing his throat.
‘I hope we do not interrupt you?’ he said with mock formality.
The two looked up in surprise and Jack half rose from his seat.
‘Please, don't get up,’ said Melissa.
She sat down in the chair that Dieter held for her and craned her neck to peer at the book.
‘What have you got there?’
‘Reproductions from the Arthur Sanderson Design Archive,’ explained Jack.
‘These are from the William Morris School.
We've been looking at the contrasting features of these two.’
He pushed the book across and pointed out the swirling fronds of ‘Seaweed’ and the stiffly formal ‘Sweet Pea’, while Iris looked on, nodding and chipping in with observations from time to time.
Melissa detected a growing rapport between them, and rejoiced.
Jack put the book to one side and the four of them sat chatting over a bottle of wine.
The evening air was soft as silk, cicadas sang in the trees and a few birds, black against the sunset, flew home to roost.
‘Last day of the course tomorrow,’ said Jack with evident regret.
‘I understand you're going home on Saturday as well, Dieter?’
‘Yes — a summons from my manager.
It seems I have to  make some travel abroad, but I may return later to complete my studies.’
‘I'm hoping to come back as well, if everything goes to plan.’
Jack glanced at Iris and received a nod and a smile in return.
The slight figure of a woman emerged from the hotel and stood on the steps leading down to the terrace, scanning the tables with anxious eyes and making agitated, jerky movements with her hands.
‘Here's Rose,’ said Melissa.
‘Something seems to be wrong.’
Rose caught sight of them and came rushing across, dodging between the tables and nearly sending a waiter flying.
Dieter guided her to an empty chair; she was trembling violently and he called for brandy.
‘What is the matter?’ he asked, a note of resignation in his voice.
‘Have you had another quarrel with Dora?’
She nodded without speaking.
‘The usual thing, I suppose?’
‘No, it's much worse.
Oh, Dieter, I don't know how to say this!’
Her shoulders slumped and she covered her face with her hands.
With some reluctance, it seemed to Melissa, Dieter put an arm round her.
When at last she lifted her head, she found herself facing three pairs of curious, slightly embarrassed eyes.
She appeared taken aback, as if she had only just realised that the pair of them were not alone.
Simultaneously, the others stood up.
‘We'll leave you now,’ said Jack.
‘I'm sure you want to have a private talk.’
‘No, please stay,’ begged Rose.
‘You'll hear about it soon enough anyway — Iris and Melissa probably know already.’
‘Know what?’ asked Dieter as she seemed unable to go on.
She turned terrified eyes on him.
‘Dieter, can you say exactly where you were yesterday, every minute of the day until you got back to Les Châtaigniers?’
He frowned.
‘I am not sure about every minute.
Why do you ask?’
She grabbed him by the hand, her eyes frantically searching his.
‘You were at that factory by nine o'clock, weren't you?
It's important!’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘When they told you you'd have to wait…you stayed right there…you didn't leave and then go back later?’
He frowned and said, ‘What a foolish question.
Why should I do that?’
‘You might have thought, as you had to wait…’
‘And where do you suppose I went?’ he said impatiently.
‘Really, this is becoming quite stupid.’
‘How long were you at the factory?’ she persisted.
‘Until about twelve o'clock.
Then Monsieur Coutelan invited me to lunch in a restaurant in some village.
I don't know what time we came back.’
‘But you were with someone all the time?
You do have an alibi for the whole morning?’
‘Why should I need an alibi?’
He forced a smile.
‘Has someone robbed a bank?’
‘Dora thinks Alain Gebrec was murdered,’ said Rose in a terrified whisper.
‘She says…she saw you go up to the belvedere…and one of her golf-clubs is missing…
I'm afraid she thinks you took it…to kill him!’
‘Indeed?’
Dieter withdrew his arm.
‘Your friend goes to great trouble to make you think ill of me.’
His expression was grim and a muscle above his right eye started to twitch.
‘Oh, darling, you don't think I believe it, do you?’
‘I hope not.’
His face did not relax as he picked up the brandy and handed it to her.
‘Perhaps you should drink this,’ he said.
Rose's hands were shaking so badly that some of the contents of the glass spilled on her dress.
Spluttering and gulping, she mopped it with her handkerchief.
‘I'm sorry,’ she faltered.
‘It was such a shock when I realised what Dora was suggesting.
We had a terrible quarrel…
I was screaming at her.
I don't think I can ever be friends with her again.’
‘You know something about this?’
Dieter glared across the table at the others, his voice harsh and angry.
Jack shook his head and Iris gave great attention to her glass.
It was left to Melissa to reply.
‘Dora took it into her head this evening that you'd pinched one of her golf-clubs as a sort of practical joke,’ she explained.
‘She insisted she'd seen you heading out through the woods at about half-past nine, shortly before she missed it.
Then she suddenly got the wild idea that you might have taken it to attack Alain.
I did point out that you were supposed to have been in another place at the time…’
‘That's Dora all over,’ interrupted Rose with a sniff.
‘Once she gets an idea into her head, wild horses won't shift it.’
She turned to face Dieter.
‘I didn't believe it for a single moment, darling,’ she repeated earnestly.
‘I just wanted to be sure you had an alibi.’
Dieter ignored her.
He was staring at Melissa with fury in his eyes.
Supposed to have been in another place’— what are you suggesting?’ he demanded.
She spread her hands in a conciliatory gesture.
‘Nothing, really…just a figure of speech.
It seems to have been a case of mistaken identity.’
‘Obviously,’ said Dieter coldly.
To Melissa's relief, he did not raise the subject of their earlier conversation.
‘Then who did she see, if it wasn't  Dieter ?’ asked Jack.
‘It could have been Alain,’ said Melissa.
‘They wear similar clothes, and they are the same build and colouring when you come to think of it.
You did say her eyesight isn't all that good, didn't you, Rose?’
‘Of course!’
Rose sat bolt upright.
‘If she had her putting glasses on, anything at a distance would look fuzzy.
Most people with her problem wear bifocals, but not Dora, oh no!’
She did not actually say, ‘she would have to be different’, but the implication was unmistakable.
‘So it was Alain all the time, and she took him for me,’ mused Dieter.
‘Mein Doppelgänger!’
He gave a short, mirthless laugh.
‘How ironic,’ he added, almost to himself.
The cloud had vanished from Rose's face.
‘How silly we are not to have thought of that before,’ she said.
‘And won't Dora feel a fool when we tell her.’
Equally relieved at the removal of any suspicion towards Dieter and delighted at the prospect  of Dora's embarrassment, she picked up her glass again and swallowed a mouthful of brandy with relish.
‘Dora said she called after him, but he didn't respond,’ said Melissa thoughtfully.
‘If it was Alain — and it almost certainly was — then he might not even have heard, let alone taken any notice.
Philippe said he rushed off in some distress.’
‘Poor chap!’ said Jack sadly.
Mechanically, he picked up the wine bottle and offered refills, but gloom had settled over the table and no one was interested.
‘So what happens now?’ asked Iris with a keen, somewhat disapproving, glance at Rose.
‘I don't know.’
Rose turned to Dieter.
‘I can't go back to sharing a room with Dora, and I know the auberge is full.’
She put a hand on his arm and gave an arch smile.
‘Perhaps I could stay here?’
Looking anything but delighted at the prospect, he stood up.
‘Wait here, I'll go to ask,’ he said curtly.
He returned a few minutes later with the news that a room was available.
‘I have told them to make it ready for you,’ he said.
‘I will take you now to collect your things.’
‘Oh, thank you!’ she said, but her smile withered at the sight of his expression and she trailed after him towards the car park without a word or a glance at the others.
‘Hmm,’ said Jack.
‘Things seem a bit bumpy there, don't they?’
‘Looks as if Dora's going to have the last laugh,’ said Iris.
‘I'm going to the ladies, then we'll be leaving too.’
She hoisted her lanky frame from her chair and Jack immediately leapt from his.
‘No need to fuss,’ she said, evading the hand he held out to assist her.
She slung her bag over one shoulder and went marching across the terrace, head erect, free arm swinging.
Jack's eyes followed her in admiration.
‘What a woman!’ he exclaimed.
‘She's an independent soul,’ commented Melissa.
‘But a rare character.
I can't tell you how much I'm enjoying this week, despite all the trauma.’
His face grew serious.
‘Melissa, do you agree with Alain's mum that he was  murdered?
It's pretty odd, isn't it, one of Dora's clubs going missing like that.
I take it your search came to nothing?’
‘Well, as a matter of fact…’
On impulse, she decided to tell him of her discoveries at the belvedere and the conclusions she had drawn from them.
‘I didn't say anything to Philippe because it was so inconclusive,’ she finished, ‘and I still can't decide whether it's worth taking them to the police.’
‘I see your point about Philippe, but I don't see why you're keeping this from the police,’ said Jack.
‘What's the point of sending Officer Hassan flying off at half cock and upsetting a lot of people if it's all to no purpose?’
‘Who do you mean by ‘a lot of people’?
You wouldn't be trying to protect anyone?’
His eyes were shrewd.
‘Fernand, for example?’
‘I suppose Iris has been telling you about my chats with ‘the nutter’, as she calls him?’
‘You can't pretend he's normal and it's no secret that he didn't see eye to eye with Alain.’
‘Fernand has been badly traumatised, but he's a gentle soul and wouldn't lay a finger on anyone,’ Melissa insisted.
Jack shook his head.
‘That really isn't the point, Melissa.
The evidence you found may not on its own be inconsistent with the suicide theory, but just the same, it's your duty to hand it over and let the police decide if it's worth following up.’
‘I suppose so,’ she sighed.
‘All right, I'll give them a call in the morning.
Ah, here comes Iris.
We'd better be going now.’
Sixteen
On the way back to the auberge, Iris demanded to know what Melissa had managed to learn from Dieter Erdle.
‘Precisely nothing,’ Melissa said.
‘He claims it was just harmless Teutonic fun at the expense of a humourless Frog.’
‘You believe that?’
‘No.’
‘So what's the game?’
‘I don't know, but I'm going to find out even if it means sitting up all night reading that bloody book.
Hullo, what's going on in here?’
They had reached the auberge to find the entire Gauthier family — Monsieur, Madame and five daughters — assembled round the reception desk in excited and voluble discussion.
The sound of six Frenchwomen all talking at once gave the impression of a barnyard invaded by a marauding fox, with Monsieur Gauthier rushing to and fro, beating the air with his hands like a distraught chanticleer.
In the farthest corner, looking as if she would rather be anywhere else in the world at that moment, sat Dora.
There was no sign of Rose or Dieter.
‘Wonder what's happened,’ said Iris.
‘Can you make out what they're rabbiting on about?
I'll go and talk to Dora.’
Madame Gauthier, in between making intermittent, shrill contributions to the general commotion, was proceeding with her regular evening task of making up her accounts.
Melissa's politely worded question was received with an unfriendly stare and a tart suggestion that ‘those other English’ would put her in the picture.
She, Madame Gauthier, wife of the proprietor, had her business to attend to, and this kind of scandal did it no good at all.
The Gauthier daughters, however, were only too ready to  talk; they practically fell on Melissa as she attempted to make her way through their ranks.
The two English ladies, they explained, had had a most regrettable, a most serious disagreement, during which voices had been raised and charges of murder, yes, murder, had been uttered.
A French lady in an adjoining room who understood some English had become greatly alarmed and taken it upon herself to summon the police.
An officer from the gendarmerie was even now interrogating the accused person.
‘What accused person?’
Melissa asked, but before anyone could give a coherent answer Monsieur Gauthier managed to impose some sort of order on the chaos and shooed his family, like so many cackling hens, towards the private quarters at the rear of the hotel.
Only his wife remained, a scrawny figure with gold-rimmed spectacles half-way down her nose, presiding like a recording angel over her ledgers.
In the corner, Iris was sitting beside Dora, who was looking shaken.
‘I never dreamed it would come to this,’ she declared.
‘I tried so hard to make her see how…unsuitable that man is.
I told her over and over again, but she wouldn't listen.’
‘You don't seriously believe Dieter attacked Alain Gebrec, do you?’ said Melissa.
‘I did point out…’
‘Why not?
I did see him you know — oh, I know he's supposed to have been somewhere else, but his alibi might not be…anyway, I'm sure he's quite capable of it,’ insisted Dora in a transparent attempt at self-justification.
‘In any case, I was only trying to warn her.
How was I to know that stupid woman would call the police?’
She looked pleadingly from one to the other.
‘Where is she now?’ asked Melissa.
‘And where's Dieter?’
‘Erdle's being questioned by that big gendarme and Rose is upstairs, packing her things.
She's throwing herself at that man, making a complete fool of herself.
He's not seriously interested in her — anyone can see that — and our holiday's ruined!’
Overcome with rage and frustration, Dora jammed a fist against her mouth and gnawed at her knuckles.
‘I'm just going to fetch something,’ said Melissa.
‘I'll only  be a minute.
If it's Hassan, don't let him leave before I get back,’ she added to Iris before hurrying upstairs.
On her way back she met Rose, a suitcase in her hand, her face white with fury.
‘Have you heard what's happened?’
She almost spat out the words.
‘When we got back, that fool of a gendarme practically arrested Dieter on the spot.
It's all Dora's fault — I'll never forgive her, never!’
‘She didn't intend…
I mean, it wasn't Dora who rang the police.’
‘If she hadn't been screaming all that nonsense at the top of her voice, it would never have happened.
I just hope she gets arrested herself for wasting police time.
It'd serve her right!’
The final words were pronounced in ringing tones as they arrived back in the hall, where Officer Hassan and Dieter were just emerging from the salon.
Rose rushed at Dieter and made a grab at his wrist, as if fearing to find handcuffs dangling from it.
He shook her off with an irritable gesture and turned to the gendarme.
‘I take it I may go back to my hotel now?’
‘Certainly, Monsieur.
We will talk again tomorrow.’
Without meeting Rose's eyes, Dieter took her suitcase and marched through the door.
She followed at his heels.
Dora half rose, then resignedly sat down again.
‘Madame Craig!’
Hassan rushed forward with one hand outstretched and a grin like a buttered croissant, then remembered he was on duty and saluted instead.
‘Good evening, Officer,’ said Melissa politely.
‘Whatever is going on?’
‘A most dramatic turn of events!’ he began and then, becoming aware of Madame Gauthier's fiercely disapproving frown, he gave a conciliatory bow and said, with a meaning glance in Dora's direction, ‘If Madame will permit, I should like to use the salon for a few more minutes.’
‘I've told you everything I know,’ declared Dora.
‘That remains to be seen.’
His tone held a hint of menace.
‘I will speak to you again in a moment, Madame.
First, I should like a word with these other ladies.’
‘There is nothing I can tell you, Officer,’ said Iris in her stilted French, ‘but my friend has something that may interest you.’
‘Indeed?’
His face registered delighted anticipation.
‘Then, if you would also remain here for a few moments, Madame Ash, perhaps Madame Craig would be so kind as to come this way?’
The moment the door closed behind them, he exclaimed, ‘A most extraordinary allegation has been made by Madame Lavender.
She tried to persuade me someone stole one of her golf-clubs in order to attack the unfortunate Monsieur Gebrec.’
‘So I understand from Mrs Kettle,’ said Melissa.
‘In the circumstances, you may find what I have here of some interest.’
She unfolded the tissue, displayed its contents and explained how she had come to find them.
‘I hope you don't think I question the competence of your men,’ she said, anxious to be diplomatic.
‘It is plain that all the indications were that Monsieur Gebrec had taken his own life…it was only on account of my promise to his mother…’
It was doubtful if he heard the final words.
He gazed at the two scraps of blue thread and the single button as if they were the contents of Aladdin's cave and then turned admiring eyes on Melissa.
‘Madame Craig, you are not only the greatest living writer of the detective novel, you are also a detective yourself!’
‘You think these might be significant?’
He scrutinised the items, turning the tissue this way and that under the light.
‘I will have these examined by our experts first thing tomorrow,’ he said.
‘In the light of Madame Lavender's statement, I will also seek permission to have the body re-examined.’
He folded the tissue carefully and tucked it into the back of his notebook.
‘Now, Madame Craig, this golf-club  that is alleged to have been stolen…do you have any information about that?’
‘Only what Mrs Lavender has told me herself.’
‘You have no idea who might have taken it, or for what purpose?’
‘None at all.’
‘Have you seen any evidence that the ladies’ car or its contents have been tampered with?’
‘No.’
‘So we have nothing but Madame Lavender's word that the article is missing?’
‘I suppose so.
The only other possibility is that it was never there in the first place — that she left it at home by mistake.’
‘I myself put that very point to her.’
Hassan beamed at this evidence of a meeting of minds.
‘She refuted the idea absolutely.’
‘I can well believe it,’ said Melissa with a smile.
‘She takes her golf very seriously; she told me her clubs are a matched set and I imagine they're worth quite a lot of money.
I'm sure she keeps a careful check on them.’
‘Quite so.
Now, as to the circumstances of yesterday morning.
I have been over her story several times and she is quite positive that she saw Monsieur Erdle walking towards the belvedere at about half past nine, although she is unable to state the precise hour.
Monsieur Erdle denies this absolutely; he has made a statement — which, of course, will be verified — accounting for his movements from nine o'clock until well past the estimated time of death.’
‘We were discussing this earlier,’ said Melissa.
‘There was a suggestion that it was Alain Gebrec that she saw.’
‘She does not accept that possibility.’
‘Well, I'm sure you will check everything very thoroughly,’ Melissa murmured tactfully.
‘By the way, what was the estimated time of death?’
‘Some time between nine-thirty, when Gebrec left the office of Monsieur Bonard, and midday.
Now,’ Hassan licked a forefinger and turned a page of his notebook, ‘you are no doubt aware that Madame Lavender has shown considerable hostility towards Monsieur Erdle on a number of occasions?’
‘It is because she is very anxious about the extent of his influence over her friend,’ said Melissa.
‘She does not wish to see her hurt.’
‘Ah, yes.’
Hassan fondled his moustache.
‘The little Madame Kettle.
She is, I think, much in love with Monsieur Erdle?’
‘Mrs Lavender is convinced that it's an infatuation that will pass once they leave here.’
‘And what do you think?’
‘I hope for Mrs Kettle's sake that she is right.’
‘Madame Lavender alleges that there was ill-feeling between Monsieur Erdle and Monsieur Gebrec.
Have you observed anything of the kind?’
‘Several times.’
Melissa recounted briefly the exchanges on the way to the belvedere and the altercation over the book.
‘I would have said, however, that the ill-feeling was all on Alain Gebrec's part.
Erdle kept hinting that he knew of something unsavoury about him — or possibly his family — and the angrier Gebrec became, the more Erdle taunted him.’
‘But you did not observe any threats being exchanged?’
‘No, nothing like that.
As a matter of fact, I tackled Erdle about it this evening because I was curious to find the reference in the book that upset both Madame Gebrec and her son.
He denied knowing anything about it, but I'm not sure I believe him.’
‘I will mention the point myself tomorrow.’
Hassan scribbled in his notebook.
‘It may be significant, although it hardly suggests a motive for murder.
Now, Madame.’
He glanced round, dropped his somewhat magisterial style of questioning and leaned towards Melissa with a prurient gleam in his eyes.
‘My next question is a rather delicate one.
I know from your books, that I admire so much, that you are a shrewd observer of human…er, behaviour.
What, would you say, are the intentions of Monsieur Erdle towards Madame Kettle?’
‘If you had asked me that question yesterday, or even this morning, I might have found it difficult to answer,’ said Melissa slowly.
‘I was prepared to believe that he was genuinely fond of her, although I don't think many of the others at the Centre would have agreed with me.
But now…’
‘Now you have doubts?’
She nodded.
‘May I ask what made you change your opinion?’
‘My conversation with him this evening made me realise that he can be quite devious, and also that he has a rather cruel sense of humour.
I suspect that the relationship with Mrs Kettle began, from his point of view, as a light-hearted flirtation — in fact, he as good as said so.
He would, I think, have found Mrs Lavender's attitude to him something of a challenge and it probably amused him to manipulate Mrs Kettle into defying her and then to observe her reactions.
Only I doubt if he realised just how seriously Mrs Kettle was taking him.’
‘So you do not share Madame Lavender's conviction almost, I would say, her obsessive fear — that Monsieur Erdle is seeking to marry Madame Kettle for her money?’
‘I wouldn't like to say that such an idea has never occurred to him, but, if it has, I suspect he is having second thoughts.
She is, after all, some years older than he is and inclined to be emotional, hysterical even.’
‘Madame Lavender, I understand, has very little fortune of her own.
Such a union would cause her a certain…inconvenience, shall we say?’
‘I don't know much about their private affairs,’ said Melissa guardedly, ‘except that they are friends of many years’standing and have shared a house since they both became widows some time ago.’
Hassan's smile nearly severed the upper part of his head.
‘Then I have the advantage of you!’ he declared.
‘Madame Kettle is this evening a very angry lady…and when people are angry, it is easy for an experienced interrogator like myself to make them talk.’
He tapped his nose with an air of supreme self-satisfaction.
It was not difficult to guess the direction his thoughts were taking; Melissa's own were not far behind.
The idea, as yet only half formed, seemed preposterous…and yet…it would be interesting to know if he had learned something of which she was unaware.
A bit of judicious flattery might bring results; after all, she thought, angry people aren't the only ones capable of indiscretion.
‘Of course, a trained investigator knows all the tricks,’ she said, injecting a good ladleful of admiration into her tone.
‘People don't always realise how much they are giving away, and in the hands of an expert such as yourself…’
Predictably, he tapped his nose again, but it immediately became plain that she had underestimated the man.
‘Exactly so,’ he said proudly, ‘but the situation is a little tricky, is it not?
Until we can be sure that murder has been committed, we must tread carefully.
Very carefully indeed, Madame.’
For the time being he was going to play this one very close to his chest.
‘Then you do not now rule out the possibility of murder?’ she said.
‘I rule out nothing.’
His smile was tantamount to an unspoken ‘We must hope for the best’.
He closed his notebook and put it in his pocket.
‘Thank you, Madame, that will be all for the moment, but,’ he bent his head close to her ear as they moved towards the door, ‘I would ask you to act as my eyes and ears when I am not present.
Anything, anything at all that might be significant…you will report to me?’
‘Of course,’ she promised, keeping her expression as solemn as his.
When they returned to the reception hall, Madame Gauthier had departed, leaving only one dim light switched on.
Dora was sitting in the shadows with Iris at her side, staring at the floor.
They both looked up as the tall figure of Hassan loomed over them.
‘The old girl left us in the dark,’ said Iris with a jerk of her head towards the empty desk.
‘Think she was trying to tell us something.’
‘Madame Lavender, I should like to ask you one or two more questions,’ said Hassan.
‘Can't it wait till tomorrow?’ said Dora crossly.
‘I have nothing more to tell you and I'm feeling quite exhausted.’
Hassan glanced at his watch, pursed his lips and nodded gravely.
‘Very well, Madame, provided you will give me your solemn undertaking not to leave Roziac in the meantime.’
An hour or so later, Iris and Melissa collapsed, fully dressed, on to their beds, too weary to change into their nightclothes.
After Hassan's departure they had escorted an abnormally subdued and submissive Dora to her room, where Iris insisted on putting her through a series of noisy deep-breathing exercises, ‘to calm her down’, and then prepared a cup of herbal tea, ‘to make her sleep’.
Dora accepted these ministrations without protest, but Melissa thought she detected a growing restiveness and a thinly veiled relief when at last they said goodnight and returned to their own room.
‘What d'you suppose he meant?’ asked Iris, yawning.
Melissa turned her head without opening her eyes.
‘What who meant by what?’
‘Banana Split.
Telling Dora not to leave Roziac.
Is she a key witness or something?’
‘Reading between the lines,’ said Melissa, ‘I think he suspects her of killing Alain Gebrec, mistaking him for Erdle.’
‘Good Heavens!’
Iris sat up with a jerk.
‘He said that?’
‘Not in so many words, but I'm pretty sure that was what he was getting at.’
Never loquacious, Iris was for the moment totally lost for words.
She sank back and closed her eyes.
‘Too fantastic!’ she muttered after some thought.
‘Not so fantastic as you might think,’ said Melissa.
‘She admits following someone she believed was Dieter into the woods.’
‘Only to talk to him.’
‘That's what she says.
Suppose her real intention was to kill him?’
‘To stop him nobbling Rose and her money?’
‘Something like that.
From what we learned the first evening we were here, Rose is very well heeled and it's obvious that by sharing her home, Dora enjoys a lot of luxuries she could never afford by herself.
If Rose were to remarry, she'd be thrown on her own resources.’
‘Don't suppose she'd starve.
Doesn't she work in a bank or something?’
‘Even so, it might mean a pretty drastic cut in her living standards.’
Iris looked dubious.
‘So what's your theory?’
‘I haven't worked it out in detail,’ Melissa admitted, ‘but I was thinking about it while you were putting her through your puff-and-blow routine…’
‘Yoga breathing,’ Iris corrected firmly.
‘Helped you more than once.’
‘Only kidding.
Now, how does this sound?
For the past week or so Dora has been getting steadily more frustrated at the way things are going between Rose and Dieter.
She's been counting the days to the end of the course in the hope that it'll be a case of out of sight, out of mind.
And then what happens?
Rose decides to cop out of the trip to Antibes for another week here with Dieter.’
‘Oh, yes.’
Iris gave a derisive cackle.
‘The last straw, losing her golfing partner.
Enough to make anyone commit murder!’
‘Be serious, Iris.
Who knows what Rose and Dieter might start planning, here on their own?
Apart from what Dora would see as a disaster for her friend, her own life-style could be on the line.
She'd do anything, anything, to stop the affair going further.
And then, suddenly, she sees Dieter going off on his own, and decides to have it out with him.
Only it isn't Dieter, it's Alain Gebrec, but because of her dodgy eyesight she doesn't realise her mistake.’
‘And when she does, she lets off steam by socking him anyway!’ jeered Iris.
‘Believe that and you'll believe anything.’
‘Do shut up and listen.
Alain, totally absorbed in his own troubles, has reached the belvedere.
The last thing he's thinking  about is being followed.
Maybe he's leaning on the safety rail, with his back to the path and his head bent.
Dora sees him there, and suddenly realises he's at her mercy.
It never enters her head that it isn't Dieter, she happens to have a golf-club in her hand and the temptation is overwhelming.’
‘Hmm…maybe.’
At last, Iris was beginning to listen seriously.
‘So far, so lethal.
Now what?’
‘She's got to get rid of the body.
I've already explained how I think that could have been done.’
‘Don't tell me she still doesn't know it's Gebrec she's topped.
Her sight can't be that bad.’
‘It's just possible, I suppose — if she keeps her head averted all the time — but I agree it's unlikely.
At this stage, it doesn't make much difference.
The deed is done, she's got a corpse to dispose of and there's only one way to do it.’
Iris sat up again, crossed her legs and put her chin in her hands.
‘Over the edge with the stiff, back to the house and off to her appointment.
What does she do with the weapon?’
‘My guess is she hides it in the undergrowth.’
‘Then what?’
‘She assumes that sooner or later the body'll be discovered and there'll be a hue and cry.
The suicide theory won't occur to her and her common sense would tell her it's unlikely to be written off as another accident.
If it's later established that death was due to a blow on the head with a blunt instrument, the police are going to find that golf-club and start asking awkward questions, so she puts it round that someone's nicked it.’
‘Why not put it back in the bag and say nothing?
No one would suspect her of killing Gebrec?’
‘Er, hadn't thought of that,’ admitted Melissa.
‘Maybe she just panicked for the moment, wanted to get rid of it as soon as possible.’
Iris frowned.
‘Not Dora,’ she declared.
‘Not the panicky sort.’
‘You never know how people are going to react in that sort of crisis,’ Melissa insisted.
‘Anyway, let's assume for the moment that's what happened.
She probably spent the time  it took her to get to Alès working out her story.
I must say, she's pretty cool.
Never batted an eyelid when we were all wondering where Gebrec had got to…although she did react rather oddly when Dieter showed up,’ she added thoughtfully.
Iris was still sceptical.
‘Having her story ready in case things get hot, that makes sense.
But why stir up a hornet's nest by accusing Erdle when murder hasn't been mentioned?’
‘That's a point.
When did that first come up?’
‘At dinner this evening, when you were playing detective.’
It was Melissa's turn to sit up suddenly.
‘That's it!
She twigged what I was driving at…that I suspected Alain had been murdered…and decided to get in first to throw me off the scent.
How does that strike you?’
‘Far-fetched.’
Iris rocked to and fro, clasping her ankles and shaking her head.
‘Might use it in one of your whodunnits, though,’ she added with a malicious twinkle.
‘Needs polishing up, but…’
‘Oh, come on Iris, it is feasible.’
‘Okay, let's think.’
Iris closed her eyes and began speaking slowly as if reciting a lesson.
‘Go after A, kill B by mistake, then have a go at throwing suspicion on A…hmm.’
She opened her eyes and said emphatically, ‘No good.
A has an alibi.’
‘Assuming the alibi holds water.
I thought Dieter seemed a bit evasive when Rose was questioning him.’
‘Normal reaction to her blathering.’
‘Maybe.’
A disturbing thought struck Melissa.
‘Iris, if we're on the right lines, Dora must be feeling pretty grim at the moment.
Perhaps we shouldn't have left her on her own.’
‘You're right!’
With the same thought in their minds, they hurried from the room.
When they tapped at Dora's bedroom door, a calm voice invited them to enter.
She was sitting up in bed with a light shawl round her shoulders and a book on her lap, apparently quite composed.
‘What is it?’ she asked, with the air of a headmistress disturbed by a couple of prefects during her lunch hour.
‘We just wanted to make sure you were all right,’ said Melissa hesitantly.
‘Of course I'm all right.
If Rose wants to behave like an irresponsible teenager, that's her affair.
I've decided to wash my hands of her.’
‘You're sure you'll sleep?
You wouldn't like one of us to stay with you tonight?’
Dora's eyebrows lifted.
‘Do you suppose I'm afraid of the dark or something?’ she said frostily.
‘Rose is the one who has nightmares, not me.’
‘Sorry.
Only trying to help,’ said Iris.
‘Come on Mel, let's get to bed.
I'm tuckered.’
Feeling vaguely foolish, the pair went back to their own room.
‘She's a tough customer,’ remarked Melissa when they had finally settled down for the night.
‘If she did kill Gebrec, Banana Split will have a job getting her to admit anything.’
‘If she killed him?
You're having doubts about your theory then?’
‘I still think it's possible — just — but yes, I agree with you that's it's unlikely.
I'm beginning to think his mother's right, though.
It wasn't suicide.’
‘What about Erdle?
You were going to spend all night studying that book, remember?’
Melissa gave a deep yawn.
‘Tomorrow,’ she promised.
‘Tomorrow morning, for sure.’