

CONTEMPORARY INITIATIVES
Community Education and Community Action
Richard Johnson in his essay on the early nineteenth-century radical educators emphasised the relationship between the activities of the latter and the tremendous social, economic and political changes brought about by the industrial revolution.
He rightly stressed the resonances between that period and the issues and problems facing educators and activists today and the fact that the historical investigation of the former is usually impelled by the concerns of the latter.
Many adult educators would agree that the reason for their interest in the past is because of the apparent similarities between past and present.
Community educators in particular would argue that we are faced with a crisis of a similar magnitude — a crisis in social, economic and political structures and a ‘cultural’ upheaval like the one in the early nineteenth century outlined by Johnson.
The tremendous economic and technological changes of the last two decades have affected every aspect of life, from the intimate details of personal and family relationships to the wider world of social, institutional, economic and political structures.
As with every crisis of this magnitude there are opportunities for advancement or retrenchment; for liberating the human spirit, and removing gross inequalities, or for the reinforcement of injustices and an extension of inequalities.
It will not be possible in the space available to detail these changes but I would like to briefly mention some.
For instance, in the cultural and moral area the most marked changes have  occurred in family life; in the role of, and relationship between, the sexes; in the position of women; in the attitude to established morality and tradition and in attitudes to authority generally.
Traditional roles and relationships have fragmented, producing a demand for more democratic relations in daily life: between men and women, between parents and children; indeed in all spheres where people come together by necessity or choice.
But the reality  is that, whilst such liberation has had its positive effects, many people, particularly in working-class communities, do not have the opportunity, do not have access to either money or education, to make positive use of such a philosophy of personal liberation except in very restricted terms.
As Jeremy Seabrook so vividly illustrates in his many books, working-class areas have instead become the victims of a process of mindless violence, the community turning in on itself in the search for thrills, kicks, money.
Liberation has turned sour producing anomie and alienation, severely undermining any sense of collective responsibility or response.
It is a bleak picture.
Many would argue that he paints a very romantic image of working-class communities in the past and exaggerates the collective ‘breakdown’ of the present.
However for many who live and/or work in such communities the picture he paints is recognisable.
It does express some of the deeper discontents and anxieties of the contemporary working class, particularly a real sense of loss, which is not nostalgic but a genuine understanding of the cost of ‘progress’ in terms of any sense of community or collective responsibility.
In the social sphere the  changes are as great.
For many in the working-class the role of state and its agencies in the provision of housing, education, health and welfare services was initially seen as a move towards greater equality.
However even before it came under attack from conservative administrations it had failed on two counts.
First, it failed because it did not benefit the poor as much as it did the middle classes.
Second, it failed because of its bureaucratic and institutional nature.
It became an impersonal, distant, uncaring, social and welfare service.
Thus, despite the movement towards a welfare state it is obvious that in the details of people's lives, in the new housing estates and tower blocks, people have been relieved of the worst of their miseries, encouraged to think rich and live poor, to become in effect the permanent prisoners of someone else's conception of their happiness.
Finally the economic and technological changes of the last decade, with mass unemployment, the growth of widespread poverty and the attacks on the remaining aspects of the welfare state have made such problems even worse.
Behind the optimistic rhetoric of a new definition of work and increased opportunities for leisure is the spectre of enforced idleness, wasted resources and the squandering of a whole generation of human potential.
New attitudes to work  and leisure require radically new social and economic policies which few politicians, of the left or right, are prepared to contemplate.
The tensions and contradictions in this scenario have produced a response, not from politicians, but from a small but growing section of the population involved in various forms of social and community action.
The growth of such organisations — community groups, tenants' associations, welfare rights groups, women's groups, community employment groups, popular planning associations, unemployed centres, alternative technology groups, cooperatives — bear witness to a general discontent with existing social and political structures.
Those involved are attempting to come to grips with the injustices, the inequalities and the prejudices of a political system in which the practice of representative democracy appears to have little relevance to their plight as they battle against the social and economic problems briefly outlined above.
They are concerned to find new ways and means whereby individuals can be freed from existing constraints and afforded the possibility of individual growth and development through collective action.
Theirs is an essentially optimistic view of human nature, one which stresses cooperation, fraternity, egalitarianism.
It is basically a call for people, oppressed people, to have more control over their own lives, to shape their world and to use modern resources and technology to do so.
It emphasises the need for participation rather than representation; a call in short for social and political structures which offer people the possibility of control of the resources of modern society to care for each other in an active, convivial manner.
It presupposes that it is possible, in modern circumstances, using modern tools and resources, to find a way whereby men and women can become more fully integrated into their social environment and find in it something deeply expressive of their own personality and aspirations.
Such a new sense of community requires a common culture, a cultural democracy.
However, as Tawney pointed out, a common culture cannot be created merely by desiring it.
It rests upon economic foundations.
It involves, in short, a large measure of economic equality.
It also requires political action.
If the great mass of the people are to make a cultural democracy for themselves a prime  objective must be the development of political awareness and action so that they can achieve command of their own culture and control of the socio-economic forces which affect it, surmounting the crises of a world of crises.
Political competence, social commitment and community participation are among the essential characteristics of a man of culture.
This is the major challenge facing adult educators today, the extent to which they can actively assist this process.
This is what Freire means when he states:
The starting point for organising the programme content of education or political action must be the present existential concrete situation reflecting the aspirations of the people.
Utilising certain basic contradictions we must pose this essential situation to the people as a problem which challenges them and requires a response, not just at the intellectual level, but at the level of action.
This is what he means by ‘cultural action for freedom’.
In the following chapters in this book there are many illustrations of how adult educators have attempted to take up this challenge working with women, peace groups, the unemployed, ecology groups, trade unions, cooperatives, people in the Third World.
In this chapter I want to concentrate on the response of community educators, particularly their reaction to the problems and issues facing the working class.
I then want to conclude with an outline of my own personal experiences in this field here in Northern Ireland.
THE RESPONSE OF COMMUNITY EDUCATION
The role of community education in the process of social change has aroused a great deal of discussion and action by socially committed adult educators over the last two decades.
It has also generated considerable disagreement.
On the one hand are those adult educators who see in it exciting possibilities to extend the concept of adult learning, making it more relevant to the issues and problems  facing ‘disadvantaged’ groups, helping them to participate more effectively in society, gaining more recognition and resources, removing gross inequalities and injustices.
On the other hand are those who feel that adult educators should be wary when they are offered the resplendent new garments of ‘community educators’ intended to transform their perception of themselves and their role in society, particularly vis-à-vis the working class.
They believe that the role of the community educator is much more limited than the rhetoric often implies.
This gap, between rhetoric and practice, this expanded view of community educators as major actors and agents in the arena of social change, versus a more limited, cautious role is, in some respects, though not all, a division between those concerned with access and those concerned with content in community education: between those concerned with ‘merely useful knowledge’ and those interested in ‘really useful knowledge’.
This division has its roots in developments which took place in the late 1960s and 1970s, particularly in Great Britain.
Then the question of social purpose once again became a relevant and important theme for adult educators.
There was increased pressure on organisations like the Workers' Education Association to concentrate on the needs of the working class.
There was also a great deal of debate about: the need to popularise knowledge, utilising aspects of working-class and popular culture in adult education; the problem of linking adult education more effectively to social and economic issues in local communities; the necessity for greater informality and flexibility in the provision of adult education; the importance of community-based adult education initiatives; the challenge of creating new educational ‘networks’ to provide a comprehensive community education service linking a range of education providers, formal and non-formal, to the needs and interests of working-class communities.
Important theoretical influences at the time were the writings of Bernstein, Illich and Freire.
Berstein reinforced the belief that language and culture were major barriers in attracting working-class adults to education.
Consequently, more attention was paid to working-class and popular culture.
Freire confirmed this approach with his concept of cultural invasion and the importance of using everyday life and experience as cultural material in an educational dialogue about concrete issues and problems, linking reflection  and action in a continuing praxis.
Illich stressed the need to de-institutionalise education, to think instead of creative and dynamic ‘learning networks’ utilising a variety of  educational resources, formal and informal, including the skills and talents of people themselves.
At a more practical level adult educators, like their counterparts in social work and education, were influenced by the initiatives taken by the federal agencies in the United States of America to resolve the problem of poverty and deprivation in inner city areas.
The concept of the community school and community development were important influences here.
As far as the former is concerned, adult educators saw the emphasis on home/school links and parental involvement in schools as an opportunity for involving working-class parents in relevant education meeting a real need, i.e. their children's education.
The concept of the ‘community’ school was regarded as a means of widening the role of the latter, making it a ‘community resource’with a special stress on the provision of adult education and resources for community development — an educational powerhouse in each community.
Community development, with its stress on community involvement in the search for solutions to local problems, was seen as an informal ‘learning through doing’ process which would benefit from the involvement of adult educators and vice versa.
Many adult educators also regarded its concern for ‘effective service delivery’, i.e. coordinating all the relevant social, health, environmental, housing agencies and concentrating their expertise and resources on particular disadvantaged communities, linking them more effectively to local needs, as a total ‘community learning network’.
They saw adult education as an important primary resource for all those local people and professionals involved in the search for solutions to local community problems.
This view of community education and development is well summed up in the first Gulbenkian Report on Community Work.
Community work is essentially concerned with affecting the course of social change through the two processes of analysing social situations and forming relationships with different groups to bring about some desirable change.
It has three main  aims: the first is the democratic process of involving people in thinking, dealing, planning and playing an active part in the development and operation of services that affect their daily lives: the second relates to the value for personal fulfilment of belonging to a community: the third is concerned with the need in community planning to think of actual people in their relation to other people and the satisfaction of their needs as persons rather than to focus attention upon a series of separate needs and problems.
The end-result of these developments in the 1970s was a great variety of educational initiatives in working-class communities under the general umbrella of community education and action, e.g. neighbourhood learning centres, community arts and media centres, community learning exchanges, participatory research units, trade union and community resource centres, community schools, community development projects.
Even as far away as Australia commentators talked about a quiet revolution in the way Australians and their communities were responding to the types of learning challenges being presented to them by the changing social conditions of the 1970s and early 1980s.
One cannot but be struck by the extent to which traditional adult and community providers such as universities, colleges of advanced education, technical and further education colleges, workers' education associations and the plethora of service based organizations such as YMCAs and CWAS and so on, are being by-passed as people link up with, or fashion, their own community based continuing education capabilities.
Such community based and genuinely continuing education orientated phenomena would form a major challenge to the power, prestige and relevance of large, established and more traditionally structured adult education providers.
That sentiment, and the optimism expressed in such statements, fairly accurately reflected the views of those involved in similar activities with working-class and oppressed groups in Great Britain and the United States of  America in the 1970s and early 1980s.
Thus, while Richard Johnson refers to the counter-education challenge to traditional education by the student movement, and the women's movement in the early 1970s, it is often forgotten that another site of opposition was in community-based education and action in working-class communities.
It was, and is, in community-based education programmes that the problems of resources, space, control, content and method, mentioned by Johnson as the key issues in radical education, have been debated and explored.
It is here that efforts have been made to open up resources to working-class communities and/or to provide access into educational institutions.
Many of the lessons of this experience have been utilised by those involved in work with women, the unemployed and other oppressed minorities.
Yet community education in working-class communities has not grown to offer a radical alternative to traditional adult education provision.
What went wrong?
Some have suggested that the response was too wide and varied, like a catherine wheel — plenty of sparks and action but little sense of direction and inclined to chase its own tail.
This backhanded compliment is, in fact, a tribute to the imagination and commitment of community educators.
It also underlines one of the main reasons why community education did not become a radical movement for social change.
Not the lack of direction but the fact that the various initiatives were going in different directions!
The common concern with access and resources often disguised quite different assumptions about the nature of the problems facing the working class and the means to resolve them.
However, this was not simply a conflict between radical process and radical content.
Like the situation in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it was a struggle to resolve some basic contradictions, i.e. a desire to involve the working class in the control of their own education and a concern to link that education to a process of social and community action.
It soon became clear however that the former was easier than the latter.
Local community-based education projects, even when organised and controlled by local people, often mirrored the very education offered by traditional providers and rejected by a large section of the working class.
A concern with personal growth and development was apparently in conflict with an emphasis on collective growth and development.
Informal structures and local spaces for  education with people ‘doing it themselves’ did not always produce a new definition of practical knowledge and/or a radical content.
Obviously, and understandably, working-class men and women took a very instrumental view of education and how it related to their needs and the opportunities available and open to them in society.
They wanted education which offered some evidence of achievement, some possibility of widening their choices in life.
Some adult educators felt that the ‘alternative education’ offered to such communities was not a real alternative.
It was too informal, too concerned with non-directiveness and a limited concept of need and relevance, too immersed in ‘learning through doing’, particularly as far as community action was concerned.
They decided to offer an alternative which, whilst concerned with collective efforts to improve social and economic conditions, would provide an education offering a real sense of achievement within an alternative curriculum linking local concerns with wider social and economic issues, hoping to provide an educational arm for the working class.
Two examples of these very different approaches, one concerned with community control of adult education the other with strengthening community and collective action, will, I hope, highlight some of the problems and difficulties, some of the tensions and contradictions in these efforts to reach the working-class with relevant education.
One is from Scotland, the other from England.
The Strone and Maukinhill Informal Education Project
The problem of space and local control was an important element in the successful community education project in Greenock, Scotland.
The Strone and Maukinhill Information Education Project was operated and controlled by local residents and financially supported by the local education authority.
It was situated in a post-war housing estate on the outskirts of Greenock and suffered from the same sort of social and economic problems found in the working class communities elsewhere.
The project arose out of the work of a Community Action Project established in the area in 1972 and financed by the Rowntree Trust.
This project worked with existing community groups in the area, helping to set up new groups and acting as a resource for community action.
As a result of a request from the project to a local  College of Further Education for someone to provide an ‘O’ level class for mothers involved in a pre-school play-group, discussions took place about the possibility of setting up an educational project to complement and support the work of the community action project.
In the summer of 1974 a public meeting was called and SMIEP (the Strone and Maukinhill Informal Education Project) was established.
From the start it was controlled and directed by representatives from the community groups in the area, plus a representative from the college.
The chair rotated annually and committee membership was limited to two successive years in order to avoid the dangers of elitism and institutionalisation.
This particular initiative in community education, although building on a period of active community involvement, set out at an early stage to involve local residents in controlling the educational programme and establishing a structure for participation which, it was hoped, would avoid the sort of elitism which beset the WEA.
The classes offered by the project reflected an emphasis on instrumental and vocational education.
Such classes appear to have formed the bulk of the programme and little was offered which could be seen as particularly relevant to community action or the problems of social change.
Rather they were with practical home skills and formal qualifications.
Thus in the autumn of 1974 classes were held in ‘O’ level English and Modern Studies and in Typing, Dressmaking, Car Care and Home Maintenance.
This reflects the range of subjects found in other community education projects and confirms the view that community education can become, in many instances, more of the same, although taking place informally in local neighbourhood centres.
In the SMIEP Project, classes were held in community halls and local homes and the resources were in the main provided by the James Watt College, illustrating once again that if an educational institution is prepared to venture out into the community, meet people on equal terms and offer its resources, then adult education can attract people who normally do not attend its classes or courses.
The outreach approach has now been successfully attempted by many projects and institutions confirming the view of those who insist that educational institutions must be more open and outgoing if they are to provide a worthwhile community education service.
The Greenock Project summarised the lessons of its initiatives thus:
That, given co-operation and tact, there is a fund of goodwill in the bureaucracy, people with open minds who are prepared to try something new.
That such projects should evolve, that the people involved should be allowed to feel their way gradually (they should be the doers)— mistakes in this game are really only important after they have been repeated.
That a college like the James Watt should be prepared to play second fiddle, should never patronise but should be ready with sensible advice when asked for it.
As community education begins to work through the community then the colleges (or any other resource of this nature) should recede even further.
Although this particular initiative was successful in providing a community education service operated and controlled by local people, and subsidised by the local authority, it was very limited in scope.
In fact, there was a contradiction at the heart of the project in terms of the aims and objectives of those involved in it.
In discussing their views on community education they state that
there is a serious side to community education and it is highly political in nature, that it should be directed towards equalising political power at local level, that communities should be learning skills to enable them to work with, and if necessary to confront local bureaucracy.
If power is to be devolved to the people they must learn how to use power.
This is just another way of describing community development and this you will not get without good solid, useful community education.
Very radical indeed!
Yet the actual educational work of the project was, as indicated above, very vocational and recreationally oriented (in the traditional sense) and confined to subjects such as‘O’ levels, Typing, Dressmaking, Car Care, Home Maintenance, Conversational French.
Hardly the stuff to enable local people to learn how to use power!
In fact, experience would suggest that, when education is deinstitutionalised those with an interest in traditional subjects are likely to come forward first since they have already defined their interest but have been deterred by the formal procedure.
This is not to condemn such initiatives but to indicate the gap between their objectives and the actual work on the ground.
It raises problems to do with the role and objectives of the professionals engaged in such work.
Are they merely providers, acting as a resource for local communities, responding to needs and demands which are often based on past experience of education or have they a duty to seek ways and means of broadening the role of education into areas with which it is not normally associated such as changes in family and community life, the problems of poverty, inequality, and the general lack of local control over the formal decision-making process?
This dilemma was referred to in a Council of Europe paper on Permanent Education.
Whereas the aim of social advancement is to reduce individual inequalities but the social environment which produced them is left intact (on the assumption that these inequalities are due to inadequate education effort on the part of individuals, the state or to inequality of ‘education gifts’), the aim of the collective advancement is to give individual education and, at the same time, influence the social context in which the individuals live: an effort is made to involve as many persons as possible in the education campaign.
It will always be based on the concrete problems encountered by communities in real situations.
Education will be a means of enabling them to develop; structural changes in the situation will make education easier and useful.
Without collective advancement there can be no genuine individual advancement, but only uprooting.
However, many community education projects have a social and political philosophy which sees community problems as the result of inadequate education effort on the part of institutions and the state, to be remedied by locally controlled community education networks.
Acceptance of such a community philosophy ignores the fact:
(a)
that many local community problems are in fact national, structural problems;
(b)
that too much concentration on meeting articulated needs in an unimaginative and uncritical manner can  result in a community education programme which, whilst reaching a section of the population never catered for before, in fact assists individual advancement but does little to assist collective advancement towards solutions to the problems of poverty and inequality found in working-class communities.
This is not an easy dilemma to resolve and most community education projects have sought to provide both types of education based usually on a liberal, reformist view of education and social change.
This latter ideology is in fact one which runs through most of the liberal adult education tradition in Britain.
It is a tradition which emphasises a commitment to the working class as a section of society which should be the object of positive discrimination so that they can avail themselves of educational resources and opportunities.
Community education can be seen as a means of ensuring the widening of such opportunities through a more effective delivery and coordination of education resources.
It can cater more effectively than traditional methods for the wide range of individual needs and interests and also provide an educational back-up service for groups engaged in the process of community action.
But those concerned seldom commit themselves to collective advancement on social and political issues, rarely setting themselves social and political as well as educational objectives.
This creates the dilemma illustrated in the project discussed above, of appearing to meet local needs when in fact such actions do little about the real causes of social problems and may indeed aggravate them by uprooting local leaders.
Other initiatives in community education have taken a more critical view of ‘community development’ and adopted a more radical approach.
The Liverpool Second Chance to Learn Project
This particular project began in Liverpool in 1976 and has established itself as a national model for radical working-class adult education.
It has its roots in the work of Jackson, Yarnit and Ashcroft in Vauxhall, Liverpool in the early 1970's.
They were involved in a great deal of supportive educational work with community groups and other working-class organisations in that area of the city.
However, the educational team took a more openly  critical view of the community development process and the philosophy underlying it.
In our own project we have seen no alternative but to see local people as part of the working-class, exploited more than many of their fellows elsewhere by their social, economic and cultural environment in the centre of a large city, whose economy is shaky and uncertain in Britain's present stage of development.
This determines the educational structures we must encourage emphasising wider contacts rather than local parochialism and the debate we think should take place around local social action.
It is clear that this position creates difficulties when operating in the context of community development.
Solidarity with working-class activists sits unhappily with non-directive help offered to autonomous community groups.
The team thus took a much more radical, class, view of the problems facing residents in working-class communities and did not see themselves simply responding to any educational need or demand: ‘…the educationalist should be forced to recognise his responsibility to intervene positively and constructively not just respond to any demand’.
The team had an explicit position to debate with local residents and did not hide its philosophy and politics behind a bushel.
It tried to define more clearly those occasions when it could make a positive and explicit contribution to solving the problems facing local activists rather than just becoming involved in learning-through-doing activities with the latter.
This created problems which were not easily resolved since, given the team's philosophy, it was essential to operate in the context of ‘solidarity with working-class activists’.
However, they did make important contributions to the education of local residents involved in the problems of vandalism, lack of recreational facilities and housing.
Throughout the early reports there is a constant emphasis on the level and content of the work, in an obvious attempt to stress that adults in ‘deprived’ areas are capable of undertaking sustained, demanding education if it is seen to be relevant to their needs.
As a result of this experience, and this emphasis on educational standards, it was decided  in 1976 to establish a Second Chance to Learn course for local activists from various parts of the city.
The course is run one day a week over 30 weeks for 60 students.
It is organised and taught by tutors from the WEA and the Liverpool University Department of Adult Education.
When the course began in 1976 its tutors believed that content was more important than process.
‘To put content before form is not to deny the importance of pedagogy, or to equate content with a perpetual diet of politics.
It is merely to affirm that in the end if education is to grow deep roots in the working-class, they will be nourished more by what people learn than how they learn’.
However, since then the course has realised the importance of methodology and its value as one complementary to content.
A more fundamental change in the course over the years is the emphasis on individual development and growth within a radical perspective.
There is now some questioning as to whether the stress on working-class adult education may in fact present a narrow version of the possibilities for social change which excludes other social movements and oppressed groups in society.
It is also clear from a recent evaluation that, despite the fact that the course was originally concerned with recruiting activists and not concerned with qualifications, the activists are now in the minority and that the course has become for many a means of access into higher education.
This is not surprising.
It echoes the experience of Ruskin and other residential adult education colleges.
It also echoes the experience of similar day-release courses for working-class adult students.
However, if the original social and education objectives of the course have not been met it has nevertheless succeeded in tapping the hidden intellectual and educational potential of many working-class men and women.
It is in terms of the latter and their involvement in, and influence on, movements for social change that the project will be judged radical or not.
In some respects it is an initiative influenced by the experience of the Plebs League and the NCLC, discussed in previous chapters.
It has sought to avoid the narrow dogmatism of the latter, combining a radical analysis with democratic participatory teaching methods.
However this effort to resolve the problems of access and content within an institutional framework has apparently seriously weakened the earlier close ties with social and political movements in working-class communities in the city.
Another attempt to resolve this dilemma, to provide really useful knowledge, outside of institutions and in close cooperation with the working class and other oppressed groups, is to be found in N. Ireland, i.e. The Ulster Peoples' College.
However before examining it I want to say something about the general response of community educators to the problems facing the working-class in N. Ireland.
COMMUNITY EDUCATION IN NORTHERN IRELAND — THE RESPONSE
Northern Ireland has been described as a society under siege, a society where there is a problem for every solution!
The usual picture is one of violence and sectarianism.
However it is, in fact, a society facing all the social and economic problems outlined at the beginning of this paper plus armed conflict and community division.
It has one of the highest unemployment rates in the EEC.
The situation is well summed up by a community worker in the Creggan area of Derry, a city profoundly affected by these changes.
When I think of all the social problems there are I mean Creggan has everything.
It's got poor housing.
It's got people on low incomes.
Those that are employed are on low wages; the majority are unemployed.
When you're talking in terms of Creggan — widows, pensioners, single parent families — you name it we've got it.
We've got poor facilities medically; we've got poor facilities as far as shopping is concerned; no telephone, no place to post your letters.
I sometimes think that if we were back in biblical days and John the Baptist was running around looking for a wilderness he wouldn't go to the desert he would come to Creggan!
This is an estate of two and a half thousand homes and there is something like a population of 13,000 people.
Perhaps the authorities are fortunate that the people up here have a certain amount of self respect for themselves.
God knows how they manage to keep this about themselves with the situation as it is.
But somehow, the people manage to keep themselves together.
Maybe it's a pity that people haven't lost the head a bit; that they haven't gone berserk and showed up the authorities for  what they are — I don't know, unfeeling, inhuman, unconcerned.
That's the impression we get up here; nobody cares, nobody's interested.
It is obvious from the above comments that many of the problems facing the working-class in Northern Ireland are similar to those found elsewhere.
However, in Northern Ireland they are compounded by violence and sectarianism.
Some commentators see it as a society suffering from a vast nervous breakdown at community level, with the social fabric slowly disintegrating.
This is far from the truth.
The people are brave, resilient, humorous, friendly in the face of great change and adversity.
They have responded to their troubles and problems with imagination and initiative.
They have been involved in various forms of community action designed to protect and regenerate community life and to tackle the social, economic and cultural problems common to both communities — Catholic and Protestant.
This process of community action has involved people from both communities, people with no politics, people with radical views, people with connections with paramilitary groups.
It has resulted in the formation of numerous community associations, tenants' groups, community resource centres, welfare rights centres, women's groups, cooperatives, etc.
These developments provided, for a short period, a bridge between the two divided communities emphasising their common problems, their common culture.
It even had some influence on paramilitary groups like the Protestant Ulster Defence Association.
One of their spokesmen commented,
We are aware that socially and economically we have more in common with our opposite numbers in the Republican (Catholic) side than we have with loyalist (Protestant) big-wigs.
But, how are we going to put this over?
What formula are we going to find to get the ordinary people of Ulster to vote on real issues which concern them and not on the entrenched sectarian issues into which we are brainwashed.
A Catholic community leader echoing the above sentiment said,
No matter what happens to the National question in the final analysis the community struggle goes on, the struggle against the hopelessness and helplessness of ordinary people to manage to cope in a very complex society.
We cannot separate politics from community action, no matter what we try to do about it, no matter how idealistic we may be.
This popular response in the 1970s presented community educators with a real challenge.
It indicated that community education for peace and reconstruction offered a possible alternative to violence and conflict by building a united working-class movement based on local community action.
The response was, however, like the catherine wheel analogy, wide and varied — community education workshops, community education programmes and projects, social studies groups, community work, education forums, women's education projects, second chance projects.
Like similar developments in Europe, North America and Australia, these initiatives reflected a wide range of activities and corresponding educational, social and political philosophies, sometimes openly stated, often not.
The result was a certain pragmatic consensus which glossed over their ideological differences in favour of meeting local ‘needs’ and an emphasis on process at the expense of content and direction.
However, by the late 1970s these ideological divisions surfaced in the debates between, and amongst, community activists and community educators.
The pragmatic consensus weakened as people became more aware of the tensions and contradictions between these different approaches to community education and working-class community action.
It was obvious that the latter had brought no great changes in the problems of poverty and inequality facing the working class in Northern Ireland.
In fact their position had worsened considerably.
There is no evidence that people had any more influence on the policies of major institutions.
There are no programmes of participation in schools, social welfare agencies, planning departments, housing authorities, etc.
Local community action had in fact failed to make any important impact on the larger social and economic political structures in Northern Ireland.
This is not to decry the small, but important, changes and victories at local level.
However, community education does not present an alternative, radical analysis  and vision for those involved in this process.
Instead, in the main, it has concentrated on access, second chance, and a limited concept of training for community activists.
With some notable exceptions it assists the process of individual growth and development but does little for collective growth and development.
One such exception was the Ulster People's College.
THE ULSTER PEOPLE'S COLLEGE
At the beginning of the 1980s a group of community activists, trade unionists, community educators, peace workers and feminists met and agreed that what was needed was a reappraisal of previous efforts in the field, a conscious effort to determine their own social and political position and to choose an educational model or approach which reflected the latter.
This group felt that the community movement of the 1970s had been too romantic, too naive, too easily influenced by the popular educational theories and conventional wisdoms of the decade.
They applauded the attempt to cross the sectarian divide to stress the problems common to members of the working-class in both communities.
However, they felt that this did not grasp the nettle of community division and conflict between the two sections of the working class.
They believed that it was necessary to combine the best in local community action and larger social concerns; to bring the fragments of social and community action together, e.g. community groups, trade unions, women's groups, etc. to work towards a vision of a new society based on a radical analysis of existing structures and the lessons and aspirations of the men and women attempting to create new structures at local level; to stress objectives and content in education as well as methods and process.
From previous experience it was obvious that, on the one hand, not all alternatives in adult education were necessarily radical.
On the other hand, there were grave limitations in using existing adult education institutions for radical education and action.
Their sense of social responsibility is to society at large.
Work with the poor and the oppressed is a marginal activity.
This is not to decry the useful, and often innovative, work done by such institutions.
However, the concept of social responsibility and service is  of limited use in developing a radical social movement.
The group decided to go back to other dreams, other schools like some of those discussed in the earlier chapters of this book.
They were particularly struck by the work of the Highlander Centre in the USA  founded over fifty years ago by Myles Horton.
Its maxim is, ‘Learn from the people and start education where they are.’
Highlander has worked closely with various social movements in the USA, e.g. trade unions, farmers, civil rights.
It has sought to educate people away from the trap of individualism and to reinforce those instincts which lead to cooperation and collective solutions to problems.
It has survived from the early 1930s because of its craggy independence, its non-institutional base, its ability to adapt to new social movements thrown up by the working-class and oppressed groups and, most important, its radical philosophy and perspective.
With this as a model and financial support from various trusts and charities, the Ulster People's College was established in 1982.
It is situated in Belfast and has short-term accommodation for 30 people.
This central resource is used to complement and strengthen the work in the field; to extend the process of action and learning in local communities; to bring together people from both sides of the religious divide, and from different movements, to reflect on their common problem; to learn from their different experiences and to discuss their cultural and political differences.
The College is thus issue and problem-oriented.
It is not concerned with access, second chance or certification.
It is openly committed to radical social change and the concept of individual and collective growth and development.
As well as providing space for workshops and conferences on various social, economic and political issues as they arise, the College is developing an alternative curriculum based on the issues and problems facing men, women and youth in working-class communities throughout Northern Ireland.
It is also seeking to explore ways and means whereby men and women can play a larger part in the reconstruction of local working-class communities through the establishment of new forms of social and economic structures designed to meet local needs in a collective fashion.
What the Ulster People's College is about is developing an alternative vision of society.
Until recently, educational initiatives concerned with such alternative views have been severely neglected in the discussion about community education  and social change.
Yet the evidence, as outlined in the earlier chapters of this book, is that, historically, such alternatives played an important role in encouraging, supporting and strengthening movements for social change.
This is part of the hidden history of education.
As indicated in this chapter, many contemporary initiatives in community education are not really radical alternatives but various extensions of the prevailing liberal ideology in adult education.
Yet never was the need greater to think in terms of real alternatives in adult education, helping people to dream their dreams, to construct their version of a better society out of their own experiences.
Such a search for educational alternatives can reach back to that radical historical tradition in adult education which drew no fine distinction between action and education.
This is the challenge facing community educators: a challenge which requires them to engage in a process of reflection on their action: to clarify their views of the crisis facing the working class: to face up to certain contradictions in their practice: to sharpen their sense of social commitment.
Only then will they have a clearer, more honest assessment of what exactly is their role in relation to social, economic and political inequalities and injustices.
Only then will they be able to decide whether they see community education as something complementary to the formal adult education provision or an alternative system pursuing distinct and radical objectives.
In the Australian experience referred to earlier, those engaged in the study of alternative community-based educational initiatives stressed the former rather than the latter, ‘The innovating organisation will only survive if it can show them (the statutory bodies and local power groups) that its power is complementary rather than invasive.’
Much community education is struggling to achieve that objective.
However, radical community education is not concerned with complementing or invasion.
It is concerned with challenging the way things are.
Adult Education and the Women's Movement
For women, the re-emergence of feminism in the late 1960s has been one of the most important political developments since the war.
Some women would want to link this with the consolidation of black consciousness and with the reclassification of lesbianism as a political and sexual choice rather than a congenital affliction.
Others would mention the Peace Movement and an opposition to imperialism as related issues.
Even women, who for a whole variety of familiar reasons, do not call themselves feminists, know that whatever else women's liberation means, it represents a standpoint that begins with women and with the intention of reconstituting the world for women as a better place.
In terms of the distribution of the world's resources we know that women — half of the world's population — share 1 per cent of them.
And whilst this massive imbalance has an enormous amount to do with international capitalism, imperialism, racism and militarism, it is also embedded in the historical development of patriarchy which precedes all other oppressions, post-dates fascist, socialist and communist revolutions and seems to recognise no boundaries when it comes to cultural, regional and racial differences.
It is not only that patriarchy is institutionalised in the major systems and apparatus of control in any given society, but it also structures the interpersonal relationships between men and women in their private and most intimate concerns.
The re-emergence of feminism in the 1960s is important for women because whatever other political struggles we might be engaged in, our subordination to men individually and collectively is a condition we share with all women irrespective of class, race and sexual preference.
In the 1960s feminism was a fairly middle-class affair — some would say it still is — except that in Britain, just as in the earlier suffrage, trade union and legal struggles around the turn of the century, working-class women have been strongly involved in campaigns to do with working conditions  and wages, male violence, racism, childcare, housing and community action.
Although a rich resource for trivialisation by the media, the women's movement in the 1970s succeeded in making issues to do with women's rights visible in ways they had not been for over sixty years.
The launching of the United Nations Decade for Women began in Britain with the passing of Equal Pay and Anti-Sex Discrimination legislation, and so long as women's demands were not seen as too extreme, and were easily satisfied by a few minor modifications in the administration of sexual injustice, then the liberal socialist establishment seemed happy to make the appropriate gestures.
The main concerns of the women's movement at that time — job opportunities, pay, childcare, education and reproductive rights — were familiar topics of discussion and there was a sense in which ideas and attitudes were settling and.shifting into more enlightened grooves.
But, of course, not all feminists were happy to settle for gestures or liberal attitudes without much serious commitment to social change.
The New Left was in practice turning out to be almost as bad as the Old Left when it came to defining political priorities and treating women as the cheer-leaders, nurturers and sexual services brigade of the revolution.
By which time the sexual revolution was also wearing a bit thin and became more to do with increasing women's availability to men than the sexual autonomy and control over our own bodies we had all been promised.
And when the economy began to collapse and the political optimism of the 1960s and early 1970s began to tarnish, it was women who saw our jobs, our wages, our support services and our educational opportunities become the first and most serious casualties of the new depression.
Of course, no one else except feminists and women returned to the trenches and put under  siege noticed what was happening.
Returned to the invisibility of the home front, where we should have been all along, unaccounted for among the statistics of unemployment, stuck with the main responsibility for unpaid community care as the welfare state collapsed, women have seen the major characteristics of the depression of the 1980s depicted as male and youth unemployment, the destruction of men's jobs, small businessmen going bankrupt and resentment turning to violence on the streets.
Women's response to poverty and unemployment remains an enigma, and whilst the inequality which leads to civil war between men on the streets is  called a riot, the battles at home between unequals, in which the less powerful are also the losers, is dismissed as ‘domestic violence’.
In these circumstances the voice of feminism has become more insistent and more angry on behalf of battered and abused women and against male violence in general.
Increasingly patriarchy, racism and militarism have been named as the main enemy rather than the milder rebukes of the 1970s against red tape, prejudice and sexism.
And women have become more impatient with each other for allowing the divisions which men have created historically — class, racism and heterosexuality — to continue to divide us as women from finding ways of working politically that do not only liberate women but transform the systems of oppression themselves.
Not surprisingly, the popular trivialisation of the women's movement in the 1960s and 1970s has now sharpened into a more concentrated and vicious backlash against feminism.
The return of women to the homefront to live in varying degrees of poverty has been paralleled by an intensification of family-centred propaganda to remind us that women are the ‘natural’ homemakers, and that in difficult and unsettled times our prime responsibility is to make sure that our men and our children and our dependent relatives are properly cared for.
Feminist ideas are presented as extreme, and women who hold them are described variously as unfeminine, man-hating, aggressive, ugly and perverted.
In circumstances in which women's primary commitment to men can no longer be guaranteed, the attack on ‘extremists’, and especially lesbians, within the women's movement has increased.
It is part of an attempt to deter potential recruits and to distract us from concluding that it is men who are the cause of women's oppression, not anyone else.
To crown it all, I now read in my newspaper that we are living in ‘the post-feminist era’ which I take to mean either that the battle is won — a view informed by the same kind of stupidity which once encouraged Macmillan to proclaim ‘we're all middle-class now’— or that feminism is a spent force and has slipped back into obscurity for another sixty years of oblivion.
Either way the notion is both ill-informed and ridiculous and it comes from paying too much attention to newspapers like the Guardian.
So far as adult education is concerned it would seem reasonable to expect some significant response to the women's movement given the close association between adult education and popular political movements in the  formative years, and also because women constitute the majority of students, in current adult education provision.
In practice, of course, this hasn't been the case, largely because the controlling influence in adult education historically, and those who monopolise the current debate and the definitions of issues in adult education are predominantly men.
This is not the place to elaborate upon why the educational system we have inherited can be described as men's education or why, even in areas like adult and community education in which women outnumber men as students, and are employed in considerable numbers as part-time tutors and volunteers, the structures in which we operate are so effectively well grounded in male power and male values as to appear inevitable.
Except to say that women's entry into education generally was conceded reluctantly and belatedly a hundred or so years ago, long after the rules had been established and the parameters had been set.
Our subsequent participation has been conditional upon our acceptance of the inevitable — a curriculum constructed historically as a reflection of men's ideas, assumptions and priorities, presented as objective truth: and a view of women informed by a range of ideologies collectively based upon notions of male supremacy.
For women, education in the men's system has meant learning a lot about men in male ways and a lot about learning to be the women men have determined we should be.
In adult education, more than in schooling, and more than in higher education, the possibilities for resisting the inevitable are greater, because the learning relationship is not based on  compulsion in quite the same way and because there is less male power invested in it.
And yet the evidence of radical initiatives on behalf of women, which seriously challenge patriarchal knowledge and control actually being seen to flourish and beginning to transform oppressive structures are extremely rare.
Most of what passes for women's education and which is considered different in kind and emphasis from that which is usually provided in mainstream education for women, is, in my view, a transparent variation on a familiar theme.
In circumstances in which the opinion leaders and policy-makers in adult education have responded to the women's movement at all, it has been to co-opt feminism into their platitudes, whilst at the same time seeking to deflect and defeat the radical intention of women's liberation as it might be applied in adult education and society generally.
If we examine the record of adult education in relation to the women's movement there seem to me to be four kinds of responses.
The most familiar is that of total ignorance, in the sense of making no response at all, and which could also be said to be based on total ignorance.
The second is based on a latter day philanthropy, which like its nineteenth-century antecedent, muffles the iron fist of control in the velvet glove of sentiment.
This kind of response is based on the view that women are one of those ‘minorities’(sic) who are disadvantaged and for whom the mission of adult education is to provide the wherewithal to cope with their misfortunes.
The third response is more enlightened and less grounded in the liberal fixation with genetic and pathological explanations of deficiency when it comes to deprivation.
But it still retains the liberal tradition of ‘rescue’ in its definition of responsibility.
This response has incorporated the respectable face of feminism, concerned with ‘equal rights’, into its understanding and provision, with a range of initiatives intended to acknowledge the justice of equal opportunities.
It is favoured by all those who believe that institutional practices can be changed by persistence and goodwill, and by those who understand that the best way to defeat feminism is to co-opt its radical and rebellious potential.
The fourth response is more to do with the response of the women's movement to adult education than the other way round and about welcoming adult education as just one more arena in the battle for women's liberation.
It is based on the conviction that women's liberation is principally about personal and social change but that the opportunity for consciousness-raising and intellectual clarification of ideas and strategies, together with the consolidation that can come from collective support and struggle, constitutes really useful knowledge in the old radical sense.
But it is not just knowledge that matters in this view of women's education; it is control over the learning process.
Radical feminists want freedom from male control.
It is this version of the relationship between adult education and the women's movement which is at the same time the most challenging and the most precarious.
TOTAL IGNORANCE
It has taken a long time for those engaged in mainstream  adult education to attribute any significance to the Women's Movement.
A few years ago, in the brief period of enthusiasm and expansion after Russell, those responsible for writing reports, conducting research, making recommendations, did so in a fairly jovial cavalier fashion that could be said to characterise the type of men who operated their way to the top in adult education.
If the old guard could be depicted as slightly fusty quasi-academics, the ‘new boys’, who became the opinion leaders in the 1970s, with their retinue of henchmen and clones at local level, were more populist in their manner and opportunist in their principles.
The inheritors of the liberal tradition, they reconstituted its principles and practice to legitimise their entrepreneurial concern with extending the influence of adult education, managing and professionalising the service, and advancing their own importance.
All of this with no reference made to one of the most significant, popular, grassroots political movements of the time — feminism.
Despite the fact that the majority of students in adult education are women, the majority of volunteers, part-time workers, detached workers, and assistant workers in adult education are women, those with key jobs in the career structure — mostly men — made no recognition of this fact, except in so far as it influenced their assumptions about ‘relevant’ curricula and enabled them to plan programmes which depended upon an enormous amount of female exploitation.
In terms of their publications, their journal contributions, their conference papers, their committees and planning groups, women's existence and participation were both invisible and tokenistic.
Just as it was extremely difficult to get the liberal establishment to take on board issues to do with social class in the 1970s  so too was it rare to hear feminism and the politics of gender discussed with any degree of seriousness or attention at any of their gatherings.
Today, the response based on total ignorance is still alive and well in circumstances in which even the limited attention given to gender discrimination in schools far exceeds its identification as an issue in the provision of educational opportunities for adult women.
Most LEA programmes and the mainstay of WEA and extra-mural provision remains locked into the restricted notion of women as homemakers, or as consumers of male cultures and ideas.
As ever, vigilant assessors of needs, and assiduous entrepreneurs in the pursuit of punters, the rhetoric of  practice to be predictably familiar across regional and social settings.
It is not unusual to find adult education centres, in the middle of provincial inner cities, for example, in which the majority of the provision is still a testimony to white, petit-bourgeois aspirations and hobbies, peopled by students who travel into classes by car from outside the immediate neighbourhood.
Those who operate according to total ignorance about the women's movement also pay scant attention to social class and race as critical concerns in the content and teaching and provision of what passes as adult education.
Under pressure from government economic policies and spending cuts, the predisposition to rethink conventional provision is slight, except in so far as as competition for student numbers, effective teaching hours and fee-income intensifies the concentration on popular recreational and leisure pursuits, rather than innovative and developmental work in areas which cannot be relied upon to be lucrative.
The picture in extra-mural departments and the WEA is much the same, as the liberal tradition fights a rearguard collapse in the name of ‘education for its own sake’ in the face of enormous government and institutional pressure to become cost-effective.
In these circumstances there is little visible money to be made out of feminism as such, although there are specific financial benefits to be gained by institutions from the identification of women as a deprived minority.
LATTER DAY PHILANTHROPY
One of the achievements of the British ruling class historically has been its capacity to deflect opposition and resistance by calculated philanthropy and by the concentration on individualism as an explanation of success and failure.
It is less important that people gain sustenance from philanthropic benevolence than that gestures are seen to be made.
It matters little whether there is much evidence of individualism creating achievement or loss so long as it is believed that it does.
It is important if the interests and privileges of the ruling class are to be preserved that not too many people develop a sense of grievance, outrage or anger about the inequalities and oppressions which they experience.
It is also important that agencies like education, the media, government and the legal system assist the ruling  class in preserving those interests.
Great care has been taken in the current depression, for example, to construct the image of scrounging, fiddling, laziness and greed as characteristic of the unemployed who ‘could find work if they really wanted to’ or whose misfortune can be explained by ‘the irresponsible pay demands and restrictive practices’of those still in work.
The nineteenth-century notion of the undeserving poor and the deserving poor has been reconstituted — the former are effectively stigmatised, the latter become the focus of qualified liberal sentiment — the target group for crumbs of philanthropic consideration.
Benevolence becomes the bridge between oppression and control.
The dissemination of these views in adult education is based not on a class or race or gender analysis of inequality but on notions of feckless, unconfident, incompetent individuals who, because of learning difficulties or lack of social and life skills, are inadequate in their day-to-day lives.
They are seen not as the victims of social problems but as those who contribute to their own victimisation by their irresolution or fatalism or apathy.
In the ‘post-feminist era’, equal opportunities are available to those women who ‘get off their hands and knees and work for them’.
Those who don't ‘have only themselves to blame’.
In the 1970s such individuals were called educationally and emotionally deprived or culturally disadvantaged, and a whole quasi-medical terminology of concern and cure became part of the intervention procedure of community workers, social workers and educationalists.
Today, the same individuals have become labelled as minority groups — ethnic, unemployed and women whose ‘special needs’ are the focus of limited intervention by the ‘caring professions’including adult education.
Women who are identified as a problem are those whose isolation and poverty and poor housing affects their competence in childcare, domestic skills and coping with unsatisfactory circumstances.
The cure?
More domestication.
Adult education's concern for them is mediated through community education outreach schemes based in neighbourhoods, community centres, clinics and mother and toddler groups.
The emphasis is on contact and a chance to talk: non-formal activities centring on children, domestic skills and basic literacy.
The philosophy underpinning such schemes is simplistic and patronising, concentrating on women's deficiencies rather than their strengths, their inadequacies rather than their capacities, their limitations  rather than their possibilities.
Education is rarely named by providers for fear of alienation and women are talked about in ways which make the hairs on the back of your neck stand on end.
The role of the teacher/outreach worker is to guide facilitate, contain, but not to engage in critical social analysis or action.
Although frequently the recipients of special grants, such schemes are understaffed and poorly funded, given the enormity of the resources which would be needed if women in such groups were to be genuinely compensated for their massive economic disadvantage and their political powerlessness.
The schemes are also usually only short-term — six months, a year, two years at the most.
But then, the intention is not to solve social problems so easily, only to acknowledge them.
The recent history of liberal response to urban deprivation as it affects groups like women is littered with the unmet commitments and unfulfilled promises of such initiatives: each highly circumscribed; each mediated through the transitory commitment of part-time interlopers in communities in which they do not live, among women whose lives they do not share; and all controlled elsewhere.
The best thing that can be said of them is that their contact with women is slight, the numbers who participate regularly are few, and whilst this reinforces the commonsense definition of poverty as being a result of apathy, it protects those who escape from the prescriptions of unperceptive need-meeters and from yet more management by misguided missionaries.
But it is also true to say that fashions in philanthropy change.
The social isolation of women is not nearly as popular a cause for concern as it was in the 1970s.
More recently, unemployment or ‘education for leisure’ have become the flavour of the month.
In practice this means for men.
THE RESPECTABLE FACE OF FEMINISM
Of course, many workers in adult education are also feminists — they may be the anti-sexist male variety — but on the whole they are women who want adult education to respond to the concerns of the women's movement.
(Whatever happened to liberation?)
Adult education, unencumbered by the constraints of certification and examination, has been a popular breeding-ground for courses which focus on women's cultural and political ideas and  activities.
Workshops, day schools, short and more intensive courses about women's literature and history and psychology and health, for example, have become a feature of every self-respecting liberal studies programme; whilst courses in self-defence, assertiveness training, women's sexuality, welfare rights, peace studies and feminist politics have helped to reconstitute what is usually defined as a relevant curriculum for women.
In the LEA sector women have been able to learn non-traditional skills like building, carpentry, motor mechanics and electrics.
Some courses, especially those sponsored by the MSC like Wider Opportunities for Women, have been concerned with women re-entering the labour market.
Others, like New Opportunities for Women, have provided the re-entry points into higher and continuing education for women whose choices have been restricted by marriage and childcare and lack of opportunity.
The growth and development of new technologies and scientific knowledge have inspired programmes providing positive discrimination for women in areas concerned with science and computing.
Some, encouraged by the EOC have offered Women into Accounting, Women into Management and Women into Public Life courses, aimed at women trying to break into areas of employment and influence usually monopolised by men.
The variety is enormous as is the nature of the response to feminism which they reflect.
The characteristic that courses for career women, courses reclaiming the curriculum on behalf of women's history and culture, and courses providing useful knowledge and skills for women  reconstituting their traditional roles have in common is the recognition that some women at least have expectations, aspirations and preoccupations which are not well catered for in the mainstream provision of adult education.
The assumption remains that most women will continue to be satisfied with conventional provision and that the others, the ‘more liberated’ perhaps, can choose women's studies options which now exist amidst the many other courses that go to make up a centre programme.
The attraction of this approach is that most up-to-date and enlightened LEA centres, WEA branches and extra-mural departments can be relied upon to include some kind of women's studies in their provision which is different in kind from domestic education and men's education.
The problem with this approach however is that it is based on opportunism rather than commitment.
So long as women's studies options exist, the rest of the curriculum  which is not women's studies, and the structures in which knowledge is constructed, managed and transmitted, can remain unchanged.
Issues about who comes to adult education, what knowledge gets transmitted, how the teaching-learning relationship is negotiated, who is in control, are all just as important questions for feminist education as the introduction of feminist content and analysis into the curriculum of some courses.
And yet these are issues which the token recognition paid to the women's movement in adult education does not even begin to consider.
The contradiction remains that in a liberal framework, feminism can be tolerated in a piecemeal way, and be claimed as evidence of enlightenment and progress, so long as nothing else — the rest — has to change.
Another problem with this view of reality is that it is more likely to respond to the respectable face of feminism than to women's liberation.
So far as I am concerned, arguments that women's studies should include management training and courses to help women to be more assertive and successful in public life (like Margaret Thatcher?) don't have very much to say about how the majority of women live our lives.
Courses which substitute female content for male content in the curriculum, but which continue to fragment subjects, which reflect the same criteria about what counts as excellence, and which construct language and theories which are obscure and elitist, all echo patriarchal ways of learning.
Just because courses are attended by women, taught by women and are about women, does not in itself make them feminist.
With an educational heritage created and sustained by men, and in a context in which men control the employment of teachers and the allocation of resources, the constraints are enormous.
In these circumstances the politics of penetration becomes the art of the possible.
Women modify their demands and their language and explain their intentions in terms which will seem reasonable.
Obvious flashpoints like ‘women-only classes’ and ‘separatist politics’are avoided and terminology likely to be alarming like ‘lesbianism’, ‘patriarchy’, ‘woman hating’and ‘liberation’, is diluted into ‘sexuality’, ‘inequality of opportunity’, ‘sexism’and ‘equal rights’.
The price of a foothold in the system is compromise.
The struggle, once a tiny space has been achieved, is to stay put.
This can mean more compromise.
The danger of compromise of course is that you forget what's been relinquished in the pursuit of what's been  achieved.
The vision is translated into consequences which seem possible.
The possible is dictated by the limits of men's tolerance.
Men's intolerance is fortified by their power.
Some of the compromise has to do with money.
Defined as a minority group with special needs, women's courses can attract — in adult education terms — quite large grants of money and special funding, principally from the European Social Fund and Manpower Services Commission (MSC).
European funding can be lavish but it is tied to cooperation with public bodies.
Grants are not given into the control of women participating in the projects being funded.
A more common relationship is that between adult education and MSC whose declared commitment to training of various kinds and social education in preparation for responsible citizenship is well known.
The philosophy underlying the operation of MSC is also well known.
It is rooted in conservative values of limited self-help, virtuous thrift and individualism.
Courses can be instrumental or diversionary but not contentious.
Students, tutors and the curriculum are supervised by representatives of MSC and unnecessary luxuries like crêches attached to women's courses are conspicuous by their absence ‘in case women become dependent upon support services that will not be provided in the wider society’.
MSC are opposed to schemes which can be defined by them as political or critical of prevailing government policy — in practice, this leaves courses for women which concentrate on traditional job skills and traditional job expectations — even though those skills are not valued in the present economic climate and the opportunities for women in the labour market are negligible.
Dependency on short-term grants and external funding is an excellent way of keeping women — as well as other disadvantaged groups — in competition with each other for scarce resources.
So long as the energies of project workers and project participants can be distracted by the relentless search for short-term funding, the chances of any significant changes being achieved are minimal.
Also, this form of poverty control and management is most susceptible to applications intended to pacify potentially disorderly groups.
Projects directed at cooling the anger of the male unemployed or blacks in inner city areas are likely to be more successful than schemes seeking to increase women's access to employment or educational opportunities.
The picture so far presented, of feminism being restrained by this form of response to the women's  movement, is not completely accurate, however.
There are women holding positions of influence in adult education who have used their power to secure space and resources for women which would not otherwise exist.
The consolidation of women's visibility and conspicuous presence in adult education means that the men with power must take us into account in ways which otherwise would not happen.
In organisations like the WEA particularly, because of its grass roots and more democratic base, women have been able to take more control of their own learning and become their own teachers and organise themselves in ways which are less controlled by patriarchal infiltration.
Although, as money runs out, the cost-effectiveness of non-traditional classes comes under greater scrutiny.
For feminists who believe in coalition with other progressive groups and in the power of eloquence to change men's attitudes, then educational systems, like other institutions, can become the site of struggle in which concerted action might bring about changes in personnel and policies.
It may be in these circumstances that moderation rather than liberation is more likely to achieve results, but it is a matter of interpretation whether the results achieved by good behaviour are worth the energy required.
When feminism becomes respectable — and if the world hasn't been turned upside down as a consequence — the significance of our achievements needs to be examined carefully.
FREEDOM FROM MALE CONTROL
There isn't a great deal of historical precedent to support the view that patriarchy can be transformed by sweet reason and persuasion.
It is more likely that the incorporation of radical ideas will contribute to their dilution and distraction.
The definitions attached to strategies for change in educational institutions, as in other institutions, to do with becoming effective lobbyists, operators and competitors, are based on assumptions constructed over time about politics and power.
Men have practised and perfected these strategies for centuries in different contexts.
They may disagree with each other profoundly, and compete to outdo each other relentlessly, but they share the same notion of the contest and adhere, more or less, to the same rules.
A change of emphasis merely replaces one group of men by another, as does revolution.
The method is  as much a creation of their history and culture as is the priority given to the issues they compete about.
Women wedded to men's systems, arguing for resources and significance, have little alternative but to accept the context as given and learn as effectively as possible, to pitch in with the rest.
The problem with this, of course, is that, as in most sports, some competitors are nobbled from the start.
They can never win, and when it looks like they might, someone moves the goal post.
The odds against women beating men at their own game, without becoming amateur men in the process, are enormous.
Access to men's institutions, with a transformation of the ways in which they operate, will not in itself assist women's struggle for independence.
Given the resources available to men (99 percent of the world's resources) and the few available to women, and given the institution of male power in every dimension of the education system — grounded deep in the structures, the language and the social context of every exchange — it is unrealistic to imagine that individual women, men of good will, or students, however energetic, resourceful and determined, can change things single handed.
If it were merely a matter of eloquence, or energy or conviction, the education system, like other male institutions, would have been transformed by women already.
It's like expecting the class system to change once the workers have explained to the ruling class why they don't like poverty; or racism to go away once blacks have made clear why they find it oppressive.
Much better as women to put our energies elsewhere and to think in terms of guerilla action — to redistribute resources to women wherever possible; to asset-strip men's buildings of their space and facilities and resources on behalf of women; to expose male hypocrisy, corruption and oppression wherever it appears; to reserve loyalty for principles and for women not for institutions; and to concentrate on the subversion of men's ideas about themselves and about women by behaving badly and with irreverence to their rules.
Adrienne Rich puts it precisely:
The question facing women's studies today is the extent to which she has, in the last decade, matured into the dutiful daughter of the white patriarchal university — a daughter who threw tantrums and played the tomboy when she was younger, but who has now learned to wear a dress and speak  and act almost as nicely as Daddy wants her to.
And the extent to which women's studies can remember that her mother was not Athena, but the Women's Liberation Movement, a grass roots political movement with roots in the civil rights movement of the 1960s; a movement blazing with lesbian energy whose earliest journals had names like, It Ain't Me Babe, No More Fun and Games, Off Our Backs, Up From Under and The Furies.
In other words, how disobedient will women's studies be in the 1980s?
And how will she address the racism, misogyny, homophobia of the university and of the corporate society in which it is embedded?
And how will feminist teachers and scholars choose to practise their disobedience to white patriarchy?
An education which does justice to feminist priorities is not merely a matter of curriculum innovation and change although when women begin to rewrite the history and culture of societies in ways which include the diversity of women's experiences, and when women generate their own knowledge and become their own teachers — the consequences can be challenging to men's view of the world and their view of women.
It is common to dismiss women's analysis and writing as tendentious, irrational, subjective, misguided, or more simply wrong.
What it means, of course, is that very often we have different definitions of experience and reality from men, and that much of what we say is critical of men and about what they have done to women.
Because of this, the Second Chance for Women courses  in Southampton have been continually investigated by local politicians, LEA advisers, university professors and HMI for signs of bias, indoctrination and extremism in ways which other courses sponsored by the university department have never been; and despite the lip-service paid to experimental learning and Freirian praxis in the rhetoric of our leaders this does not extend any encouragement or enlightenment about attempts to make space for feminist ideas in adult education.
Increasingly, it has been necessary to think in terms of creating our own learning environment in a separate Women's Education Centre in which men as students, teachers or visiting authorities are unwelcome and in which women act independently for themselves.
The rationale for women-only classes in adult education is often explained as  a remedial  exercise , in terms of women's lack of confidence and men's tendency to dominate and monopolise the educational exchange.
Whilst this is  undoubtably true — men, even when they're in the minority, take up proportionally more space and time and attention  than in equity they are entitled to — but it is not the reason why radical feminists argue for their exclusion.
The most effective way in which any group, conscious of its oppression and concerned to change the relationships of oppression, can organise, is without the participation of the oppressors in the process of resistance.
It is also empowering for groups who have long been powerless, downgraded, humiliated, patronised, deskilled and diminished to discover the strength of concerted action for themselves and on their own behalf.
The same can be said for working-class, black and other oppressed groups.
It is as true in political campaigns like Greenham and against male violence as it is in the reconstruction of an education which serves the concerns, reflects the values, and enhances the priorities of women.
It means also the creation of a different kind of education in which the organisation and control is with women and in which the usual demarcation between teachers and learners, thought and action, fact and feelings, personal and public, becomes removed.
It is not, on the whole, the kind of shift which men in education take kindly to.
It challenges their authority and specialisms and notions of objectivity.
It also raises critical questions about purpose, like: is the purpose of education to consolidate the logic of the present system or is it to challenge and transform it?
The other reason why women should organise and educate separately is because we have more important work to do than to have our attention and energy continually claimed by men.
Merely surviving in male systems, let alone trying to challenge them, is exhausting and frustrating in ways which drain energy away from more important issues.
The re-emergence of feminism, which began as a flash of vision, and continued with an examination of the evils and gross distortions of patriarchy, and led to a whole variety of campaigns on behalf of women, now needs to concentrate on the differences between us as women which have divided us under patriarchy and which cannot be allowed to divide us as feminists.
The divisions, of course, are based mainly on class, race, age, politics, health and sexual identity, and of these class, race, and sexual identity are perhaps the most urgent  in our immediate struggle.
Feminists who are also black, working-class or lesbian (or all three) have been as concerned as any other group to establish their own identity and to reclaim their own realities as women.
But the women's movement, especially as it is represented in western-style education, is dominated by white, middle-class, heterosexual women.
It has not been sufficiently sensitive to the issues which divide and potentially destroy us, or to the need to renounce the legacy of patriarchal relations in our own behaviour.
Statistics aren't necessary to document what is painfully obvious.
Working-class women live in increasing poverty and are more vulnerable than middle-class women to state interference and control.
Black women live and work in the poorest of circumstances and confront the penalties of white racism as a matter of course in every aspect of their lives.
Lesbian women can expect to lose their jobs, their children and their community support because they choose to love women in preference to men.
Audre Lorde reminds us of our differences and of the reasons why we need to overcome them:
We are not as women living in a political and social vacuum.
We operate in the teeth of a system for whom racism and sexism are primary, established, necessary props of profit…
I am a lesbian women of colour whose children eat regularly because I work in a university.
If their full bellies make me fail to recognise my communality with a woman of colour whose children who do not eat, because she can't find work; or a woman who has no children because her insides are rotten from home abortions and sterilisation; or if I fail to recognise the lesbian who chooses not to have children, or the woman who remains closeted because her homophobic community is her only life support; the woman who chooses silence instead of another death; the woman who is terrified lest any anger triggers the explosion of hers; if I fail to recognise these women as other faces of myself, then I am contributing to each of their oppressions, but also to my own.
I am not free while any woman is unfree, even when her shackles are very different from my own.
Nor are you.
For the women's movement now this is one of the most  important issues we have to deal with — our relationships with each other and the eradication of all the  oppressions we have inherited from capitalist patriarchy.
The other major concern for women is about finding ways of living which give us more independence, more control over our own lives, and more self worth than is frequently the experience of women in subordination to men.
Men's opposition to women-only education, as with other women-only activities, is the fear of separatism and of men's exclusion from influence and control in our lives.
This opposition, expressed in terms of adult education, seems out of all proportion given that most women can expect to spend at most three or four hours a week in women-only classes as against a lifetime in the world of men.
And yet men do have reason to be concerned if, on these occasions, women find their lonely anger or isolated oppression is understood and shared by other women, so that personal struggles take on political dimensions.
And if, in a woman-centred, woman-positive, pro-woman environment, women discover their affiliation and affection for other women, which raises critical questions about friendship and solidarity and love, and why we spend so much time and emotional energy on relationships with men which cause us so much pain.
Living and working separately from men, on our own, or with other women and children, as a conscious political choice and labelled separatism is not something the vast majority of women would identify as a possibility.
It seems extreme and many women, for reasons of poverty, children and physical fear remain in unsatisfactory relationships without hope of change.
But yet, the steady increase in the divorce rate over the last fifteen years or so is not the simple consequence of attending women's studies classes.
The fact that women remarry is not surprising.
What is more surprising, given the amount of pressure that goes into promoting compulsory heterosexuality and married bliss, and given the economic and social penalties imposed on single parenthood by the state, is that, increasingly, women are choosing to bring up children on their own without close relationships with men.
Many women in this position today, sharing childcare and social support with other women, meeting in mother and toddler groups, in each other 's houses, at the school gates, at the shops, are engaged in a kind of separatism.
They are experiencing what women have always known — that the life-sustaining relationships that  enable us to grit our teeth and pick our way through the mess made by men, to endure and to survive, are those we share with other women: our mothers, our sisters, our neighbours and friends.
I have yet to see much validation of this support women give each other, especially in working-class communities, which recognise it as a political affiliation, a movement.
It is more common to associate what counts as politics in such communities with the labour movement — a movement which men have created and in which men meet to decide priorities and strategies.
It is however an important part of the women's movement, which might lack the explicit analysis of male oppression and resistance, but is none the less an affirmation of women's allegiance to each other.
The problem is, that because of the power of male definitions of reality in our culture, and because women are taught to accept these definitions too, the friendship and support which countless women give to each other can remain unacknowledged and invisible.
The structural organisation of women's isolation in the home compounded by women's poverty doesn't help.
And yet once these connections are made visible and acknowledged often, in my experience, in the context of feminist education groups and meetings — the sense of men's significance evaporates.
It becomes possible to imagine other ways of living.
It becomes possible, if we remain committed to living and working with men, to identify the terms on which we shall participate and what re-negotiation must go on if these relationships are to be transformed.
The argument for feminist education, free from male control, is not as a remedial  exercise , it is because we have important work to do together, from which we cannot afford to be distracted by the interference and destruction we know happens when men remain in control.
TRUE AND FALSE REBELLION
The problem we face as feminists is to understand the difference between true and false rebellion.
White capitalist patriarchy will allow a certain amount of argument and independent thought.
‘Women's Lib’ has matured and has become incorporated into the language and into the superficial behaviour of most self-respecting liberal socialists.
A good many educated women have used the ideology of economic independence, job sharing and role swapping to  establish careers which bring satisfaction and economic rewards.
Many have become lifestyle feminists with husbands and boyfriends who have cultivated the good-humoured acceptance of feminist ideas and who behave as non-oppressive, anti-sexist men, cooking the ratatouille, organising crêches at women's conferences, and turning a blind eye to untidy houses and piles of dirty washing.
This is not the experience of most black and working class women.
In the academy, where a semblance of pluralism persists, it is perfectly acceptable to introduce elements of Women's Studies material into the curriculum which, during the last fifteen years or so, has also made space for Black Studies, the teaching of race relations and working-class history.
None of these has posed any particular threat to the  hegemony of traditional discipline and patterns of academic thought and women can be incorporated as easily as the rest.
In all of these circumstances women can wear their feminist hearts on their sleeves and the world will continue much the same.
It's only when women refuse to tow the line, when we renounce the rewards of good behaviour and resist all attempts to be incorporated that true rebellion comes into its own.
It is only when women cross the line drawn by patriarchy and choose to do things on our own and when our collusion with racism, homophobia and class oppression can no longer be guaranteed, that real resistance and real possibilities begin to emerge.
Workers' Education and the Crisis of British Trade Unionism
Until perhaps twenty years ago, it would have been pointless to speak of a radical tradition in British adult education in isolation from the organised labour movement.
The precise nature of the relations between adult education institutions and organised labour has always been problematic, and usually unsatisfactory, but that there should be a close and organic relationship was never questioned by adult educators who saw their work as part of a broader movement towards social emancipation and change.
If we look at the context of Tawney's 1957 address to the extra-mural department at London University, we find that the idea that all serious educational movements in England have also been social movements was no intellectual abstraction.
Tawney's argument placed ‘the world of Labour’ explicitly before his audience, at a time when he and they were concerned about the WEA's drift towards the middle class — a drift that any radical, like Tawney, would have regarded as an unqualified loss, an opting for the ‘line of least resistance’.
The radical tradition, from the Chartist Sunday Schools of the 1840s through to the WEA and extra-mural department situated its practice firmly within a labour movement paradigm that increasingly placed the organised working class — defined above all as the active members of the trade union movement — at the heart of its endeavours.
Since the late 1960s, though, organised labour has been displaced from its focal position at the crux of education for social change, and a growing rift has opened up between those who work in education for trade unionists and those who work in community-based forms of radical adult education.
A remarkable silence, to take one salient example, has greeted a heated debate among trade union educators about the nature and purpose of their work.
In two recent books which attempt to examine the philosophy and practice of a radical adult education, the only substantial references to  education for trade unionists are historical; yet both books were conceived at a time of unparalleled expansion in trade union education, underpinned by a sizeable government grant and the first statutory entitlements to paid educational leave for working-class people that Britain has ever experienced.
For their part, trade unions showed little or no interest in the new community-based movements that emerged from the late 1960s, and saw little to interest them in the educational work that developed around community struggles.
The consequences of that rift have been thrown into sharp relief by the present crisis.
It is above all a crisis of and for British capitalism, but it is one in which the working class and its organisations have been unable to mount an effective resistance, let alone develop an effective struggle for a socialist solution: Conservative ideas and values may not be pervasive amongst working-class people, but they were sufficiently popular in 1983 to deliver 32 per cent of trade unionists' votes to the Conservative Party.
Ways of organising struggles that were appropriate to a phase of economic growth and full employment must now be reviewed and revised; although the scope and diversity of trade union education have remained admirably broad even under the impact of the crisis, defence of past achievements must as ever be supported by an appraisal of shortcomings and deficiencies.
TRADE UNION STRATEGIES IN THE 1980s
Struggles that were limited to the workplace or the neighbourhood brought real, if limited gains, up to the 1970s.
Nor are they now dead: limited and sectional actions can still bring results, both for trade unionists and for community groups.
Clearly, though, the scale and the nature of the crisis have altered the context in which struggles occur, and have set constraints on the effectiveness of inherited patterns of organisation and action.
Most disturbing, for socialists, is the profound unpopularity of trade unionism and trade union action, combined with a very real decline in working-class involvement in union organisation.
Ten years ago, evidence of the gap between organisations and members was generally hailed, on the left, as a conflict between stodgy bureaucrats and heroic workers; today, the left is likely to be on the  receiving end of complaints about unresponsiveness, paternalism and manipulation.
For its part, the Trades Union Congress has recognised the gap; but its response has been primarily cosmetic, couched in terms of a public relations campaign which leaves power where it already is, and fails to address the crisis within the movement itself.
A strategy document circulated internally in 1984 treated the problem largely as one of presentation:
The vital task facing trade unions at the present time is to sell trade unionism — to convince trade union members that they belong to a beneficial, positive and essential organisation.
The far greater challenges — transforming union organisation and government in ways that involve members in actively making their own decisions and implementing them — have been taken up only by a minority of unions, such as NUPE, the TGWU, the Society of Civil and Public Servants and arguably — the Electricians and the Engineers.
It would be foolish to claim that the unions have done nothing right since 1979.
The movement remains remarkably strong: despite all that the government and economic collapse have done, TUC membership is still above the ten million mark, and many unions enjoy the loyalty and energetic commitment of tens of thousands of active members.
For many working-class men and women, their union is still the most effective and open means of participating in a democratic organisation belonging, not to the state or the employer, but to them.
In spite of the onslaught, at local and national level employers have no option but to engage in collective bargaining with union representatives; an index of their effectiveness is that, in general, wage settlements are still (for those in work) running ahead of inflation.
Finally, there have been some striking public successes, notably in the highly effective campaigns to defend the political levy, which have even produced ballot results in favour of political funds in unions like the Hosiery and Knitwear Workers or the Inland Revenue Staffs Federation which have never previously had them.
Unions continue to make a vigorous and robust contribution to the defence of working-class interests in a hostile society; but, especially since the unsuccessful conclusion to the miners' strike, there is no escaping the problems facing the movement.
In the bitter climate of the 1980s, the organisation, operation and quality of trade union education are hardly likely to be decisive.
It might be able to make a valuable contribution, as is suggested by the part played by the organisation of dayschools and weekend conferences during the political fund campaign in enabling unions to hold close discussions with active members, provide clear and detailed information, and build up a grassroots movement.
But the question of education cannot be dealt with in isolation from the wider and urgent need to develop forms of union organisation and action that will rebuild the movement and protect and advance working-class interests.
THE ROLE FOR TRADE UNION EDUCATION
One response to the effects of the crisis upon trade unionism is to suggest that it needs a more politicised education.
It should shift away from narrow economic and workplace concerns to embrace a broader view.
This raises as many questions, though, as it answers.
Most obviously, what kind of politics?
What interpretations of the wider issues should it consider?
Which trade union members should engage in such wider learning?
With a membership deeply divided in its views, will a politicised curriculum be divisive?
On its own, the call for a broader and more political curriculum leaves untouched vital questions of scope, purpose, organisation and control.
The implications of the crisis for union democracy, including control over union education, and for forms of organisation and education that will encourage a more popular and campaigning trade unionism, have their parallels in radical educational initiatives elsewhere.
Since 1979, the rapid expansion of union education in Britain has gone into reverse.
From a peak of almost 44,000 students in 1979, the TUC's day-release courses had declined by 1983 to some 31,000.
Many trade union studies units in colleges of further education have now closed; trade union tutors from colleges, extra-mural departments and the WEA are now spending all or part of their time in organising and teaching courses for unemployed people and others.
The catastrophic fall in union education mirrored a wider malaise in the movement as a whole, as the assumptions that underlay existing strategies started to crumble, The TUC's own education programme is a case in point; it expanded rapidly from 1975, after an internal review of  educational services showed that the average workplace or branch official enjoyed half a day's education a year, but it did so on the basis of government funding combined with statutory entitlements to day release for workplace representatives.
From the government's point of view, the settlement complemented the ‘Social Contract’ between unions and state; it accorded the unions considerably more leeway than the joint management-union training scheme proposed in 1972 by the Commission on Industrial Relations, with the stated purpose of ‘improving industrial relations’through corporatism in the workplace, while setting limits on the scope and nature of the expansion.
While the TUC adamantly rejected direct employer control over union education, as proposed by the CIR, its independence was compromised by the legislation and agreements of the mid-1970s.
First, legislation allowed paid release only for certain stipulated categories; these were for the most part workplace stewards and health and safety representatives.
Second, it was open for employers to challenge the content of courses where they felt that it was irrelevant to industrial relations (an option increasingly taken up by employers in the past five years).
Third, partly for reasons of cost, almost all the expansion was taken up by fairly short courses (five to ten days, with limited options for follow-on courses of a further ten days), largely taught in local authority technical colleges.
Fourth, the grant depended on continued government goodwill; in 1983 it was cut, and part of the rest was allotted only to courses jointly approved by employers.
Finally, the TUC consciously sought to confine course content to workplace issues, encouraging tutors to rely upon centrally produced materials and not to apply any specialist knowledge of their own.
The debate among trade union tutors has concentrated almost entirely upon the content and organisation of the TUC day-release scheme.
Doug Gowan, of the TUC Education Department, argues that the courses are intended to develop skills and techniques rather than transmit abstract and academic knowledge; the TUC has tried to dissuade tutors from thinking in terms of‘subjects’ or ‘disciplines’, and instead to shift towards ‘student-centred educational methods’which shift away from classroom styles towards something more like a trade union meeting or office discussion:
One of the  assumptions that underlies a traditional  approach to the role of the tutor is the idea that more effort, direction, control, leadership, motivation and so on by the tutor is better.
But the more tutored a course is, it is likely that the less self-reliance and self-activity are produced in the students.
The non-hierarchical, participative styles of teaching now common in community-based adult education made particular sense for the TUC, given its decision to use existing public educational services to deliver the courses rather than educators whom it employed and controlled directly, combined with its suspicion of the more independent ‘service organisations’(WEA, extra-mural departments and residential colleges).
Similarly, the TUC's exclusive concentration on learning from experience in the workplace resembles much of what now passes for experience-based learning in progressive adult education elsewhere.
From 1979, a number of trade union tutors started openly to criticise the TUC's preoccupation with methods and its failure to enable trade unionists to grapple with wider and more analytical issues.
Paradoxically, the critics have appeared at the same time more radical and more conservative than the TUC.
More conservative because they clearly derive inspiration from the old WEA extra-mural model, of the tutorial class seriously, conscientiously, and at length coming to grips with conceptual insights and analytical frameworks which appear remote from the workplace, and because they insist upon the vital contribution of the professional educator.
More radical, because they insist that what is needed is a trade union education that recognises the political and economic causes that  underlie workplace concerns, and that brings together and questions the common experiences of a range of working people.
John McIlroy, most persistent of the critics, argues that
Skills are important but in the harsh world of the 1980s the basic ‘battle of ideas’ is even more vital.
Core TUC courses do not deal with the ownership of industry and managerial control of the workplace, the historical development of trade unions and their present predicament, the economic context or the  political dilemmas.
TUC Education creates its own sealed world; its overwhelming  focus on plant bargaining is like using bows and arrows to combat nuclear technology.
The TUC's response to such criticisms has been characteristically heavy-handed: McIlroy was barred from teaching on TUC courses, and it is alleged that attempts have been made to stifle debate.
Outside the TUC, individual trade unions have their own education programmes which are not always hampered by the same constraints.
Some unions, notably the EETPU, organise joint courses with employers and invite management to contribute to teaching.
Others, including NUPE, GMBATU and the TGWU, have moved towards more widespread membership education (including an ambitious distance learning programme in the case of the TGWU), involving shop stewards as lay tutors, and developing more politically aware forms of education that are related to active campaigns around particular issues.
The mine-workers have always preferred lengthy day-release courses for active members, usually organised through extra-mural departments of the WEA and pre-dating the 1975 entitlements, to the more limited TUC courses (more limited in three senses: they are shorter, they are role training, and they are only for representatives).
Trades councils organise seminars and conferences, branches hold discussions or pay tuition fees for members attending evening classes and workshops; there are study tours and exchanges with overseas comrades.
The debate over the TUC's programme has missed much of this diversity and pluralism; in particular, it has ignored the extent to which many trade unions run a broad programme of courses and resources for members as well as representatives, both directly and through organisations like the WEA.
The debate has also failed to question the way that union education is organised, particularly where ‘service organisations’ with some degree of independence from the unions and from the state are concerned.
There have been real gains in trade union education in Britain, through the TUC and through individual unions.
As a forum it involves larger numbers of working-class men and women than any other form of adult education in Britain, and it appeals to them as representatives of a wider movement of working people, banded together into continuing and accountable organisations.
One study of day-release trade union students found that the most important  benefit they identified from the courses was not simply enhanced skills and smoother communications with management, but a general gain in confidence; judged by the ‘needs-meeting’ paradigm, it was an overwhelming success.
Clearly, individual gains, in terms of meeting individual needs, have important collective consequences in a trade union.
But judged by the needs of the collectivity — whether the union or the wider community of working men and women — union education has a number of deficiencies:
1.
Trade union education, particularly where opportunities are limited to representatives who enjoy day-release facilities, can simply highlight the differences between the active minority and ordinary members.
2.
There are far too few structures for democratic representation and control over union education, so that decision-making depends mostly on a smaller number of individuals.
3.
The ‘front-end loader’ model of initial training ignores the changing and continuing needs for representatives and other workers to learn how to cope with new challenges and demands in the workplace.
4.
Other than in mining and one or two other industries, there is still a massive gap between the best day-release work and the advanced courses on offer at the residential colleges or higher education institutions like Middlesex Polytechnic.
5.
The labour movement has made hardly any use of its own scholars and intellectuals, and gives them little support, so that many drift through higher education into roles that have little relationship with their origins and aspirations.
6.
No satisfactory relationship exists with ‘service organisations’ like the WEA, extra-mural departments and residential colleges.
7.
Trade union horizons rarely rise above the economistic, and fail to address the political and cultural aspects of the crisis that working class people are living through.
8.
Most day-release is concerned with socialising representatives into forms of collective bargaining which are under challenge, and carefully avoid encouraging creative thought about representatives' role in generating and sustaining organisational change.
The old slogan, carried on many union banners and enshrined in rule books, holds that ‘Knowledge is Power’; the present weaknesses of British trade union education call into  question its ability to support those active members who are trying to resist and counteract ideological dominance, let alone revive the old ambition of a learning that would emancipate the oppressed and engender social change.
SOME ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES
Internationally, most trade union education looks remarkably similar, in its main purposes and structures, to the British pattern (apart from in certain non-capitalist states).
An education which is both liberating and informed by an alternative conception of society is rare, and educational opportunities which are extended beyond representatives to the wider membership is rarer still.
Even in South Africa, for instance, most union training is organised for shop and shaft stewards, and the curriculum is workplace-based; there is, though, a recognition of the national struggle and of the role of multinational capital.
The same insistence upon a curriculum which goes beyond a narrow conception of role initiation may be found even in North America, where trade union traditions are relatively apolitical but not all union education is as blinkered as that offered by the British TUC.
In Canada, where the government agreed a $2 million annual grant in 1977, the Canadian Labour Congress decided only to accept the money on a ‘no strings’ basis, taking its traditional view that labour education must be controlled by labour.
The view, ironically, has a reactionary provenance; the Canadian WEA was strangled by  Canadian universities and trade unions precisely because they could not control what they saw as its promotion of class consciousness, but the resulting  emphasis upon a ‘do-it-yourself’ labour education enabled Canadian unions to avoid the academic drift that characterises labour education in the USA.
In 1977, the CLC chose to make its own educational system, creating a national Labour Education Studies Centre and developing materials and courses for regional use.
In the first two years, the LESC ran 76 courses on 31 subjects, ranging from Occupational Health and Safety to public relations and Labour Journalism, Socio-Economic Planning, Labour Economics and International Affairs.
Traditional ‘tool courses’ were left to the existing Congress programme, or preferably to  affiliated unions.
In other words, basic steward training was not financed out of additional funding, which was devoted instead to a union-controlled programme which tackled more advanced issues.
The response, it was said in 1979, suggested ‘a considerable backlog of interest in obtaining training at advanced levels’.
Some individual unions have gone much further, notably the Steelworkers, who have responded to the collapse of steelmaking in Canada by recruiting in high-technology industries and the service sector, including fast-food chains.
The Steelworkers, financing their programme through a 1 per cent levy on union dues, provided training for reps in fighting union-busting methods in the early 1930s; by 1985, they had developed a full two-day residential course on ‘Facing Management’, which includes introduction exercises, and a role play (‘Handle with Care’) on productivity bargaining; the course also looks at Japanese management methods, quality circles and technological change.
Over a two-day residential course, it is possible to start with recent trends in the workplace, go on to analyse a variety of management styles and approaches, consider strategies, and then develop what the course manual describes as ‘a sense of solidarity and optimism in ‘Hard Times’ '.
Canadian labour education is by no means a model of good practice, but if it is possible for unions with far weaker traditions of political affiliation and shopfloor militancy than in Britain to stray beyond the circumscribed perimeters of the workplace in their training, then it is harder still to accept the myopic parochialism of much current British practice.
It makes even less sense in view of the collapse of the TUC's regional day-release programme.
Currently, the TUC's regional education programme is shifting steadily in favour of courses even shorter than the ten-day representatives' courses, not organised coherently as part of a process of recurrent union education but arranged on a more or less ad hoc basis around single issues.
And, as the old manufacturing heartlands decline, so participation in TUC courses is increasingly drawn from the public sector unions, representing women and men whose labour processes and relationships with employers set quite different constraints to effective struggle from those affecting private-sector workers.
Trade union education has, for the most part, barely started to grapple with the implications of the growing importance of public-sector trade unionism: in 1972, for example , 6.6 per cent of all TUC membership belonged to NUPE or NALGO alone; by 1982, the equivalent figure was 14.1 per cent .
The growth of public sector unionism raises starkly the  issue of alliances between workers as producers and working people as consumers.
For any adult education movement which addresses itself seriously to education for social change, such alliances are of profound importance — as arenas within which really useful knowledge can be learned, as subjects for learning from, and as sites of practical intervention in the form of participatory research and independent analysis.
As yet, though, these alliances — many of which, by their nature, will be localised and often short-lived — constitute an underdeveloped agenda.
In Britain, a number of projects developed in the 1970s with the objective of bringing together socialists, trade unionists and community activists.
Most initiatives arose from the ‘movement left’— that amorphous network of local groupings, cultural ventures and autonomous campaigns that was the legacy of the libertarian revolts of the late 1960s and early 1970s — rather than from within the existing labour movement (apart from the Institute for Workers' Control, which in the mid-1970s looked as though it might become a major national forum for the newer movements of the 1970s and the earlier generation of intellectuals and trade unionists who had quit the Communist Party after 1956).
A number of locally-based trade union and community resource centres were established, often with support from trades councils and the WEA, only to be subsequently proscribed by the TUC as ‘unofficial’.
Coventry Workshop, one independent research, education and advice centre, founded in 1975 out of the Home Office-sponsored Community Development Project, tried to service a range of community and trade union organisations.
On the principle that ‘the job of winning control has to start where the powerless are’, it supports struggles at grassroots level over health, housing, wages, health and safety, and employment.
Its role was partly that of a forum, partly a catalyst, and partly that of an intellectual resource which feeds in ideas and information; over the years it has developed an outstanding reputation for encouraging and sustaining an informed dialogue between local movements.
But its principled insistence upon grassroots-level work, criticising labour movement officialdom where necessary, has also produced difficulties: its inability to win sustained trade union support at regional level, over-reliance on the now abolished West Midlands County Council for core funding, and the instability of many of the community groups it serviced, have placed its future  at serious risk.
Even more ambitious attempts to bring trade unionists and community activists together in educational settings have taken place at Northern College.
Opened by the four Labour-controlled local authorities of South Yorkshire in 1978, the College was deliberately intended to be rather different from existing residential colleges.
Whereas they all currently specialise either in advanced academic credit-bearing courses of one or two years, or in short courses for groups who often have little or no contact with each other, Northern College's founders hoped to combine long courses with ten-week courses so that students would benefit from having the continuity of learning associated with the long courses alongside the fresher experiences and perceptions of students on short courses.
It was also intended that a wide range of groups and individuals would take advantage of both types of course; trade unionists, school governors, people intending to be councillors, voluntary organisations, and people intending to apply for higher education or vocational retraining were all mentioned in the final planning paper in 1978, whereas the other long-term colleges concerned with education for social action were either, like Ruskin, largely trade union-oriented or, like the Cooperative College, intended for cooperators.
Finally, by the time that the early group of tutors was appointed, there was a strong concern not to be caught up in the academic drift that, we felt, had tugged Ruskin away from its labour movement roots.
Plans for ten-week short courses were never realised: the longest is the five-week course for the Yorkshire and Derbyshire Areas of the NUM, the average is around one week, and many are only a weekend.
Like course content and organisation in general, length is negotiated with organisations before they come in.
Moreover, trade union students, at around a fifth or a quarter of all short-course students, are a smaller proportion of the total than we hoped.
The College has provided an important forum and resource for a wide variety of groups and individuals from working-class backgrounds.
During the miners' strike, for instance, it hosted dayschools and conferences for ordinary NUM members and miners' wives groups, which allowed them to discuss the direction that events were taking.
It also ran a series of weekend schools for the women's groups, mostly taught by College staff, offering the women the  opportunity to situate their own struggles in a wider historical, political and economic context, and develop a more strategic purpose for their actions as well as identify continuing needs for further educational work.
But this work also had its flaws and weaknesses.
The College was unable, during the dispute, to continue its ordinary programmes with Yorkshire and Derbyshire miners.
While this might have been expected, neither did it explore alternative ways of allowing mineworkers to use its educational resources.
The opportunity for a serious educational intervention was missed: a sad contrast to the rapid organisation of adult education lectures by Yorkshire WEA and Nottingham University during the 1926 miners' lockout, especially in the light of the College's unambiguous commitment to a working-class adult education that is independent and emancipatory, that analyses and seeks to explain the structures of inequality and power that operate in British society and elsewhere.
Of more long-term concern is the degree to which the frontiers between trade union and other courses have or have not been broken down.
The intention was always to develop the College as a learning community, which deliberately sought to emphasise the common experiences of working-class people through the full use of the residential setting by
the mix of students — men and women, old and young, black and white, on long and short courses, from many different backgrounds and parts of the country, studying on different courses — with a common interest in learning from each other 's experience.
In a society which fragments and alienates working people from one another, the process of learning from differences is as difficult as the more intellectual learning from analysis and explanation on the course.
It has not, though, been addressed nearly as carefully.
On the other hand, Northern College has established the basis for a new type of working-class adult education, by providing a shared educational and residential resource for people who are active in their unions, their communities or in neighbourhood-level adult education.
Its contribution has in part been developed through its critical understanding of what a working-class adult education might be, drawing on  the best elements of the liberal adult education tradition to produce an education that respects people's culture and experience, but also subjects it to analysis and questioning.
The celebration of working-class culture on its own can be simply an acceptance of oppression, a refusal to recognise the often racist and male nature of that culture, a romantic blindness to rapid change in the social composition of the working class.
Trade union education can only contribute to the regeneration of the movement; first, if it is prepared to subject what now exists to sustained debate and analysis, and if its development is tied to a thorough and far-reaching commitment to more campaigning, participatory and decentralised forms of trade union organisation and action.
COMMUNITY, DEMOCRACY, AND THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT
Trade union education in the 1970s developed in a world of its own, cut off from many of the new developments in community-based adult education and from its own origins in the committed and politically alert work of the WEA and Labour College movement.
But the advocates of radical community education bear part responsibility for this caesura between different attempts to develop an education which will inform and support effective social action.
Many of the community-based projects were developed by libertarian socialists, formed politically in the ‘alternative’ social movements of the 1960s and 1970s, who rejected hierarchical and bureaucratic forms of organisation and who celebrated cultural rather than economic struggle.
With the exception of the tiny Trotskyist groups, libertarian socialists — even in the Communist Party — regarded trade unions with suspicion or even contempt (conveniently forgetting that these were institutions that working-class people had themselves built up and developed).
For their part, trade unions mostly ignored community-based groups as irrelevant, self-appointed and ephemeral; they seemed unaware that they were becoming increasingly remote from the people who belonged to them, especially to women (as members, and even more so as unwaged workers).
The new forms of organising had, therefore, at best a tenuous relationship with organised labour.
Some projects did attempt to establish trade union links at grassroots  level: organisations like Coventry Workshop bring together people from a range of causes and struggles in a common endeavour to build connections and analyse the wider context.
Their successes highlight the failure of vision elsewhere.
The current crisis places a new agenda before trade unionists and community groups, and it is an agenda on which many of the items are common to both.
Deindustrialisation and job loss, and proposals for economic renewal and growth, are shared concerns, and urgently so.
Health is another, whether in the form of workplace hazards that pose broader dangers or in the form of struggles to defend the health service.
A third is the defence of public services more generally.
A trade unionism that is paralysed by an obsession with parliamentary lobbying and television training for general secretaries can scarcely expect to win the wholehearted support even of its own members, let alone women engaged in domestic labour, part-time workers or the unemployed.
The ‘gulf…between the formal structures and machinery of government of the unions and the rank-and-file membership’, combined with traditional union hostility towards what it sees as parallel organisation, is a major cause of the current crisis of trade unionism in particular and the predicament of the working class more generally.
The miners' strike revealed the range of new movements and organisations which have been arenas, if complex and contradictory, for the development of working-class culture and working-class consciousness, promising to broaden traditional conceptions of the composition and objectives of the labour movement yet also portraying the unions' capacity to ignore that potential when it stepped beyond the domestic and controllable to stake its own claims for recognition.
For working-class people, the crisis — economic, political or cultural — is being experienced above all at the local level yet is the outcome of unprecedentedly global forces.
The role of adult education networks and institutions whose mission encompasses a strong social purpose is now an urgent issue.
What is urgently needed is forms of education which open up resources — intellectual and material, critical and role-supporting, analytical and committed — to sustain a dialogue between people engaged in different kinds of struggle: a dialogue that respects the differences, while seeking to generalise out of practice at local level to reach  an understanding of the power structures against which struggle takes place.
Ultimately, it is necessary to develop forms of trade union education which tackle, as well as the collective bargaining framework and negotiating tactics, issues of control and power.
And that includes the major issues of change and development within the labour movement itself; the most serious indictment of all involved in trade union education in the past fifteen years is their failure to inspire a regeneration of the ideology of labour as a collective movement for democratic advance combined with the widespread dissemination of a modern organisational competence.
A trade union education that is — as some have rightly advocated  — open to members as well as representatives, broad-based and educational rather than narrow and role-specific, continuing and recurrent rather than ad hoc and disparate, will itself produce limited and ephemeral results unless working people can see that what they learn is also practised in their own organisations.
Adult Education with Unemployed People
INTRODUCTION
The 1930s and the 1980s
January 1936: In South Wales, particularly in the Rhonda Valley the tramp of thousands of feet was heard day after day.
Even the shopkeepers closed their doors and joined the demonstrations.
They knew what this new attack would mean to them, that more little shopkeepers would be driven out of business by the poverty of the people and their inability to purchase goods.
Doctors also marched: they knew that the new [unemployment benefit]scales meant increased difficulties for them in their desperate efforts to protect the health standards of the people against the ravages of poverty.
Teachers, who had the difficult problem of endeavouring to educate half-starved children, knew that their task would become still more onerous under the new scales: so they too joined in the demonstrations.
Employed workers, who found that they were being compelled to maintain their unemployed relatives out of their meagre wages joined with the unemployed.
Reactionary trade union officials who had steadfastly declared that they would not stand on a public platform with revolutionary workers, found themselves caught up in the stream and carried forward to participation in great united front unemployed demonstrations.
These demonstrations were organised by the National Unemployed Workers' Movement, and their actions illustrate one of the major differences between responses to unemployment in the 1920s and 1930s and current responses.
Unemployment in the 1980s is generally regarded as one of the most important political issues facing all major capitalist economies.
In Britain, the problem has been particularly acute and all political parties are agreed that the phenomenon of unemployment is not only a centrally important political issue but raises also profound economic, social and moral questions.
Unlike the 1930s, however, there is a dramatic contrast between this generalised macro-concern, and the manner in which unemployment and its effects on millions of people's lives are, in practice, marginalised and hidden.
Unemployment in the 1920s and 1930s, partly through the types of demonstrations outlined above, was highly visible.
In the 1980s, unemployment is often invisible and there is no organisation of unemployed people themselves to highlight the problems.
The 1930s and 1980s are similar in that a wide variety of institutions, both voluntary and statutory, were involved in both decades in work with or for the unemployed.
In both periods, churches, charitable bodies, voluntary organisations, the Trades Union Congress (TUC), central and local government, and, more particularly in the context of this chapter, a variety of adult educators responded to unemployment.
Whilst it is not possible in this chapter to provide a detailed comparative analysis of the two periods it is important to outline the context within which adult education responses to unemployment in the 1980s take place.
ADULT EDUCATION RESPONSES TO UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE 1980s: AN OVERVIEW
During the 1980s there has been a proliferation of schemes, courses and activities for unemployed people in many parts of the country organised by a wide range of adult education agencies and voluntary organisations.
McDonald has summarised the objectives of the programmes specifically designed for the unemployed:
These may aim to provide…basic education, English as a Second Language (ESL), second chance, and in-fill (to existing courses).
They may be concerned with helping people to formulate their educational needs.
They may be concerned  with helping people to face up to unemployment and make choices for themselves, including the acceptance of alternatives to unemployment.
They may be intended to help people to be more aware of their own interests and abilities with a view to taking the first steps towards any of these possibilities.
Overall it is clear that two parallel developments have been taking place in adult education for the unemployed.
Adult educators in all sectors have attempted to make access to existing facilities easier; and/or special programmes have been developed.
McDonald comments that in the course of her enquiry, ‘there was much evidence of concern for the needs of special groups and much imaginative development of outreach and provision to satisfy them’.
The combination of these factors — increasing evidence from projects and reports about the educational needs of the adult unemployed, allied to increasing concern generally in education about the financial and ideological predominance of the Manpower Services Commission (MSC)— led the Department of Education and Science (DES) to take some initiative.
Thus, despite continuing major cutbacks affecting all adult education agencies, it was announced in Parliament on 5 March 1984 that a three-year DES initiative (subsequently entitled REPLAN) costing £2.5 million would be launched to improve educational opportunities for unemployed adults.
This is not the place for a detailed critique of REPLAN, but elements within it (such as the National Institute of Adult Continuing Education (NIACE) local development project) are currently at a crucial stage.
Projects in different parts of the country have gained valuable experience and useful lessons have been learned.
Staff and participants involved in them are now asking critical questions about the future of such projects.
If the projects themselves and the questions which have been raised are quietly shelved and ignored, many adult educators will be severely critical of NIACE (as the managing agent) and the DES (as funders) for establishing ad hoc, token gestures towards the educational needs, in the broadest sense, of unemployed adults.
Before describing some examples of current or recent educational work with unemployed people, it is necessary to explore the objectives of various kinds of provision.
MODELS OF DEVELOPMENT: OBJECTIVES OF PROVISION
In this section, five models, with differing underlying objectives are examined.
These are the training model, the therapy/social control model, the liberal model, the social purpose model and the socialist/community action model.
Training model
Reference to training inevitably raises questions about the role of the Manpower Services Commission (MSC) which has emerged as the major institutional vehicle for government schemes to cope with unemployment.
Whilst the MSC is not the main focus of attention here it is important to refer to the gross disparity of resources — financial, human and political — between the training agencies, represented by the MSC, and the educational providers.
What, then, is the nature of the current ‘training model’ in provision for unemployed people?
The first priority for most unemployed people is obtaining a job: and training or retraining courses are one seemingly obvious route to this end.
Yet there are, of course, severe problems.
As far as adults are concerned it is important to note that the overwhelming emphasis within MSC is upon the 16–19 age group.
(The problems of YTS et al.lie beyond our scope here: but the hostility with which such schemes have been greeted from many parts of the political spectrum is indicative of their questionable value.)
Nevertheless, both MSC and other agencies are involved in training schemes for adults, and it can be argued that this is the most appropriate form of ‘educational’ provision for the unemployed.
Nobody could deny that, in a rapidly changing society, retraining has a centrally important role.
An exclusive emphasis upon such approaches, however, is fallacious, and would be a misuse of AE resources.
First, the ‘Thatcherite’ myth of a leaner, fitter economic structure, engendered via market forces, and producing at some unspecified future date a buoyant economy with full employment, has been exposed as a myth, from numerous ideological standpoints.
To pretend, therefore, that unemployment is a temporary phenomenon, which can be cured by a combination of retraining and market forces, is at best naively optimistic and at worst politically dishonest.
In this context, then, approaches to education  must begin from the notion, articulated by André Gorz and others, that ours is a post-industrial society where paid work on a full-time basis is no longer to be seen as the norm, and where ‘education for life’ rather than‘training for jobs’should be the objective.
Second, the training model assumes that all criteria are economic and unilinear, and rejects, by implication, the validity of social, cultural and indeed human concerns.
Changes of social and geographical, as well as occupational, location are simply assumed, taking no account of the often very strong existing attachments (let alone more mundane issues, such as differential house prices and rental charges).
Third, a purely training model is inherently mechanistic and conservative: the task to be accomplished is given, assumed; the training consists of instruction as to how best it is to be accomplished.
No discussion or  analysis — except in terms of efficient achievement of the given task — can enter into such a process.
No questioning of the validity or desirability of the task can be permitted to intervene in the process.
And no open-ended discussion, in the wider social, economic and political contexts, of possible alternatives or possible criticisms of the assumptions, can be undertaken.
In all these senses, therefore, the exclusively training model performs no educational function at all.
Indeed, it reinforces the status quo, closes off discussion and analysis, and restricts rather than expands popular consciousness.
For these reasons it is no exaggeration to claim that the increasing drift to training at the expense of education, in adult education as elsewhere, represents a very real threat to a democratic society.
Therapy/social control model
From a similar ideological stance as the ‘trainers’ are those who see the purpose of adult education with the unemployed as being either therapeutic — easing the process of adjustment and thereby acceptance — or controlling — ensuring that potentially disruptive elements in society are neutralised.
The level of unemployment, at least in the short to medium term, is likely to remain high; therefore, so the argument goes, it is essential that unemployed people, in both their own interests and those of the wider society, do not drift into alienation or even ‘subversion’.
The role of adult education, in this respect, is therefore twofold: to provide  leisure or recreational courses to enable unemployed people to fill in their increased ‘leisure hours’ with personally satisfying (but cheap) activities; and to ensure that in a variety of ways unemployed people are ‘reintegrated’into society, brought within the norms of the dominant culture, and protected from deviant modes of thought and behaviour.
Three aspects of such approaches are worthy of particular note.
First, they depend upon a pathological view of unemployment: that is, it is implicit that ‘being unemployed’ is indicative, at least in part , of some personality deficiency or lack of ability or drive (cf.
Tebbit's ‘on your bike’ attitude), and is also akin to a social disease.
There is no hint here of structural explanations, still less of critical analyses of alternative political and economic strategies which might be held to ameliorate, if not cure absolutely, unemployment.
Second, such approaches contain an often explicit, and always implicit, element of ideological and political control.
In its milder forms this can be articulated as ‘giving people what they want’— in reality, providing what the lowest common denominator  commercial culture dictates; but, in a significant number of instances, the element of ‘social control’ is quite explicit — the refusal to allow politically controversial topics to be discussed in government or local authority funded centres, for example.
Finally, such approaches are, again, inherently conservative in that they underpin the prevailing common sense about the nature and causes of unemployment, they foreclose discussion on any alternative analyses, and they integrate and undermine potentially ‘deviant’ political stances amongst the unemployed.
The liberal model
The traditional liberal approach to adult education as exemplified in the University Extension and WEA movements (from the 1870s and 1900s respectively) formed the core of the approach of the responsible Bodies (RBs: that is, University Adult Education (UAE) Departments and the Workers' Educational Association (WEA)) in the inter-war years, and, in their period of greatest growth, from the 1940s through until the late 1970s.
The liberal tradition is hard to define briefly, both because it is a ‘conceptual continuum’ rather than one specific stance, and because its practice — its organisational application — has varied widely  over both time and institutional location.
However, it is safe to assert that it has always had a strong emphasis upon personal development and upon the intrinsic worth of education per se; and, equally, that a critical, open-ended and analytical approach, and a ‘democratic’ teaching mode, have characterised the provision of the RBs for many years.
Such precepts have underlain some of the provision made by the RBs for the unemployed.
Most RBs (as Local Education Authorities — LEAs) have introduced fee reductions for unemployed people attending their ‘mainstream’ programmes; and some Departments have introduced specially targeted provision (see next section below).
The problems with such an approach can be divided broadly into two: those relating to the nature of RB provision per se; and those relating to the underlying educational perspectives of the liberal tradition itself.
On the first count, it is significant that a very small proportion of RB programmes is concerned with developing work with the unemployed ; moreover, much of this work is concerned not with the working-class unemployed (who, of course, form the large bulk of unemployed people in Britain), but with the unemployed middle-class or professional people.
Moreover, much of this latter work is much closer to a ‘training’ than to a ‘liberal’approach.
All this reflects the RBs' increasing concerns with middle-class education; and, in the case of the UAE Departments, with an increasing emphasis upon professional, continuing, and post-experience work.
Whilst there may well be every justification for such developments, which have been growing steadily since the 1950s but with increasing rapidity over the last decade, these emphases do undermine the notion of RBs as being wholly concerned with liberal adult education.
The DES's New Formula for grant aid, which is complicated but based essentially on a head-count of students attending courses as the future basis for allocation of grant (the grant having, anyway, undergone a global reduction), exacerbates considerably such tendencies.
In future, the best way to secure grant will be to provide popular, undemanding short courses, aimed at the ‘soft end’ of the market — the already educationally integrated middle class.
The scope for adult educators to develop liberal AE for the unemployed is thus severely limited in the 1980s — and is, of course, further curtailed by the continuing UGC cuts.
But, moving on to the second of the problematic areas  indicated earlier, the liberal mode itself is open to question, irrespective of its organisational context.
The traditional ‘neutrality’ of the tutor, syllabus content and presentation have tended, de facto, to result in orthodox viewpoints predominating.
And the orthodox pedagogic practice of the liberal tradition — the imparting of an established body of knowledge by the tutor to the students — has also tended, in practice, to predominate.
These characteristics have applied to much of the RB liberal provision for the unemployed.
Often, provision for the unemployed has consisted largely of mainstream courses based in educational institutions, with virtually the only distinctive feature being a reduced fee.
Not surprisingly, the result has been to recruit predominantly middle-class unemployed people into mainstream programmes.
The net effect of the application of the liberal model for developing work with the unemployed is thus somewhat muted and minimal.
The social purpose model
As was noted earlier, the liberal tradition should be viewed as a continuum; and, at the radical end of the continuum, has existed as a continuous, albeit minority, strand: the commitment to collective, social purpose Adult Education.
In the long history of workers' education the role of the RBs has an important place: from the early days of University Extension, through the founding of the WEA, and the development of Trade Union education, the idea of ‘education for citizenship’ to enable a genuinely participative and egalitarian democracy to emerge, has been central.
The point need not be laboured, as this aspect of Adult Education history is, rightly, much emphasised and is well known.
What is noteworthy, here, however, is the two contrasting legacies of this tradition for contemporary Adult Education practice in work with the unemployed.
The first is that the social purpose framework — of raising collective working-class consciousness through critical, liberal educational processes — has been of central importance in the development of community adult education practice in Britain.
And this development has been the key to such successful innovation in the field of work with the unemployed as has so far been accomplished.
On the more negative side, however, the social purpose tradition of workers' education has been concentrated overwhelmingly on the white, male, manual, working-class trade unionist, to the virtual exclusion of other sections of the working class.
Thus, as we have argued at length in a recent book, ‘doubly disadvantaged’ sections of the working class — the unemployed, women, black people, the retired, and the disabled — have especially acute educational needs.
Moreover, such groups require innovative and community education approaches if adequate and relevant social purpose education is to be provided.
Socialist/community action model
It is also the case that, in practice, social purpose Adult Education has frequently concerned itself exclusively with the small minority of politically active, leftist members of the working class, usually, though not always, via trade union education.
Such groupings respond more readily, naturally, than the great mass of the working class, to institution-based, and social studies-oriented, courses.
There is a strong case for ‘educational vanguardism’ of this type.
Moreover, there have been successful schemes which have combined this approach with that of community activism (see, for example, the Liverpool programmes in the 1960s and 1970s).
A related, though significantly different, approach has been developed since the 1960s in the community education movement.
(Examples of this include the Northern Ireland work pioneered by Tom Lovett, and the Leeds Pioneer Work programme, discussed briefly below.)
Here, the objective has been to involve the local community, first, in awareness of its own problems, provision of access to relevant information about them, and the alternative solutions that might be constructed to solve them; and, second, in the development of local community groups, concerned partly with further analysis and discussion, partly with building community consciousness and collective involvement, and partly with community action to improve conditions and ameliorate problems.
Some of the work with the unemployed has taken place within this context.
There are, however, considerable problems with such approaches, however desirable radical adult educators may consider them to be.
There is no  necessary connection between community activism and progressive or radical politics: indeed, quite the reverse may well be the case, as is to be expected in a predominantly conservative society (cf. working-class racism).
How far, then, are radical adult educators prepared to engage in a fully democratic community education?
In a context where unemployed whites think that unemployment would be solved by ‘repatriation’ of black people and, generally, the adoption of National Front-type policies, are the facilitating roles of community education to be used?
Obviously not: but how does this tally with community control?
Much more problematic, in practical terms, is the resistance by public bodies to funding what are seen as subversive cliques.
Nor is this a problem for the authorities alone: how far should adult educators, qua educators, engage in activism as opposed to education?
The dividing-line may be difficult to draw but most would agree that it must be drawn somewhere.
Perhaps most important of all is the clear and simple fact that the vast majority of the unemployed do not want ‘political’ classes.
Here, the Leeds approach, for example, may be instructive.
Rather than classes on directly social or political topics, the emphasis has been upon issue-based provision, in the first instance, as a means to develop work, where appropriate and possible, with a broader scope (hence courses in Housing, Welfare Rights, Health Care, etc. rather than in Social Policy, Politics etc.).
Within working-class communities generally, and perhaps amongst unemployed people in particular, there is an  understandably negative attitude towards ‘education’ in all its forms.
If significant provision is to be made it must be on the basis of a genuine negotiation and interaction between educators and the community, involving both social understanding and careful curriculum development to meet the needs of each particular group.
From the viewpoint of the radical adult educator there is also a need for a reinterpretation of the liberal approach to adult education.
In a society where there is a hegemonic bourgeois culture pervading all sectors, including that of education, it is essential that the ideals of critical, open-ended analyses that are at the core of the liberal approach, are upheld.
This entails a ‘positive discrimination’, in ideological terms, to give a full explication of deviant ideological perspectives within the educational process.
This is not to advocate socialist or any other sort of indoctrination, but to stress the importance of studying — via community education provision — alternative perspectives on reality socialist, libertarian, feminist or whatever — in order to counteract the prevailing orthodoxies portrayed through the media and other agencies of socialisation.
Whilst such experimentation in community education may be small-scale it does provide the opportunity for adult education to demonstrate in microcosm the potential for change that inheres within the adult education framework, given the right political context.
These are points to be returned to in our concluding section.
All that need be noted here is that, whilst none of these approaches is unproblematic, it is within the latter two perspectives that radical adult educators will find the most potential for development.
Equally important, it must always be emphasised that all approaches, here as elsewhere, are underpinned by a series of ideological assumptions and arguments.
Even the most seemingly neutral model has in reality strong ideological orientations.
A brief review of some recent experience in the field will serve to amplify in specific and practical detail some of the more general points made in the foregoing section.
SOME EXAMPLES FROM PRACTICE
Five current examples of adult education schemes for unemployed people, from different settings in Britain, indicate the potential and the problems of this kind of work.
These examples are located in: a local authority-funded employment project; a Local Education Authority Institute of Adult Education; a College of Further Education; a university adult education project for unemployed people; and the work of the Trades Union Congress Centres Against Unemployment.
These examples have been chosen not because they are necessarily typical or representative but because they illustrate interesting practices which are now underway to a greater or lesser extent both across different areas of adult education,(Local Education Authority, mainstream provision, Further Education colleges, the Responsible Bodies) and outside the formal boundaries of adult education (an employment project, and the Trades Union Congress Centres).
An Employment Project
The Braunstone Employment Project (BEP) is based in a shop on a large council estate which is situated on the edge of Leicester.
The estate, with 2000 houses, has an unemployment rate of over 50 per cent.
The workers devised detailed outreach strategies (based on surveys, including a local talent survey, and community consultations) which taught them a great deal about the skills and experiences in the area, and attitudes to unemployment.
With the residents, they applied successfully for finance  through the Inner Area Programme to establish the Braunstone workshops on the estate.
These provide a car repair workshop and facilities for woodworking, metal working, the construction trade and textiles.
These resources, however, needed sympathetic staff to work with groups of residents.
The BEP staff therefore approached two Colleges of Further Education and they began to provide courses on the estate.
One example is a course on building and construction skills which makes use of ‘in-fill places’ but is run on an outreach basis by the College using Braunstone Training Workshops as a base.
These courses are jointly planned by the College and the residents' training groups.
This project has focused on training and ‘employability’.
Through the involvement of local people, resources have been secured which are based on their needs, and made available in their area.
The College's resources have been deployed on the estate, and jointly controlled by staff and residents.
BEP illustrates the possibility of linking together a training/employability approach with an educational orientation.
The surveys and the detailed discussions with local groups ensured that questions of training resources (and the control of them) were raised, but within the context of unemployment as a more explicit, live, local issue.
A Local Education Authority Institute of Adult Education
The Southwark Adult Education Institute, London, has developed special provision for unemployed people, as well as being sensitive to the needs of unemployed people on its mainstream programme.
This work may be representative of  much LEA adult education activity with unemployed people, but unfortunately the paucity of action-research evidence means that this must remain a hypothesis.
The specific provision at Southwark includes a basic education programme located on one particular housing estate.
Run on an open-access basis, it includes very basic literacy/numeracy skills, to 0-level standard.
A large number of students are enrolled for City and Guilds and RSA certificates.
These qualification-based courses may assist some people in gaining employment, but staff feel they are perhaps more important for personal development and self-confidence.
This liberal model was articulated by one of the basic education tutors in the following way: ‘To see the look of joy on someone's face when they pass, when they've never passed anything else in their lives, is wonderful…
And the change in self-image is remarkable…a big boost in confidence.
The Southwark programmes attach heavy priority to work with ethnic minorities and with women.
On one estate basic education and general classes are held in various premises after staff have developed contacts through outreach.
The unemployed, then, are broadly defined to include the unregistered unemployed, particularly women.
Other specific provision includes an ESL (English as a Second Language) initiative which seeks to help unwaged individuals from ethnic minorities to look at the skills involved in setting up small businesses or entering self-employment.
These specific initiatives, however, represent neither the only nor the main use which the unemployed make of the Institute's resources.
‘A recent in-house survey showed that almost exactly 10% of the students in the mainstream provision were unemployed (1300 out of 13,000).’
Many adult educators, particularly in inner city and working-class areas, would probably argue that they are already working with unemployed people, like the Southwark Institute, through their mainstream programme.
The critical questions which remain unanswered relate to the objectives of this approach.
Clarity is needed about which of the five models (the training model, the liberal model, the therapy/social control model, the social purpose model or the socialist/community action model) is being adopted and evidence is needed about the outcomes of the work as seen by participants.
A College of Further Education
Valuable lessons should be available from specific community-based programmes aimed at unemployed people; an exclusive focus on these initiatives, however, can deflect attention from the need for Colleges of Further Education (with much more  substantial resources than community-based programmes) to confront the issue of long-term structural unemployment.
The Leicester project illustrates that college resources can be taken to the community and their use jointly negotiated and controlled with local residents.
Even where this does not happen, colleges can still make courses more accessible to unemployed people by experimenting with the timing and  publicity for courses and supporting them with creches and easy access arrangements.
Tile Hill College in Coventry has attempted to do this through its courses which are specifically geared towards the unemployed (MSC-funded), and general courses which by their nature and structure attract the unemployed.
The MSC courses in 1985 included a Pre-Tops ‘Breakthrough’ course, a Business Skills Workshop, New Skills courses, and Adult Preparation Training (funded through the Adult Training Strategy and using a modular approach).
Unfortunately, many non-waged people are unable to benefit from these MSC courses since they are only available for those with UB40 cards.
The courses are obviously based on a training model, and all colleges running such courses should evaluate longitudinally whether participants do in fact secure subsequent employment or further education and training.
It is also important to evaluate other outcomes of these courses.
Do they lead to increased self-confidence, and if so, is this deliberate or unintentional (the liberal model)?
Do they implicitly reinforce particular views about paid work and the inevitability of unemployment (the social control model)?
Are the general courses (the non-MSC ones) based on a similar training model?
These included a computer programming course and an Open-Access course (aimed at ethnic minorities and acting as a bridge into higher education).
Or, are they explicitly broader than MSC courses and based on the liberal or social purpose model; and if so, to what extent are issues of unemployment brought into the course and stereotypes challenged?
These broader, qualitative questions must be raised and  examined as courses for unemployed people continue to proliferate.
It is probable, however, that many colleges may not, as yet, be examining even the organisational issues about such courses, far less the more complex qualitative questions raised above.
A university Adult Education Project with unemployed people
Although much of the provision for unemployed people is organised through the local education authorities, this university project illustrates that the RBs (referred to earlier in the liberal model) can also play an important role in developing this work.
By systematic monitoring and evaluation, they can produce guidelines about approaches, recruitment methods, curriculum and outcomes.
Since a project at Leeds University was established in 1982, more than 400 short courses have been organised with various groups of unemployed people.
The vast majority of participants have not had previous experience of higher or adult education, and had left school at the minimum age.
The courses are neither qualification-based nor training-oriented.
They are primarily issue and community-based, and could be described as ‘education for everyday living’.
They have included Welfare Rights, Interest Courses (Photography, Video, Art, Local History), locally-based courses with tenants groups (Housing, ‘Know the System’, ‘How the Council Works’), and Women's Courses (Women and Health etc.)
There are no restrictive enrolment procedures for these courses, which are all free, and held in locations away from the University (e.g. in unemployed centres, community centres etc.)
The process for organising these courses involves detailed discussions with core groups of interested people, and the courses emerge from their concerns and interests.
These may be members of local community groups or unemployed centres and/or paid staff of particular projects or paid staff working in the community.
This process of negotiation is crucial, since one of the principles underlying the work is a belief in the potential participants to plan jointly and control their own learning and the way in which it is provided.
A two-year research programme is currently in progress  which is examining the outcomes of these courses.
Based on detailed interviews with unemployed people who have attended courses, it should provide valuable information about the effectiveness (or otherwise) of the provision and the extent to which the liberal model, the social purpose model and/or the socialist community action model are implemented in practice.
Such projects, then, can produce important lessons, but there is a danger of temporary, inadequately funded special projects being seen as the sole response of adult education to the unemployment crisis.
The TUC Centres against Unemployment
There are currently 210 TUC centres against unemployment in Britain, and there is increasing evidence that much adult education is organised with unemployed people in such centres.
The TUC Guidelines for these centres list three objectives:
(i)
to provide advice (eg. on welfare rights) and counselling;
(ii)
to provide a focal point for unemployed people;
(iii)
to develop a ‘representation’ role (eg. promote concessionary schemes for unemployed people.)
The rapid development of these centres during the 1980s in different parts of the country has led to different emphases being developed in practice (some are mainly advice centres, other social centres; others combine these roles with elements of campaigning work).
Educationally, it is clear that a wide variety of provision has been developed, mainly in ‘coping’(welfare rights, staying healthy on the dole) and ‘interest’ courses (photography, art, hobbies, DIY, etc.)
More recently, users and staff have been meeting at regional and national courses sponsored by the TUC which have examined the political and organisational issues about these centres and unemployment generally.
Given the absence of any organisational focal point for unemployed people in the 1980s, it is obviously important for adult educators concerned about unemployment to utilise such centres and work jointly with them.
Any educational intervention in these centres, however, must be carefully monitored so that the effects of different models of education can be assessed more accurately than is possible at the moment.
The five examples outlined above illustrate the proliferation of schemes and courses which have been developed for unemployed people in the 1980s.
They indicate that much imaginative work is being developed, and that different types of provision have been established.
Many lessons have been learnt (including the need for outreach, pre-course negotiations, free and relevant courses, and inter-agency collaboration) but considerable challenges still confront the major institutions of adult education — the LEAs, the RBs and the Colleges.
CONCLUSION
The persistence of long-term structural unemployment is now generally accepted, albeit not explicitly stressed, by politicians, planners and government ministries.
Thus, the Manpower Services Commission (MSC) stated in 1985 that ‘the best assumption for planning purposes is for a continuing high level of unemployment throughout the period (1985–89) and for a level of long-term unemployment remaining at around the one million mark.’
In this context, adult educators have responded with a variety of educational and vocational training measures, some of which were discussed earlier in this chapter.
There is a gross disparity between the size of the unemployment problem and the  minuscule educational resources available to make adequate provision.
Such miserliness is nothing new for adult education, of course.
After all, the concept of mass working-class adult education organised and taught from within existing institutions and existing budgets, is inherently unrealistic.
Over and above resource problems, however, there are several more fundamental ideological and structural problems.
There is, to begin with, a complex of institutional problems.
Although an increasing amount of community adult education development involves small voluntary organisations, the crucial full-time staff involvement comes from the major adult education institutions.
Moreover, the funding for part-time staff involvement and administrative and clerical back-up is also provided from these institutional sources.
And yet these institutions are concerned only marginally with working-class adult education, and still less with the specific field of adult education for the unemployed.
Despite all their marked differences (in scale, perspective and perceived functions) most of these agencies have in common their commitment to institution-based and qualification-oriented programming.
Moreover, they are all, in different ways, linked both structurally and ideologically to existing patterns of provision and to the dominant culture and its assumptions.
Closely related to these institutional problems are the pedagogic concerns raised by the development of community adult education in general, and work with the unemployed in particular .
Is it possible — and if so is it desirable — that the institutional, professional control of the curriculum and of the whole teaching context should be shared with the participants?
How far is a ‘Freirean model’ of adult education a practicable proposition?
It is essential for radical adult educators to provide coherent and positive answers to such questions if a viable practice is to be constructed.
Most fundamental of all, however, is the question of the political context of adult education of this type, and the delineation of aims, objectives and relative priorities.
We need here to return to our discussion of the social purpose and socialist/community action models, in order to explore these problems in more depth.
Adult education for the unemployed, as with other areas of working-class adult education, must be concerned centrally with developing both individual intellectual awareness and collective community consciousness.
These general principles have long lain at the heart of the social purpose approach: and they are no less relevant today than in the 1900s.
Moreover, such educational concepts are integrally related to political commitments to a radical and decentralised democratic social and political structure.
If we are to produce a genuinely participative and educated democracy then adult education — untrammelled by ‘establishment ideology’— has a central role to play.
All this, however, is not enough.
In a society so deeply divided by class (and gender and race) inequalities, and increasingly dominated by the privatised technological culture of late capitalism, the social purpose orientation alone is now inadequate, however admirable it may have been in the past.
The ‘educational’ problems of the unemployed are but one dimension of a range of negative factors — psychological, economic, environmental, and so on.
And the unemployed themselves are but one section, albeit an important and prominent section, of the ‘disadvantaged’ in our society.
Problems of inequality and disadvantage are thus, in one sense, too big and too fundamental for education per se, let alone adult education, to resolve.
Nevertheless there are possibilities within the adult education system (some of which have been indicated, at least in their potential, earlier in this chapter).
If really significant progress is to be made, in the educational context, however, there must be radical changes at both the structural and pedagogic levels.
Structurally, adult education for the unemployed must be seen as part of a wider reorientation of priorities within the education system as a whole towards the ‘disadvantaged’.
Priority, in terms of funding, staffing and programming, must be given to the educational needs of the large majority of the population who do not at present have access to educational resources beyond minimum school leaving age.
Such a reorientation requires, first, political will, and, second, institutional restructuring (by, for example, universities and polytechnics in the higher education sector) to facilitate the sort of programming discussed in this chapter (and similar developments in analogous fields).
Pedagogically, there must be a similar change towards an outreach and needs-oriented educational delivery system.
Whilst this requires considerable political and structural change to achieve full success, potentially important beginnings can be made through educational programming that is based in the community, that recognises community needs, and is attractive and relevant to adults in the community.
To demonstrate the viability and utility of such approaches is a significant, though of course partial, advance towards the more macrocosmic political change.
What must be emphasised here is the absolute need to achieve such a reorientation if adult education with the unemployed and analogous work with other ‘disadvantaged’ sections of the population, is to move beyond a marginal and merely ‘symbolic’aspect of adult education provision.