

Christine's Hammer
She returned to the club about a half-hour later, but this time she was changing her approach.
This time, she had her angle.
She'd circled the block until she'd found the side alley where the stage door was located, and then after hiding her bag in a dark spot behind a big wheeled trash hopper she'd turned around and headed back to the coffee shop.
Now, carrying a cardboard tray loaded with teas and coffees and soft drinks cans, she stepped in again from the street and felt the silence of the alley as it clamped in around her.
At the far end was a place where the backs of four high buildings came together to form a small courtyard.
There was a single overhead lamp in cast iron and, looking up, by its light Lucy could see warehouse-style windows fitted with the exterior boxes of air-conditioning units, more windows with rotting frames, iron galleries, fire escapes, and a couple of high railed terraces with a hint of greenery in silhouette against the night sky.
Down at ground level, all but two of the courtyard's doorways had been roughly sealed with cinderblocks.
One of these was the loading bay for The Gilded Cage — or, as it apparently had once been called, the Ambassador Club — and the other was its stage door.
The loading bay had old roll-across galvanised doors, twisted and battered out of shape and just about held together by a new-looking chain sheathed in blue plastic.
The stage door was of plain wood, and carried a couple of handprints in primer where some impatient builder had  once slammed it shut.
There was a buzzer to the side, nothing much else.
She pressed the button, heard no sound, and waited with her tray held level at shoulder height.
Nothing happened for a while.
(And as Lucy was shuffling tensely and waiting for someone to respond, Joe Lucas was in his hotel room and trying to prise the cap off a fresh bottle of painkillers that he'd picked up, along with some disposable razors and a few other essentials, from a late-opening pharmacy on Piccadilly.
The cap had a childproof seal, and it was proving to be pretty Lucasproof as well.
The harder he worked at it, the less success he seemed to be having; his pain and frustration were combining to make him angry, and he flung the bottle down onto the bed.
A gentle voice behind him said Easy, Joe,and he spun around in terror and surprise.
The room was empty.
He put a hand to his head, and wondered what the hell was happening to him.
He could have sworn that the voice had been that of Christine Ashdown .)
The stage door opened.
She'd wondered who would answer.
The door was opened by a nondescript man in his forties wearing a brown overall.
He'd obviously walked some distance to respond to her buzz, and right now he was wondering why.
‘Don't hang about,’ she said.
‘The stuffs going cold.’
He looked at her cardboard tray, and his face cleared a little.
‘I thought Charlie had put a stop to all that,’ he said.
‘Are you kidding?’ she said.
‘Most of this is Charlie's order.’
He moved back and, only a moment later, she was inside.
The adrenaline was really pumping now.
She had a bad moment as she heard the alley door closing behind her, but she was already on her way down.
She'd entered a rough-looking hallway in which two flights of concrete stairs descended to a fire door.
Loops of wiring and cable  ran overhead, loosely tacked at intervals to the unpainted ceiling; it was the kind of Who cares, no-one'll see it protocol that had applied behind the scenes in the shopping mall where she'd landed her first Saturday job.
The next ten minutes would be critical.
Like a shark, she'd have to keep moving to survive…and some shark, Lucy thought as she shouldered her way through into some windowless corridor which echoed with the tinny sounds of the show playback, coming through on a cheap relay speaker.
She had to look as if she knew where she was going, move as if she had every right to be there; one challenge could ruin it all.
Ten minutes at the most to get the measure of the place, to get some idea of its layout and how it all ran, and to use the information to work out her next move in the game.
Not for the first time, she was going for broke; she tried to tell herself that nothing much bad could happen, at the worst she could be discovered and thrown out, but somehow the stakes seemed much higher.
Second chances didn't come by too often.
Mostly, they didn't come by at all.
Holding her tray high, she moved on down the passageway.
It was hot, airless, badly lit, and generally had a cramped below-decks feel to it.
There were no signs on the doors, no markers or anything, but fortunately most of them stood open.
The area was strictly functional, no frills and no great obsession with tidiness either; crates of empty bottles half-blocked the way by a storeroom, and there was a bicycle under the punch clock.
Two small offices and a staff locker room, all unoccupied; she gave a quick once-over to the noticeboard just inside the door, but it told her nothing.
She could hear ventilators pumping somewhere deeper in the complex, but they didn't seem to be equal to the job.
Wherever the action was, it was all taking place somewhere other than here.
So go for it , she told herself, and pressed on.
The grey vinyl floor gave way to carpet tiles.
Some stairs, and then around a corner where a staff pay phone hung under a grey plastic hood on the wall, and she was looking down what she guessed had to be the dressing-room corridor.
The paintwork was black, the walls covered in silver foil; each of a line of doorways blazed with about a thousand watts of brilliance and there was a smell of greasepaint and cleansing cream that she hadn't encountered since having a couple of bit parts in school plays.
She squared herself, and moved along to look into the nearest of the rooms.
The light came from a long mirror surrounded by unshaded bulbs.
She could feel their heat from the doorway.
On the table before the mirror stood half a dozen wigs on red velvet stands, the wigs themselves all Barbie-doll perfect and in colours unknown to nature.
The walls had long ago disappeared under a solid mass of posters and playbills, some of them so old that they'd faded completely.
Two young women were in the room; one was reading a magazine, the other was stuffing herself into a tight corset of black vinyl that appeared to be a part of a stylised nun's costume.
It was cut low across the top and high above the thighs, and for a moment Lucy was stopped short by the thought that Jesus, it looked hell to wear, but wouldn't it just kill 'em on the disco floor back home?
They both looked her way.
The one with the magazine, who appeared to be wearing a bathrobe over nothing, looked at her tray and said pleasantly, ‘Who's all that for?’
‘You, if you want it,’ Lucy said, and moved in.
Neither of them seemed to find her presence remarkable or unusual.
She slid in and around the one who was dressing, and set a couple of coffees down in what limited space she could see on the table.
Close-to and without their performance wigs, these two hardly seemed to connect with anyone that she'd seen out on the stage less than an hour before; then they'd been all front, carnival vamps, not so much real human beings as fantasy figures with hidden human operators.
Back here, they seemed pretty  approachable.
One of them said, ‘What do we owe?’
‘On the house.’
‘On Charlie ?’ the one in the bathrobe said incredulously, from which Lucy gathered that whoever Charlie might be, his reputation rested on something other than his generosity.
Well, kid, she thought.
It's time to shit or bust.
‘Not on Charlie,’ she said.
‘It's on me.
I want to ask you about Chrissie Ashdown.’
Their faces were polite, slightly puzzled blanks.
‘Christine Ashdown,’ Lucy said, feeling her heart begin to sink.
‘I think she may have worked here just over a year ago.’
‘We wouldn't have been here then,’ the one in the nun's costume said, snapping the last of her buckles.
‘There's quite a turnover.
Go see the show from out front, and then work out why.’
She smiled, briefly.
‘But it's work,’ she said, and she put on her head-dress, checked her black stockings, picked up her whip, and went out to prepare for her cue.
The other dancer said, ‘Thanks for the coffee,’ and returned her attention to the magazine.
As Lucy moved back out into the passageway, she met the returning tide from the last ensemble number onstage; they arrived in a rush, panting like horses and shedding their quasi-military costumes as they moved.
Everyone was in a hurry as they squeezed by; no-one seemed to notice her, and she didn't see much chance of getting their attention right now.
They charged into the other dressing rooms, gabbling as they started a quick change for another number.
Over the relay system Lucy could hear the filtered strains of Ain't Misbehavin' .
Every now and again the music would cut for a couple of seconds and there would be some faint, whispered phrase that would haunt its way down the wire, but she couldn't make out what was said.
Her depleted tray cooling fast, she moved on to see what else she could find.
Time was running out.
A couple of the doors further down the corridor were shut, and appeared to be locked.
The biggest open room was a wardrobe area with hundreds of costumes on moveable racks, two sewing machines and a makeup chair, but for the moment it was unattended.
The costumes were an assortment of the bright, the bizarre, and the impossibly sequinned.
Shower cubicles were steamy with recent use, but also unoccupied.
But then she saw an office at the corridor's end, and it was occupied.
A man sat with his back to the open doorway.
He was using the phone.
As she was approaching she saw his head turn slightly in awareness of her, which meant that there was no going back.
She went in.
Like everywhere else down here it was cramped and lightless, and there were books and files and heaps of dusty papers wherever she looked.
There was a shaded desk lamp by the telephone, and that was it.
Lucy wanted to back out, and now.
Immediately she'd sensed that this was wrong, that there was nothing for her in this office, and that she'd be at risk if she stayed around a moment longer than was necessary.
She reached over by the man's shoulder to set a styrene cup on his desk, and saw him look at it sharply.
‘From Charlie,’ she whispered as she turned to make her getaway, but he was fast.
He grabbed her wrist, and spun her back to face him.
His chair swivelled around to meet her.
‘I'm Charlie,’ he said.
‘Now, what the fuck do you think you're playing at?’
She swallowed, totally wrong-footed.
He was a big man in an unbuttoned dinner jacket, someone who could probably shave three times a day and still show a five o'clock shadow.
In fact, he was the man who'd escorted her to the door to mark the end of her first visit.
And he had pigs' eyes, was all that she could think as he said, ‘Let me call you back,’ into the phone and then cradled it before standing and, still holding her arm and not much caring about how it would hurt, moving to close the office door.
The tray went, along with her balance.
She had to twist around to follow him, and still her elbow and shoulder screamed; she fell back as he let her go, pushing her slightly to make her stagger.
‘Well?’ he said.
There was only the one way out, and he was blocking it.
She was in a trap within a trap, and she had no-one to blame other than herself.
She felt desperate, she felt empty.
And all that she could say was, ‘I'm Christine Ashdown's sister.’
There was silence for a while.
Then he eased away from the door, and back to the desk.
Lucy watched him uncertainly, turning with him as he moved.
He seemed to be out of scale with the rest of the room, as if his size and all of its angles had somehow been exaggerated.
He reached out and turned the lamp so that it shone onto her face, seating himself on the edge of the desk so that he could study her.
She winced when the unshaded light hit her, but she didn't look away.
‘I reckon you are, at that,’ he said, and there was a slight sense of wonder in his voice.
‘So what's the game?’
‘Turn the light away, and I'll tell you.’
He grinned.
Already she liked him even less.
If he'd broken her arm, she doubted that it would have altered his tone or his attitude in any way.
He reached out and gave the lamp a push.
and it swung away from her to shine onto the wall.
Charlie stayed where he was, now mostly in shadow.
She said, ‘Have you seen much of Chrissie, lately?’
It wasn't easy to make out his expression, but she was watching him as carefully as she could.
She saw no change, no glimpse of an unguarded thought before defences could go up; in fact, he seemed pretty well relaxed.
‘Not since she walked out,’ he told her.
Lucy wouldn't have staked anything on it, but he didn't appear to know that Christine was dead.
Lucy wasn't about to educate him, at least not yet.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘I just got into town and she said if ever I was here, I should look you up.’
Another moment went by, as he considered the thought.
She saw him glance down to where her cardboard tray had fallen
He said, ‘And why all this business?’
‘She told me you'd be a hard man to reach.’
He grinned again.
She could imagine the calculation in his eyes, like dull glass mirrors reflecting the action of some well-oiled clockwork.
‘All right,’ he said.
‘So you've reached me.
What do you want?’
‘The same deal as Christine got.’
Nothing happened for a moment, and in that moment she started to think that she'd over-reached herself; but then Charlie said, ‘This isn't some charity for runaways, you know,’ and she knew that she was still within the limits, if only just.
I know,’ she said.
‘It isn't charity that I'm looking for.’
‘I'll tell you what I'll do,’ Charlie said, standing and moving toward her.
‘I'll think about it.’
She tried not to flinch as he passed within arm's length, but he reached by her and re-opened the office door.
She had to restrain herself from dashing for it, almost in the fear that it would close again and that this time, it would be forever.
She said, ‘For how long?’
‘I said I'd think about it.
Go down to Wardrobe and see Josie.
She'll find you something to do.’
‘Is this a job?’
‘I'll see what I can slip you at the end of the week.
You want to call that a job, then it's a job.’
‘Thanks,’ she said.
‘You'd better mean it.
If you weren't Chrissie's sister, you'd be out on your arse in the alley.’
‘Understood,’ she said, and started to slide gratefully toward the doorway as Charlie moved over into his chair and picked up the phone again.
He started to dial.
‘But clear that shit up, first,’ he said, nodding toward her fallen tray and its spillage, and then he swung his chairback around to her as if she'd ceased to exist.
The shit went into a waste bin, and Lucy went into the Wardrobe room to wait.
Not bad , she thought with a fierce kind of glee that she knew she didn't dare to show.
Not bad at all .
She sat demurely on the edge of one of the room's more nondescript-looking chairs, knowing that this Josie, whoever she might be, would be her key to success or failure over the next few hours and maybe even the coming days.
So far, all that she knew of Josie was that she owned a big handbag.
After about five minutes a middle-aged woman appeared in the doorway and, seeing Lucy, stopped and frowned at her over the top of her glasses.
‘Are you Josie?’
Lucy said.
‘Who needs to know?’
‘Charlie sent me to give you a hand.’
Charlie was clearly no big deal as far as Josie was concerned.
‘What's he doing,’ she said, ‘fucking you, or hoping to?’
Lucy shrugged and said, ‘He can hope for as long as he likes.’
Which overcame the frown, and even drew the beginnings of a smile out of Josie.
Not a bad start.
Not bad at all.
Josie was a solidly-built woman, hefty but fit-looking, whose taste in clothes ran mostly to knitwear and slacks.
Lucy was later to learn that she attended lunchtime yoga  sessions on three days of the week.
She had dark curly hair with no sign of grey, and a certain shyness that could make her manner seem brusque.
Her father had been an army officer of fairly high rank, and she'd spent most of her early life in a military environment.
Her age was something, Lucy quickly deduced, that one could not enquire about and expect to survive.
There were two shows, at nine and at midnight.
The work consisted of laying out costumes in the appropriate dressing rooms in advance of the required changes, rescuing those from the previous number and returning them to Wardrobe, checking for damage, separating out for laundry.
On close inspection the various materials proved to be sweat-stained and much-repaired.
Josie seemed to be pretty well organised, the work fast and precise without being pressured.
The only mistakes were Lucy's own, and she quickly got to hear about them.
Her worst was when she got in the way; backstage timing sometimes had to be precise, and it was no place for someone who was still taking in the sights.
Between shows the girls dressed in sweatshirts and jogging shorts; some of them stayed in the dressing rooms and stretched out to sleep or read, others went to another room in the basement complex where they could watch TV.
Maurice, the male dancer, went out front to sit on a bar stool and be seen.
Josie seemed okay.
Not exactly forthcoming, but not averse to having someone around to talk to, either.
Lucy tried not to be pushy, and Josie slowly thawed.
‘How is Christine, these days?’ she said as she worked along the racks, pulling out the second set of changes for the show that was just about to start.
Lucy hadn't been a hundred per cent sure with Charlie, but here she felt certain.
Josie knew nothing of Christine's death.
As far as she was concerned, Christine had simply left town and never been heard from again.
Given the nature of the business, nobody would have expected her to get in touch.
So Lucy said, ‘She's taking it easy.’
‘Now, there's bright for you.
That's what I ought to be doing.
But I've been stuck in this line for twenty years, and I reckon I'll be stuck in it when I drop.’
‘All in the same place?’
‘Are you kidding?
I've done everything.
Rep, tours, big musicals…. though not so many of those.
This suits me for now.
It's regular and I don't have to travel.’
‘Were you ever a dancer?’
‘Once, for a while.
But you reach thirty in this game, and you're on the way out.
Some of these girls are sharper than I was.
They're making the money while they can, but they're planning ahead.’
‘You seem sharp enough to me,’ Lucy said, thinking how hard it was to find a way of guiding someone into telling you things that they'll assume you already know.
Josie looked at her, that over-the-glasses look again.
‘Not as sharp as I needed to be, though,’ she said.
‘I had an abortion go wrong.
This was way back before it was legal.
End of high kicks and handstands.’
‘I'm really sorry.’
‘I don't mind you knowing,’ Josie said, dumping the costumes into Lucy's arms and then picking out more.
‘Kids ought to know stuff like that.
Maybe you wouldn't get so many of them wasted before their time.’
‘It won't happen to me,’ Lucy said.
‘Glad to hear it,’ Josie told her.
So there it was, Lucy's first night in showbusiness.
The air heavy with sweat, greasepaint and burning dust, a lot of clutter and small talk, some haste, occasional flurries of panic, and long stretches of nothing much happening while the empty passageways echoed with relayed sound from the house pickup.
She saw everything except the show.
After the final number, when all the dancers came offstage whooping and whistling with relief to crowd into the showers, Lucy followed Josie around in a final inventory  of wigs and clothing and then generally cleared up ready for the next night's work.
It was around two in the morning and most of the performers had now dispersed to waiting cars and taxis.
In a great gesture of trust, Josie let her switch off the lights unsupervised.
When Lucy came out, Josie was on the pay phone at the corridor's end.
Seeing her, she covered the receiver and said, ‘Will you need a taxi?’
Lucy, feeling awkward, said, ‘I don't think so.’
‘Where are you staying?’
‘I'm not sure, yet.’
Josie turned away and finished her minicab booking, and then hung up and faced Lucy again.
‘You've got nowhere lined up?’ she said.
‘I've managed before.
It's not a problem.’
‘It's two o'clock in the morning.
You've got jailbait written all over you and you're proposing walking the West End without a place to stay.
Are you demented, or what?’
‘Do you think anyone would notice if I crashed out here?
I don't mind being locked in.’
‘There's a man with a Doberman comes around two or three times every night.
If you've ever fancied your chances as dogfood, go right ahead.’
‘There's other places.’
‘Name one.’
‘Hostels.’
‘They're full by nightfall, and you know it.
The kids they turn away end up sleeping in cardboard boxes by the river.
I can't believe that Chrissie would let you come down here without setting you up better than this.’
‘Chrissie's not involved,’ Lucy said stubbornly.
‘This is just me.’
‘Looking for what?’
Josie said, facing her squarely.
‘Good times and glamour?
That's just bullshit.
Go back home.’
‘I will.
But not just yet.’
They were almost shouting at one another, and both  seemed to realise it at the same time.
Embarrassed, each looked away.
‘You'd better come with me,’ Josie said then, with resignation.
‘I don't want to be a problem,’ Lucy said.
Josie met her eyes again.
Her gaze was dark, and hinted at some impossibly deep sense of pain; and for a moment Lucy felt a certain regret, if not shame, at the way that she seemed to be ready to manipulate any situation for whatever advantage she could get.
But only for a moment.
During the minicab ride to Josie's place, Lucy did a little mental stocktaking.
On the minus side, she'd blown a lot of money and received a couple of scares.
She hoped that she hadn't made an enemy out of Joe Lucas; she knew that what he'd done, he'd done for her and for the memory of Christine.
Lucy was no saint, but she could forgive him the rough handling.
She could even forgive him the talk about having her committed, now that that possibility was safely in the past and she was making progress on her own.
She'd show them.
She knew nothing of the future other than that it was an inhospitable fog that no-one had any choice but to enter, but she was certain that there was a scene all laid-out and waiting for her where she brought in the name of the man — or woman — who'd first talked to Chrissie and then run her down.
The fog would clear, and some daylight would enter.
Life would be different.
Christine could rest.
Lucy wondered if Christine was watching her now.
Wondered if she could see how well she was doing.
Because that was the plus side — the progress she'd made, on the slenderest of evidence.
Better than the police, better than anyone.
She was Christine's hammer, and she was unstoppable.
From here she'd get to know those whom Christine had known, perhaps find out where she'd lived; enter her skin, almost as if Christine were to walk again while Lucy became the ghost.
The two of them, closer in death than they'd ever been in life.
She'd rewrite Christine's story from the inside.
And this time, the ending would be different.
The cab made a turn through a narrow archway in a row of buildings.
She hadn't been paying much attention to the journey, and didn't have any idea of where they were; the archway led into a long courtyard with a cobbled surface and small, squeezed-in houses to either side.
It was a mews; she'd never been in one before, but she knew what it was.
The buildings would once have been the stables to the bigger houses out on the street, but now the bigger houses would all have been subdivided long ago and the stables leased off and converted.
Simon Templar had lived in a mews.
Lucy had been reading The Saint from her father's shelves when all of the other girls had their noses in Black Beauty .
The thought of living in a mews cottage had been one of her daydreams, like living in a penthouse.
Modesty Blaise had lived in a penthouse, and Travis McGee lived on a boat called the Busted Flush .
Nobody, but nobody, had ever seemed to live in a boring house in the suburbs with a swing in the back garden.
She looked the place over while Josie was paying off the cab.
Beyond its roofline, the backs of the big houses looked down.
An exterior stairway led to the entrance at first-floor level, with another storey above; these would have been the groom's quarters over the stable itself.
In some of the other houses the stable was now a double garage, but in this one it had been blocked in and a window installed.
It looked impossibly quaint, although nothing like as appealing as those far-off places of her imagination.
It wasn't a big place, but it didn't look cheap.
She wondered how Josie could afford it.
Perhaps The Gilded Cage was a better employer than it appeared.
A lantern burned above the stairway, in the same wrought iron as the handrail.
Josie stood under it as she fished out her keys and then, as she opened the door, signalled to Lucy for silence.
They went in.
A couple of low lights were burning in different rooms, lit as if in anticipation of Josie's return.
Lucy wondered by whom…a husband?
But Josie wore no rings, and had talked of nobody.
Boyfriend or lover?
Yeah, perhaps, Lucy thought.
Who could say for sure?
Maybe old people could still get up to that kind of thing.
Still in silence, Josie beckoned to her to follow.
The carpets were deep and expensive, and they made no sound as they moved to the end of the hall.
Lucy glanced into a couple of the rooms as they passed.
The house was immaculate and had been furnished, as far as she could tell, like something out of a design magazine.
She caught a movement in the corner of her eye, and looked up.
Someone was watching them from the top of the stairs.
Lucy's first impression was of the robe that she wore; it was either silk or satin, she couldn't be certain.
She was tall, slender, thirty-plus; she had long hands, red hair, and the kind of class that could make a shopgirl weep with envy.
The woman looked down on them for a moment; not seeming to see Lucy at all, she was looking at Josie.
Her face was hard to make out in the half-light.
After a moment she turned abruptly, and moved away.
Lucy glanced at Josie, wondering what the story was and what her place in it might be.
Josie was watching the space where the woman had been.
The light was soft and one-sided, Josie's eyes were bright and clear.
Lucy saw sadness in them.
A sense of inevitable damage, inadvertently done.
And then Josie whispered, ‘Follow me,’ and started down the carpeted stairway to the lower level.
This was the spare room, the room that had once been a garage, and it was noticeably colder than the rest of the house.
It had books, records and unsorted bric-a-brac, and a foam chair that folded out in three sections to make a single bed of sorts.
Josie disappeared for a couple of minutes and then reappeared with some pillows and a duvet.
Lucy said, ‘Did Chrissie ever stay with you?’
Josie glanced over the arrangements, as if checking for anything that she may have missed.
‘No,’ she said.
‘Chrissie could afford better than this.
I'll see you in the morning.’
‘What time?’
‘Not too early.’
When Josie had gone, Lucy closed the door and looked around.
It didn't much matter that she was in the junkroom of someone else's home and that her position here was uncertain.
At least for tonight, she had privacy and she was secure.
The months since she'd left her father's house had been tough in a number of ways; she'd known loneliness a lot of the time, solitude hardly at all.
Opportunities to relax and let her guard down, even if only for a few hours, had been rare.
She wondered what they were saying about her, up at the top of the house, as she undressed and laid her clothes out before sliding under the duvet in her underwear.
Kind things, she hoped.
It wasn't only because she didn't want to trail damage amongst those who'd helped her; partly it was that calculating element in her mind again, that perpetual level of awareness that was tuned to seek out and recognise any opportunity that she could take to keep her in the game and moving.
Just like a shark , she thought for the second time that night, and the image didn't entirely displease her.
She hadn't switched off the light.
But now she felt too good to move.
She'd stir in a while, before she fell asleep.
She thought about Christine.
She wondered where she was.
If she was watching, and whether she'd seen Lucy's progress.
Her dark sister, the unquiet spirit, everyone's back turned against her but Lucy's.
Perhaps, if she waited for a while, Christine might come to her again.
And, still waiting, she drifted into sleep with the light undimmed.
Joe Lucas' new room was hardly better than his first.
It overlooked the street, it was too hot, and the people on the other side of the wall had been watching the hotel's cable channel late and loud so that he'd had to go around and hammer on their door.
The door hadn't opened, but there hadn't been another sound out of them for the rest of the night.
It hadn't made any difference.
Even before it was light, he dressed and went out.
The last couple of days had been mild, but at this hour there was no mistaking the imminence of winter.
He could feel its bite.
He wandered around the streets in the heart of the city, past darkened buildings with odd floors of offices lit, ready, and empty.
What life he saw, was all at street level; dawn risers moving stiffly, holding carry-out coffees from early-morning takeaways with the delicacy of rare isotopes.
Most of the store windows were already given over to Christmas displays in silver and white, whilst around behind his hotel, down-and-outs were sleeping over hot air vents in the pavement.
Outside a big store on Regent Street he saw an elderly woman hurriedly changing old clothes in a doorway.
Back in the hotel's dancehall-sized breakfast room, he sat alone amongst a couple of hundred empty tables.
In about an hour they'd be forming lines in the lobby outside, but for now he had the buffet almost to himself.
It was a pity that he didn't have much of an appetite.
His bruises  were fading, and no longer such a problem; the problems lay elsewhere.
Afterwards he went upstairs, hung out the Do Not Disturb sign, and lay watching Sesame Street until the world outside had come fully into life.
He had a few contacts in the Metropolitan force.
He a attended courses, and on a couple of occasions he'd travelled down with another officer to collect prisoners.
It hardly made him a frequent visitor, but it gave him a few numbers to ring.
When he started phoning around, he played it straight in every respect apart from one.
He let everyone think that he was calling from his own area, and not from the middle of their territory.
‘No, nothing specific on the cards,’ he'd tell them.
‘It's just background I need at the moment.’
Most of what he heard he already knew, but still he made notes.
They weren't encouraging.
Young kids, some of them not even teenagers, were arriving all the time, mostly for reasons that they hadn't thought through or couldn't express.
The juveniles could be brought into a place of safety and passed along to one of the agencies for intensive counselling, but the rest of them — those over eighteen, and who were neither obviously offending nor mentally ill — were free agents.
Mostly they'd make for the West End and meet others like themselves; they'd pick up survival information, get oriented within the subculture that they'd entered, and learn where the free food could be picked up.
They'd haunt the alleys behind bakeries, they'd help themselves from uncollected deliveries, they'd stick around on the embankment for midnight handouts from the Salvation Army and the Krishna Temple.
Some slept rough, the more streetwise would find their way onto somebody's floor or into a squat…
Hackney or Lewisham, somewhere not too far out.
They never went too far out.
The centre of town seemed to draw them back like a magnet.
Certain doors stood open, particularly for the girls.
It  might take a while for the contacts to happen, but they'd happen.
Drugs were a bigger hazard than sex.
Hostess work in some of the clubs involved little more than chiselling money out of tourists for fake champagne, and the money that changed hands for street assignations almost invariably led to an instant disappearance with no follow-through.
But hang out for long enough, and something illegal was bound to be made available.
Most of the kids would be pretty unworldly, and unequipped to deal with what was on offer.
They'd see a free sample and a temporary escape, and only later would the outlines of the cage become apparent.
That was how many of them got into the peep shows, selling off their self-respect in order to finance their habit.
After Joe had hung up, he stared at the window for a while.
He heard the housekeeper's cart go by outside the room.
Then he called Jack Ashdown.
‘Jack,’ he said, ‘it's me.’
‘I tried to get you.
Line was busy.
Any news?’
‘Nothing since last night.
Has she called you?’
‘Not yet.’
‘That's it, then,’ Joe said, and he lay back on the bed with the receiver to his ear and the handset held on his chest.
‘She's got her money, what does she care?
We'll hear nothing until it runs out, and then she'll put the tap on you again.
God knows when that will be.’
‘She's not like that, Joe.
She's not a bad kid.’
‘No?’
Joe said.
He'd been beaten up, lied to, and left flat on his back in the Underground.
He reckoned he'd earned the right to be cynical.
‘No, she's just obsessed.
She promised that she'd keep in touch and I know that she will.’
‘All right, Jack, point taken.
But look at it from my angle.
I'm on the spot, here, and I'm making no progress.
You've got to give me something to work with.’
‘I won't set her up in another trap.
One time was once too often.
There's got to be some trust involved.’
‘Christ, Jack, whose side are you on?’
‘I didn't know it was a matter of taking sides, Joe,’ Ashdown said with a gentleness that was almost a reprimand.
Joe held back his anger.
It wouldn't help.
‘Do one thing,’ he said.
‘If she calls you again, persuade her to meet me somewhere.’
Now it was Ashdown's turn to be disbelieving.
‘I can see her going for that,’ he said.
‘Persuade her, Jack.
It'll be above-board, the whole thing.
She can pick the time, the place, she can set it up however she wants.
I'll talk to her and we'll try to work something out.’
‘What if she won't?’
‘You'd better make sure that she does, Jack.
You're not doing it for me, you're doing it for her.
She's so damned intent on following in Chrissie's footsteps…do you want to see her end up in a box, as well?’
‘There's no call for that kind of talk,’ Ashdown said, clearly hurt, but Joe didn't back off.
‘No?’ he said.
‘You ought to be where I am.
You ought to hear what I've been hearing.
If you really don't think she's in any danger, then I don't know what else I can say to you.’
There was silence on the line.
Then Ashdown said, ‘I'll try.’
‘Trying's not good enough,’ Joe said.
‘Do it.
I'll call again later.’
And then he hung up.
Lucy crawled out of bed around lunchtime, found her way up to the shower while Josie could be heard moving around in the kitchen, and couldn't resist leaving aside her own hard soap and supermarket shampoo in order to freeload a few squirts and squeezes of the gels, mousses and lotions that stood on the tiled windowsill.
The bathroom was tiny, but well-designed.
Her last bathroom back in the squat had been mouldy, iced-up in winter, and mostly decorated with the husks of dead bugs in spiderwebs.
Water would sometimes come through the one working tap and when it ran, it ran brown.
Josie was alone in the kitchen, reading a trade newspaper at the breakfast bar over a glass of hot lemon juice and some wholemeal toast.
She'd said something about being careful with her blood sugar; nothing as serious as diabetes, but something she had to watch.
Lucy reckoned that it was just some middle-aged woman's thing, and left it at that.
Josie waved toward the refrigerator and Lucy took her at her word, beginning with a plate of leftover ham.
Until Charlie paid her at the end of the week, Lucy would again be in her usual flat-broke condition.
Josie's mood seemed okay, which suggested to Lucy that any problems that her presence may have caused must now have been smoothed over.
The woman that she'd seen last night at the top of the stairs was nowhere around, and Lucy knew better than to ask.
At a guess, she owned the house.
Beyond that, it would be tactless to enquire.
Over the countertop, Lucy said, ‘Did you ever know where Christine lived?’
That look, over the glasses.
‘Didn't she tell you?’
‘You know how it is.
Unless you're familiar with a place, the name means nothing.
She probably told me and it didn't stick.
I'd never been to London then.’
‘Whereas now,’ Josie said with the trace of a smile, ‘you're an old hand.’
‘Right.’
‘Well,’ Josie said, turning her page and then refolding the newspaper to keep it manageable, ‘I couldn't tell you for sure.
It wasn't cheap, though, I remember that.’
‘I didn't realise Charlie paid so well.’
‘Charlie pays as little as he can get away with.
Look, I've arranged for you to stay with us a while longer.
But do me a favour.
Don't be tempted to look on it as anything permanent.’
This was a better start to the day than even Lucy could have hoped.
She said, ‘That's great, Josie.
Thanks.
And don't worry.’
Lucy spent most of the next couple of hours in the ground-floor utility room just behind the room where she'd slept, sitting on the tiles against the wall and reading back numbers of magazines while her washing tumbled around in the Zanussi.
Her fringe had a tendency to fall over her eyes, and she had to keep blowing at it to knock it aside.
Tonight she'd try to find out which, if any, of the other employees had been working at the club when Christine had been there.
Also, she wondered if the taxi firms kept any kind of record of their more regular late-night destinations; if she had to rely on drivers' memories then there wouldn't be much hope, since on the evidence of the previous night they'd mostly be part-timers with a high turnover.
They set out for the club toward the end of the afternoon.
Josie said that she didn't usually get in until around six, but that there were a few extra jobs that she wanted to finish off; Lucy had the feeling, but didn't say so, that the  main point of the exercise was probably to get her out of the way before the slender red-haired woman arrived home.
If that was the case, she didn't mind.
Whatever they had going, it was their business and none of hers, and if it wouldn't lead her toward Christine then she wasn't even interested.
(And then she thought, But how do I know that for sure?
How well had she known her sister in adult life, after all?
And with the vague, uneasy sense that, having forced the door open a little way, the country on the other side might prove a lot stranger than she'd ever imagined, she walked on in subdued silence for a while.)
But the silence didn't last.
Out through the archway at the end of the mews, a couple of turns, and Josie told her that they were on Harley Street.
Harley Street, the Mecca of big-money medicine.
To Lucy it looked drab and overdone, lined with cars bumper-to-bumper like every other London street that she'd seen since she arrived.
The only difference was that many of the cars were big limousines, in contrast to the bikes and the pieces of bikes chained to railings that were her last, hazy recollection of the hospital.
She spotted a couple of receptionists in designer whites, coats slung around their shoulders against the chance of a late afternoon shower; and then, because she was looking more closely now, she spotted a couple of doctors in conversation on the steps before their town house offices.
They had to be doctors.
They wore expensive suits and had the general air of men who'd found the secret key to the money pump and were cranking its handle for all they were worth.
Now they were crossing Oxford Street, according to Josie.
The distant city of Lucy's dreams was becoming steadily demystified.
She felt an unaccountable sense of loss.
‘Boyfriend?’
Josie said when Lucy returned from the pay phone at the end of the corridor.
They were midway through the first show and just about everyone was out on stage, giving ten minutes of comparative quiet before another storm of quick-changes and running repairs.
Just enough time for a reverse-charge call, and an excuse for getting away if the conversation began to get awkward.
‘My dad,’ Lucy said.
‘I'll bet he's worried about you.’
‘I told him not to.’
‘Yeah,’ Josie said disbelievingly, ‘and that'll make all the difference in the world.
Does he know where you are?’
‘Not exactly,’ Lucy said evasively.
‘He doesn't much approve of what I'm doing.’
‘Working backstage in a tit show?
Now what on earth could be wrong with that?’
‘I don't mean this.
I mean being on my own, travelling down here the way that I did.
He sits thinking about everything that could go wrong and I suppose it just eats him up.’
‘The man is no fool.’
‘I know he isn't.
But neither am I.’ Lucy sat on one of the big property baskets.
It was old and well-worn, and it creaked under her weight.
‘He wants me to meet somebody and I'm not sure I should.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because the last time I did, he tried to drag me home.
I'll go home someday…but in my own time.
And not like that.
What do you think I should do?’
Josie fluffed out some of the tail-feathers on a costume for the upcoming number, and gave the matter some thought.
Without actually giving her the details — and still keeping back the crucial fact of Christine's death, which would have changed the tone of their conversations completely — Lucy had been able to give Josie some idea of her home situation and of the problems that she'd caused with actions that she'd felt to be right.
Working closely as they were, it was almost inevitable.
But consideration  apart, Josie's answer was the one that she'd probably have given anyway.
‘If it was me,’ she said, ‘I'd meet whoever he asked me to.
You're giving him a tough time, it's not fair to make it tougher.
Pick somewhere public and stay out of his reach if you're worried about being forced.
But I don't know why I'm telling you this, because you're going to do exactly what you want to anyway.’
Lucy's first reaction to her father's pleading had been No chance .
More than anything, she remembered her feeling of helplessness, the total loss of control, as Joe had dragged her along toward the station.
And yet…
And yet, even though her father had talked to her like one adult to another, as if at last he was ready to acknowledge that she'd grown up and was making her own decisions, she'd sensed the undercurrent of despair in what he was saying.
She didn't know how to make him understand that, in a sense, she was doing this partly for him.
The last thing that she wanted to do was to add to his pain.
But how could she make him aware of that, let him hear from someone else how well she was doing, without putting herself at risk again from Joe?
It was too risky.
She wouldn't consider it.
And as the house playback signalled the end of the number, she picked up a pen and some scrap paper and went out to collect orders for interval food and coffee.
It had been a forgotten tradition, but Lucy's availability had revived it.
She'd made her decision.
So now she had to stop thinking about it.
Lucy wasn't entirely sure what to make of Josie.
In years she was senior to everyone including the infrequently seen Charlie; as mother hen to the dancing girls she'd taken Lucy in and allowed her to feel at home in a matter of hours.
She'd even given her a bed in her own place, brought her in like a waif from the streets in a gesture of stern and unsentimental charity.
Hadn't given her a key, but Lucy supposed that there were limits.
She talked freely, didn't treat Lucy like a child, and told her stories of old times in long-forgotten venues.
But something was being held back.
It wasn't just some inevitable reserve because of the age difference, and it wasn't just that she was an intensely private person whose public persona didn't tell the whole story.
Lucy knew it because whenever she started to talk about Christine, she'd realise after a couple of minutes that they'd moved on and were now talking about something else.
As time went by, she grew more certain.
Josie knew more about Christine than she was saying.
Ask the wrong questions or apply the wrong kind of pressure, and she'd close up like a clam; Lucy only wished that she could have more of the patience required to play a waiting game.
After she'd returned with the coffee shop order and sorted out everybody's change, Josie said to her, ‘Take a seat in the chair.’
‘Why?’
‘If you flick your hair out of your eyes once more, I'll scream.
Who cut it for you?’
‘I did,’ Lucy said, neglecting to add that the job had been performed in front of a dusty mirror with rusting scissors and in the worst kind of light imaginable.
Josie said, ‘The term that springs to mind is ‘self-inflicted’.
Get in the chair, and I'll tidy it up.’
Josie switched on the lights for the department's makeup mirror, and Lucy winced as the brightness hit her.
She sat in the chair, and Josie slung a nylon barber's gown around her.
Lucy said, ‘Have you done hairdressing?’
‘I've done a bit of just about everything there is,’ Josie said, lifting sections of Lucy's hair and watching to see how it fell.
Then she took out a comb, and began to set it into some kind of order.
Lucy, resisting the temptation to blow at her fringe, said, ‘You sound like you've had a great life.’
‘You think so?’
‘Yeah.
All your stories.’
‘There's some old Chinese curse about living through interesting times, isn't there?
The best stories always come from the worst experiences.’
‘But say you had to do it all over again.
What would you change?’
Josie laid down her comb, and picked up a couple of big plastic clips from a box on the makeup table.
‘I'd probably do everything exactly the same.
But I wouldn't go and see Ziegfeld .’
She swept back a handful of Lucy's hair and pinned it up, first on one side and then on the other; but before she'd reached for the scissors to begin, Charlie's face appeared around the doorway.
‘Josie?’ he said.
‘Got a minute?’
Then he disappeared.
Moving around her, Josie said, ‘Don't mess about with this.
It's all kind of raggy, but I think I can get it to look like a hairstyle again.’
And then, leaving Lucy in the chair with the gown around her, she followed Charlie.
Lucy gave it a moment, tugged the gown free from  underneath, and then moved in silence to the doorway.
They'd gone into Charlie's office, at the end of the corridor.
He'd closed the door behind them, but he hadn't closed it all the way.
It stood open about an inch.
Lucy glanced back.
No-one was watching.
She moved closer, and tried to listen.
‘If it's a problem ,’ Charlie was saying, ‘get the kid to lend you a hand .’
‘It's no problem ,’ she heard Josie say.
‘And I want her left out of it .’
And that was all she heard, because abruptly the door began to open.
Lucy scooted back to Wardrobe, dived into the chair, and fumbled with the gown to get it tied.
She was panicky and totally unco-ordinated.
Josie walked in before she'd finished.
‘Too tight?’ she said.
And Lucy said, ‘A little.’
So then Josie retied the gown, and said, ‘Now it's decision time.
Do we go with the black roots, or the bleach job?’
Lucy looked at her own face in the mirror.
‘I want it how Chrissie had hers,’ she said.
Spooky.
Lucy stared at herself in the mirror.
Something like this had happened to her once before, but now the feeling was even stronger.
It would take only a minor leap of faith, a moment of transcendence, to believe that Christine Ashdown stared back.
Younger, perhaps, and less well travelled, but there in all her essential details.
Josie seemed to sense it, too.
But she turned away.
‘That's about as much as I can salvage,’ she said.
‘It looks great,’ Lucy said.
‘Thanks.’
Josie glanced back over her shoulder, not at the mirror but at Lucy herself.
‘Yeah,’ she said.
‘It doesn't look too  bad.
Listen, do you want to knock off early tonight?’
‘We'll have all the stuff to put away.’
‘I managed on my own before you came along, madam,’ Josie said, not really offended but acting the part.
‘And I've got to stick around and do a couple of things.’
‘How will I get in?’
She hesitated.
‘I'll give you the key,’ she said.
‘And I'll phone Pamela to tell her what's happening.
Don't worry, you probably won't even see her.’
‘Whatever you say.’
Josie rummaged in her oversized handbag, finally bringing out a set of keys on a ring.
She fiddled around for a while, and cursed and muttered before she managed to get one detached.
Lucy waited patiently.
She'd feel awkward, alone in the house with this strange other woman who tolerated her presence at best and to whom she hadn't spoken, but she'd handled worse.
The little that she'd been able to piece together was that Pamela was a barrister, that the house did, as Lucy had suspected, belong to her, and that she and Josie had been together for at least five years and probably longer.
Josie held out the key.
‘I'm trusting you, now,’ she said.
‘I know,’ Lucy said.
‘Thanks.’
And all that she could think about was, why did Josie want her out of the way?
Shortly after midnight, Josie handed Lucy her taxi fare and told her to scram.
Lucy collected her stuff together and put on her coat and said goodnight, but she didn't leave.
Once out of Josie's sight, she turned and pushed her way through the double blackout doors leading directly into the backstage area.
Non-performers were supposed to stay out, but as far as she could tell nobody paid the rule much heed.
This was great.
You could see everything that wasn't  visible out front; the braced wooden frames of the canvas flats, the angle irons and stage weights that held everything in place, the fact that the ceiling was hollow and the space went on up to about another fifteen feet above, the gap crossed by a catwalk and a lot of cabling.
The sound system's speakers were like upended steamer trunks, one on top of another; standing so close, the volume gave her a sensation in her ears like that of tearing paper and she experienced a few moments of sensory overload before she recognised the tune as New York, New York .
Behind the golden curtain was a four-foot gap, and then the back wall of the basement.
It was kind of exciting to realise that another three strides would put her out in front of everybody, almost like looking over a low rail at a mile-long drop.
Someone waited in the wings.
One of the artistes, as she'd heard Charlie call them.
She seemed to sense Lucy's presence, and turned her head to look; then she smiled, and Lucy's uncertainty diminished.
The girl's name, according to the house advertising, was Coco Wunderbar, but everyone in the dressing rooms called her Jeanette.
Lucy found herself mouthing like a mill worker to make herself understood over the noise, which was louder than any machinery.
‘Am I okay, here?’ she said, and Coco/Jeanette said, ‘Sure,’and pointed to a place alongside her where Lucy could stand and see a part of the performance without any risk of being seen or getting in the way.
They stood together, watching the New York routine for a while.
Top hats and canes, spangles, lots of high-stepping.
The dancers, from what Lucy had seen, were all pretty good in their way; she'd even begun to develop a liking for Maurice, who'd winked at her in the corridor earlier.
It was the show itself that was garbage.
She couldn't see much of it because the thrust stage ran onward out of sight…but you didn't have to down the entire egg to know that it was rotten.
Nobody could remember who'd staged it originally; none of the originals were left.
Jeanette leaned toward her and said close to her ear, ‘You're Chrissie Ashdown's sister, aren't you?’
Lucy's eyes widened, but she tried not to betray her surprise.
‘Can you tell?’
‘You look just like her.’
Something in Lucy's heart warmed.
‘Did you know her well?’
Jeanette shrugged.
‘You know how it is.
She had a life outside.
We all have.’
They watched for a while longer.
Or rather, Lucy pretended to watch as her mind raced.
She was seeking the next angle, the next approach, knowing that she'd have at the most a couple of minutes to make her pitch.
She said, ‘How did you get into this?’
‘Usual way,’ Jeanette said.
‘Ads and auditions.
It's just another dancing job.
Worse than some, better than most.’
‘I couldn't do it.’
Jeanette smiled.
‘It's only showbiz.
It comes off with the makeup.’
‘No, I mean, I couldn't do it.
I'm the worst dancer in the world.’
Jeanette gave her a quick once-over.
‘You've got a good body.’
‘Until I move it around.’
And that was as far as she got because the crash-bang music gave the final crash, the stage lights held for a moment and then cut to blackout, and there was a smattering of couldn't-care-less applause from the front of the house.
A tiny green bulb winked on, wired to the back of the flat at eye level, and Jeanette McArdle became Coco Wunderbar and stepped out into the darkness.
Lucy was left alone.
After a few moments, the dancers from the previous number could be seen filing out from behind the golden curtain, having exited on the far side of the stage; their faces were slack and tired, their breathing hard.
Apart from their costumes and the props that they carried, they might have been factory workers anywhere.
The next number was starting.
There was a spyhole in one of the flats.
Lucy had to stand on tiptoe to use it, but when she did it gave her a partial view of the clientele at their tables.
Most of them were watching.
Some of them weren't.
Almost all of them probably had something else on their minds.
Lucy didn't think of herself as deep.
She'd certainly never reflected on the nature of performance before.
She'd gone through all the usual phases: rock fan magazines, writing to film stars, sometimes getting back a photo with a printed signature, usually not.
But here, for the first time, she realised something essential, something that had never occurred to her when composing those letters; that a performance was something that a person did, and not something that they were.
But not to the faces out there, on the wrong side of the lights.
She'd crossed over, they hadn't.
She looked at them, and saw dupes.
Happy in their illusions, probably, but dupes all the same.
When the show finally ended and the house lights came up, Lucy found herself a backstage corner and waited for a while longer.
Out on the dance floor, the evening ended with disco music and strobe lighting.
The reflections flickered on her like a distant storm.
And then, when she felt that she'd waited long enough, she quietly made her way back toward the dressing rooms.
She'd almost mistimed.
Many of the dancers were already showered and changed and out of the building.
Two of the dressing rooms stood empty but the door to Wardrobe had been closed.
She could hear voices in there, one of them Charlie's.
But this time the door had been closed all the way, and she couldn't make out what was being said.
She retreated to one of the dressing rooms across the corridor, switched off the lights, and set the door to give her an angle of view without much risk of being seen.
Again, she waited.
And about ten minutes later, the door opened.
Charlie came out first.
Someone came out behind him, but Charlie was blocking her.
He was turning to speak to the other person, who appeared to be wearing an evening gown; as her hand moved, there was a glint of dress jewellery.
Way in the background, Lucy could see Josie with her back to the door as she cleaned up around the makeup chair.
The woman said, ‘Who pays the taxi?’
And Charlie said, ‘The taxi's taken care of, don't worry about it.
Just watch out for the dress and don't get it damaged.’
Charlie moved on.
The woman followed.
For a moment Lucy had thought that it was Jeanette McArdle, but then she realised that it wasn't.
She'd seen Jeanette close-to, and she'd seen her scrubbed clean and ready for home.
This woman was broadly similar, that was all.
Mistakeable at a distance, but only then.
‘Who am I tonight?’
Lucy heard her say.
She barely sounded interested.
Charlie's voice was dwindling down the corridor.
‘He'll call you Coco,’ he said.
FOR SALE
Ibanez Roadshow Bass Guitar.
With amp and practice speaker.
Genuine reason for sale.
Gary, Box 24.
It was two days later at eleven in the morning.
and Soho Square wasn't anything like as crowded as Lucy might have hoped.
For a while she hovered in the doorway of a film company building and watched the steady but sparse traffic of shoppers, office messengers and business types who were using the pathways through the square's railed park as a shortcut on their way to somewhere else…but then a gold-braided security guard stepped out and asked if he could help her, and it was clear that she was being told to move on.
She was nervous.
There were plenty of gates and there were numerous ways out of the square, and the park itself was barely a couple of hundred yards across; just another backstreet pigeon trap with no feature other than a strange half-timbered lodge near its centre to make it unique, but still she hesitated to enter.
Her choice of ground, no chance of surprise…
But still she hesitated.
Joe Lucas was waiting by the lodge, around on the other side.
He saw her walking toward him, but he didn't move.
When she stopped, it was with a distance of at least ten feet between them.
Call it a safety zone, she thought.
Joe noted her caution, and nodded.
He didn't seem offended, he didn't exactly appear contrite.
But he seemed different.
‘Hi,’ he said.
‘This is as close as I want to get, Joe.’
‘Understood,’ he said.
‘I want to apologise.’
‘For what?’
‘Grabbing you like I did.
It was entirely wrong.
All I can say is that it was for the best of reasons.’
She studied him, warily.
There was no mistaking his sincerity.
She said, cautiously, ‘I can see that.’
‘It won't happen again,’ he said.
‘All I want to do now is talk.’
‘What about?’
‘You.
Your sister.
Where we go from here.’
‘I'm not going anywhere until I find out what happened, Joe,’ she warned him, but he was already nodding in agreement.
‘Maybe we can work together on that,’ he said.
‘Whatever you may think, I'm really not against you.
And…’ he looked down at the ground, as if he'd suddenly become embarrassed.
‘I think you probably know how I felt about Christine.’
She didn't know what to say.
But Joe didn't let the remark hang, as if it was something that he'd felt compelled to let her know but didn't want to discuss any further; he said, ‘Are we going to stay here, or move somewhere warmer?
Your choice.’
Her intention had been to move nowhere — that everything necessary would be said here, and then she'd back off and disappear faster than Joe could follow.
But so much seemed to have changed…and Joe would make a much better ally than an enemy, if only he could accept the situation as it stood.
Also it wasn't exactly pleasant right here, with a November sharpness in the air that had arrived almost as a  response to the Christmas lights and store displays that were just about everywhere now.
So she said, ‘We can go somewhere.
But you don't touch me, you don't even come near me.
And if you start to talk about me giving up and coming home with you, it ends right there.’
‘Agreed,’ Joe said, and held up his hands as if to say,See, no deception…would I lie to you ?
Lucy, still wary, watched him for a moment longer.
After what had happened last time, he'd need to earn her trust before he could assume it.
But this was a start.
Soho at this hour was an area of delivery vans, and of pavements that were wet with hosing-down.
Cold as it was, the sun was shining weakly.
Conversation was difficult because she walked several yards behind Joe, and always crossed the street at least two cars' lengths away.
Joe indicated a corner pub, newly opened-up for the day's business, and asked her if this would be okay.
She looked it over, saw that it had at least two exits, and gave him a cautious yes.
Even then, there was a moment in the doorway when he could have reached her.
He'd slowed to step around some soft drinks crates-the bar, although open, seemed only half-ready for business — and their arms almost touched as she came up behind him without realising.
Her eyes were still adjusting from the brightness outside and she felt a surge of panic at her mistake, but he did nothing.
He didn't even seem to have noticed the opportunity.
And so, relaxing her guard just a little, she followed him inside.
Somebody must have forgotten to lock a window one night, and designers had managed to get in.
Now the interior was all of artificially roughened timber, raw beams and panelling with a sawdust-covered floor, and the lights were piss-coloured imitation gas lamps that were almost too dim to see by.
Joe winced at the look of it.
Lucy thought that it looked fine.
They sat at a corner table, a slab of mahogany on an iron base that had once belonged to a Singer sewing machine.
Joe toyed absently with the rail around its edge as they talked.
He was starting to appear distinctly shopworn, Lucy noted; he seemed to have bought himself a new shirt, but a dip-through in a hotel washbasin didn't exactly make for the best possible finish.
His clothes were all out of shape, and so was he.
‘You were right about what happened to her,’ he admitted.
‘I don't know why I held out for so long.’
This wasn't easy for him, she could see.
‘It's not the kind of thing you'd want to be true,’ she said.
‘I'll set wheels in motion,’ he promised.
‘Get someone to look at the new evidence you turned up.
If that happens,then will you consider coming home?’
‘Perhaps,’ she said.
He gripped the rail, so hard it must have hurt.
‘I don't know what I can tell you,’ he said.
‘I'm not making any promises that I know won't be kept.
All I can say is, I'll do my best.
Even if it means hauling in every driver in the country.’
‘It's nothing to do with the lorry drivers now, Joe.’
He looked up, sharply.
‘Why?
What else do you know?’
‘I've found out where she worked.
I've met some of the people she worked with.
That's what I've been doing over the last few days.’
He sat back.
‘Where?’
‘I don't want to tell you right now.’
He started to protest, but then he seemed to remember his promise and made a conscious effort to stop himself.
And he simply said, ‘You're making a mistake.’
‘I don't think I am,’ she said.
‘There's something more to it, but I still don't know what.
I've got to move so carefully here, Joe.
But if you could see how it's going, I think you'd be proud of me.’
He managed a half-smile, and moved to put his hands over hers.
She flinched.
But she let him.
‘I'm sure I would,’ he said, and she felt almost overcome by a tide of relief because it was all right, at last he understood…and then he took his two hands away from hers on the table, and his smile and his entire attitude dropped away like a paper mask.
She looked down at the white plastic loop that now bound her wrist to the brass rail on the table.
He'd secured her with practised ease, and so fast that she hadn't even  been aware of it happening.
He'd used a disposable handcuff on her, a simple self-locking noose that was tough, effective, and impossible to break.
‘Joe!’ she said.
‘You promised!’
‘That's exactly your problem,’ he said, rising.
‘You'll believe any old bullshit if it's what you want to hear.’
Leaving her safely tethered, he walked over toward the main door.
As he passed the bar he briefly held up what Lucy assumed must be his warrant card.
The landlady, a woman in late middle age with a beehive hairdo and a face like fallen stone, gave no reaction, and Joe stepped out into the street and raised his arm for a taxi.
One went by, he looked for another.
‘Oh, Joe,’ Lucy said sadly as she drew out Chrissie's knife and, holding it away from herself, released the blade.
One spring-driven second later she'd cut herself free, and two seconds after that she was showing her heels at the side door.
Joe was still out on the street at the other end of the bar, arm still raised, already way out of date.
She could almost feel sorry for him, the way that everybody felt sorry for the coyote in the Roadrunner cartoons; so singleminded, and with a lack of perspective that was spectacular.
She wanted to hand him a killer, he still wanted to play dogcatcher.
Well, he'd had his chances.
She glanced back just as she was about to turn a corner, and saw Joe as he came hurtling out of the side-exit.
She hadn't picked up as much of a lead as she'd thought.
And he must have done some healing, because he was no longer moving so slowly.
Lucy broke into a run.
They'd moved away from the office district and she was now in an area of sandwich shops, electrical stores and ticket agencies where the traffic was heavier and the pavement crowds more dense.
She ran, she dodged, she took a quick look behind her.
Joe was scattering people like a runaway truck.
Finally she dived through the alley by the Revuebar and into the market on Berwick Street, a drab thoroughfare enlivened  by a sudden riot of colour in the narrow sunlight that came slanting down between the buildings — the yellow awnings over the stalls, the bright shades of new fruit, the brilliant white of new cardboard.
And the noise.
Dire Straits pounding from a stallholder's ghettoblaster against strong competition from the shopfronts lining the street.
She was hit by the unique scent of the market; powerful, sweet, aromatic.
Joe was still behind her, but Lucy was smaller and she was fast.
There wasn't much space along here, and he could no longer rely on people taking one look and then getting out of his way because there was nowhere for them to go.
And there was plenty of crap strewn all over the pavement, so he had to be more careful.
She could glance back and see him, bobbing his way through a sea of heads.
As soon as she saw him look down, she made a sideways dive between a couple of stalls and crossed to the opposite side of the street.
There, she doubled back.
From a place of comparative safety she was able to observe as Joe pushed his way onward, unaware of her move.
She waited until he was lost from sight, and lifted an apple when the stallholder wasn't looking.
Poor Joe, chasing a wraith.
But unlike Lucy, with no prospect of success.
That evening, she waited until Charlie was in his office and then presented herself in the doorway.
He was working through some papers.
Lucy reckoned that, for the man in charge, he had some staggeringly dull tasks to handle; she'd seen him in the stockroom once, counting every bottle in every crate of tonic water.
Charlie was an employee like everyone else, but in the absence of the owners he was the man at the top…all the responsibility, almost none of the rakeoff.
Every now and again — or so she'd been told — the owners would call in the books.
And as long as Charlie had no particular desire to lie flat and be fed through a tube, it was in his interests to see that these were watertight.
He saw her in the doorway, and said, ‘What are you hanging around for?’
‘It's the end of the week,’ she said.
‘You promised you'd pay me.’
‘Come on in,’ he said, and he drew a bunch of keys across the desk and sorted out the smallest.
‘Close the door behind you.’
She did as he said, and took the spare seat without waiting to be asked.
He unlocked one of the desk drawers, and brought out a battered tin cashbox.
‘Okay, what are you worth?’ he said.
‘More than you can afford.’
Charlie grinned.
Nothing she'd care to trust too far, but it made the atmosphere a lot easier than the last time she'd been in here with the door closed.
‘You're all right,’ he said.
You know that?’
‘Thanks.’
‘I mean it.
Especially after the way you worked your way in here.
That routine with the coffees, it was pretty good.
Shows quick thinking.
Flexibility.’
If you're a kid, people sometimes think you've got nothing going for you.’
‘Who says you're a kid?’
‘Well, that's what they used to say.’
From the cashbox he took a bundle of notes, and tossed them for her to catch.
She didn't miss.
It wasn't a particularly fat bundle, but it was still money.
‘Aren't you going to count it?’ he said.
‘Will that get me any more?’
‘Not a cent.
We're talking petty cash, I'll pay you what I can justify without having to explain it away.
But it's strictly smalltime.
I get the feeling you're more ambitious than that.’
Lucy shrugged, said nothing.
The atmosphere had suddenly changed in the windowless little room, and she was interested to know why.
Charlie said, ‘You told me you wanted the same kind of deal that Chrissie had.
Were you serious?’
‘Of course I was.’
He nodded, watching her.
‘You do know what I'm talking about?’
‘We've always been close.’
she lied.
‘We've never had secrets.
‘What about experience?’
‘I get by.’
‘Getting by's not good enough in a game like this.
You're either a hundred per cent into it.
or let's forget the whole thing.’
‘Don't worry about me, Charlie,’ she said, wondering for how much longer she could stall around the subject without letting something slip and betraying her ignorance, and hoping that Charlie would give her some further clue.
‘Just tell me what you want me to do.’
‘Well,’ he said, ‘I've been let down for tonight.
It's a  problem, but it doesn't have to be a disaster-that could depend on you.’
And he turned away from her to face his desk again, as if everything had been settled for the moment.
Lucy stood, pushing back the chair.
‘Stick around later,’ Charlie said.
‘I'll talk to Josie.’
The rest of the evening was like a ten-year sentence that raced by her in moments; a sense of endless time that ended far too soon.
She coasted through it as if dreaming buoyed by a strange mixture of anticipation and dread.
Josie looked at her strangely a couple of times, and asked her if she felt ill.
She was having to repeat herself, and even then Lucy was picking up the wrong costume or completely mistaking what had been said.
‘Just got some stuff on my mind,’ she told Josie, and Josie didn't press her further.
Kid stuff, she probably thought.
Romance and froth.
When Lucy went around the dressing rooms picking up after the final number, her hands shook.
Charlie had stopped by to speak to Josie as he'd said he would, but Lucy hadn't been present at the time.
She'd seen him coming out, but he hadn't noticed her.
Josie's behaviour toward her didn't change after that, but again she told her to go home early with the house key and her taxi fare.
Lucy could only conclude that, whatever Charlie had been saying, it hadn't included specific mention of her name.
He stopped her in the corridor, and told her what to do.
When most of the dancers had set off for home, and Lucy had given Josie reason to assume that she'd done the same, she sat in one of the empty offices for a while and then returned to the wardrobe department.
Josie was laying out makeup brushes on the table, and didn't look up as Lucy stepped inside and half-closed the door behind her.
Alongside the mirror Josie had hung out an evening gown, long and slinky and black as a panther.
‘Take a seat,’ Josie said.
‘I'll be with you in a second.
Have you ever worn the dress before?’
‘No,’ Lucy said, and Josie reacted to the sound as if caught by the tip of a lash.
She straightened, and turned.
‘Tell me this isn't true,’ she said stonily.
‘What's the matter?’
Lucy said.
Josie went around behind her, and closed the door fully.
‘Are you mad?’ she half-whispered with considerable force, and from close enough to make Lucy flinch.
‘Charlie said he'd found a substitute, but he never said it was you.’
‘I volunteered,’ Lucy said meekly.
‘Well, you can un-volunteer.
Have you any idea what you're getting into, here?’
‘I think it's a call-girl racket,’ Lucy admitted.
The phrase sounded strange and carried a number of echoes, mostly from half-remembered headlines in Sunday newspapers.
‘You think?
And what are you?
You're a child.’
Josie started to pace.
‘Don't do this to me.’
‘I've got to go through with it.’
‘It isn't worth it.’
‘Doesn't matter whether it's worth it or not.
I still have to.’
‘For what?’
Josie demanded, turning.
‘The money?’
‘For personal reasons.
This is what Christine was doing, isn't it?’
‘Yes, but she didn't run straight in like this.
At least she took some persuading.’
‘That makes a difference?’
Josie tried to reach for some killer of an argument, a real zinger that she could pull out of the air and use to disarm all opposition.
But then she dropped into the makeup chair, all of the steam going out of her.
‘No,’ she said wearily.
‘Nothing makes any difference in the end.’
She looked up at Lucy.
‘What would your father say?’
‘He mustn't ever know.
I'd kill anyone who told him.’
Josie looked into her eyes, and saw that this was something very close to the truth.
‘You're not entirely beyond hope, then,’ she said.
‘I can look after myself.’
Josie shook her head, with a hint of a bitter smile.
‘We all say that, and none of us really can.’
Lucy crouched down by the makeup chair.
There was a suggestion of tears in the older woman's eyes.
Lucy said, almost gently, ‘Will you tell me how the setup works?
There's some special angle, but I don't know what it is.’
‘You're unbelievable,’ Josie said.
‘I'm asking you to give me credit for knowing what I'm doing, Josie.
I'm asking you to accept that I've got reasons, and not to ask me what they are.
I'll do whatever's necessary, but I'm nobody's fool.
I'll come through because in here’— she touched her own chest, lightly —‘there's a piece of ice.’
Josie looked away.
‘Why couldn't you just stay in the back of beyond?’ she said.
‘Will you tell me?’
Josie sighed.
It was as if she were the child, cornered and reasoned into giving an explanation, and Lucy the teacher with all of the patience and the pressure working for her.
If only she could see what an act it was, how scared Lucy was now feeling deep inside.
Lucy wanted to tell her, but knew that this would be wrong.
She'd lose her advantage, she'd lose her edge.
As always, she was alone.
‘There's a house rule,’ Josie said.
‘The dancers don't mix with the clientele.
They can't even meet their own boyfriends outside the club-they've got to go right outside the area.
That's fine by them, they're professionals; they've worked for their Equity cards and they're a cut above the trash that sits out front.
But sometimes, the trash drops a hint to a waiter.
They'd really like to make it with a showgirl.
That's where Charlie comes in.’
‘How does he fix it?’
‘The trash thinks he's getting a date with a dancer.
Charlie's the house manager, who better to arrange it?
Only, what he gets is one of Charlie's list of ringers, girls who look enough like the real thing to justify what he charges.
And he charges a lot.’
‘Does anyone ever catch on?’
‘Never.
It's fantasy, stage lights and stage makeup.
What Charlie does is to extend the performance.’
‘And it starts right here,’ Lucy said, looking at the makeup mirror and seeing the two of them fixed and framed in its unforgiving light.
‘Don't do it, Lucy,’ Josie said quietly.
Lucy got to her feet.
‘Do I put the dress on first, or after?’ she said.
It had to be close to four in the morning.
Lucy sat on the tiled floor of a shower cubicle in the bathroom of the most expensive-looking hotel suite that she'd ever seen, hugging her knees, shivering despite the temperature of the water that beat down upon her.
She'd turned it as high and as hard as she could get it to go.
The cubicle was narrow, and it made her feel safe.
The bathroom door was locked from the inside.
She'd been in here for at least fifteen minutes, maybe longer.
She couldn't bring herself to move.
For the second time, there was a tentative tap on the door.
Again, she pretended not to hear.
It was peaceful, under the rain.
It helped her not to think too much.
Unfortunately, it wasn't enough to stop her thinking completely.
Great hunks of recent memory would break loose and surface, turning briefly before sinking again like the unclaimed wreckage of the soul.
Charlie, leading her down to the trash and making the introduction (‘I know you ‘ve made plans now, and I feel kind of responsible so I talked to one of the other girls.
I know you were so specific, but this is a fabulous kid and when I told her all about you, she just begged me to let her stop by and say hello .’).
The trash, getting ready to protest at this change in plans and then his jaw dropping at his first sight of Lucy; getting into the cab with him, knowing what she was doing but somehow feeling that she was watching it all from somewhere else.
Looking into the taxi's vanity mirror.
A stranger looking back.
Then the hotel (‘Charlie sent us ,’) and the assistant manager drawing her to one side (‘I'm putting you in a suite for a couple of hours.
It won ‘t show up as a registration, so no phonecalls out and no calling reception or room service, either.
You need anything.
phone my office and nowhere else.
I ‘ll stop by every now and again and listen at the door, just in case there's any rough stuff.
Ready?’
And she'd nodded, her heart hammering in fear .).
And then in the suite.
scaring herself; not because she played her part badly, but because she played it so well.
Even the small talk (‘How did I come to be in the show?
The usual way.
Ads and then auditions.
There's nothing special about it, just another dancing job .’)
And then…
It's only showbiz, she tried to tell herself.
It comes off with the makeup.
And the water hammered down, and washed her and washed her, and why was it taking so long to make her clean?
He was tapping on the bathroom door again.
This time she reached up, and reduced the pressure a little so she'd be able to hear.
‘What do you want?’
‘Are you all right ?’
Even through the door, he sounded nervous and uncertain.
He was young, dark, bookish-looking.
He'd had small hands and flawless skin, very pale.
He'd told her that his name was Russell.
Even this was more than she'd wanted to know.
She said, ‘Yes.’
‘I have to go.’
She made no response.
She didn't want to face him.
If she could have wiped his memory as well as her own, she'd have done it without any hesitation, and at whatever cost.
He said, ‘I've left something for you on the bedside table.
I hope I can see you again .’
‘Speak to Charlie,’ she heard herself saying, and turned up the pressure.
She stayed under the shower until she could feel nothing more.
And when at last she emerged, beaten and dull, it was to find that her sister was waiting.
Lucy stood in the bathroom doorway, wrapped in an oversized courtesy robe.
Before her stretched the main room of the suite.
She'd never before seen a carpet so thick that it showed vacuuming lines, like a lawn.
Charlie obviously had some running arrangement with the night manager, getting the use of some part of the hotel that stood empty and could all be set straight again before morning.
She'd wondered who'd handle that side of it somehow she couldn't imagine the night manager himself with a housekeeping trolley piled high with sheets and towels.
By the light of a single dim bedside lamp, she saw Christine.
Knew her immediately, even though her face was turned to the window and she was looking out.
On the other side of the glass, an infinity of darkness made the window into a shadowy mirror.
They were ten floors up, and the suite overlooked one of the big city parks.
‘Hi, kid,’ Christine said.
Lucy felt at a disadvantage.
She was damp, she was sore from scrubbing with the shower mitt, her hair hung in rats' tails.
She didn't have to ask if Christine knew what had been going on here.
Of course she knew.
Lucy moved into the main room, barefoot on the carpet.
‘How could you?’ she said.
‘How could you live like this?’
Christine half-turned then, and glanced at the room as if some ironic comment had presented itself in her mind; but instead she said, ‘Anyone can do anything.
It's just a matter of motivation.
Look on the bright side, you're braver than I was.’
‘How?’
‘You had the nerve to go through with it.
I didn't have the nerve not to.
How do you feel?’
‘Cheap and shitty.’
‘Well, don't.’
Now Christine turned to face her, and Lucy saw that she was angry.
‘What about him?
You think he feels soiled?
You think he feels ashamed?
I don't think so.
I know what just happened, and it wasn't even any big deal.
He probably paid a month's wages for tonight and look, he wasted most of it on the mattress.
It changes nothing.’
‘That's easy for you to say.’
‘You think so?’
‘Yeah, you're already dead.’
‘Sorry you started?’
‘I don't know,’ Lucy admitted.
‘But you're still going to carry on.’
Lucy's silence was her confirmation.
Hate it as she might it would be harder to stop than to go on, almost like riding a tiger.
She'd come so far, she'd given so much…and all of it would be meaningless without a final context of success.
She didn't care what happened to her, as long as she came through.
It would be worth it in the end.
Wouldn't it?
‘Listen,’ Christine said.
‘I'll always be here, you know that.
If it's too much to handle, let me help.
I did everything a sister could.
I tried to talk you out of it but nothing worked.
So let me do this for you instead.
I'm as good as lost anyway, there's no further down for me to go.’
‘I don't understand.’
Christine moved from the window.
She seemed solid, she cast a shadow.
The warm light of the bedside lamp softened her features, giving her a look as fresh and ageless as that of an angel.
Lucy sat on the edge of the bed.
Christine looked down on her.
‘I've been your mission,’ she said.
‘Now you can be mine.
There are some things that I can deal with better than you.
I mean, you could learn , but I've been down that road and I don't want you to follow.
If you still want to go on, then let's go on together.’
‘Why don't you just tell me who killed you?’
Lucy said.
But Christine only smiled, more enigmatic than a gallery of Mona Lisas.
‘You figure that one out,’ she said.
It was late in the morning, and Lucy was sitting on her fold-down bed with the curtains still drawn when Josie looked in.
As far as Lucy could see she was dressed for going out, and her manner was grim.
‘Coffee's in the kitchen if you want some,’ she said.
‘I expect you to be gone by the time I get back.’
Lucy stared at her, uncomprehending.
She was still in her night things, and somehow didn't seem able to make the simplest connections in her mind; right hand hugging her left elbow, she'd been rocking herself gently ever since she'd been wakened by the sounds of garage doors opening and cars being started in the mews outside her window.
That had been hours ago.
There seemed to be a blankness in her that prevented her from going any further; a momentary spark that said,But wait …and then said nothing more.
Josie seemed to sense that something was wrong.
‘Are you all right?’ she said, taking a hesitant step forward into the room.
‘I'm all stiff and sore,’ Lucy said, and then pulled down the shoulder of the oversized Blues Brothers T-shirt that she'd bought for sleeping in.
‘And look, I'm scratched.’
The scratches weren't much, but their unexpected presence was enough of a worry.
She looked up at Josie again.
‘I can't remember what I did last night,’ she said helplessly.
Josie took her upstairs, and sat her in the kitchen.
Wherever Josie had been intending to go, the errand  appeared to have been forgotten.
She was still mad at Lucy for something, and Lucy was sure that a little time and concentration would tell her what…but for the moment, somehow, the knowledge was just out of reach.
Josie gave her a black coffee and then opened a kitchen drawer, bringing out bottles containing just about every prescription tranquilliser known to medical science.
She checked the labels, shook her head, tossed the bottles back one at a time.
In the end she settled on a stiff dose of Courvoisier brandy poured straight into Lucy's mug.
Lucy nearly choked on the stuff, but kept it down.
Josie made her go through everything that she could remember, prompting wherever she could.
Some of the pieces came, some didn't.
Some remained as gaps in the puzzle, suggestive in their outlines but mystifying in their detail.
‘I've got this vague memory of the hotel,’ she said after a while.
‘And then later on, I remember talking to Christine but I don't know what about.’
‘What did you do, phone her from the room?’
‘I can't phone her,’ Lucy said.
‘She's dead.’
This had been a fact of Lucy's life for so long now that she'd almost lost her sense of its shock value, but Josie was hit by it head-on and without warning.
‘What are you talking about?’ she said.
‘Sorry,’ Lucy said belatedly.
‘I forgot you didn't know.’
So then she had to explain the rest of it, from the beginning.
She couldn't feel any direct effect from the brandy, but she felt looser and more able to talk.
Josie brought the bottle out again, and took a shot for herself.
‘I know how it sounds,’ Lucy said after a while.
She'd left almost nothing out, although she'd downplayed Christine's reappearances.
‘You think I'm losing my mind, but I'm not.
It's just something that happens to me, I don't know why.
Perhaps it's like she can't die for real, until someone's sorted it all out.
And I'm the only one who's trying.’
There was a certain reserve in Josie's eyes that said Yeah, okay, let's leave the dead-walking issue to one side just for a moment.
That was fine by Lucy.
People could think what they liked about her mental state, as long as they didn't stand in her way.
Josie said, ‘What are the police doing?’
‘I've been through all that.
The best I can hope for is to be dragged home and given stuff to make me manageable.
I won't let them do that, Josie.
Christine's world is opening up to me now.
I'm finding out things about her that I never could have known.’
‘Yes,’ Josie said.
‘And at what price?’
‘Nobody down here seems to know that she died.
Nobody except the person that killed her.
He's the one I'm finding my way towards.
I have to meet all her old contacts, I have to enter the life that she had.
Sooner or later, he's going to turn up.’
‘You think it was someone on Charlie's client list?’
Lucy could hardly believe what she was hearing.
‘There's a list ?’
‘Well, he keeps records.
But I don't know where.’
‘Does he get names, and everything?’
‘The waiter makes a note of the table number, and Charlie digs out the credit slip at the end of the evening.
It's his insurance against comebacks.
You wouldn't believe some of the people he's got in there.’
Lucy gripped the breakfast bar.
Her mind was now as clear as spring water.
‘I'd like to see that list,’ she said.
‘Not so easy,’ Josie said doubtfully.
‘He keeps the books well hidden.’
‘In his office?’
‘Or somewhere close by.’
In the cramped space of the mews kitchen, Lucy got to her feet.
Suddenly she wanted to be dressed, and out, and running.
‘Let's find it,’ she said.
Nothing could happen until the evening, but then Lucy got her chance to see the inside of Charlie's office much sooner than she'd expected.
The moment he saw her, he called her in.
Her heart did a flip when she saw the ring binder that lay open on his desk.
He told her to sit down, and then he went around and took an envelope out of his desk drawer which, she noted, was already unlocked.
The envelope contained cash, and the cash was for her.
Not too many notes.
But mostly big numbers.
Christ, she thought, how good was I?
This was something that Charlie now seemed to want to establish.
He hemmed and hawed and rambled through a number of subjects before making a sideways approach to what he really seemed to need, which was any useful or memorable detail that would be worth noting about the previous night's client.
Any scars, tattoos, birth marks…anything odd that he'd done, anything weird that he'd wanted or said.
Any unease that Lucy had been feeling now vanished in the face of Charlie's uncharacteristic embarrassment.
Charlie, manager of a tit show with a little pimping on the side, couldn't talk about sex without blushing.
She gave him a few things, all invented, and watched as he jotted some notes in the ledger.
There was a limit to what she could make out, given the angle and that she was trying to see the page upside-down, but what she saw was enough to confirm that this book, or perhaps its predecessor for the previous year, had the potential to tell her exactly what she most needed to know.
It had dates, it had initials, lots of numbers, some addresses…she briefly speculated about the possibility of braining Charlie with his own desk lamp in order to get her hands on it, but relinquished the option with a certain regret.
Braining Charlie wouldn't be so easy.
His head was probably tougher than a brass doorknob.
No, she'd have to rely on other means.
Somewhere outside the world went on turning, but down in the backstage changing rooms and passageways of The  Gilded Cage — London's Finest Nightspot, All-New Revue — everything moved to the beat of Performance Time.
The dancers arrived, singly or together, wearing jeans and thick sweaters and high-heeled leather boots, and they hung up their fun furs on the backs of dressing-room doors as the showtape was being wound onto the reel-to-reel in the stage manager's control room somewhere above.
The tape controlled the entire show, including all lighting cues, and the stage manager would have little more to do than read his newspaper and greenlight the girls as they waited in the wings.
First costumes were already laid out, wigs were on stands, the changes were hanging in show order on rails in the wardrobe department.
Out on the floor of the house, about half a dozen of the tables would already be occupied.
When there was an opportunity, Lucy slipped up to the control box and borrowed a screwdriver.
She didn't much rate her chances of getting hold of the key to Charlie's desk, but the desk itself was so old and the drawer appeared to be so ill-fitting that a touch of leverage might just spring it open.
‘I'll bring it straight back,’ she promised.
‘You bet you will,’ said Billy, stage manager and all-purpose house technician, over the top of his copy of the Standard .
But when would she get the chance to use it?
Charlie would be on the move for most of the night, supervising, troubleshooting, bringing back cash from the tills to be counted and put into the safe, but there was no regular pattern to it and he was liable to show up in his office at any time.
It wasn't the risk of getting caught that troubled Lucy.
It was the risk of getting caught and then losing any chance that she might ever have of getting her hands on Charlie's ledger information.
Why not just ask him ? she wondered as she stepped over the outstretched leg of Polly Inferno, aka Amanda Stern from Lanarkshire, who was using the corridor space for some warmup exercises and somehow, at the same time, studying a book.
Lucy could just imagine how Charlie would react; at the first whiff of implication in a murder case he'd probably burn everything.
He'd be stupid to do otherwise.
Charlie might be lowlife, but stupid he wasn't.
And she owed Christine something more than ashes.
‘What are you doing?’ she said to Polly/Amanda as she stepped over her again.
Amanda was on her back, book held at arm's length above her as she bicycled with her legs.
She was in her warmup kit of white tank top, running shorts, red legwarmers, and basketball shoes.
She was also chanting softly to herself.
But at Lucy's questions, she broke off.
‘Modern Greek,’ she said, only a little breathlessly as she scrambled to her knees and began a series of back stretches.
‘I speak four languages now.
When I'm too old for this line, I reckon Europe should just about be ready for me.’
‘The boys in the coffee bar are both Greeks.
You should come along and get some practice.’
‘Chance would be a fine thing,’ she said.
At around ten o'clock that evening, Lucy's chance arrived.
If it hadn't been for Josie, she wouldn't even have been aware of it.
One of the waiters passed the open doorway of the wardrobe department on his way to Charlie's office.
‘Wait,’ Josie said to Lucy, who'd been about to leave with an armload of silver lame for dressing room three, and Lucy waited.
Sure enough, the waiter returned a moment later and Charlie was with him, brushing dandruff from his jacket as he squared himself to face the public.
‘The waiters only ever come back here for one reason,’ Josie explained in a low voice.
‘Some trash is sniffing the bait.
Charlie's going out to check on the territory and strike up a deal.
Unless it's just a runaround we'll have ten, fifteen minutes at the most.’
‘We?’
‘I'll keep watch for you.
Come on.’
Josie stood by the door.
Lucy went straight to Charlie's desk and tried the drawer.
She had her borrowed screwdriver ready to attempt a little amateur lockpicking, but she didn't need it because the drawer wasn't locked.
For a moment she was elated, but that didn't last.
There was nothing much in the drawer beyond the cashbox (which now contained only loose change), some rubber bands, a clutch of half-used ballpoint pens, a calculator, a stopwatch with no glass, and a bundle of guest passes identical to the one that Lucy had first used to enter the club.
Leaving everything more or less as it had been and closing the drawer, she turned her attention to the rest of the room.
‘Any idea what you're looking for?’
Josie said from the doorway, and so Lucy explained about her earlier interview and the ring binder that she'd seen.
Josie said, ‘What did you tell him, if you couldn't remember?’
‘Some old crap.
I don't know.
He was happy enough.’
She opened a cupboard, rummaged through.
The ledger was a fair size, and surely couldn't easily escape her.
Nothing inside, so she checked between the cupboard and the wall.
‘Exactly how many ringers does he have?’ she said, spying nothing but dustballs and old mouse turds.
‘About a dozen that I know of,’ Josie said, ‘and I think I know them all.’
‘Where does he get them?’
‘No idea.
His wife used to handle all the recruiting, but then she ran off with someone.
They're all kinds.
Not one of them's a hard-bitten tom, the kind you'd find on the streets.
Some are just housewives, and there's at least one who I know doesn't need the money.’
‘Why does she do it?’
‘She enjoys it.’
‘Sick.’
She got down on the floor and ran her arm under the bookcase.
Again, nothing.
‘By when do I have to get out of the house?’
Josie was blank.
‘Who said anything about that?’
‘You did.’
Josie gave a shrug.
‘I don't know.
When you're ready.’
‘Does that mean I'm forgiven?’
Lucy said, clambering to her feet and then looking around for anywhere that she might have missed.
Charlie's office was small and poky and lightless and overcrowded, but the number of possible hiding places was limited and it seemed that she-d tried them all.
‘I'm not in the forgiveness racket,’ Josie said.
‘I only handle the Wardrobe.
Time's up, kiddo.’
She checked the floor for loose boards.
But the floor was parquet, with concrete beneath.
So then, in frustration, she had to retreat.
She bumped into Charlie later on, as she was heading out with her list for the coffee-shop order.
He gave a slight raise of the eyebrows and said, ‘Same again?’
‘When?’
‘Tonight, if you can handle it.’
‘I can handle it,’ she said.
Jessica had just seen the boys to bed when the call came.
This consisted mainly of shutting them in and leaving them be — go in sometime after midnight perhaps, switch off the TV, unplug the Commodore, pick up the comic books and rearrange the covers, but that was about it.
When she reached the top of the stairs and turned to descend she saw Simon on the hall phone and hesitated, wondering.
He looked up at her, held the receiver out, and then she knew.
‘Can he hear us ?’
Charlie said when she'd taken it over.
She watched as Simon wandered on through into the all-white kitchen, the door swinging shut behind him.
He never quite seemed to know where he was going, or why.
The house was huge, and he seemed lost in it.
When they'd moved in he'd made a point of telling just about everybody where it was and how much it was costing — wincing a little at the same time, as if he were telling the story against himself and his own folly — but it had become a sterile kind of heaven, and he sat around in it like some forgotten angel.
‘No,’ she said.
‘He can't hear us now.’
All the books that he'd bought to fill the stripped pine shelves, and never read.
Bought them by the yard or by the box, or on a whim.
All of the spines looked good.
Most of the books were crap.
He'd bought a BMW because he'd heard that it was the car to have, and wouldn't admit that he felt uncomfortable in it.
Charlie said, ‘There's work tonight, if you want it .’
‘Can I make it in time?’
‘I can stall.
It's a party of three.
You'll meet at the hotel, then pair off.
Don't let them talk you into doing it any other way, I'm not having anything kinky.
Okay?’
‘Send me a cab.’
‘It's on its way.’
After she'd hung up, she went through into the kitchen.
The lights were on, but Simon wasn't there.
So then she cut through the dining room and into the lounge, where she found him sitting in front of the big Sony TV.
He had the remote control in his hand and he was channel-hopping, listlessly.
She felt an urge to tousle his hair and say,Never mind.
Back to work in the morning .
At work he had a job title, and his own parking space.
‘Callout?’ he said.
‘Another emergency.
They're sending a taxi.
I wouldn't wait up.’
He nodded, as if this was what he'd been expecting.
‘Will you be all right?’ she said.
‘Yeah, I'll be fine.’
He was running through the cable channels now, most of them showing ‘seventies reruns or obscure sports cheaply covered.
‘There's all kinds of stuff in the freezer, if you want anything.’
‘Don't worry,’ he said, skipping on through the amateur boxing and back around to the broadcast channels again.
Jessica had been a dental nurse before they'd married and now she was a dental nurse again, for an average of six hours a week on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons.
As far as Simon knew, the late-night callouts were an occasional part of the job that she didn't much like, but said that she felt she had to do.
Simon had only the vaguest idea of where she worked and what was involved, but didn't much mind.
She went out, she came back.
End of story.
I know it isn't much, she used to say.
But it gets me out of the house for a while.
Jessica had been getting out of the house for a while  since just after the youngest of the boys had begun at school.
She'd started with a small ad in a contact magazine, and a box number to keep the entire business at arm's length; she couldn't believe the number of replies that came in.
Most of those who were freaks seemed to declare it by their handwriting, and these she ignored.
Also any that gave her the wrong kind of buzz.
Those who remained, once she'd made allowances for the ways they described themselves, fell broadly within the category of Ugly but Eager.
The first couple of times she'd arrived at a rendezvous and then lost her nerve, backing out before anyone could approach her; but then she'd tried getting herself a little drunk beforehand, and from then on the doors were flung open and she was away.
Always with strangers, mostly in their cars, always in the late mornings or early afternoons in some remote country spot or shady lane.
No names exchanged, no comebacks.
The sense of betrayal and the risk of danger only served to intensify the experience, much more so than the most potent of drugs.
Once it had been on the top deck of a multistorey car park in town, with shoppers passing only a few feet away on the other side of a layer of tinted glass, and she'd felt like a tight-fitting skin over a multiple explosion that was sounding off again and again and again.
And of course, every now and then, she'd do it with Simon.
Good old Simon, pounding away and probably thinking about his golf handicap to keep himself going.
Jessica had no real complaints.
She lived in a big house in what they called the stockbroker belt, she had healthy and good-looking children, they took two holidays every year.
Life with Simon gave her everything she needed.
Except for a little spice of danger.
And the occasional sense of being in total control.
She went up to the bedroom.
Everything would be provided, even the underwear, so she didn't need to change; all that she had to consider was the little ritual that she went through every time.
She took off everything  that could identify her, and stowed it in the bottom layer of her jewellery box.
Her wedding ring, as well.
Then she pulled on gloves, so Simon wouldn't see that the ring was missing.
Not that he was in much danger of noticing.
There was a thin slice of light showing under the door to the boys' room.
She listened for a while, heard the low murmur of the TV.
All seemed fine.
She grabbed a coat, went back downstairs, kissed Simon on top of the head and got a grunt in reply, and then went out to meet her cab.
Less than two hours later, a city-centre taxi let her out under the lighted awning of the hotel by the park.
After a change of costume and half an hour in the makeup chair at The Gilded Cage, she was no longer Jessica.
She went in through the front door, as always.
Further along the bay, it seemed to be taking five flunkeys in grey uniforms a lot of effort to usher one middle-aged man into a chauffeur-driven Bentley.
It was now after one-thirty.
The hotel was quiet, but by no means dead.
She saw the night manager as the night manager saw her, and he quickly signalled her to go around and into his office.
He took a hell of a risk.
But greed seemed to get to people that way.
Jessica could hardly have cared less about the money; she'd simply stick it in her purse like always, and when it was spent, it was spent.
She'd have done all of this for nothing.
She'd found her way to Charlie through another of the contact magazines, back in the days when his wife had been handling that end of the business; she'd had to send along a photograph and that had gone a little against the grain — in all of her moonlighting so far, she'd never let slip so much as her name — but everything had worked out well.
Now most of her contacts were out-of-town businessmen, far more scared of comebacks than she'd ever have to be.
Because when she was with them, she was somebody else.
‘Wait in the office,’ the night manager told her.
‘I'm trying to find three rooms on the same floor.’
‘Charlie said nothing kinky.’
‘Good old Charlie,’ the night manager said with a roll of his eyes, and hustled her into the office.
The other two ringers were already there.
One was turning the pages of an old copy of Hotel & Caterer , the other was looking out of the window.
The one with the magazine looked up briefly and without interest, and then carried on.
But the other one seemed familiar, at least from what Jessica could see of her reflection.
But she couldn't be certain and so, tentatively, she said, ‘Chrissie?
Is that you?’
The woman turned.
On the window, her shadow turned away.
‘It's been ages,’ Jessica said.
‘I almost didn't know you.’
The woman smiled.
‘Hello, Jess,’ she said.
‘How've you been?’
In the days that followed, Joe felt a growing sense of panic.
It was as if the hunt for Lucy Ashdown had spread to take over his world from one horizon to the other and everything else, every essential concern and unanswered question, had been crowded out at the edges.
He was running up a huge bill on his credit card, and he was getting nowhere.
Back home.
he'd missed more appointments.
More calls would have gone unanswered.
People who wanted information from him were noting his silence and making their judgments accordingly; his life seemed to be funnelling down into a pit like so much waste water, and yet he couldn't stir himself to the right kind of action.
He'd try.
But then his concentration would slip away from the complexity of it all, and escape into Ashdown country again.
He moved out of the hotel and into some serviced apartments that rented by the week and were slightly cheaper.
When he wasn't walking the streets, he'd lie on his bed and torment himself with thoughts of her being somewhere close.
Possibly even less than a mile away.
What was she doing?
How was she getting by?
How far had she fallen already?
For all that he knew, she could be lying dead and cold in an empty building somewhere.
Waiting to be discovered, but in no particular hurry.
Or worse.
Joe had been around.
He could think of worse.
A bleak thought that occurred to him one night, crossing the Hungerford Bridge on the way back from a check of  Cardboard City.
was that he might look straight at her and not even know her.
Some of these kids were going down fast.
They looked back at him with the bright eyes of rats in old people's faces and when he asked them a question.
he could barely understand their replies.
Cardboard City.
on the south bank of the river.
Already an institution.
of a kind, and accepted as a fact of life.
How long before the tour buses began to include it on their schedules?
But then.
Cardboard City all but vanished in the daytime, and reappeared like a gypsy camp at night.
In the afternoons there was little to see other than the skateboarders who came to clatter back and forth in the bowl-shaped space under the Festival Hall, making a sound that was somewhere between a roller derby and a kendo match; but as evening came on, bags and boxes would start to appear in the best-lighted spots under the concrete.
Each makeshift arrangement concealed a human larva that would emerge again at the first signs of dawn.
Most nights he made at least one trip out here, and each time he learned nothing.
She was calling her father every couple of days.
that much he knew.
The cash was probably gone by now, and Joe's guess was that she'd have to beg or steal to keep going.
He hoped so.
He didn't like to think too much about one of the conversations that Jack Ashdown had reported to him on one of Joe's occasional check-ins.
‘Jack?
Has she called again?’
‘She phoned me this morning.’
‘How did she sound?’
‘She says not to worry, she's found herself some work.’
‘Meaning what?’
‘I couldn't get her to say exactly, but she says she's getting by.
She's doing the same kind of work that Christine used to do.
Joe?
Are you still there?’
‘I'm still here.’
‘That's something reassuring, isn't it?’
‘Carry on thinking so.
Jack.’
But this was said after he'd hung up the phone.
After that, he'd headed for a street in north-west London that he hadn't visited in over a year.
He stood almost on the same spot as before, and watched the lighted windows of a basement flat across the way.
This was a Regency crescent, its big houses a shuffled deck of peeling stucco and expensive restoration, and even the meanest of them wouldn't come cheap.
This wasn't one of the meanest.
The flat was reached by a narrow flight of steps descending into a well between the entranceways of two adjoining buildings, a small pit of private space behind cast iron railings, and the angle of view was limited.
Someone down there hadn't drawn the blinds.
Probably never even occurred to her that she was observed.
Joe could see the end of an ironing board, and somebody moving around.
This had been Christine's place, once.
But this woman was nothing like her.
So he'd walked away.
Now, returning across the Hungerford Bridge, those same thoughts came to haunt him a little as the overhead lights stained everything to the colour of dull old parchment.
The footbridge section was narrow, but only a couple of feet to his left — within touching distance, in fact — was the steel mesh side of the railway bridge where monsters went battering across, drowning out conversation as their lights flickered through the big crossed support girders.
Christine.
Lucy.
In his mind, they were starting to merge.
He'd asked Ashdown to send him a photograph that he could use.
He wasn't even sure which of them it showed.
Even on the bridge there was no relief.
They sat in the littered corners at the ends, beggars in various states of desperation waiting mutely for handouts.
Down below the bridge, he knew, about eight or nine shambling street people would be setting up the plastic pallets and bakers' trays that would keep them off the floor for the night.
It was as if his vision had steadily darkened, until he could see nothing else; no brightness, no sunlight, just a public  hell into which he felt he was being dragged while others walked by it unseeing.
He couldn't even hear faint sounds from the next apartment without his imagination putting together some unwholesome scene of matching action.
If only he could find her.
If he could find her.
and keep a hold on her this time, then none of this would matter.
But where was she?
At around eleven o'clock.
by an all-night snack counter near to Marble Arch, about half a dozen teenaged girls had gathered outside the service window to chat.
The specialities of the counter were overcooked pastries and undercooked rolls, and nobody was buying; the place was simply a focus of life at this hour of night, in an area where nothing much else was happening.
Most of the girls were clippers, specialists in stopping men on pavements and taking cash in advance in exchange for a key and an arrangement to meet indoors about half an hour later.
The keys were cut by the dozen at an Oxford Street heel bar, the addresses were always false.
It was an obvious-looking deception, and shouldn't have had a hope in hell of working; but the girls were mostly young and good-looking, and their prey were mostly out-of-towners, and as long as they kept shifting their ground the money kept on coming in.
The group had a perky.
schoolgirlish look, and bore a close resemblance to an officeful of typists at a hen party.
One of them, a girl named Marion from Northampton, felt a nudge from one of the others.
The conversation was dying all around her as she looked in the direction that had been indicated.
Across the wide pavement, man was watching them.
He was tall and badly shaven, his raincoat collar turned up against the cold of the December night.
The girls looked from one to another, but no-one seemed to recognise him.
The biggest danger in the racket was to be caught by a  client who was angry at his treatment.
Mostly, they were never a problem.
But once could be problem enough.
At their silence, he came forward.
He seemed to single out Marion, to be looking straight at her.
‘Can I ask you something?’ he said.
‘That depends what it is, doesn't it?’
Marion said, glad of the security of the others around her and thus able to sound pretty sharp.
The man brought out a photograph and held it at arm's length, walking toward them.
‘I'm looking for this girl.
Do you think you may have seen her?’
Marion glanced at the picture, but didn't really bother to take it in.
‘Maybe, maybe not.
What's she done?’
‘I never said she'd done anything.’
‘No.
But you're a copper, aren't you?’
He stopped.
Slowly, he lowered the photograph.
‘Not right at this moment,’ he said, seeming to choose his way carefully.
‘Don't try to kid me that you're looking for business,’ Marion said.
‘Coppers always want it for nothing.’
But then she felt the sudden tension of the others, and knew that she'd pushed it too far.
‘You want to watch what you say,’ he told her quietly, eyes burning as if with a long-term fever.
‘Talk like that could get you a smack in the mouth.’
She didn't answer him, or try to goad him any further.
She threw back her head, and yelled for Jerry.
Instantly, three athletic-looking youths sprang from a doorway where they'd been idling just a short distance along the road.
Without exception, their hair had been cropped short enough to reveal the scars underneath.
The man took a couple of steps back as they headed for him; but then they stopped, as if they'd sensed his fury and found it to be a wall that they hesitated to scale.
‘That's near enough,’ he said.
‘I'm just not in the mood.’
Hands held up in a no-harm gesture, he continued to back away.
The three youths waited, debating within  themselves whether honour had been satisfied as he took his attention from them and returned it to Marion; and suddenly, as his eyes burned into her like a couple of lasers, it was as if the two of them stood alone and everything else was just background.
‘You look at yourself,’ he told her.
‘Just go home to the mirror, and take a look.’
‘Up your arse,’ Marion said defiantly.
And later she might have sworn, even though the lighting was bad and he was already some distance away, that before turning around and stalking off into the night, the stranger had snarled like a beast.
PART FOUR
Death and the Maiden (II)
Whenever he could, Joe would arrange to work through the Christmas period.
Christmas on the job was fine.
Lots of atmosphere, a few in-house parties, a whole new angle on the people that he spent so much of his time alongside.
Wartime must have been a little like this, he used to think…routine thinking not allowed, every moment fresh and open-ended.
A purer form of existence, somehow, that paid no heed to the conditions that had created it.
This year, he supposed it would be different.
This year he wouldn't even have the fallback option of his sister and her family, something that he always approached with a grim sense of duty and then often wound up thinking, at the end of the day, that perhaps it hadn't been so bad after all.
A wild idea occurred to him — why didn't he just get his spare shirts and the few pieces that he'd picked up while he'd been staying here, throw them all into a bag, and jump on a train or a bus to present himself on their doorstep?
For a while the notion gripped him, and he prowled the many floors of Hamleys looking for toys.
He bought a magic set for Sebastian (although his ideal present for the kid would have been a brand-new name) and a marionette for Louise.
He could remember that there was an age for puppets and magic, just as he could remember the time that he'd spent trying to fan a deck of cards or sitting in front of a mirror trying to get the hard consonants down like a real ventriloquist.
Never managed either, but there you go.
The Hamleys bag sat on the dressing table at the end of his room, the one clean, bright item in the place, and Joe lay back on the bed and stared at it as the daylight outside gave way to the evening.
He began to get the odd feeling of doubt.
Kids were reckoned to be more sophisticated, these days.
He'd seen the stuff that was pitched at them through advertising.
Much of it was way beyond anything he'd ever been able to dream about.
What if they thought his presents were old-fashioned and stupid?
They were polite, they'd probably try not to show it.
But think of it, emotional charity from a couple of eight-year-olds — how low could a person possibly get?
And then, as if to deliver the knockout blow to his scheme, the phone rang.
It was Jack Ashdown, and he'd heard from Lucy again.
She'd been calling him often, at least a couple of times every week.
She'd reassure him over and over that she was fine, she was safe, there was nothing for him to worry about, and Ashdown would then ring Joe and pass along anything new or helpful that he'd been able to pick out of the conversation.
Which, in almost every case, amounted to nothing.
Joe thought he'd seen her once, riding in the back of a big car.
He'd run to follow it, missed it at the traffic lights, almost caught up with it at the next.
But it had to have been someone else.
‘I tried what you suggested,’ Ashdown said.
‘I think she's going to go for it.’
‘Did she mention me, at all?’
‘I told her you'd given up and gone home.
Said she could check with the hotel if she wanted to be sure.
I don't feel very good about this part of it, Joe.’
‘Don't get soft.
After the last couple of times, she's not going to turn up for anything that has my name attached to it.
But if she thinks she's meeting you, that's different.
I know what I'm dealing with now, Jack.
Should have realised it the first time, but that's what happens when you make assumptions.
This time she won't slip away.’
‘Tell me straight, Joe.
Do you really believe all this is worth it?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I mean, what if she really is making out as well as she says?
We could be handling it all wrong.
Maybe we should be leaving her alone to get it out of her system.’
‘In Christine's footsteps?
You know where those led, don't you, Jack?’
And for this, as always, Ashdown had no reply.
Joe said, ‘Where and when?’ and Ashdown fumbled around a little at the other end of the line and then came up with an address.
‘Do you think that's where she's staying?’ he said.
Joe couldn't be sure without checking, but he thought that the street was somewhere outside of Soho proper and bordering on the fringe of Chinatown.
Not too likely to be residential, more probably a row of shops and restaurants and oriental supermarkets.
And after such a lengthy period of secrecy, was Lucy going to blow her cover so comprehensively in a single gesture?
‘I doubt it,’ Joe said.
‘But who knows?’
As soon as he'd hung up the phone, he gathered up the toys and slung them, Hamleys bag and all, under the bed.
Then he put on his coat to go out.
He had until morning to prepare.
The hire desk made a phonecall on the first credit card that he offered, and then told him that he'd exceeded his limit and they couldn't take the charge.
So then he gave them Visa, which he'd hardly been using at all, and twenty minutes later they gave him a car.
It was a plain, basic, rock-bottom hatchback, but it would do fine for the distance and had the extra advantage of childproof locks on the rear doors.
To let herself out of the back she'd either have to clamber over the seats or squeeze out of a window, and because of the shape of the doors the windows didn't even open all the way.
And it didn't much matter because, the way he had it planned, she wasn't going to be in any position to try anything.
At the slow, jerking speed of city traffic at night, he drove toward the address that Ashdown had given him for the rendezvous.
Missed the street a couple of times, and had to circle back around to it.
What he saw was more or less what he'd expected; lots of business, big crowds full of stupid people who weren't watching the traffic, every other window steamed-up and hung with a brace of Peking duck.
He went on around the block, again and again, until a space opened up in a barely-lit alley and he slipped the car in ahead of a Mercedes driver who, to judge from how he leaned on the horn, was well along the way to a heart condition.
He locked the car.
This would be fine.
He wasn't blocking anything, and at the end of the alley was the street; he'd probably pick up a ticket between now and the time of the meeting, but that would be a small price to pay for the convenience of having less than a couple of hundred yards to drag her.
When he'd managed to count down the numbers and identify the exact address that she'd named, he felt something go cold inside him.
He checked again, but there was no mistake.
Instead of the cafe or the restaurant that he'd expected, he found a narrow shop with a few uncontroversial-looking videos in the window display and a more extensive and X-rated stock of tapes and magazines inside.
The place was open late and he was able to glance in through one of those cheap glittery curtains that screened the doorway from the street.
A couple of browsers, a beefy and balding man behind the raised counter, reading a newspaper Was this her idea of a joke, or what?
It was hardly the kind of place that a girl should arrange to meet her own father, unless she had a cruel streak or a deeply insensitive nature, or both.
Any doubts that he may have had, now vanished.
His first impulse had been right.
After two failures, it was time for the gloves to come off.
Ten minutes later, he was standing as a customer in  another shop, the kind of shop that he'd only previously ever visited in a raid.
The counter assistant was a young man with an ear-ring, artfully unshaven and trailing a whiff of cologne.
‘I want a blackjack,’ Joe said.
‘A blackjack?’
‘A blackjack, a sap, I don't know exactly what your crowd would call it.
A little leather thing with lead shot sewn up in it.’
‘You know they're not legal.’
‘The fuck they aren't.
Are you going to sell me one, or not?’
He chose the blackjack from a selection on a velvet tray, and then he looked at some handcuffs — real ones, this time, but heavier than regulation and suggestive of overkill.
From the same shop he could have picked up enough straps and buckles and ties to restrain King Kong.
He could have bought chain mail underwear, or a whole-head rubber mask with nothing interrupting its smoothness but a single, tiny breathing hole.
But he settled for the blackjack, and charged it to Visa.
Then he checked on the car, took the long walk back to his serviced apartment, and spent a restless night staring at the stain patterns on his ceiling.
He was out again early; too early even for the car to have been ticketed yet, as he found when he got in and turned the engine over to be sure that the cold and damp of the early hours wouldn't leave him with any last-minute problems.
It caught on the second try, and after a minute's revving he switched off the ignition and let it die.
No messing around with public transport this time.
This time, he was going to have everything covered.
The video shop wasn't open yet.
He walked around the block a number of times to check all of the approaches, any possible escape route, then he picked up some hot coffee and a sticky croissant and settled in a doorway to watch.
It was a cold morning, and a thin jet of steam rose from the pinhole vent on the coffee cup lid.
As he waited, he couldn't help thinking about that first night.
The tourists, with their Coke and Danish.
The lorry drivers in their big, companionable groups, with a much different Lucy Ashdown in amongst them.
In his memory, it took on the aura almost of an age of innocence.
The video shop didn't open up until a few minutes after ten.
By then he was thoroughly chilled.
He'd shifted position and walked up and down a piece of the street a few times, but this was hardly enough on a day when his own breath hung in the air before him.
He shuffled, he stamped, he stayed well back in the shelter of the narrow brick passageway that he'd found as a better lookout point.
He'd another half-hour to go before the time of the meeting, but he wanted to see her arrive.
It went without saying that he didn't want to be seen, but it was worth the extra discomfort of hanging around for the extra information that he might pick up.
How she came, and from which direction.
Whether she'd be alone, or would have someone waiting.
But when the time finally arrived, he hadn't seen any sign of her at all.
He gave it a few more minutes.
Maybe she was waiting somewhere, and watching as well.
Or maybe she was just late.
Or perhaps there was some other, unofficial entrance, and right now she was getting ready to give up and leave by the same way.
He moved out with abrupt decisiveness.
He hardly even noticed the complaints of the people that he shouldered aside, or from the cars that were forced to stop as he set out to cross the street.
The beefy man was back on his seat behind the raised counter.
His shirt was the same one as the previous night, only his newspaper was different.
There was one browser, a sad-looking hawk of a man whom Joe had seen entering a while before.
And that was it.
What now?
Flexing his fingers so that they popped with the cold, he looked around tensely.
The beefy man looked up at the sound.
She might still arrive.
He could hop up behind her and pop her one with the blackjack, no discussion, no fuss, just an instant human sack that he could throw over his shoulder and rush to the car.
He'd lay it on as gently as he could, and when she came round she wouldn't even remember how it had happened.
The browser wouldn't move to interfere, and the man at the counter…
The man at the counter said, ‘Are you Joe Lucas?’
Joe looked up at him.
The man was elevated and screened-in like an auctioneer, to deter attack and to give him an overall view of every part of the shop.
Joe would have liked it better if they'd been level.
He said, ‘Why?’
‘You're expected.
Twenty-five quid.’
Joe glanced around uneasily.
He'd been thinking that he'd covered every angle, but now he was feeling as if he'd been wrong-footed.
‘What if I don't have it?’
‘Then you don't get to see her.’
‘Well, I don't.’
‘We take Visa.’
the man said, lifting the card machine from behind the counter and slamming it down on the top.
Feeling slightly unreal, Joe handed up his card.
He didn't bother with the returned slip.
Hadn't been bothering with them for a while, now.
It wasn't as if they were real money.
The beefy man climbed down from behind his counter and led Joe to the back of the shop, where he unlocked a door.
Joe looked in and saw a dark stairway.
and then he looked at the man.
Who said, ‘Top of the stairs.
Third door along.’
The stairs creaked as Joe climbed.
It was as if he'd moved through a layer of reality and into something older, a prewar world of poor light and brown paint and damp walls.
The stairs were barely wider than his shoulders, and there was a smell of old plaster and distemper.
When he reached the top, he stopped on the landing for a moment to allow his eyes to adjust; there was illumination of a kind, coming down from a grimy skylight set into the angled ceiling, and it showed nothing much more than three old-fashioned doors and a bare wooden floor.
Even the floor wasn't straight.
He moved as quietly as he could.
He eased his hand into his trouser pocket, and slipped the blackjack loop over his wrist.
The padded teardrop of shot was warm to his touch.
A tap.
Just a light tap.
Minimal damage, instant compliance.
Without knocking, he opened the door.
Something wasn't quite right, here.
She was standing at the far end of the room, waiting for him.
It was a deep room, like two knocked into one.
His end had no carpet, and its walls were panelled with old painted boards like a fisherman's cottage.
Hers was draped with dusty red velvet, and there was a worn armchair alongside her in the same material.
When she spoke, even her voice was wrong.
‘Surprise, surprise, Joe,’ she said.
He looked to the side of the room and saw the plastic speaker from which the sound had come; it was a component from an old car stereo, and it hung from a hook with its wire incompetently stapled to the boards.
He advanced to the wall-sized sheet of glass that divided the room down its centre.
‘You knew it was going to be me,’ he said.
And she smiled, faintly.
She said, ‘Do you think I'd arrange to meet my own father in a place like this?’
‘It wouldn't amaze me.
You've got no shame that I can make out.’
It looked like two rooms in one, because that's what it was; Joe had recognised the layout as that of a disused encounter studio, a place whose sole commodity would once have been three or four minutes of stilted conversation with a naked woman in the armchair.
The glass would prevent contact, and when the time ran out she'd stand and draw the velvet curtain across to end the  encounter.
They'd never really taken off, and repeated raids and tougher licensing had killed them completely.
At the glass, Joe stopped.
She was returning his stare without flinching.
Her eyes were cool, her gaze level.
Her hair had been re-styled and had nothing of the incompetent dye job that had once been her most eyecatching feature.
Her clothes were good, and seemed to have been chosen by someone who knew what she was doing.
Even her shoes, he noted with a glance down, were expensive, and shoes could be such a giveaway.
She seemed older, and she held herself differently.
She looked like some rich man's daughter.
Or some rich man's plaything.
‘It was you I saw in the car,’ he said.
‘Don't look at me as if I worked here,’ she said.
‘I just rented some protection.’
‘Yeah, some arrangement.
You make the booking, I pay the money.’
‘I had to set it up this way.
I can't trust what you tell me, Joe.
Last time I let you make friends, you chained me to a table.
I'm not getting fooled again.
I can see straight through you by now.’
‘You think so?’ he said, wondering what it would take to break the glass.
‘And I can see through my dad, as well.
He couldn't tell a lie to save his life.’
‘Or yours.’
The answer regarding the glass would probably have to be, nothing that lay immediately to hand.
If there had been a chair on this side of the room, she'd had it removed.
All that he had was the blackjack, and that wouldn't do it.
He said, ‘If you're so well-informed and I can't be trusted, what are we doing here?’
‘I wanted you to see me, Joe,’ she said.
‘Do I look as if I'm having a hard time?
Do I look as if I'm in danger?
Look at me now, and remember what I was, and be sure to tell my father what you saw.
Be honest, Joe.
I was on the skids, now I'm doing all right.
How would you rather see me?’
‘This isn't you,’ Joe said.
‘This is some whore with money.’
The remark went home, hard as a rubber bullet.
Her face tightened.
Her eyes went from cool to a deep, deep chill.
‘All right,’ she said, ‘that's enough.
You don't know anything.
I'm closer to my sister now than I ever was when she was alive, and I'm closer to knowing what happened to her.
I'm not going to let you mess that up.
Go home, Joe.
You look as if you need it.’
Joe dived for the door.
She seemed to read what he was doing in an instant, but he didn't wait around to see her reaction.
He slammed out onto the landing, and kicked open the door to the next room.
Given that there was no way through the glass itself, she had to have entered from somewhere.
The next room was a garbagey mess of ripped packaging and stacked video cases, and old display material that had been slung in and forgotten.
The third and final door opened onto another dark passageway.
The floor was so uneven that it was like running through the Crazy Cottage in a funfair; the building itself seemed to pitch around him like a listing boat.
He reached the turning in four long strides, used the wall to speed himself on around the corner.
There was another landing here, and more stairs; there was noise of some kind from down below.
A door stood half-open, showing a mirror-image view of the room that he'd just left.
Nobody was in sight.
He kicked the door all the way back and then, when it bounced against the wall, went in and kicked the armchair around in case she'd curled up and was hiding on that.
She wasn't.
So the open door wasn't a ruse, and she really had run for it.
‘Shit,’ he said to the empty room, and then left it to chew on the idea.
He still had a chance to catch her.
Those shoes, they hadn't been the running kind.
He clattered down the stairs two, three at a time, and almost fell when he reached the bottom.
The noise was that of a restaurant kitchen.
Not one of the big places, but one of the little shop-sized Chinese cafes that didn't even display an English menu.
There was just the one chef, and he was standing at what looked like a domestic range using a wire scoop in a king-sized wok.
‘Did she come through here?’
Joe demanded, remembering the last time that she'd dumped him into trouble in a Chinese restaurant, but the chef said something angry and then ignored him and so Joe pushed on past and shouldered his way through into the main part of the premises.
‘Did she come through here?’ he demanded of the astonished-looking Chinese family at one of the restaurant's six plain tables, and they gave him a look of complete incomprehension.
For a moment when he emerged into the street, he was completely disorientated.
Nothing looked familiar, and yet he'd gone around the block again and again in anticipation of something like this.
But then a couple of features clicked into place, and the world stopped its spinning.
He looked both ways, but saw no running figure.
Looked again, more carefully this time, and saw no-one that resembled her at all.
There were about thirty shops within sprinting distance.
There was an entrance to a shopping complex and another to a four-screen cinema.
There was a steady crowd pushing its way along, the usual anonymous array of big city faces with other things on their minds.
It was hopeless.
For the third time, he'd had her within reach and then lost her.
She hadn't simply evaded him; she'd evaded him each time with an ease that had left him looking like a fool.
His anger barely contained, like a storm in a bottle, Joe walked the distance back to where he'd left his rented car.
There was no ticket, but there was a big sticker plastered  across the windscreen.
Do Not Attempt to Move this Vehicle .
the sticker read.
The offside front wheel had been clamped with a locking shackle.
Well, to hell with it, he thought.
Who needs it now?
And he took out the keys and threw them onto the bonnet.
And then as he turned and walked away he took the blackjack, which had come out of his pocket in the same handful, and tossed it into the first unblocked drain that he saw.
The weight of the shot drew it down through the grating and out of his sight like a skittering lizard.
Hold it in, he told himself.
Use it.
Don't blow it all off like some nobody would.
Stiffly, walking like a machine, he headed across town for his apartment.
If anybody had spoken to him, he probably wouldn't have heard.
Not that anybody would have been tempted.
His face was like something brewed up out of spit and bile.
Back in his room, he carefully laid himself down on the bed.
In the next apartment, someone switched on the TV.
Joe covered his head with his pillow.
The place was jerry-built.
The walls were thin.
And the pillow blanked out almost none of the sound at all.
It wasn't even a show that he liked.
Joe came off the bed like a Saturn launcher.
He reached the door in a single bounce, and flung it open.
The passageway outside was still reverberating from the crash when he started in on the door of the next apartment.
There wasn't much to it, just painted ply over a cardboard shell, and its lock went spinning across the room at the second kick.
Joe stood in the doorway, and roared.
A mousy-looking woman sat on the end of the bed, her face a blank-looking O of surprise.
She was wearing a quilted housecoat, and in her hand was a hairdryer.
A man of around the same age was squatting down in front of the TV set, belatedly fumbling to turn down the volume; he was in his underwear, and was as pale as lard.
‘Christ almighty,’ Joe shouted, ‘where do you draw the line?
It's the middle of the day!’
‘Fuck you, peeping tom,’ the woman shrilled.
‘Get out of here!’
‘I'm turning it down!’ the man was gabbling.
‘I'm turning it down!’
‘Yeah, do that,’ Joe suggested, and he walked over and put his hand behind the man's head and pushed him face-first into the screen.
The cheap TV rocked on its legs as the man grabbed at it in an over-eager embrace, and Joe turned to the woman on the bed.
The flying hairdryer hit him just above the eye, flex trailing like the tail of a kite, and as he swatted it away the plug whipped around and smacked into his teeth.
The fury burst again in his head like an overloaded artery, washing through him in a hot and irresistible wave.
He was half-blinded as he reached for her.
His hand shot out like a slaughterhouse bolt, and closed on air; she'd ducked out from under, and was already halfway to the door.
‘Cheap little slut,’ he yelled.
‘What would your father say?’
‘You tell me,’ she said from outside, and then she hit the corridor fire alarm.
The siren noise was terrific.
It exploded in Joe's head like a grenade, yet another battering shock to add to the effects that had gone before.
He put his fists to his temples.
He could feel the blood as it pounded there.
He screwed his eyes shut, but it was as if his sight was being destroyed by the light of a thousand flares.
He screamed, loud and long, but the pain wouldn't lessen.
So then he sank onto the floor, to make himself as small as possible so that he could wait out the agony.
Nothing like this could last for ever.
Even the sun had to burn itself out, one day.
As he waited, he rocked.
And as he rocked he said her name, over and over and over again.
She felt bad about what was happening to Joe.
Even in the short time since he'd chased the car along the street, she could see that he'd gone further downhill.
She felt guilty, she felt responsible.
If it hadn't been for her, he wouldn't even be here.
He'd be home, doing his job and living whatever life he had that didn't include her.
Looking back at his forlorn figure as the car had accelerated away, she'd wondered if there might be some way to set him back on his rails.
All right, so she'd used him a little , but this was all way out of proportion.
She couldn't remember where she'd been going at the time.
A chauffeur in uniform and the more upmarket end of Bayswater, was all that she could recall.
But that side of it was Christine's department anyway.
Should the haziness of her memory be a matter for concern?
Their bargain was working, and Lucy didn't care to examine the arrangement any more closely than that.
The more immediate problem was with Joe.
The next time that she'd spoken to her father, she'd suggested a meeting in the certain knowledge that it would be Joe who would turn up; and he had.
Every precaution that she'd taken had proved to have been justified, but she doubted that she'd managed to do any good.
Joe had called her some names, and hadn't been reassured at all.
He'd become a wreck of a man.
He'd lost weight, his eyes were staring and red as if they'd been rolled in grit, and his clothes hung on him like a scarecrow's; it was almost as if , in the course of the past few weeks, he'd been drained of the zest  and the energy and the sense of confidence that she'd steadily been picking up.
She felt that they'd become bound together, somehow.
They were like dancing partners, waltzing away into darkness.
She no longer felt threatened by Joe.
She could forgive him the anger, she could forgive him the names.
She could forgive him anything if only he'd go home and take away the guilt she was feeling at the idea of dragging him down.
he was like a terrier, unable to let go in spite of a beating, and it was hard for her not to feel responsible; because, after all, didn't his persistence show that she'd come to matter to him, at least a little?
On that basis, forgiveness came easily:
But she wondered if, even given time and the success that she was hoping for, he might ever come to feel the same way about her.
Joe was taken in the back of a police van to the Divisional Headquarters on Vine Street.
The back of the van held a faint odour of vomit, despite an obvious hosing-out and the liberal use of an industrial disinfectant.
He gave no trouble and sat with his head down and his elbows on his knees, hands loose and empty.
When the van came to a halt and the loading doors were opened he slowly raised his head and blinked at the light, like some slow-moving reptile whose rock had been taken away.
‘Move yourself,’ the officer at the van's open end said, and Joe clambered out.
Vine Street itself appeared to be a short cul-de-sac that was hardly more than an alley, and mostly dominated along one side by the towering rear facade of some big hotel.
Under the steam vents and the aluminium air shafts and the painted-over windows, kitchen porters were hosing out galvanised bins.
The station was opposite, and not nearly as imposing.
A police Rover had been parked half-on the pavement, along with a couple of officers' cars.
In the rear window of one of these, a handwritten notice  read Murder Investigation — do not ticket or clamp — See Stn Officer CV .
A uniformed man on either side of him, Joe walked past the vehicle to a steel-shuttered garage door which stood just beyond the public entrance.
and waited under a camera eye as the door clanked and banged upward to reveal a small covered garage yard.
He was taken across the yard, down a narrow passageway lined with stuffed brown paper sacks of confidential waste, and through the door at its end into the Vine Street Charge Room.
Several hours later, after statements and interviews and a considerable number of phonecalls, Owen Nelson went down to take a look at the prisoner in cell number three.
Nelson was thirty-five, although most people thought he was younger.
He'd been a uniformed inspector with the Soho Unit for nearly three years, and was probably due for a move; no sign of it yet, but there was most likely a memo waiting deep in the machinery, easing its way out at the speed of a splinter.
Rather like God, New Scotland Yard could sometimes work in mysterious ways.
The cell block stood just off the L-shaped charge room, a corridor almost completely without daylight.
The corridor and all of the cells had been recently painted, but gaiety wasn't the theme around here.
Two doors down, the gaol sergeant was copying some fresh prisoner details onto one of the name boards from a charge sheet.
The sergeant was big and burly, with a rugby player's face and a small trimmed moustache.
His name was Rosenthal but everybody, for no reason that Nelson had ever learned, called him Katz.
Probably something that had been generally agreed over the remains of the first person that had dared to call him Rosie.
Nelson stopped by Lucas, Joseph Alan , and lifted the cover on the spyhole.
The cell had no features other than a low shelf bearing a thin vinyl mattress.
Lucas had been relieved of belt, tie, shoelaces, and everything in his pockets, and now he sat in the far corner on the mattress with his knees drawn up  and his arms clasped around them, as if to present the smallest possible outer surface to the world.
He might have been rocking slightly, it was difficult to tell.
He was staring into the space before him.
But his mind was clearly somewhere else.
‘What's the word?’
Rosenthal said, laying down the chalk and moving toward Nelson.
‘He checks out.
He's a county bobby all right, and they want him back.’
At the door between them Rosenthal stopped, and did a brief visual check of the cell's occupant.
‘Thank God somebody does,’ he said.
Whoever was on the other side of the door, he was singing.
In the nick south of the river where Nelson had done his early constable training, such a case would have been referred to as an AFD.
He'd always assumed that this was a piece of official terminology until one day he'd asked what it meant, and found out that it stood for Another Fucking Drunk.
He said, ‘In fact, they've been looking for him.
He was supposed to turn in for a disciplinary hearing over three weeks ago, but he never did.
Just took his suspension and vanished down here.’
‘What was he up for?’
‘He beat up a woman in custody.’
Rosenthal was about to ask something further, but then he stopped himself and said, ‘Don't tell me.’
‘Yeah,’ Nelson said, leaning to look through the spyhole again.
‘Can you imagine an uptight bastard like that in the Vice Squad?’
Lucas hadn't moved.
Yes, he was rocking, but barely.
Nelson watched him with no contempt, no outrage, no brotherly feeling.
It was as if the sight of the man prodded at a dead spot within him, where no response would come.
‘Let's have him out,’ he said.
Nelson went out into the charge room.
It was deep inside the building and, like the cell corridor, received little daylight through its small, high windows.
The main part of the chamber was taken up by a table, long and black  and battered, that stood at right angles to the sergeant's desk and had about half a dozen unpadded chairs around it.
Nelson went around to the far side of the table, and sat down to wait as Lucas was brought from his cell.
The situation wasn't as clear-cut as he'd have liked.
The only complaint to have survived the past few hours was the one relating to the damage of an apartment door; the couple in the next room had wanted Lucas to be prosecuted, crucified even.
but had somehow formed the impression that the police would be able to proceed without any further input from them.
Nelson didn't know their background story, and didn't want to.
But at the first mention of statements and the prospect of court appearances, they'd suddenly become tight-lipped and forgetful.
They wouldn't say anything, sign anything, or even give their addresses.
Then they left the building muttering something about justice.
Sometimes you just couldn't win.
When people were in trouble, the police were more welcome than the Lone Ranger and Tonto.
Any other time, they'd believe anything they heard as long as it was bad.
Nelson's experience was of an organisation that had its regular human share of good soldiers, time-servers, wasters, whiners, climbers, saints, piss-heads and heroes; and when the pressure was on, probably more of the latter than it was fair to expect.
Things happened, one heard stories, but overall you got on with the job.
But then along came someone like Lucas, and put the mark of Cain on everybody.
Handling him was going to be a delicate business, and Nelson was more than relieved that the job wouldn't fall to him.
Lucas came to the table, his shoes in his hand.
Apart from being tousled and run-down, he seemed normally competent.
He pulled out the chair across from Nelson and sat down, placing his shoes on the floor beside him.
Then he folded his hands on the tabletop, and waited.
Normally, any ordinary citizen subject to dropped charges would receive a stony-faced apology and the  opportunity to leave via the public foyer.
But Lucas was no citizen, and the situation was anything but normal.
‘I don't know who you think you are,’ Nelson said, ‘or what you think you're doing.
But this is the last time you do it around here.’
‘Is there a charge?’
Lucas said patiently.
‘I'll tell you what's going to happen.
Two of the lads are going to go back to the apartment hotel with you.
You pick up your gear and you settle your bill.
There'll be no more trouble.
Then they'll take you to the station, they'll watch you buy your ticket, and then you'll get on the train and you'll bloody well stay on it until you're back where you belong.
Am I making myself clear?’
‘What happens at the other end?’
‘Being perfectly honest, I couldn't give a stuff.’
And Lucas shrugged.
After all, it wasn't exactly as if he was being given a choice.
Lucy sat, her hand over her eyes, and thought about the way her life was heading.
She thought about how it usually went.
Mornings, she'd sleep late.
She'd a sense that she dreamed, but then could never remember what.
She'd remember odd images, odd words, the way a place looked.
Often it was that same suite, in the same hotel.
And that was about as much as she cared to recall.
The afternoons were mostly her own.
She'd go shopping, now that she had some money, or go to see places that she'd heard of.
She went to the Wax Museum, she visited the Tower.
She went to Trafalgar Square and dodged pigeon shit.
The afternoons were also good for going to the cinema; they had all of the stuff that would take about six months to make a brief appearance in her home town and she could see it on decent-sized screens instead of one like the end of a shoebox.
In many ways, the movies were best of all.
They helped her not to think too much.
It was early one evening, coming out of the Empire in Leicester Square with a head full of Harrison Ford, that she'd seen Gary again.
Gary, the hospital porter who'd helped her out and whose friends had treated her so strangely.
She hadn't forgotten that she owed him taxi money.
There was a line already forming outside the cinema for the next performance; Gary wasn't in it, but he was waiting to one side where a number of cutoff cast-iron pillars made an ideal site for leaning and lounging.
He was in his good clothes.
It was already dark but the square glowed with marquee brilliance, and none more brilliant than the Empire's.
The electronic billboard with its tacky Stardust effect was the ultimate nothing, an entity written entirely in light.
There he was, an island of stillness in the flow of pre-Christmas shoppers and tourists, and Londoners heading into the glittering heart of the capital for the best of all possible times.
He was looking around, and hadn't seen her.
She called his name.
At first, he didn't hear.
Then she saw him look around quickly, but in all the wrong directions.
So she called him again.
This time, he saw her.
She was walking toward him now, and she saw him rise as if stung and then start to back away.
‘Hey, Gary,’ she said, but it made no difference.
This was all wrong.
There was something in his face that had no right to be there, and the fact that it was so unexpected made it hard for her to recognise; but recognise it she did, and its presence bewildered her.
Fear.
Gary bumped someone, didn't seem to notice.
He continued to back off.
‘I don't know you,’ he warned her.
‘Leave me alone.’
‘Gary?’ she said.
‘I only wanted to tell you thanks.’
‘I don't want thanks.
I don't want anything from you.’
‘And I owe you for the taxi.’
‘You don't owe me for anything.
Just stay away from me.
I don't want any more trouble.’
She couldn't get near.
But then, by a makeshift badge stall surrounded by litter and empty cider bottles, they got into a group of people before a West African busker.
His long hair was tied back in a scarf and he was playing guitar to a whistling song.
The crowd that he'd pulled wasn't much, but it slowed Gary down a little.
‘Gary,’ she began, and with disbelief saw his fear become actual terror.
‘Fuck off, will you?’ he almost screamed, and he thrust a chicken's claw up in the air before her face.
The chicken's claw was his hand.
It was twisted and thin.
and lined with two long, fresh-looking operation scars like zips.
The scar tissue was pink and shiny against the natural brown.
She stopped, staring, understanding nothing.
‘Haven't you done enough?’ he demanded.
And then he turned and stalked away.
He almost ran.
That had been…what?
Four, five days ago?
It was impossible to be sure.
Sometimes the days and the nights ran together.
The days she mostly piddled away, while so many of the nights belonged to Christine.
Progress seemed to have halted; two more furtive searches of Charlie's office had turned up nothing other than his hidden Scotch bottle but then, every evening of the day after a job, she'd see him go in there empty-handed and the book would be on his desk when he summoned her.
She was getting pretty good at inventing details for him to note down.
Maybe Christine was feeding them across without her knowing, it was impossible to say.
Now Lucy sat, her eyes covered.
With her spread hand she could pinch both of her temples and she'd been sitting like this for a some time, holding out the light.
For a while, there, she'd been convinced that everything was coming together.
But it hadn't, not completely, and now she was beginning to have the feeling that all of the best chances had been narrowly missed and the whole thing was now starting to come apart again.
Someone moved, close by, someone whose approach so far had been in silence, and she quickly took her hand away.
He stood before her.
A dark figure, tall.
He said, ‘Is everything all right?’
‘I think so,’ she said, straightening in her seat and looking around like someone who'd fallen asleep on a long journey and awoken in an unfamiliar place.
‘How long have I been here?’
‘Half an hour.
more or less.
I don't always like to disturb you.’
‘I'm sorry if I'm doing anything wrong.
This is strange for me.
I'm not used to being in a church.’
He gestured around.
as if commending the place for her use.
She was in the third of its twenty-odd rows of wooden seating.
One city centre chapel, probably a listed building, Georgian stonework, Victorian plumbing, congregation almost nothing.
Lavender wax on old timber, bad light through yellowed glass, air like the inside of a grave.
‘Whatever you want from it,’ he said, ‘that's what it's here for.
Have you been away?’
‘Since when?’
The cleric raised his eyebrows, half-amused.
Not as if they were old friends, but as if there was no reason on earth why, given time, they couldn't be.
‘Don't you remember?’ he said.
‘I've been through some interesting times of late,’ Lucy told him, and smiled along with him when she saw that he understood the reference she was making.
But her smile died as the cleric went on.
He said, ‘Perhaps you've forgotten.
It was a while ago, now, more than a year.
You sat in that same spot and I stood right here.
You said that you weren't a Catholic, but there was something that you wanted to confess.
I said that it was all right, because I'm not a Catholic either but if you wanted to talk, I was willing to listen.
But then you left.
When I saw you again last week, I wondered if you'd changed your mind.’
‘I was never here last week,’ Lucy said.
‘Well if it wasn't you, then you must have a twin sister.’
Abruptly, she stood.
She wanted to make some lightweight remark that would let her out gracefully, but nothing came.
‘Wait,’ he said with some concern.
‘Whatever it is, don't run from it.’
But she waved him back and scrambled awkwardly out of the pew.
She didn't run.
But she made it to daylight in one hell of a hurry.
Josie found her when she turned in for work at the club that evening.
Lucy had curled up on a pile of old throwouts in the corner of the Wardrobe department, and had pulled some of them over herself like a burrowing animal.
‘Hey,’ Josie said.
‘Hey, come on, what's all this?’
And she teased her out and straightened her up a little, and then she went over to the makeup table and tore off a length of the soft toilet roll that she used instead of Kleenex, and then she sat on the floor beside Lucy and put her arm around her shoulders.
‘What's happened?’ she said, but for a while Lucy could only shake her head.
‘I don't know, Josie,’ she managed at last.
‘I think I'm losing my grip.
I was okay at first, I thought I was going somewhere.
But it's been weeks now, and no progress.
I'm sliding too far in.
The most terrible things are starting to seem normal.’
‘I did warn you,’ Josie said gently.
‘I know.
What am I going to do?’
‘You could just walk away.’
‘Could I?’
Lucy said, looking up at her, and right at that moment Josie would have sworn that some kind of a facade had dropped and that she was returning the gaze of a six year-old.
‘Anybody can do anything,’ Josie said, which she knew was only so much bullshit but which she also believed was a reasonable dictum for getting a person through life.
After  all, it didn't need to be true.
It only needed to be true enough of the time.
Lucy seemed to take it in, and to give it her consideration.
‘If anybody can do anything,’ she said, straightening a little amidst the old clothes and the discards, ‘then I can carry on.’
Oops.
That hadn't been the intention.
Josie squeezed Lucy's shoulders and said, ‘What about this Joe person you've talked about?
Can't he be of any help at all?’
‘No,’ Lucy said, shaking her head and looking down.
‘He means well, but all he ever does is try to grab me and take me home.’
Someone went by outside the door, but didn't look in.
Josie said, seriously, ‘Perhaps he's not wrong.
I've been watching you, and the price you're paying is too high.
This whole thing's destroying you.
You're in a dead end as far as Charlie's records are concerned, and even if you get your hands on them you've no guarantee they'll be of any use.
And even if they were…well, they won't bring Chrissie back, will they?’
But she could see that it was too late.
Perhaps there had been a moment where Lucy's guard had been down and she might have been diverted, but the moment had now passed.
I was worth a try , Josie thought sadly.
Anything was worth trying once, except for Yugoslavian chocolate.
Lucy got to her feet.
Josie's hand slid from around her as if she'd been holding nothing more substantial than a wisp of smoke.
Lucy blew her nose.
‘I'd better get to work,’ she said.
A short time later, a car pulled into the underground drive-through that had been set aside for taxis and pick-ups at the mainline rail terminus.
This was where Joe had  brought Lucy, what seemed like an age before, and this was where he'd lost her.
This time Joe was the prisoner, and two strangers his escorts.
Neither of them knew him, the assignment wasn't exactly official.
and the one who owned the car was itching to get Joe dumped so that he could turn around and make the slow, crawling drive across town to his home.
It had been a long day for him already, and if he made it back before nine he was going to be lucky.
The other man was in no particular rush to be anywhere, being newly-divorced and having been thrust back into bedsit-land alone and at the age of forty-two, but out of a range of possibilities the prospect of hanging around on a station platform with Joe Lucas had to rank among the lowest.
So they pulled in ahead of the taxi rank in the underpass, and the one next to Joe leaned across him and opened the door, and almost in unison they told him to bugger off home.
Joe got out slowly, stiffly, and he straightened up and took a deep breath of the exhaust-tainted air.
The lighting down here was bright, the surroundings that depressing blend of streaked concrete walls and painted metal fittings that had become the principal feature of late twentieth-century gothic.
An observer would have seen a raggedy man with his possessions gathered into a couple of carrier bags, his hair uncombed, and no life in his eyes at all.
They'd have seen him walk toward the escalators as the car drew away, moving as if on some rudimentary automatic pilot.
And then, as the escalator carried him up into the main concourse of the station, they'd have seen the spark returning almost like the glow of a neon tube being borne up into a powerful field of energy.
He dropped what luggage he had into the nearest garbage receptacle and then, ignoring the ticket windows completely, headed over toward the phones.
Most of them seemed to be the kind that took the prepaid cards that he never had, but there were a couple of pay booths at the end of the row and he made for those.
One was coming free as he approached.
A few people were waiting and one of them called out angrily as Joe stepped in ahead of them all, but he gave him a one-second blast of his sub-zero gaze and said, ‘Police business,’ and then he turned his back and forgot the man completely.
His small change had been returned to him, along with his belt and laces.
He fed the slot, dialled Jack Ashdown's number, and then fed it some more.
‘Oh.
Hello, Joe.’
Always that first momentary disappointment, with Jack Ashdown's realisation that it wasn't the voice that he was most hoping to hear.
‘How's everything?’
‘Hunky fucking dory,’ Joe said.
‘I've had a change of air and the chance to do some thinking.
Lucy's been phoning you regularly, right?’
‘Not regularly.
Just whenever she can.’
‘What time?’
‘It could be any time.
Mostly evenings, but not always.’
‘And she'd never say where from.’
‘She made me promise not to ask.’
‘But you know where, don't you, Jack?’
A fatal hesitation.
It told Joe most of what he wanted to know.
But it hadn't yet told him everything.
He said, ‘When she first started making the calls, how did she pay for them?’
‘I don't understand.’
‘Like hell you don't.
She was living hand to mouth and she wouldn't spare the cash if she could help it.
I reckon she was calling collect and that you were accepting the charge.’
‘Maybe once or twice.
I don't know.
It's something I don't remember.’
‘Had your phone bill yet, Jack?’
Another silence at the other end of the line.
Ashdown could have hung up on him now, and messed him up completely.
But Joe knew that Ashdown would do nothing of the kind.
Joe said, ‘If you've been billed, then you've also had a statement giving the number that she called you from.’
The silence continued.
Then Jack Ashdown said, ‘I wasn't going to say anything.
Not unless there was an emergency.’
‘You think this has turned into a game, or what?
This entire business is an emergency, Jack, or had you forgotten that?
You're letting me run around like a headless fucking chicken while you've got the one piece of information that could lead me straight to her!’
‘I'm not letting you do anything, Joe.
You're doing it because I can't stop you.’
‘Well, pardon me.
Who asked who, Jack?
You think I'd have screwed up my own life like this if you hadn't come along with your cap-twisting routine and your sob story all about how you were losing your little baby girl?’
‘That was then.
But you've changed.
You started to scare her.
Now you've started to scare me.’
‘So instead of letting me finish it, you let her carry on giving me the runaround.’
‘She says she's doing fine.
I'm starting to believe her.’
‘Shall I tell you what it is she's doing, Jack?’
‘I don't want to know.’
‘Say that again?’
‘She's told me that it's nothing she regrets.
That's good enough for me.’
‘She's screwing for money, Jack.
Just like Christine before her.
She's riding in big cars and she's dressing like a tart.
Somebody's running her, somebody's using her.
I might have stopped it already if it wasn't for you.
What kind of a father do you call yourself?’
‘I'm going to hang up.’
‘Want to bet?’
And Joe waited, cruelly, and nothing happened at the other end of the line.
And then he said, ‘Give me the number, Jack.’
It seemed to ring out for a long time.
Then someone picked up and he heard a woman say a curt and cautious, ‘Yes’
‘Is Lucy Ashdown there?’
Joe said.
‘I'll check.
Who wants her?’
‘Just tell her it's a friend.’
There was a moment's hesitation and then the woman said, ‘This wouldn't be Joe, would it?’
Joe's mind raced.
Blow it now, and he'd be stuck.
The number was useless to him as long as he had no address to go with it.
But if Lucy had talked about him and given out some kind of general warning, this could be as far as he'd ever get.
So he simply said, cautiously, ‘It might be.’
‘Don't be cagey, Joe,’ the woman said.
She seemed to have dropped her voice and moved in closer to the phone as if to avoid the chance of being overheard.
‘She's told me all about you, but don't count me as an enemy.
My name's Josie.
I work with her, and I'm about as close to her as anyone around here.’
‘Go on,’ Joe said.
‘She's as tough as they come, but I think she's at her  limit.
I don't believe she ought to go on, Joe.
I think she's all set to do herself some permanent harm if she pushes it any harder.’
‘Where is she now?’
‘Out getting the coffee.
She's really low.
I know you've had problems with her before, but I don't think it'll take much persuasion to get her to give up.
But I do mean persuasion, not strongarm stuff.’
‘I'll do whatever's necessary,’ Joe said.
‘Can you be at the stage door in an hour?’
‘The stage door of where?’
She told him where to go, and how to find it.
‘I'll be there,’ he said.
It had only taken a few weeks for Lucy Ashdown to become one of the more useful ringers on Charlie's list of reserves.
She could be matched to any of four performers in the floorshow; Josie wasn't sure why, but it was as if her teenager's skin and certain odd, somehow held-back elements of her personality made her into a blank sheet onto which anything could be drawn.
Josie reflected on how easily, with just a change of clothes and a few amateur touches, Lucy had managed to transform herself into a resurrected image of her own sister.
Nothing that would stand looking at too closely, of course, but it was like all the best illusions that she'd ever seen, onstage or off because for all its contrivance, in the moment of perception it somehow transcended reality.
And it was destroying her.
Of this much, Josie was sure.
Josie's job was to suggest the changes with the most minimal effects, but the truth of the matter was that she could probably have slapped on the makeup with a billposter's brush and the trash would be equally fooled.
This was the case with Lucy, and it was the case with just about all of the recruits that Charlie had gathered together in his long and shady backstage career.
Perception was a weird thing.
Nobody really knew what they saw.
Mostly, they saw what they expected — and because the trash with whom Charlie had his dealings were rarely the deepest or most sober of men, their expectations tended to be predictable and few.
She had no pride in what she was doing.
Her cut of the  money wasn't even so great.
But then, neither was her regular income from the Cage.
With Pamela it was always the same — don't worry, we don't need it, the bills are all covered, I can take care of everything — but Josie would rather have packed her bags and moved out than go along with such a line.
Without self-respect, everything else was a sham.
Strange, she'd think, the way life could sometimes go — how you'd take on one humiliation simply in order to avoid another, and reckon yourself ahead.
After she'd completed her delivery round of the dressing rooms, Lucy came back into the department, took off her coat and threw it in the corner, and then threw herself onto one of the available chairs with an equal lack of ceremony.
She was slumped, dejected.
For once, her mileage was beginning to show.
Josie said, ‘You shouldn't be working tonight.’
There was no need to specify the kind of work that she meant, because both of them knew.
Charlie had already been by, and needed to do no more.
Lucy said, ‘It doesn't matter.’
‘Don't kid yourself.’
‘It doesn't.
I just tune out and let Chrissie take over.
She handles it all.
I'm not even involved.’
Out of all the women that she'd processed for Charlie, the hard cases and the desperate and the downright kinky, she'd felt affection for none until Lucy had come along.
Not even for Christine, whom she'd found distant and uninterested, as if in her mind she'd created a better place and preferred to wander there.
When Lucy had first talked about Christine taking her over, Josie had assumed that she was merely finding words to describe some devised means of survival.
God knows, she needed it, considering her obvious distress after that first night.
But now Josie was gradually coming to realise that Lucy was treating it not as a metaphor for anything, but as the literal truth.
She went over and crouched down before her chair, so that their faces were level.
‘You scare me when you talk like this,’ she said.
Lucy was uncomfortable, but could hardly look away.
‘Why?’ she said.
‘It works out pretty well.’
‘I didn't like it when you started, and I like it even less now.
At least you had a good reason in the beginning.’
‘I still do.’
‘No, you don't.
You got nowhere and the reason leaked away and now you're just doing it.
You got nowhere, you're going to get nowhere.
So what's the difference now between you and the rest of them?’
‘Don't do this to me,’ Lucy said quietly.
‘Admit it.
You're at the end of the road.’
‘No.
There's more.
I came here to do something.
Not to get screwed and make money.’
‘But in the end that's all there is to it, isn't there?’
‘I'll think of something else.’
Well, you had to give it to the kid for determination.
The problem was that determination seemed to be all that she now had left, and it wasn't a currency that was likely to get her any further.
Josie glanced at the old folding travel alarm that she kept open on the makeup table, and said, ‘I have to go somewhere for a minute.
What are you going to do now?’
‘I'll be around for a while,’ Lucy said.
And so Josie left her there, intending to be as quick as she could on her errand and to return before Lucy could wander away to think her thoughts of darkness somewhere else.
There were no goodbyes, no final glances around to fix the details of this tacky, tawdry workplace in her memory.
There was no particular sense of occasion, no fear, no sudden awareness of unrealised longings.
No hint that she was about to walk into the last surprise party that she could ever expect to see.
As she headed through the basement corridors that would lead her to the stairs and the stage door and thence to the waiting Joe Lucas, Josie's thoughts barely touched on the subject of dying at all.
Joe had been in the alley for a while already, enough to scout the area and to be sure of his ground.
An hour hadn't been much in the way of preparation time, and he'd been forced to improvise.
Fortunately, the alley's rubbish skips were like twin goldmines.
They were huge wheeled galvanised cylinders, each taller than a man and of the kind that could be chained to a garbage wagon and then hoisted and inverted in one great burst of hydraulic power.
Joe had climbed up over the side of the nearest and lowered himself in, rubbish sliding unsteadily beneath him, and then he'd found his balance and hunkered down and started to sift.
He had only a weak light to work by, from a solitary streetlamp near the end of the alley, but it was enough.
Someone else had been here before him, tearing open the bags of perishables in search of anything worthy of rescue.
The stink was terrible.
But one of the offices in the area must have been undergoing a thorough make-over, because along with the garbage and a tangled mess of strip aluminium and ceiling tiles he found a number of office throwouts that included a desk lamp with about five yards of trailing flex.
Bracing the lamp with his foot, he jerked the flex out and then had to steady himself as the unstable ground beneath him shifted.
There was no plug.
It was thin stuff, almost bellwire, but when he wrapped a length around either hand and then pulled, it didn't seem to stretch.
He clambered down, dusted himself off.
And then, in the shadow between the skips, he settled down to wait.
He couldn't see his watch, but that didn't matter.
For this, his patience would be infinite.
Traffic passed the end of the alley, hut no-one came in.
He wouldn't have expected them to.
With the one exception, all of the doorways in the alley seemed to be back entrances and delivery doors for daytime businesses.
At this hour they were all barricaded and fortified, protected by wire and armed with heavy padlocks.
And being a dead end, the alley led to nowhere else.
Joe crouched, and waited, and tapped out a slow and silent rhythm on the ground before him with a loop of the wire.
He heard a thunk as someone hit the crush bar on the inside of the stage door.
A yellow slice of light appeared around its edge.
He moved like flowing mercury, out from his shelter and sliding along the wall toward the door…
Which opened wider, throwing a long and somehow bizarre shape of light across the alley, everything exaggerated and distorted including the elongated and backlit shadow moving out within its frame…
And he heard the shadow speak as it moved, and tentatively, questioningly, he heard it speak his name…
And as the all-too-solid original took a single step out from the doorway he dropped the loop of wire over its head and, like a man straining to start an outboard motor, suddenly hauled it tight for all he was worth.
Then, as he felt the wire disappear into the flesh, he held it there.
She started to fight, but he was ready for that.
He dragged her backwards and off-balance, and then kept her moving so that she couldn't recover.
Joe had no illusions about how it was to kill someone.
It always went one of two ways.
Either like a snap of the fingers, leaving a sense of bewilderment at the ease with which the line between existence and history could be crossed, or else it was damned hard labour which could seem to take forever, like attempting to snuff out one of those trick candles where the flame dodged and dipped but wouldn't disappear.
When they were underneath one of the fire escapes, he stopped.
It was an old strapiron stairway with a counterbalanced ladder which, assuming that somebody kept it oiled and tested, would drop to give one-way access to ground level.
He had to hold her one-handed for a moment, and to hold her steady even though she was fighting him hard.
There was fury but not much strength in it, like the tantrum of a very small child.
‘Not much longer,’ he promised, and threw the loose end of the wire over the lowest part of the ironwork.
Because he'd wound so much of it around his hand, the bundle went with some weight and accuracy and then tumbled, unravelling like a falling spider, on the other side.
He let her go, and caught the free end of the wire with both hands.
She dropped to her knees, clutching at her throat, but the wire was probably in too deep already.
Her lungs would be full of stale air that she couldn't release, while her brain was already filling with static from lack of the same.
Taking it slowly, watching the wire for any tendency to break, he hoisted her body into the air.
As her feet cleared the floor, one of her shoes fell off.
She jerked around and the wire stretched a little, but that was all.
There had been no sound since the sound of his name.
She hung and twisted, and if she felt anything when she dropped a little as he tied off the line to a handy window bar, she didn't show it.
Good piece of work, Joe , he thought with some satisfaction, as she turned slowly on the wire.
The wire creaked.
Her face came around and into the light.
And Joe frowned.
‘Oh, fuck,’ he said.
‘Who're you?’
Charlie looked in, wanting Josie, but Lucy couldn't tell him where she'd gone.
She'd moved over into the makeup chair and had been studying her own face in the mirror.
It wasn't an act of vanity, or even a professional kind of analysis; it was more with the unease of a person who picks up something familiar and finds that, at some unrealised point in the recent past, it has somehow been exchanged for the property of a stranger.
‘I don't know where she went,’ Lucy told Charlie.
‘But don't worry.
I know what to do.
I can get ready on my own.’
Watching her in the mirror, Charlie moved into the room and half-closed the door behind him.
He lowered his voice, just enough.
‘You've really taken to this, haven't you?’ he said.
Lucy turned from the mirror.
‘Is that how it looks?’
‘Don't misunderstand what I'm saying,’ he said.
‘There's a way to go yet, but you've got the makings of a real professional.
How would you feel about that?’
He almost made it sound as if this was something that he'd expect her to be proud of.
She said, neutrally, ‘It's nothing I can't live with.’
He nodded, watching her with the narrow, approving eyes of an experienced horse thief.
‘Talk to some of the others if it gets to be a problem,’ he said.
‘Anything else, you talk to me.’
‘The only thing I get scared about is the chance of someone turning rough.’
If ever I think that's a possibility, I don't make the deal.’
Oh, sure, Lucy thought cynically, and she said, ‘Has it ever happened?’
‘Once or twice,’ Charlie conceded.
‘But never anything that couldn't be handled.’
‘Ever happen to Christine?’
‘Off the top of my head, I couldn't say.’
‘And I don't suppose you could check.’
He'd already seemed to sense that she was steering him somewhere.
Lucy didn't for one moment think that she could trick him or trip him, but knew that he'd see her as young and naive and so might just let her get away with a little more.
He said, ‘Check where?’
‘In the record book.’
‘What record book?’
His gaze was steady, his face didn't change.
She'd seen the book a dozen times and he knew this perfectly well; he was challenging her to go further, but Lucy now knew better.
She shrugged and looked away, to indicate that she was backing off.
Charlie came over, hitched himself half-onto the edge of the makeup table, and looked down on her.
She felt uncomfortable.
He was too close, and she didn't know where to look.
She had a sense that Charlie was about to get paternal with her, and the prospect was an embarrassing one; but at least this would be better than his anger.
He said, ‘Now, listen.
All that stuff's strictly off-limits.
As far as you're concerned there's no book, never was.
It's my security and it's your security, but the information works both ways.
Let that stuff get into the wrong hands, and it could hang us all.’
Lucy nodded slowly, trying to look thoughtful and responsible.
‘I couldn't have a quick look through it, then?’ she said hopefully.
But Charlie gave her a pained look as if to say,You've  got to be joking , and Lucy tried to cover her tracks by pretending that, yes.
of course, that's exactly what she had been doing.
And Charlie, believing none of it and letting her see as much, slid down from the makeup table and went over to the door.
Before withdrawing, he glanced around the department.
‘Looks like you're in charge for now,’ he said, and let himself out.
He'd been more on-target than either of them had known.
Josie didn't reappear for the rest of the evening, which pissed Lucy off mightily.
She'd never been left completely alone before; for the space of a phonecall or an errand, perhaps, but never to the extent that the final responsibility for any of the work had been hers.
As she scrambled around and tried to stay level, she watched for Josie's return with the thought that, when she finally arrived, she'd damn well see what a tough time Lucy had been having.
But the fluster and the harassment were largely wasted, because Josie didn't return at all.
Her coat hung on the back of the door, her handbag stood open on the side.
As the second show was coming to an end, Lucy sat herself in the makeup chair and made a sullen face and checked her watch frequently, with the idea that Josie should catch her doing it as she finally came in through the door.
But it didn't happen.
So then, with no better grace and without even a passing thought for Josie's safety, Lucy pinned back her own hair and began to carry out the makeup job that she'd undergone so many times before.
A while later, when she was finished and dressed and sitting alone, Charlie came to take her out to the taxi.
‘It's repeat business tonight,’ he said as they climbed the rough-cast stairway to the alley exit.
‘Or did I already tell you?’
‘No,’ Lucy said as Charlie banged on the crush bar to open the door.
It really wouldn't matter to her, one way or the other.
As usual she planned to shut it all out, and let Christine take over.
‘It's not the usual setup.
He isn't here, so I have to take you to the hotel myself.
You're not going to believe this.
He's waiting to buy you supper after the show.’
They went out into the alley.
Her taxi was already there.
having reversed all the way back from the street.
The alley's dead end glowed red in the wash of its brake lights, long shadows being thrown by the garbage hoppers over on the far side, and the sound of the cab's turning engine had a hard edge in the chill night air.
‘So,’ Charlie was saying as he moved ahead to open the cab door for her, but then he stumbled slightly and muttered a curse.
He gave a kick, and something skittered across the alley and bounced against the wall opposite.
A woman's shoe, Lucy noted.
You got all kinds of crap being dumped in a place like this.
‘So since he asked for you again,’ Charlie went on as she climbed past him into the back of the cab, ‘make sure that whatever you did for him, you just keep on doing it.’
He got in alongside her, slammed the door, and moved forward to speak to the driver.
The side window was open a couple of inches, and Lucy closed it.
Outside, something moved in the shadows.
Lucy sank back into the darkness at the rear of the cab, and waited.
Okay, Christine , she thought.
This is as far as I can go .
She closed her eyes, tried to clear her mind, tried to let the world fall away with the rhythms of the journey.
But this time, nothing happened.
They pulled in before the big hotel that overlooked the park.
Even though it was late, the broad carpeted entranceway was brightly lit and all of the available off-road parking space was crammed with a mixture of upmarket image cars and stupefyingly dull, staggeringly expensive saloons.
No chauffeurs waited.
People who employed chauffeurs went to better places than this; like many of the cars it was an image hotel, all bright expensive surfaces with no detectable trace of a soul underneath.
From the basement casino through the ground-floor restaurant to the top-floor penthouse, it was little more than a money pit for any out-of-towner with an expense account.
Charlie leaned forward and said to the driver, ‘Keep the meter running.
I won't be staying.’
And then he turned to Lucy.
‘Well, kid?’
Lucy didn't move.
Frowning, Charlie said, ‘Something wrong?’
She looked at him with a rising sense of panic that she tried to conceal.
She'd been waiting for Christine, but Christine hadn't come.
It was as if she'd been calling on a dead line to an empty building.
She tried to speak.
Her throat was dry.
She cleared it.
‘I was just trying to get a couple of thoughts together,’ she said.
‘Think on your own time,’ Charlie said impatiently.
‘This is business.’
He stood by the cab with the door held open, and Lucy  climbed out in a daze.
She didn't know what she was going to do, how she was going to handle this.
It was worse than the first time.
At least the first time, she'd only a vague notion of what might lie ahead.
They went into the foyer.
Instead of going straight to the front desk as usual, Charlie guided her towards the restaurant.
She couldn't help wondering how the two of them looked.
Charlie was in a dinner jacket and black tie, but it was the outfit that he wore every night of his working life and its shape was starting to go.
And she was feeling overdressed and underconfident…
Christine might have carried it off, but Lucy was feeling cheap and obvious.
They waited by the desk of the Maître d'Hôtel, and the Maître d'Hôtel took his time in appearing.
He looked at her, then he looked at Charlie.
She could see his disdain, and it wasn't so much for her — she hardly seemed to count for anything at all in his eyes.
Charlie was the one who seemed to be inspiring his contempt.
It wasn't simply a matter of class, it was the feeling of the big-league operator for the non-contender.
Black tie and a waistcoat would never make Charlie look like a playboy, only like a bartender.
And, totally unexpectedly, Lucy found herself moved by a brief surge of affection and pity.
‘Table for Mister Wingate,’ Charlie said.
‘One moment,’ the Maître d'Hôtel said, ‘while I check,’and Lucy was pretty sure that whatever it might say on the reservations list, no booking in the name of Wingate was about to be found.
Terribly sorry, sir, now sod off.
But Charlie said, ‘You don't need to check, he should already be here.
I've brought along his guest.’
‘Oh.’
The Maître d 's expression was chilly enough to freeze a slug of flying spit.
‘Will you be staying?’
‘No thanks,’ Charlie said, totally unfazed.
‘I've seen the kitchens.’
Charlie walked away and the Maître d'Hôtel watched him with the eyes of a deep-sea predator, all dull surface  and no depth.
Lucy wanted to call after Charlie, to beg him to come back and to take her away; this was all wrong, it wasn't the way things were supposed to go at all.
But she didn't move and she said nothing, and the Maître d'Hôtel didn't so much turn his attention to her as give her the briefest of glances.
‘Stay here,’ he said.
‘I'll send a waiter to take you over.’
‘Can't you do it?’
Lucy said, but he was already moving away.
She watched his back for a moment.
And then, loudly enough to be heard from some of the nearer tables, she said, ‘Wait a minute.’
He stopped, and looked back.
She said, ‘What makes you think you can look down on me?’
But he didn't even reply.
He simply shrugged, almost imperceptibly, and walked on.
Lucy was left to kick around by the unmanned Reservations desk for a couple of minutes, and then a waiter appeared to lead her over to the table.
She felt as if every pair of eyes in the place was turning toward her.
The fact was that almost nobody even as much as looked her way as she passed, but the tight knot of embarrassment stayed deep within her all the same.
The decor in the low-ceilinged room was mostly of wicker and bamboo, with plenty of foliage washed by a green light so vivid that its effect was one of utter unreality.
Some of the casino crowd were here, an assortment of dinner jackets and plunging cocktail dresses.
Many of the tables were screened from one another, and staggered over different levels.
The effect was that of an attempt at Mediterranean good taste, contrived by and for people who had no taste at all.
The table stood somewhere in the middle of the room, but was partly screened from Lucy's approach by a trellised partition topped by some overspilling broad-leafed plant life.
As Lucy came around and into sight, a seated man began to rise.
He hovered with a nervous half-smile as the waiter drew  out Lucy's chair and seated her.
Only then did he drop back onto his own chair.
She hadn't expected to recognise him, but she did.
She even remembered his name.
Russell.
The young, nervous and over-eager man who'd been the first of her assignments for Charlie.
He seemed almost overcome by her arrival, as if she'd breezed through his mind and driven out whatever it was he'd been planning to say.
He looked around the table, fidgeted for a moment, then spied the single long-stemmed rose in a box that was lying directly in front of him.
‘This is for you,’ he said, picking it up and offering it to her.
She looked at it.
‘Really?’
‘It was an impulse.
Just a token thing.’
She took the boxed flower and then, after holding it for a moment and wondering what to do with it, laid it down alongside her place setting.
She'd never seen so much silverware, and all laid out for one person.
Her napkin had been folded to resemble a half-shell and it stood upright, unsupported.
They had two wineglasses each.
There was a lit candle between them.
‘There was no need to go to all this trouble,’ she said.
‘But I wanted to.
And I read about how dancers burn up the calories, so you're to order whatever you like.’
She peeked over at the ice bucket which stood, almost out of sight, at his elbow.
‘Champagne as well,’ she said.
‘I don't know what to say.’
‘No need to say anything,’ he said, and he smiled sheepishly.
‘I'm getting to be able to read you better and better.
You see,
I've been watching you.’
‘When?’
Lucy said, with a sharpness that seemed to surprise both of them, and he quickly stumbled on in an attempt to limit the damage.
‘I've been coming to the show every week,’ he explained.
‘Twice, in some weeks.
I've got it timed so that I arrive just before your French maid number, so I don't have to sit through all the rest of it.
You're very good’
‘Thank you,’ Lucy said hollowly.
This was even more unreal than the decor.
‘Is that you singing, or someone else?’
‘It's all on tape.’
‘But is it you?’
‘No.’
Maybe she could handle this, after all.
The waiter came with the menus and then disappeared again.
Her host repeated that she was to order anything that she wanted and she stared at the words on the card, taking none of them in.
He seemed disappointed that she hadn't been the one on the music track, but not too much.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘I think you're the best thing in the entire show,’and she thought, If only you knew .
And then he added, ‘What did you do before this?’
‘I was on a cruise liner,’ Lucy said absently, continuing to study the menu while her mind raced through all the angles.
Somehow, she'd have to end it before they moved up to the room, or the suite, or whatever Charlie's contact had lined up for them.
Russell was nodding.
‘The programme notes said you'd been in Cats .’
Programme notes?
This was the first she'd heard about any programme notes.
She hadn't even been aware that the show had a programme, other than the stuff they put on the show board in the foyer.
‘They make all that up,’ she said, dealing with the problem as roundly as she could.
‘You mean, none of it's true?’
‘No.’
He seemed disappointed, but he'd survive it.
‘Just goes to show,’ he said wistfully.
‘You can't believe everything.’
‘That's the way to be,’ Lucy said.
‘Look, the Cage is a clip joint and this one's the same only more respectable.
How much is all this costing you?’
‘Don't worry about that.’
‘How much, Russell?’
He balked for a moment.
‘More than I can afford,’ he admitted.
She looked at him hard.
trying to read him, and he shifted uncomfortably.
‘You don't need this,’ she said.
‘You're not hopeless or past it or just passing through.
So why are you doing it?’
‘For you.
he said.
‘I don't need it.’
‘But I'm in love with you.’
Alarms.
Danger.
Damn it, she should have recognised that puppydog sickness look in his eyes from the beginning.
She'd assumed that he was probably a touch simple.
But actually, he was simply smitten.
‘Now, Russell,’ she said.
‘Wait a minute.
That just isn't true.’
‘But it is,’ he insisted, as if this somehow ought to be the best news she'd ever heard in her life.
To Lucy, it was less than welcome.
‘You don't even know me,’ she warned him.
‘What you're all fired-up about is a fantasy.
I'm not who you think I am.
I'm not even a dancer.
And when I go upstairs with somebody, that isn't me either.
It's all a cheat, Russell.’
‘I don't care,’ he insisted, loudly enough to turn a few heads.
But only a few, and just for a moment.
‘You're not listening to me.
You've been had.
Now you're trying to walk through the mirror, and it isn't going to work.’
‘I want to know everything about you.
And I want you to know me.
‘Forget it, Russell,’ she said, starting to rise.
‘That isn't going to happen.’
Suddenly he was on his feet, grabbing at her sleeve.
‘But I've paid for you!’ he said, and this time it was loud enough to stop every conversation within a radius of twenty-five yards.
Jaws dropped, spectacle lenses glinted as heads turned…
And Russell found himself looking in dismay down the point of Christine Ashdown's switchblade.
Somebody gasped.
‘Back off,’ Lucy said, keeping her voice low.
‘I don't care what you paid for.
This is the line, and you don't cross it.’
Jerkily, with less than perfect co-ordination, Russell managed to release his grip on her.
Then his legs gave way, and he dropped back heavily into his seat.
‘Out,’ the Maître d'Hôtel growled from by her ear.
‘Now.’
‘Don't worry,’ Lucy said, and glanced around.
Past the shocked faces on the next table, she saw an expensive-looking bottle of red wine and some half-filled glasses.
She reached over and took one, and nobody moved to stop her.
And then, before anybody could realise what she was doing, she turned her wrist and tipped the entire contents of the glass down the Maître d 's shirtfront.
‘That's for being a prick,’ she said, and walked out.
Surely the news couldn't travel so fast; but even as she emerged from the restaurant, the night manager was hovering in the foyer with a vague, Oh-shit-don't-tell-me look on his face.
‘What's gone wrong?’ he said, looking from Lucy to the rising commotion that was beginning to emerge from the restaurant behind her.
‘We can talk in your office or we can talk out here.
I don't care either way.’
There were night staff all around them now; porters, one of the late receptionists, even a couple of the busboys from the restaurant.
They came so far and then they stopped, looking confused and wary.
Lucy looked down and realised that she was still carrying the switchblade.
Quickly, she put it away.
The night manager told the assembling crowd, ‘Thanks, everyone, you can go on back to your work.
I'll handle this.’
And then, hustling her along without actually touching her, he got Lucy away from being the unwelcome centre of the foyer's attention and ushered her into an office behind the reception desk.
It was a dismal little room.
None of the design budget of the public areas had been wasted back here.
It had a vague familiarity to it, and she wondered if she might have been in here before.
Maybe she hadn't quite been herself at the time.
The night manager didn't meet her eyes.
He paced around behind his desk, running his hand through his hair, uncertain of exactly what he was going to do.
In here, he  seemed younger than she'd first assumed.
Like the rest of the staff, he wore a burgundy-coloured uniform although, apart from his name tag, it could have been taken for a regular formal suit.
His shirt was so white that it must have been starched.
There was a cold sheen of sweat on his forehead.
‘What the hell are you doing?’ he said.
‘Are you trying to get us all strung up?’
‘I couldn't care less,’ Lucy said.
‘Oh, thanks,’ the night manager said, looking heavenward.
‘Thanks, Charlie.
Just what I needed, a psychotic fucking harpy.
You were never like this before.’
‘Maybe not.
That's because I needed to get somewhere.
Now I need to go further, so I'm changing the rules.’
Now he looked at her, and he pointed a finger.
‘Listen, you,’ he said.
‘You don't make the running around here.
What you just did was right out of order.
I'll be lucky if I come through this with my balls still attached.’
‘Look at me,’ Lucy said, ‘I'm in tears.
You think it's bad now, stick around.
I've got a police contact who'd just love to know what kind of racket you're into, here.
And if I don't find out what happened to Christine Ashdown, I'll make sure that he does.’
He blinked, as if she'd hit him from some unexpected direction.
‘Who?’ he said.
‘Christine Ashdown.
I'm her sister.’
He groped around behind him until he found a chair, and then he slowly sat.
‘Damn it,’ he said, ‘Charlie never told me.
I assumed he'd just picked you for the resemblance.’
And he shook his head in wonder, his earlier agitation all but undercut by this new discovery.
‘Did she ever come here?’
‘A few times,’ he admitted.
‘What about the last time of all?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Maybe doesn't tell me anything.’
‘And threats from kids don't exactly make me inclined to cooperate.
Why don't you just ask her?’
‘She's kind of hard to reach.
How well did you know her?’
He shrugged.
‘I didn't see her so often.’
‘But you've got a reason to remember her.’
He sat back in his chair, calculating now.
‘What's the comeback for me if I tell you?’
‘Nothing,’ Lucy said, taking another chair from by the wall and bringing it over so that she could sit facing him across the desk.
‘I'm not sorry for anything I've done, but I'm not proud either.
I did what I had to.
That doesn't mean I'd want my dad to read about it in a newspaper.’
He thought it over.
But by then she already knew that he was going to tell her.
She could read the signs.
What she saw amounted almost to an urge to confess; not to any offence, but to something that was old and troubling and somehow unresolved.
She knew that it was time to ease off, don't push too hard, just wait and let it come out.
‘We had an accident here,’ he said quietly.
‘I think that's what decided her to quit.
In fact, I know it was.’
He said.
‘I don't remember the date.
It was near Christmas, that's all I know.
Bitch of a night.
It was raining.
There were three of them, all in their twenties.
and they were as pissed as farts.
Two of them could handle it but the other one…
I'd have called him a mother's boy.
‘Charlie phoned to say they were coming over.
They wanted champagne.
This time of night, the reservations are pretty well settled; all I have to do is pick out a room in one of the quieter areas and then take them up on a passkey.
Charlie gives me a cut, I slip something to the maid in the morning, she makes the room over and nobody ever asks anything.
‘Anyway, one o'clock in the morning, and the three of them come rolling up with your sister in tow.
At first I thought trouble, but then I started to get the picture.
The mother's boy had never been laid in his life, and your sister was his graduation present from the other two.
I kind of caught her eye when the others weren't looking.
She didn't exactly like the situation, but it was no big deal for her.
Let's face it, all she'd have to do would be to sit and let him sleep it off for a while, it was probably what the kid needed most, and he'd never remember anything different.
Just pull his shirt out and mess up his hair a little, and his friends would be happy.
He was too far gone to give a damn about anything .
‘So we all go up in the lift, and the two bucks as good as carry the mother's boy into the room; he's almost completely gone, and they sit him on the bed and they  pour some of the champagne down him and then they come out.
They wanted to stay and listen at the door, but I wasn't having that.
I virtually had to drag them away.
‘I've got them halfway down the corridor, and the door opens behind us.
It's Chrissie and she says, I don't like the way he's looking.
So I go back and I'm standing in the doorway, and there's this kid on the bed and he's thrown up all over the cover and now he's starting to shake.
I've seen just about every kind of drunk, but I've never seen one shake like he did.
It was more like a fit and I'm thinking Oh, shit, how do I handle this?
And while I'm doing that, the two bucks are pushing past me into the room and they've got his shirt open and they're really doing a number on him.
They'd gone from legless to stone cold sober in nothing flat.
One's doing his pulse and the other's doing heart massage but nothing seems to be making any difference.
And all I'm thinking is, for God's sake let's get him off the premises.
If he's going to die on us, let it happen somewhere else.
‘So then I grab hold of Christine and drag her out.
She's white.
She says that's it, forget it, nothing's worth this, I'm going home.’
Lucy had been saying nothing, letting him speak without interruption; he'd seemed almost to forget that she was there, but now he fell silent as if the vividness of the memories inside his head had made the words somehow redundant.
Which was of no damned use to Lucy at all, and so she prompted, ‘She actually said she was going home?
I mean, right away?’
He seemed to stir, and became aware of her again.
‘More or less,’ he said.
‘I told her that she could do what she liked as long as she got her arse out of the building, and quick.
I got her all the way along to the lift and put her in it.
I can remember what she said then.
She said, I've had enough.
It doesn't get any lower than this.
Tell Charlie I'm out of it, I'm leaving town and making a new start.’
The words seemed to make him smile, but there  was no cruelty in it.
Nor tenderness either, but more a wistful thought of a better world where such things as new beginnings could actually take place, and which he could never realistically expect to see.
He went on, ‘When I got back to the room, it was empty.
I hadn't been gone more than a minute.
They must have used the service lift.
This was one that I didn't want the maid to know about, so I cleaned it up myself.
None of us ever saw your sister again after that.’
‘Do you know the names of the boys?’
‘Only Charlie could tell you that.’
‘If I can get it out of him.’
‘Yeah,’ the night manager said with the dry kind of irony usually reserved for flying pigs and hell freezing over.
‘Good luck.’
And then, as Lucy was rising, he said, ‘Did it ever work out for her?’
She stopped.
‘What do you mean?’
‘The new start she was going to make.’
She watched him for a moment.
She saw no attempt at deception, no trace of an attempt to manipulate.
It was a straight question, and he genuinely didn't already know the answer.
And so Lucy said, ‘Well…she got away from all this.’
He nodded slowly, as if this was good to hear.
‘She was okay,’ he said.
And Lucy, who could spot the point at which casual sentiment tipped over into bullshit, said, ‘Yeah.
I can see what fond memories you have of her.’
At which the night manager shrugged.
And Lucy walked out of his office, and out of the hotel, and into the night where a soft winter rain had just begun to fall.
There was a song that kept running through her mind, for no other reason than that of the atmosphere conjured up by its opening line, which was Midnight at the Oasis .
It was well after midnight and the cold surface of the Thames had only its elemental nature in common with a desert pool, and although she was once again sitting in the shadow of the Sphinx it was on cold, wet stone and not on sunbaked sand.
But what did it matter?
It was just a feel-good song, a piece of ephemera, and Lucy was feeling surprisingly good.
They'd always taught her that the only truly good things were those of permanent value; her first school had been a church school, and twice a week they'd had to set their chairs in a raggedy half-circle and fidget their way through one of the vicar's haranguing lectures on Life.
He was a small man, bald and beady-eyed and turkey-necked, and only in retrospect could she see that he'd probably been something of a mental case as well.
She could only now assume that Life had served him badly in some way, at least in his own opinion.
Most of the time he probably kept the fact well-concealed, but give him an audience of five-year-olds behind closed doors, and the brakes would come off.
His regular message was, in essence, that everything they thought of value was actually worthless.
Their toys would fade or break, their pets would die, and they themselves would grow up and get old and surely follow if they didn't knuckle under and live their lives in dread and apprehension of the Holy Spirit.
Unfortunately, he  never seemed to be able to give them an explanation of what this Holy Spirit was supposed to be.
It was something that you had to swallow whole, like a stone of uncomfortable size, and the act of swallowing was called Faith.
And then he'd maybe see two small boys holding hands, and the Holy Spirit would be forgotten while he hauled the bewildered pair out in front of the rest of the class and subjected them to a blistering rain of sarcasm.
Lucy wasn't sure if she believed in God or not.
On the whole she reckoned that she probably did.
But from those earliest days, she hadn't believed in the Church at all; not one scrap, not one iota, and this was why she'd been so surprised to discover herself in such a place only the previous morning.
God was something that you glimpsed in only your rarest moments, and couldn't put a name to.
Church was a place where there was a name for everything.
But then, it hadn't really been her choice to go there at all.
It had almost certainly been Christine's.
Before her, the river slowly heaved and the riverside lights danced in its swell.
Only one train crossed the near-distant bridge at this hour and that had been a night train going nowhere, its carriages empty and its windows dark.
She wasn't really dressed for this.
Her gown was thin and her jacket, a stage-prop fur, was too short.
The cold of the riverside steps was rising up her spine like mercury in a glass.
But Lucy didn't care.
This was one of those moments; not of ecstasy, exactly, but of utter calm.
They didn't happen often, and could come at the unlikeliest times and places.
They had one big enemy, and the enemy's name was Routine.
Something that she hadn't known much of, in this past year.
In fact, she'd known little peace at all.
But had she come on a journey, or what?
‘Tell me how you're holding up, kid,’ Christine said from beside her.
‘I'm doing fine,’ Lucy said.
‘I was worried about you for a while.’
‘So was I. But it's like one of those arcade video machines, sometimes you hit things you have to get through.
Next time you open your eyes, you re in a whole new phase of the game.’
‘So you reckon you're getting somewhere.’
‘Watch me.’
‘Don't worry, I am.’
They sat in silence for a while.
Two wraiths, and a river full of shadows and stars.
And then Lucy said, ‘Why did you leave me like that?’
‘I never left you,’ Christine said.
‘And what about our deal?’
‘I can't do anything that you can't do.
I can't tell you anything that you don't already know.
Because I'm Christine, but I'm also a part of you.
Once I was alone, and it was the most terrible thing in the world.
But then you picked me up, and you made me your mission — and in spite of everything that I'd lost, I gained something that I'd never had before.
As long as you remember, I'll always be with you.
But as soon as you forget me, I'm gone.’
‘I'll never forget you,’ Lucy said.
And then she looked at the empty stairway beside her.
The wet stone glinted yellow with a reflection of the embankment lights above.
There was traffic along it even at this hour, while across the river an abandoned generation slept on like larvae in their paper cocoons.
She took a breath of the cool night air.
And then, a little stiffly, she began to get to her feet.
The first light of dawn found Joe in Lucy's basement room at the mews cottage.
He was crouching amidst the emptied-out debris of her possessions, sorting through them with a patience that was deceptively gentle.
Two floors up, the red-headed woman lay face-down dead on her own bedroom carpet.
She'd been easy to surprise; she'd been expecting someone else.
Probably her dyke friend who was now feeding the rats in one of the alley's big trash hoppers.
He'd waited for Lucy but then, when she hadn't come out alone, he'd stayed well back in the shadows.
By this time he'd let Josie's body down and was checking through her pockets, which was a no-hope situation if ever there was one — women almost always carried their stuff around in handbags, and hers had to be back inside the building somewhere.
After the cab had departed he'd returned to the body search; a couple of rough-looking kids came sneaking up the alley for purposes unknown, but a long, low growl from the shadows sent them running.
He found nothing on Josie but a couple of folded Kleenex and a Tube ticket, but then when he rolled her over he heard a faint clink of metal on stone.
It was from something on a thin silver chain around her neck, and after snapping it free he stood up to inspect his find in the available light.
At first he thought it was some kind of a St Christopher medal, but it seemed too thick.
When he put his nail to the edge, it sprang open like a locket and he drew out a concertina-folded strip of paper.
The first thing he saw was her blood group.
Then something about blood sugar.
It was some kind of a medical thing; he'd seen the bracelets before, and this was just another variation.
He spread the strip out to full length.
It gave her address, her phone number, her next of kin…he tore off this last part and put it back into the locket, which he returned to her body.
It was the only piece that she'd be needing from now on.
And then.
when he'd hidden her and covered her over, he set out to find where she'd lived.
After the minor unpleasantness with the redhead, he'd felt able to shake the place down without much fear of interruption.
He'd known Lucy's room as soon as he'd seen it.
That temporary-looking, fold-out bed, her clothes on hangers.
the unzipped valise that had once belonged to her sister Christine.
He turned the bag upside down and dumped everything onto the floor, and then he did the same for the drawers and for the wardrobe.
A few things got torn along the way.
Nothing he could help.
And shortly after the daylight found him, he was pensively studying a box of a dozen contraceptives that he'd turned out of her soapcase.
It was almost as if he'd hit some kind of a block.
He couldn't go back, he couldn't go on, and yet he wasn't entirely sure why he'd stopped.
He felt like some programmed thing with a piece of its instructions missing, battering itself repeatedly against the same piece of wall while a door stood open only a few feet away.
He felt dulled and stupid.
He kept rereading the Kitemark, the safety standard on the side of the pack.
And then he saw her pass by outside the window, and heard her climbing the steps toward the front door.
It had only been a glimpse, but it had been enough.
He was back on the rails, and moving again.
There was a thin leather belt in amongst the mess on the floor, and he grabbed it on his way to the door.
He took the stairs up to the hallway two at a time, the carpet absorbing almost all of the sound.
Then he snaked back through the house  in silence, arriving at the front door just a couple of seconds ahead of her.
He could see her shape through the frosted half-glass; he didn't think that she'd be able to see him but he stayed close to the wall, just in case.
When she came through the door, he'd be behind it.
She'd hardly know a thing.
Joe sincerely believed that it wasn't in his nature to be cruel.
He got the ends of the belt around his hands and wound them into a good, tight grip.
The shape outside had stopped, and seemed to be looking for something.
He could see masses of blurred colour, not much more.
The hair gave her away.
He supposed that she'd be looking for her key.
He held his breath, not wanting to make the slightest sound that might betray his presence.
After a moment, she seemed to find what she was looking for and stepped up to the door.
He'd only a vague notion of what was going to happen after this.
It had occurred to him that maybe, just maybe, they'd be able to link him in with what he'd done.
Perhaps, when he'd dropped her, he'd better give a little thought to damage limitation and the covering of his tracks.
Rearrange the scene a little, write himself out of it.
The problem was that the whole thing had become so complex — it wasn't only what he was going to do now but there was the stuff back at the club, there was Ashdown and what he knew, there was the whole sorry business of his suspension and the charges against him…taken one piece at a time it seemed bad enough, but taken all together it was far too much for his mind to handle.
His thoughts tended to be deflected away, as if from a fast-running flywheel.
Far better to take it in stages, to concentrate purely on the shortest of short-term problems.
The most immediate of these was the demise of Lucy Ashdown.
It wouldn't be hard to achieve.
She was already within arm's length, only the door standing between them to prevent him from reaching her, and she clearly suspected nothing because  she was moving in and as her hand passed close to the glass, he could see it in vivid pastel detail.
But then he frowned, because the key that he'd been expecting didn't appear anywhere in the picture —
And the lock didn't turn as he'd been expecting it to —
And instead the folded slab of a newspaper slithered through the mail slot and dropped at his feet, and the figure on the other side of the glass turned and moved away, and seconds later he could hear the sounds of its descent down the outside stairway.
The newspaper slowly unfolded itself on the mat, flopping open to reveal some glossy law magazine that had been placed inside.
Joe lowered his hands, with the belt still around them.
And then he lowered his head, and breathed out.
And as Joe Lucas was unwinding from the pitch to which he'd momentarily raised himself, Lucy was seated at a side-table in a Wardour Street coffee shop.
The tables were high in a breakfast-bar style and so were the stools, and on the walls were movie posters and signed eight-by-tens.
Two of these featured stars that she'd heard of, the others had an inescapable bit-playerish look about them.
Takeaway business was brisk and the espresso machine howled and hissed almost constantly for a steady traffic of hard-looking, fast-talking men with tattoos and torn jeans.
They took out large orders of tea and coffee on cardboard trays, and after wondering for a while if they were anything to do with the film business Lucy finally decided that every last one of them was probably either a builder or a shopfitter.
Apart from the bike messengers, that was, and these were easy to distinguish because they were young and wiry and bizarrely dressed, and their eyes seemed to have a certain glaze on them from being on a permanent adrenaline high.
The girl behind the counter was Mediterranean in her appearance, with a big shock of dark curly hair out of which she peeped as if from hiding.
She seemed uncertain of her English, and asked for everything to be repeated.
People came and went, but almost nobody stayed to eat; Lucy had the dining area beside the counter more or less to herself, apart from a business type in an Aquascutum raincoat who sat two tables away reading a caravan magazine.
Which was fine, because it meant that there was no pressure for her to move on.
Her sole purpose in being here was to kill some time.
She'd thought about going back to her room for a while, maybe find out from Josie what she'd been caught up in the night before, but it would take her more than half an hour to walk.
Any other day, but not today.
She probably had enough cash for a taxi, but the taxi habit still came hard to a girl from the sticks who wasn't even used to being able to afford bus fare.
She couldn't help how she was, and she certainly didn't want to change.
Her tea grew cold, which was no great loss.
It was buying her some time and some space, nothing more.
When the cold engine that was the city had coughed and kicked and finally started up for the day, then she'd set out about her business.
She reckoned that she'd considered just about every possible course.
She couldn't simply go on as before, not after what had happened in the hotel's restaurant.
If anything, she was relieved at the outcome –f that particular incident — Josie had been right when she'd said that after going so far Lucy was now marking time and getting no further.
The more she thought about it, the more certain she became that there was really only one avenue open to her.
So when the espresso machine was quiet for a moment, she leaned over to catch the attention of the man in the Aquascutum raincoat.
He seemed startled.
‘Excuse me,’ she said, ‘but would you know which is the nearest big police station in this area?’
Charlie wasn't in the greatest of moods today.
His old worries about his heart had come back, and he thought he was maybe starting an ulcer.
He knew that he looked like an ox, but that counted for nothing; an ox could drop in its tracks just as easily as anything else.
All that it would take would be a couple more calls like the one that he'd received at home, at three o'clock that same morning, from the night manager of a certain parkside hotel.
He came in on the Tube as usual, and walked the last quarter-mile.
When he came down the alley toward the club's stage door he could see that there were three rough-looking teenagers who'd clambered up the side of one of the big waste bins and were lifting stuff around inside.
‘Oi,’ he shouted up to them.
‘What are you poking around at?’
‘We're not doing any harm,’ one of them said.
‘I don't want to hear about that,’ he said.
‘Look, you're throwing shit everywhere.
Just clear off.’
And then, as they mumbled and made half-hearted climbing-down gestures that he knew would probably stop as soon as he was out of sight, he opened up the door to the club and let himself in.
The crush bolt made a dragging, trailing sound across the floor, once to open and again as it closed.
The rough-cast stairway was dark, but there were lights further on down and he could hear the faint strains of the show tape playing over the speakers in the club proper.
Rehearsals, if you could distinguish them with the name.
They'd had a  choreographer in when the show had first been set up, but no-one had been near it since; replacement dancers had to pick up the routines from the others, and some of the results could be kind of interesting.
Charlie knew that it was no way to run a cabaret, but it wasn't his department.
Choreography cost money, and no-one out front really gave a toss anyway; but all the same it rankled. because it seemed to say something unignorable about the station he'd reached in life.
He tried to tell himself that it didn't matter, that you could find the same situation all over the West End; back in the long-lost days of sweetness and light he could remember taking his wife to a performance of Jesus Christ, Superstar when it had gone through so many cast changes that no-one was even bothering to count, and what a bunch of wankers they'd been.
The band was tight, but everyone else had seemed to be making it up as they went along.
Nineteen seventy-five, or thereabouts.
A heartbeat away, and yet another life entirely.
Where did the time go?
Almost as soon as he walked through the door of his office, his phone started to ring.
It was Lucy Ashdown.
‘You've got a nerve, after last night,’ he told her.
‘No time to talk, Charlie.
I ‘m phoning from Vine Street police station.’
He felt his heart leap, dangerously.
His doctor had checked him out, told him that he had nothing to worry about.
But what did they know?
He said, ‘Why?’
‘I've turned myself in.’
Suddenly, he had to sit.
He reached for his chair, missed the first time, and then drew it over.
Once in it, he closed his eyes.
‘You stupid little cow,’ he said.
‘It's not only because of last night.
I wasn't going to tell them anything about you, but you know what I found out?
They already know about the racket.
Everything, even the records you keep.
They're on their way with a warrant right  now.
I'm supposed to be calling a solicitor but I thought it was only fair I should warn you instead.’
She was saying something else, but he'd already dropped the phone.
He jumped up, turned the chair around, and stepped up onto it.
This brought him within reach of the ceiling.
The ceiling was of the suspended kind, a lightweight grid of porous tiles with an airflow space above.
The pores were choked with dust, and the tiles were yellow with age.
One of them was loose, and easy to lift.
He knocked it out of the way, reached into the dark space above, and drew out his record book.
He almost lost his balance and tipped the chair over as he scrambled back down to floor level with it.
Fumbling, panicking, he got the grey metal wastebin from under the desk and set it on top.
The book didn't quite fit, even at an angle.
How long would it take them to get from Vine Street to here?
Five minutes, no more.
He dragged open a desk drawer, looking for matches.
There had to be some around somewhere, from before he'd quit smoking when he'd first started to worry about his health.
No good.
He tried another.
His health.
His heart was pounding like a steamhammer.
They could be banging on the outside doors right now, and he wouldn't hear a thing.
He found the matches, shakily opened the box, and spilled them everywhere.
He had to get on his knees to find one.
When he tried to strike it, it broke.
So did the next.
He had to put three together to get a successful flame.
And then the fucking book wouldn't burn.
Charlie was almost in tears.
The book stood in the wastebin on the desk like a monument to his misdemeanours.
Even now, he couldn't think of them as crimes.
He'd been making a living, that was all, and now he was going to swing for it because the fucking book wouldn't fucking burn !
Maybe he could eat the pages.
He tried to get the book out of the wastebin.
It was wedged fast, and wouldn't come.
He'd have to hide the whole arrangement, wastebin and all.
Not here — they'd probably be taking the office apart — but somewhere, anywhere else in the club.
Under the stage, maybe, or up on the grid.
He stuck the wastebin under his arm and scrambled to the door.
Later, he could come back and do the job properly.
Right now there simply wasn't time.
The door swung open.
Lucy Ashdown was waiting right outside.
‘April fool,’ she said.
Although he'd never been blessed with a particularly vivid imagination, Charlie saw it all in an instant.
When she'd called him, she'd been no closer to Vine Street than the corridor pay phone just around the corner.
She'd tossed him some bait, and he'd swallowed the rod.
‘Oh, God,’ he said weakly.
Lucy took his arm, and guided him back to his chair.
She dusted his footprints off the seat and then helped him to settle.
She took the wastebin and the book from his hands, and he could offer her no resistance.
She glanced up at the ceiling once, as if in appreciation of the solution to a tough puzzle that she'd been unable to crack without help; the tile was still stuck in the open position, and Charlie was in no state to clamber up there and fix it.
‘Need a drink, Charlie?’ she said with what sounded like genuine concern.
‘I know where you keep it.’
He managed to nod, and she went straight to his other hiding-place and brought out his half-bottle of Johnnie Walker.
‘Better?’ she said when he'd taken a couple of swallows, and he managed to nod again.
She moved around to the other side of the desk.
For her, the book came out of the wastebin with almost no trouble at all.
She looked at the insignificant scorch marks on its cover and said, ‘This wouldn't have been necessary if you hadn't been so cagey with me.
How else was I going to get what I needed?’
He made an ineffectual grab for the book, but his heart  wasn't really in it.
She moved easily beyond his reach, and he dropped back.
‘No need to help me,’ she said, ‘I know exactly what I'm looking for.’
She laid the book on the desk, and opened it up.
This was the first time she'd ever had a close look at the entries, and she seemed to approve.
‘This is really well laid-out.
I was never much good at dates and figures.
Bit of a washout all round at school, really.
But there's one date I don't think I'll ever forget.’
She flicked back through a number of the loose-leaf pages, quickly at first and then slowing as the date that she was seeking came closer.
Even though she was making light of it, Charlie couldn't mistake the fire that animated her when she reached his entries for the final night of Christine Ashdown's brief career.
These were obviously the pages that she wanted.
She unclipped the binder rings and removed them.
‘Thanks,’ she said.
‘This'll be really useful.
Now go home and rest for a while, Charlie.
You seem to have had a nasty shock.’
Then she reclosed the book, stuck it back into the wastebin, stood the wastebin on his desk, and withdrew.
Leaving Charlie to take his own pulse, to practise his deep breathing, and to wonder if he'd ever be able to untighten his sphincter without medical intervention.
On balance, he reckoned probably not.
Lucy's use for the place now over, she cut down by the stage and went out through the main part of the club.
House lights on, clear of customers, tables unlaid, it looked like a barn and felt about as well-heated.
The stage was empty but four of the dancers — two old hands, two new sat in a huddle in the corner by the bar, dressed in their practice motley and trading stories about bad managements and past physiotherapy.
She crossed the floor, climbed the carpeted steps by the cloakroom, and pushed through the double-doors into the main entrance corridor.
The padlocks would be off at the main entrance by now, for the late-morning mail and for bar deliveries.
Technically, it was against house rules for an employee to enter or leave the building via the foyer.
Technically, the offence merited a written warning that could lead to a sacking.
But since, technically, she'd never even been employed in any official capacity, she could hardly have cared less.
And besides, she had no plans to return.
(And in the alleyway behind The Gilded Cage, the three teenagers crouched high amidst the rubbish and looked down on the body of the middle-aged woman that they'd just uncovered.
‘I'm gonna be sick ,’ said one.
‘No you're fucking not ,’ said another.
‘Shurrup ,’ said the third.
‘I'm tryna think .’
‘I'm really gonna-be sick ,’ said the first.
But none of them moved, and none of them looked away.
Then the second one said, ‘We'll have to tell someone .’
‘Like fuck ,’ said the third.
‘They'll lock us up .’
‘Just a phonecall then ,’ said the second.
‘We don't have to give 'em any names .’
‘You can, if you're daft enough ,’ said the third.
‘But check her for money before we do anything else .’
There was a silence for a while, and still nobody moved.
And then the second one said, ‘I never saw anyone make a face like that.
You wouldn't think it was possible .’
The third teenager nodded, with nothing to add to this statement of self-evident wisdom.
And the first one said, ‘Who's gonna look for the money ?’)
‘We'll have it for you in a couple of days,’ the woman told Lucy.
‘I need it now,’ Lucy said.
‘It's not as simple as that.’
‘I'll pay double what I paid last time.
Cash.
I really don't want to hang around.’
She was back in the offices of the business services agency.
On the desk before her lay a slip of paper, onto which she'd copied the basic details of a single credit card entry noted in Charlie's records.
Out of all of them, this was almost certainly the one.
The name was Wilson — too common to be worth checking against the phone book and, besides, what could she say?
She could alienate a whole list of people, and still come away without knowing which one of them she actually wanted.
No, there was only one route that she could follow.
Identify, isolate, and then confront.
It had worked with Billy, truck driver and reluctant witness — but Billy had only been a rehearsal for this, the main event.
She waited as the woman disappeared into one of the inner offices, moving to the window and taking a look down into the street.
The window didn't look as if it had been cleaned on the outside in years, and there were  splashes of pigeon droppings on the sill.
From somewhere far away, she could make out the screaming whine of an emergency vehicle in a hurry.
Back home, it was a sound that meant something.
Here, it was just a regular part of the background.
She lowered her head, leaning her forehead on the glass.
It was cool against her skin.
Suddenly, almost overwhelmingly, she wanted it all to be over.
And soon it will be, she thought, straightening as the woman came back.
‘You can have it in an hour,’ she told Lucy.
‘Or isn't that soon enough?’
‘I'll try to hold out.
Can I use the phone?’
‘You'll find one on the next landing.’
‘Dad?’ she said.
‘It's me.’
As always, he seemed pleased to hear from her.
She could almost hear him making the effort to be cheerful, as if he was afraid to disappoint her in case she decided not to ring him again.
He said, ‘How are you?
Still all right?’
‘I'm fine.
Listen, tell me something.
Does Joe still call you?’
‘Yes, the same as you do.
But while you're calling to say don't worry, he's calling to say no luck.
I've tried to tell him to come home, but he won't let it go.’
There was a slightly false note in there, somewhere.
He definitely wasn't as happy as he was trying to sound.
She said, ‘Well, it won't be going on for much longer.
I think I'm nearly there.
In fact, I'm going to need him.
In a professional capacity, I mean.
You can tell him that if he wants to meet me, I'll be able to prove that I was right all along.’
‘Meet you where?’
‘I'll know for certain in about an hour.
Soon as I do, I'll call again and you can pass it along to Joe.
I'm near the end of the trail, Dad.
I'm sure of it.’
‘And then what?’
‘Then I'll come home.’
After she'd hung up, she went back to the stairwell and sat down to wait.
The stairs were cold and draughty and the light wasn't good, but she'd placed herself so that the agency's receptionist would be able to see her through the glass-panelled door if she should happen to glance up.
There were almost certainly better places to hang around.
But none of them would do for today.
Once it had been his hand.
But Gary had come to think of it as The Hook.
His fingers would bend and there was still some strength in them, but his palm wouldn't uncurl and the tendons to his thumb had become shortened, giving him problems whenever he tried to pick anything up.
Sometimes he'd sit and look at it, and his eyes would sting with the tears of despair.
He'd never had a serious illness since a bout of pneumonia in childhood, and he'd never been less than whole.
At first it had seemed that the damage was slight, just a lot of pain and some bruising, and even after X-rays had shown a number of broken bones there had still been no reason to suppose that he wouldn't heal.
They'd set his hand and cast it, and then after a second set of plates a week later they'd broken off the cast and operated.
From that point onward, it had been downhill all the way.
It was as if his hand had begun to die on him, turning in on itself like a leaf, drying out and getting thin.
If he could ever be granted one wish in his life, he knew exactly what it would be.
He'd wish that he'd never set eyes on the Ashdown girl.
Now they were talking about giving him some kind of a disablement classification, which stung.
He'd had a couple of sessions with his union rep and had been told not to worry, it was just a way of filling some quota; if anything, his job was probably more secure now than it had been before.
Unless he dropped somebody, of course, at which point they'd have to consider transferring him to light  duties.
Light duties.
He was twenty-seven years old, for Christ's sake.
As far as anybody knew, he'd mangled himself while helping a friend with some car repairs.
He'd been working one of the axle springs free on an old Cortina when the jack had given way.
This had been the story that he'd used when it hadn't seemed so serious, and it was the story that he was sticking with now.
To backpedal and tell any part of the truth would be to admit his complicity with the Ashdown girl, which was something that he didn't want to be drawn into ever again.
He'd seen her once, on the street, and been terrified; not so much of her, but of the bastard who'd maimed him and who stalked along behind her like a shadow.
He was beginning to wonder if they weren't already softening him up for some kind of a change.
They'd altered his shift pattern twice in the past fortnight, and each time he'd been taken away from working with patients and given something fiddling to do.
He'd shifted a lot of linen, some bags of which weighed in like a circus fat lady.
So much for so-called light duties.
Tonight he'd been running swabs from the theatres down to the furnace room, in sealed bags and boxes that had been taped and marked with every imaginable hazard warning.
And it wasn't only swabs; one tightly-wrapped package had the general shape and the unmistakable weight of a human arm.
To put it on the slide and send it into the flames had seemed like a bitter, bitter joke.
He'd slammed the door, thrown the lever, and as the deep belly-roar of the gas jets had begun to thunder like a train beneath the room he'd thought,What a way to spend Christmas .
And then he turned away, leaving the cotton waste and the human tissue to render down to a common, indistinguishable ash.
Somebody would run the ash through the crusher to become an even finer powder, but it wouldn't be him.
He was finished, he was going home.
More than a week yet to the big day itself, but already the atmosphere had begun to warm up.
The pathology lab 288  had kicked off with the first of the parties, and everything had gone pretty well although nobody had wanted to touch the sandwiches.
There was something unique about a hospital over the Christmas period, and most years he'd made a point of working for as much of it as he could.
This year seemed different, as if his heart wasn't in it.
His heart didn't seem to be in much of anything, right now.
He wondered if his outlook would change, or if this was going to be the pattern of it for the future.
Tonight, over in the nurses' home on Huntley Street, a bunch of junior doctors would be putting on the usual end-of-year revue.
The room would be packed shoulder-to-shoulder and the show, if previous years were anything to go by, would probably be okay.
A lot of the jokes tended to go straight over his head, but there was always some good stuff about the management and more than once he'd noticed senior people leaving with red faces before it ended.
And then afterwards came the disco, where it was about as difficult to score as it was to hunt chickens with a machete.
Okay, so he was a porter, low man in the hierarchy, but this was the kind of time when the barriers went down and he didn't have to wear a label.
Usually, he'd make the most of it.
But this time, he didn't feel the same.
The Hook was a part of it, but it wasn't only that.
It was as if he'd crossed one of life's bridges; there was no going back, and the view wasn't the same any more.
Things went in phases.
Like with your first car, before you came to realise that every damn one of them ran down and rusted no matter what.
Or your first dog, where much the same applied.
There were things that you knew, and there were things that you only thought you new; and when something happened to shock you out of your ignorance, then the change in your perceptions could never be reversed.
Gary could remember with utter clarity the first time that some other kids had called him a Spade.
He'd thought that it was a nickname, that it meant nothing special, and they'd let him go on thinking that way until  he'd found out different.
It was as if …well, there was no describing the feeling.
Betrayal was about as close as he could get.
He'd never exactly believed that his life was charmed youngest in a family of seven in Stoke Newington would have been a damned strange place to start out from if that had been the case — but he'd never believed himself to be one of life's victims either.
All of that had changed in the course of five minutes in the ancillary staff's locker room, and the sense of betrayal had been exactly the same.
No movie that ran in his head had ever worked out as this one did.
It was as if his confidence, like a target decoy, had been blown clean out of the water.
Put on the glad rags and go out and party, after that?
He could as easily spread his arms and fart and fly.
He ran the trolley down to the corridor's end and left it there for someone else to pick up and use, and then he doubled back and started to walk the distance to the locker room.
From somewhere far-off in the building, he could hear a faint echo of the nurses' choir.
They were rehearsing carols for Christmas Eve when they'd move singing from ward to darkened ward and make the children's eyes shine with awe, and the old people's with tears.
The sound was unreal, ethereal; the music of heaven as it must echo in the airshafts of hell.
He went into the locker room, and someone was waiting.
‘Gary,’ she said.
He stopped in the doorway, and would go no further.
‘Oh, shit.’
he said.
‘Don't do this to me.’
She looked good.
Even though she scared him, a part of him had to admit it.
She carried herself differently and in her attitude, if not in her appearance, she seemed about ten years older.
A kid had led him into trouble.
Now a woman had returned and was probably going to lead trouble back to him, and he wanted no part of it.
His first impulse was to turn around and walk away, blank her out, pretend he hadn't even seen.
The problem was, it was raining sleet outside.
And his jacket was in the locker behind her.
‘What's the matter with you?’ she said.
‘I barely said hello.’
‘It's enough.’
‘I need your help again.’
‘Helping you was the most stupid thing I ever did in my life.
I don't intend to make the same mistake twice.
How did you get down here?’
She ignored the question, and didn't seem to be able to understand his agitation.
She said, ‘All I want is to speak to one of the doctors.’
‘So, make an appointment.
You don't need me for that.’
He was thinking maybe, just maybe, he could dive over to the locker and grab his coat and get out.
It felt almost like being in the presence of nuclear waste; the longer he stayed around her, the more danger he'd absorb.
All that it would  take would be a little nerve.
Surely he had some left, just a little?
‘Gary,’ she said, with a bewilderment that surely had to be faked, ‘what is this?’
So after a quick glance behind him to check that there was nobody coming in on his blind side from the corridor, he crossed to his locker and pointed to the bulge in its door.
He'd had to pound it flat with his shoe before he'd been able to get it to close again.
‘See that?’ he said, and then he held up The Hook.
‘Now see this?
It's what it cost me to help you out.
Not that you care, after you got what you needed.’
She looked from his hand to the door, hardly able to bring herself to make the connection.
‘How?’ she said.
‘Your friend with the temper who follows you around.
He's sick.
He shouldn't be walking the streets.’
‘You mean Joe ?’
Okay, so she hadn't known.
He could see in her face that he'd surprised her, but that made no damned difference to Gary at all.
‘I don't know his name,’ he said.
‘I don't want to know his name.
I don't want anything more to do with you.
So, watch my lips; goodbye.’
She had to step back as he grabbed his coat.
She was trying hard to catch up with this new revelation, and it obviously wasn't easy; her expression more or less steady, it was mainly her eyes that betrayed the complex reprocessing of ideas that was taking place within.
She looked at him with doubt, with bewilderment…but not, he noticed, with disbelief.
It wasn't his problem.
He wouldn't let her make it his problem.
Once had been enough, a warning forever, and now she was on her own.
He left her standing by the bank of lockers, and headed back toward the door.
And before he could reach it, he heard her say, ‘If what you're telling me's true, then that's all the more reason why you have to help me.’
He looked back.
She was watching him steadily.
‘Because I can arrange for you to see him again.’
He stared at her.
‘I even know where you live, Gary,’ she said.
And then she added, with an apologetic shrug, ‘Sorry.’
Nothing happened for a moment.
And then…
‘He was right,’ Gary said stonily.
‘You do use people.
You're not even pretending any more.’
‘Maybe I have done,’ she said.
‘But it was never anything deliberate.
And I wouldn't do it now, if I wasn't so close to the end of the line.’
She waited a few moments longer, and then she said, ‘Well?’
‘What have I got to do?’
Gary said woodenly.
‘Just point me where I have to go.
I'll do the rest.’