

VENUS
Venus, apart from the Sun and the Moon, is the brightest object in the sky and can cast a shadow perceptible to human vision.
Because its orbit lies within that of the Earth it passes through inferior conjunctions rather than oppositions (Figure 1.6).
It appears brightest when it is between inferior conjunction and a maximum elongation with about 30% of the Earth-facing hemisphere illuminated by the Sun.
Venus is named after the Roman goddess of love.
However, the adjective ‘Venusian’ is not normally used, but instead ‘Cytherean’(Si-the-re-an) after  Cytherea , a Greek goddess of love.
4.1 The exploration of Venus
The first known observations of Venus through a telescope were made by Galileo in 1610.
He noticed that Venus displayed phases like the Moon, that is, Venus varied from a thin crescent to full and back to a crescent again.
Moreover, the variations of phase as Venus moved around its orbit were not in accord with the Ptolemaic model of the Solar System which originated with the Greek astronomer Ptolemy (ca. 100-ca. 170) a refined version of which was widely accepted in Galileo's time.
FIGURE 4.1 (a) Ptolemaic model of the Solar System.
(b) The actual Solar System.
(c) Tychonic model of the Solar System.
Figure 4.1(a) shows the Ptolemaic model of the orbits of Venus, the Earth  and the Sun.
Several details have been omitted and I shall say nothing about the way Venus and the Sun move around their orbits, except that the point O on Venus's orbit always lies between the Earth (E) and the Sun (S), that V moves around O, and O and S move around the Earth.
Maximum elongations occur when the angle SEV is a maximum, about 47°, in accord with observations.
The maximum phase of Venus in the Ptolemaic model is when the angle SVE is a minimum, and this occurs at the position shown in Figure 4.1(a).
The corresponding phase is also shown: Venus is noticeably under half full.
Compare this with the true layout of the Solar System in Figure 4.1(b).
Here the phase of Venus can approach full as shown and as observed by Galileo.
The Ptolemaic model is therefore wrong.
However, the true layout is not the only alternative.
Figure 4.1(c) shows Tycho Brahe's model, and you can see that this also accounts for the observed phases of Venus.
It was other evidence which ruled out this model.
The earliest records of markings on the disc of Venus are by the Italian lawyer Franciscus Fontana (1585–1656) in 1643.
He drew some dusky shadings.
In the centuries that followed such shadings were shown to be transitory, and from these and other observations it became clear that Venus is completely and continuously covered in clouds.
Figure 4.2 is a typical Earth-based view.
The clouds are almost white in appearance, with the merest tinge of yellow, and their existence shows that Venus has an atmosphere to support them.
The radius of Venus to the cloud tops is about 6120 km, which is only a bit less than the radius of the solid Earth.
In the 1930s photographs at ultraviolet wavelengths displayed the visible shadings more clearly, and motions could be seen.
About 78% of the solar radiation incident upon Venus is scattered to space by the clouds.
The remainder is absorbed within and beneath the clouds.
Therefore, the scattered solar radiation carries no information about conditions beneath the clouds.
Nor does it carry much information about the clouds to Earth because the clouds fail to impress on this radiation many meaningful signatures.
The composition of the clouds was not known until spacecraft visited Venus.
However, the scattered radiation does carry to Earth signatures impressed on it by the atmosphere above the clouds, and by the 1960s it had been established that this part of the atmosphere alone contained about 1000 times as much CO 2 as the whole atmosphere of the Earth.
A trace of CO had also been detected and a trace of water with a column mass of about 0.01 kg/m 2 .
Such a small amount of gaseous water would be in equilibrium with clouds of condensed water ice crystals only if the cloud tops were extremely cold.
In 1955 radiometry at planetary wavelengths established that the cloud-top temperatures were about 238 K, and it can be shown that if the clouds consisted of water ice crystals then there would be far more water in gaseous  form in the atmosphere above the clouds than was observed.
Clearly therefore the clouds do not consist of water, at least not in their upper reaches.
FIGURE 4.2 Venus imaged from the Earth.
North is at the top.
The first indication of conditions beneath the clouds came in 1956.
In that year em waves from Venus at radio wavelengths greater than about 10 mm were detected by means of radio telescopes.
Radiometric and spectrometric investigations of such waves indicated that the Cytherean source region was at a temperature of about 670 K. Moreover, radio waves at such wavelengths can readily traverse clouds and atmospheric gases and it was readily established that the Cytherean source region lay well below the cloud tops and was very probably the surface of Venus.
Thus, the lower atmosphere and surface of Venus are far hotter than comparable regions of the Earth and Mars.
Moreover if, as seemed likely, CO 2 was the dominant atmospheric constituent then the greenhouse effect of CO 2 could only maintain such temperatures if the column mass of atmospheric CO 2 was about 10 6 kg/m 2 .
Up to this time many astronomers had regarded Venus as the Earth's twin, and that beneath the clouds, which were widely regarded as consisting of water, there were oceans and perhaps vegetation and animals.
This idea was  so firmly rooted that it was perhaps for this reason that these results from radio astronomy seem not to have been widely accepted at first.
Thus, even though the cloud tops were known not to consist of water it was possible to believe that lower down they were of water and that deeper still lay a warm ocean-covered surface.
However, through the 1960s the results of radio astronomy took root and oceanic Venus died.
The high temperatures also killed off other views, such as that Venus was covered in oil.
By the 1960s the mass of Venus had long been known from its gravitational effect on the orbit of the Earth and of Mercury.
This gives the ratio of Venus's mass to that of the Sun, and the mass of the Sun is obtained from the dominant elliptical part of the orbit of any planet just as the mass of a planet can be determined from the orbit of a satellite around it.
Venus has no satellite and so this less direct method had to be used.
The mass came to 0.82 M E .
Therefore if Venus has the same mean density as the Earth then its surface would lie about 400 km below the cloud tops.
The depth of the surface was established in the 1960s by radar.
Radar studies of Venus began in 1961 and have revealed much of what we know about the Cytherean surface.
Radar has also been a useful probe of other planets.
4.1.1 Radar studies of planets
Radar is a technique whereby an object is investigated by beaming at it a short pulse of radio waves some of which are scattered by the object and picked up by a detector.
In astronomy the transmitter is usually a radio telescope, and it usually acts also as the detector.
The received waves are called radar echoes and they can carry the various categories of information that can be borne by any em wave, as outlined in section 3.1.2, though planetary temperatures cannot normally be extracted by radar.
However, radar has the advantage over the passive receipt of radio waves that the pulses sent can be controlled and their nature and time of sending are known.
Radio waves are used rather than em waves of other wavelengths because over suitable wavelength ranges they readily penetrate planetary atmospheres and because natural emissions at such wavelengths tend to be weak thus enabling the echoes to be readily picked out from the natural background.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the types of information that can be obtained about a planet using radar which could not be, or not as readily be, determined by the passive receipt of naturally occurring radio waves.
Figure 4.3 (a) illustrates how radar can yield the radius of a planet.
A radar pulse scattered back by the planet is spread over a distance range which exceeds that of the transmitted pulse by an amount equal to the radius of the planet.
(Note that waves scattered in directions other than back towards the  source have been omitted, and that the transmitted pulse would cover the whole planet.)
FIGURE 4.3 (a) Radar pulse broadening by a planet.
(b) Doppler spreading of wavelength by a planet's rotation.
(c) No Doppler spreading in this orientation.
(d) Illustrating the range-Doppler method.
Figure 4.3 (b) illustrates that the axial spin rate, and therefore the axial period of a planet can be determined from the spread of wavelengths induced in the echo by the motion of the surface.
This spread arises from the Doppler-shifts mentioned in section 3.1.3.
The planet as a whole will be moving with respect to the Earth, and this will shift all wavelengths in the pulse.
But the edge of the disc moving towards the Earth will result in a slightly different shift from that of the disc moving away from the Earth.
Thus, as well as an overall shift in the wavelengths there will also be a spreading of wavelengths, and from the measured spread the difference in the relative speed of the extreme edges of the disc, P and Q in Figure 4.3 (b), can be deduced.
Clearly this gives the axial spin rate if the radius of the planet is known, and it is also necessary to know the axial orientation of the planet with respect to the Earth.
The need to know the orientation is illustrated by comparing Figure 4.3 (b) and (c): in Figure 4.3 (c) the axis points at the Earth and there is no wavelength spread in the echo induced by the axial rotation.
In Figure 4.3 (b) the spread is maximum.
By making radar observations of a planet at several points in its orbit, and therefore at several axial orientations with respect to the Earth, it is, however, possible to obtain the axial orientation, and hence the axial period can be deduced.
Moreover, from the axial orientation the axial inclination of the planet is readily determined.
In the case of planets like Venus, where surface features are obscured, this is an important way of determining the axial period and axial inclination.
Radar can provide a more direct determination of axial period if there is a feature in the echo that can be inferred to have come from a surface feature on the planet, such as a mountain or a region with a particular composition or texture.
By observing many separate echoes the movement of such features through the echo can be discerned, thus yielding the axial period.
Radar can also yield images, but whereas a radio telescope or a group of such telescopes can yield an image of an object in an analogous way to a conventional telescope, a radar pulse from the Earth cannot be made narrow enough to select anything other than the whole disc of the planet, except for the Moon where small areas can be examined because of its large angular diameter.
Therefore a special technique for radar imaging has been developed, as illustrated in Figure 4.3 (d).
This shows the simple case of a spin axis which is perpendicular to the line of sight.
The line XY is parallel to the spin axis, and the extension of this line above and below the planet's surface allows for surface topography, the surface shown in Figure 4.3 (d) being the mean surface of the planet.
All contributions to the pulse echo from anywhere along the line XY, which in practice means the two patches of the planet's surface on this line, corresponds to unique values of a certain two quantities which no other points on the surface possess.
The two quantities are the time taken for the waves to reach a patch and return to the Earth, which gives the range of the patches, and the Doppler-shift of such waves, which gives the motion of the patches.
The echo comes from the whole disc, but because of this uniqueness the echo can be unscrambled to reveal the contributions to it from every pair of patches of planetary surface exemplified by X and Y.
Several sophisticated techniques are available, many of which involve more than one radio telescope receiving the echo, by means of which the ambiguity between the two patches can be removed, and the topography, surface texture and information about the composition of a planet's surface can be established.
Radar techniques based on this division of a surface by range and by Doppler-shift are called  range-Doppler methods.
The need to use range-Doppler methods is obviated where radar equipment is carried near to a planet by means of a spacecraft.
In this case the radar beam can cover a small area of surface at any one time.
It is, however, essential to know where the spacecraft is.
The distance from the Earth to the spacecraft can be determined very accurately from the time interval between sending a radio signal to the spacecraft, which it receives and immediately acknowledges by sending a signal to the Earth with its own radio, and the receipt on the Earth of the acknowledgement.
The speed of the spacecraft along the line of sight from the Earth to the spacecraft can be obtained from the Doppler-shift of the known on-board transmitter wavelength.
These observations of distance and speed can be coupled with general knowledge of the way a small probe behaves in the gravitational fields of bodies in the Solar System to determine the spacecraft's position with astonishing accuracy, typically to a few hundred metres at a range of hundreds of millions of kilometres.
Any occultation of the spacecraft by the planet will supplement this positional information.
4.1.2 Radar studies of Venus
Radar studies of Venus have established that the mean radius of the surface beneath the clouds is 6052 km, which places the surface about 70 km beneath the visible cloud tops.
Radar studies also yielded a more accurate value of the mass of Venus by determining with great accuracy the distances between the Earth, Venus and Mercury, and hence establishing with great accuracy the variations in the orbital elements of these planets.
The sidereal axial period and the axial inclination were also established by radar, and the earliest values are close to the presently accepted best values (Table 1.3) of -243.01 days and 177.8° respectively.
The minus sign attached to the period indicates that the axial rotation is retrograde, and this is also indicated by an inclination in excess of 90°, though the angle between the spin axis and the perpendicular to the Cytherean orbital plane is only 2.2°.
FIGURE 4.4 (a) Synchronous rotation, once thought to apply to Venus.
(b) and (c) The actual rotation of Venus, the numbers indicating the number of solar axial periods of Venus lapsed.
The line on Venus is fixed to its surface at the equator.
The retrograde rotation of Venus came as a considerable surprise.
Previously, on the basis of very sparse data, estimates of the sidereal axial period ranged from +15 days to +224.701 days, the upper limit  equalling the sidereal orbital period.
This equality corresponds to synchronous rotation.
This is illustrated in Figure 4.4 (a), and you can see that Venus would keep the same face towards the Sun.
Note that for synchronous rotation the orbital and axial periods not only have to be equal but also both prograde or both retrograde.
Synchronous rotation results from so-called tidal interactions between bodies, to be outlined in section 6.1.1.
The actual rotation of Venus is illustrated in Figure 4.4 (b) and (c).
Between one inferior conjunction and the next Venus rotates almost exactly five times as viewed from the Sun and four times as viewed from the Earth and therefore Venus almost presents the same face to the Earth at each inferior conjunction.
If the sidereal axial period of Venus were -43.16 days then, except for the slight effect of the eccentricity of the orbits of Venus and the Earth, Venus would present the  same face to the Earth at each inferior conjunction.
If such an exact situation existed it would be even harder to understand than the approximate situation which does exist.
The slow, retrograde axial rotation of Venus is a puzzle to which I shall return in section 4.2.
Earth-based radar studies have determined the topography and the texture of about 25% of the Cytherean surface, but radar studies from spacecraft have been the main source of such information.
Table 4.1 lists the successful spacecraft missions to Venus.
I shall return to these surface studies in section 4.3.
TABLE 4.1 Successful spacecraft missions to Venus
4.2 The interior of Venus
The best value of the mass of Venus has been obtained from the orbit of the Pioneer Venus Orbiter (Table 4.1), and is 0.8150 M E .
The mean density of Venus is therefore 5240 kg/m 3 , rather less than that of the Earth (5520 kg/m 3 ) and substantially more than that of Mars (3940 kg/m 3 ).
When allowance is made for the rather lower gravity of Venus than of the Earth, and the consequent lower degree of internal compression, then the uncompressed densities of the Earth and Venus would be similar.
Therefore, Venus and the Earth could have similar internal structures and compositions, with iron cores and silicate and oxide mantles.
It has not yet proved possible to constrain the variation of density with depth in Venus.
From the orbit of Pioneer Venus Orbiter a value of J 2 (section 3.2.1) has been obtained, but it is about 200 times smaller than J 2 of the Earth, and consequently is known with poor accuracy, to about 40%.
J 2 is in any case a weak constraint on density models and when it is this poorly known it is useless.
The polar moment of inertia C is a far more powerful constraint.
For Venus the only practical way of obtaining C is by calculation from any two of J 2 , T a (the axial period) and f (the flattening) making the reasonable assumption that Venus is in hydrostatic equilibrium.
J 2 is poorly known, and only an upper limit exists for f such that the polar radius is within 0.24 km of the equatorial radius.
The Earth is over 100 times more flattened than this upper limit.
Therefore, though T a is known, J 2 and f are too poorly known for the calculated range of possible values of C to provide a useful constraint on density models.
The small value of J 2 and the small upper limit of f are consistent with hydrostatic equilibrium because of the slow spin of Venus and the absence of any large satellite to increase J 2 and f.
Weak magnetic fields have been detected associated with the ionosphere and perhaps with surface rocks, but not any magnetic field of internal dipole origin.
The upper limit on the internal magnetic dipole moment is only 0.00005 of that of the Earth.
The slow spin of Venus had led many scientists to expect that the dipole moment would be small (section 2.1.7) but perhaps not as small as this.
In section 4.3 you will see that there is some evidence that Venus is not as geologically active as the Earth, which could indicate a cool interior right down to any iron core, which could largely be solid and thus explain the small dipole moment.
However, given the similar masses and densities of Venus and the Earth it is hard to understand how their interior temperatures could be so different.
An alternative explanation is that the solid core at the centre of the Earth's liquid iron core is an essential source of energy for a powerful magnetic dipole moment (section 2.1.7).
Venus could lack such an inner core because of the lower central pressures corresponding to its lower gravity.
It is also possible that Venus is not divided into a core and a mantle.
However, the density of Venus could then only be matched if its composition, in terms of the abundances of elements, were markedly different from the Earth.
One explanation of Venus' slow axial spin is the tidal interaction (section 6.1.1) between Venus and the Sun.
Such an interaction acts through any departure from a spherically symmetrical mass distribution, and will itself cause such departures.
However, the small value of J 2 indicates that such departures are small, and therefore this tidal interaction will be weak.
It is far weaker between Venus and the Earth and therefore the nearness with which Venus keeps the same face to the Earth at inferior conjunction (section 4.1.2) is probably a coincidence.
The weakness of the tidal interaction with the Sun may mean that even after 4600 Ma synchronous rotation is yet to be achieved, and that in the distant future the retrograde rotation will cease and then the requisite slow prograde rotation will build up.
But this does not explain why Venus is spinning retrograde.
However, the  present winds on Venus are acting to increase the retrograde rate of spin, and thus the present rotation of Venus may be a balance between the tidal forces, which depend on the Sun's gravitational field, and the winds, which depend on solar radiation.
It is also possible that the rotation of Venus was reversed by the impact of a large body during or shortly after its formation.
Several theories of planetary formation include the possibility of disturbance to axial spins during the late stages of formation of a planet.
However, in my outline of some of these theories (Chapter 15) I shall not go into this level of detail.
4.3 The surface of Venus
The topography of about 93% of the Cytherean surface has been mapped by the Pioneer Venus Orbiter.
The principal technique was to transmit radar pulses vertically downwards and measure the time lapsed before the echo was received.
This gave the height of the spacecraft above the surface.
The corresponding distance of the spacecraft from the centre of mass of Venus was determined from the spacecraft's orbit.
By subtracting from this distance the spacecraft's height the distance of the point on the surface from the centre of mass is obtained.
The zero of altitude was chosen as a sphere of radius 6051.0 km, with centre at the centre of mass.
A sphere is used because the surface of Venus corresponding to hydrostatic  equilibrium is very nearly spherical (section 3.3.1).
The radar also yielded the scattering properties of the Cytherean surface.
Features about as small as 30 km across could be detected, roughly equivalent to viewing the Moon from the Earth with an angular magnification of about 4, readily obtainable with binoculars.
Altitude differences of about 200 metres could be detected.
These data were supplemented by the radar ‘looking’ sideways at the surface, a rather subtle technique which I shall not describe.
The outcome is shown in Figure 4.5.
The surface is solid, and the various features are named, in the main, after women in mythology and in science.
A prominent male interloper is James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) the British physicist after whom has been named Maxwell Montes the tallest mountains on Venus, reaching an altitude of nearly +12 km.
Figure 4.5 is broadly consistent with data from Earth-based radar some of which have yielded data on a smaller scale in equatorial regions than that from the Orbiter.
Three types of region have been recognized on the Cytherean surface.
First, there are rolling plains, which comprise about 65% of the imaged surface area and which lie approximately between altitudes 0 km and +2 km.
They display linear troughs, sets of parallel ridges and troughs, and numerous roughly circular features from about the lower size limit of 30 km across up to about 1700 km across.
Their interiors are ‘radar-dark’ in that they scatter radar more weakly than the surface outside them, and some of the larger ones have central mounds.
It is not known whether they are of volcanic or impact origin, or a mixture of the two, though the relative numbers of different sizes are similar to the impact craters in the more heavily cratered areas on Mars and the Moon.
Venus if it were devoid of atmosphere, and the corresponding hypsometric distribution.
Second, there are highlands, which comprise about 8% of the imaged surface area and which lie approximately between altitudes +2 km and +12 km.
There are three main highland regions (Figure 4.5): Ishtar Terra, which is a  plateau ; Aphrodite Terra, which is rougher, and bears wide linear  depressions a few kilometres deep; and Beta Regio, which could possibly be two shield volcanoes.
Finally, there are the lowlands, which comprise about 27% of the imaged surface area and which lie approximately between altitudes -2 km and 0 km.
They consist of roughly circular depressions and of more elongated depressions, and are radar-dark.
Within these depressions very few topographic features have been seen.
No global system of oceanic ridges, subduction troughs and mountain ranges at continental borders has been seen at the 30-km resolution achieved by the Orbiter.
Thus, a global system of Plate Tectonics is not revealed by the topography, though it would require resolution of about 15 km to firmly rule it out.
Such a resolution would also establish whether impact craters and volcanoes exist.
A clearer indication that there is no global system of Plate Tectonics is the hypsometric distribution of Venus, also shown in Figure 4.5.
This is evidence against there being two types of crust on Venus.
On the other hand, the Orbiter has established that most, perhaps all, of the Cytherean surface is close to isostatic equilibrium, which indicates that there may be a fairly thin lithosphere plus an asthenosphere, and this raises the possibility of considerable geological activity.
Also, the centre of figure of Venus is offset from the centre of mass by only about 400 metres, a far more Earth-like than Mars-like amount, and which is consistent with an interior sufficiently warm to eliminate any lopsided density distributions.
Several spacecraft have landed on the Cytherean surface (Table 4.1) and some of the USSR Venera spacecraft have carried cameras.
Figure 4.6 shows two pictures released.
One is from Venera 9 and the other from Venera 10.
Both of these spacecraft landed near the eastern edge of Beta Regio (Figure 4.5).
You can see that the surfaces are littered with boulders, a degree of roughness consistent with radar scattering data.
Boulder-strewn dusty surfaces have also been revealed by Veneras 13 and 14, which landed on rolling plains a few thousand km to the south-east of Beta Regio.
They also returned the first colour pictures from the surface, which show that the rocks are tinted brown.
The angularity of the rocks indicates chemical weathering by the atmosphere.
FIGURE 4.6 The surface of Venus (a) imaged by Venera 9,(b) imaged by Venera 10.
The curvature of the surface is an artefact of the wide-angle view.
Analyses of the rocks at the Venera 13 and 14 sites are consistent with a basaltic composition.
Veneras 9 and 10 carried out less revealing analyses, and so too did Venera 8, which landed rather further from Beta Regio than the other Veneras.
Nevertheless, the analyses from Veneras 9 and 10 are also consistent with basaltic composition whereas the analyses from Venera 8 are less consistent, and may indicate a substantially different kind of rock.
It is likely that the rocks of basaltic composition have a volcanic origin, and could  have flowed as basaltic lavas from any Beta Regio volcanoes.
In this case the rocks at the Venera 8 site may be non-basaltic because of the greater distance of this site from Beta Regio.
But though Venus does not seem to be geologically moribund it seems likely that it has not been as geologically active as the Earth and that no global system of Plate Tectonics has ever developed.
If indeed this is the case then the question arises of why the Earth and Venus, which have similar masses and densities, differ so much in this respect.
A comparatively cool Cytherean interior could account for the difference, though this raises the further question of how the Cytherean interior could be so much cooler than that of the Earth: has the tidal heating of the Earth's interior by the Moon been important (section 2.1.16), or is the Cytherean interior depleted in the isotopes which can supply copious amounts of radioactive heat, namely, uranium, thorium and potassium?
Or is there some other explanation?
Clearly, the question of whether Plate Tectonics has developed on Venus is of considerable interest.
4.4 The atmosphere and surface volatiles
4.4.1 The atmosphere today
The composition of the Cytherean atmosphere in terms of relative numbers of molecules is as follows: 96% CO 2 ; 3.5% N 2 ; 0.015% SO 2 ; about 0.01% H 2 O in the lower atmosphere; 0.007% Ar; plus traces of several other gases.
Oxygen (O 2 ) has not been detected in the lower atmosphere, though small quantities have been detected in the upper atmosphere and result mainly from the photodissociation of CO 2 by solar uv radiation.
This also produces most of the ions in the Cytherean ionosphere.
This extends upwards from an altitude of about 160 km.
Up to about 200 km the dominant ion is O 2 + and at higher altitudes it is O + .
The vertical structure of the atmosphere, averaged over the surface and over time, is shown in Figure 4.7.
The atmosphere is massive, 103 × 10 4 kg/m 2 , which dwarfs the 1.04 × 10 4 kg/m 2 of the Earth's atmosphere.
The average surface temperature on Venus is also much higher than on the Earth, 730 K instead of 288 K. The troposphere extends up to an altitude of about 60 km, and in its lower 50 km or so the lapse-rate is adiabatic.
There is no stratosphere ‘bulge’ of temperature for much the same reason as there is no such bulge in the Martian atmosphere (question 3.13).
And for much the same reason as for Mars the thermosphere of Venus only reaches modest temperatures (section 3.4.1).
However, the thermospheres of Mars and Venus have comparable temperatures only for the Sun-facing side of Venus.
At night the thermosphere of Venus cools far more than that of Mars, and reaches the low temperatures indicated in Figure 4.7.
Only a small part of  this difference between the two planets is due to the much longer night on Venus: the main reason is unknown.
Moreover, the Cytherean thermospheric temperatures are not very sensitive to changes in solar uv radiation.
Therefore, the Cytherean thermosphere is not very well understood.
The night-time thermosphere is sometimes called the cryosphere (= ‘cold sphere’).
FIGURE 4.7 The vertical structure of the Cytherean atmosphere.
Figure 4.7 also indicates typical altitude ranges of the clouds and hazes.
These clouds are unbroken, and never, for example, look like the billowy cumulus clouds of the Earth.
Moreover, the main cloud base lies at an altitude of about 48 km, which by Earth standards is a very high cloud base.
Even the haze beneath the cloud lies above the high altitude of about 31 km beneath which the Cytherean atmosphere is clear most of the time.
Detailed studies, mainly by spacecraft, have revealed the existence of at least three types of cloud particle.
First, there are tiny particles a few tenths of a micron in diameter (1 micron = 10 -6 metres).
The observations indicate that they probably consist of nearly pure sulphuric acid (H 2 SO 4 ).
These are present in the main cloud and in the hazes above and below, but though they are the dominant constituent of the hazes they are a minor constituent of the main cloud.
Second, there are larger particles about 2 microns diameter largely confined to the main cloud each particle probably consisting of a liquid droplet of rather impure H 2 SO 4 with up to 20% of other substances.
The third type seem to be solid, and are largely confined to the lower half of the main cloud.
They are about 8 microns in diameter and probably consist largely of chlorides, that is, of compounds containing chlorine.
On the Earth such compounds are largely confined to the oceans, common salt (sodium  chloride) being an abundant example.
This third type is the dominant constituent of the main cloud and also account for most of the opacity.
However, the particles in even the most opaque Cytherean clouds account for only a tiny fraction of the atmospheric volume occupied by the cloud, and therefore the cloud particles, as on the Earth, are minor atmospheric components.
The sulphuric acid is probably the result largely of chemical reactions between H 2 O and SO 2 high in the atmosphere above the haze and clouds, reactions aided by solar uv radiation and by the low temperatures.
Tiny droplets form and constitute a thin rain which feeds the hazes and clouds.
This thin rain continues beneath the clouds, where most of the droplets evaporate.
In this subcloud region there is little solar uv radiation and the temperatures are fairly high, and therefore the molecules of H 2 SO 4 revert back to H 2 O and SO 2 .
Upward convection in the troposphere carries H 2 O and SO 2 into the atmosphere above the clouds thus completing the cycle.
In passing through the hazes and clouds some of the gaseous H 2 O would dissolve in the H 2 SO 4 particles, thus diminishing the H 2 O abundance in the atmosphere above the clouds.
But though there is a greater abundance of H 2 O in the atmosphere beneath the clouds it is still a very minor constituent, and the quantity is poorly known.
Plausible schemes also exist for producing the other constituents of the cloud particles.
Fine drizzles and thin smokes of cloud particles can reach the Cytherean surface.
Moreover, thunderstorms are known to occur in the clouds and these could generate H 2 SO 4 droplets large enough to constitute a heavy shower, though the torrid surface would soon evaporate any puddles of acid.
The high surface temperatures of Venus owe a great deal to the greenhouse effect.
If the Cytherean greenhouse effect were ‘switched off’ but everything else were left the same the average surface temperature would fall from 730 K to 230 K. For the Earth, the corresponding temperatures are 288 K and 253 K. Thus, though Venus is closer to the Sun than the Earth its surface temperature would actually fall below that of the Earth.
This is because of the higher Bond albedo of Venus.
Indeed, only about 4% of the solar radiation available at the top of the Cytherean atmosphere reaches the surface.
Nevertheless, the greenhouse effect is so efficient that this energy becomes trapped to the extent that it drives up the surface temperatures to the observed values.
Recall from section 2.2.3 that this trapping results from the atmosphere being more opaque to radiation at planetary wavelengths than at solar wavelengths.
Such efficient trapping cannot be produced by the CO 2 alone, in spite of the enormous mass of CO 2 in the atmosphere.
This is because CO 2 is fairly transparent over certain wavelength ranges at planetary wavelengths.
Radiation could escape through these ‘windows’ in sufficient quantities to greatly reduce the greenhouse effect below that which exists.
It  is the blocking of these windows by SO 2 , by H 2 O and by the clouds that greatly increases the greenhouse effect.
When viewed at visible wavelengths the Cytherean clouds are rather featureless, and are tinged yellow, perhaps by small quantities of sulphur.
At uv wavelengths considerably more detail is seen, as illustrated in Figure 4.8.
The dark markings correspond to regions in the clouds which scatter less solar uv radiation than elsewhere.
The substances responsible for this are not known, though they are clearly unequally distributed and this is somehow linked to the circulation of the Cytherean atmosphere though the mechanism is unclear.
The dark markings in Figure 4.8 are subject to changes in detail but persist in broad outline, indicating fairly stable patterns of circulation.
Detailed scrutiny of these and other markings reveals that, at the cloud tops, the atmosphere moves around Venus predominantly in an east-west (zonal) direction and in the same direction that Venus rotates, taking about 4 to 5 days to encircle Venus once.
At the equator the corresponding zonal wind speed (at 60 km altitude) is about 100 m/s.
There is also an equator to pole flow at cloud-top level, but at only 5–10 m/s.
FIGURE 4.8 The clouds of Venus, an enhanced image at ultraviolet wavelengths, from Mariner 10 at a range of 720 000 km.
North is at the top.
The winds at lower altitudes have been measured at a few locations by landers as they descended through the atmosphere.
Over most altitude ranges the wind speeds decline with decreasing altitude, and at the surface are only about 1 m/s.
The increase of speed with altitude could be the result of the upward transfer, by convection in the troposphere, of energy of motion: as such energy is transferred from the high-density regions at low altitudes to the low-density regions high up then the low-density material has to move faster to carry this energy.
The north-south winds vary in direction with altitude, though the zonal winds are in the direction of rotation at all altitudes.
The circulation pattern can be thought of as made up of several contributions.
One of these is called the thermal tide and consists of a flow from the region beneath the Sun to the opposite side of the planet.
By this means the Sun-facing regions become cooler than they would otherwise be.
Thermal tides occur in the atmospheres of other planets.
In the case of Mars they make a very large contribution to the overall circulation of the atmosphere whereas in the case of the Earth the contribution is small.
In the case of Venus thermal tides make a very large contribution and it can be shown that it is this component of the overall circulation that may drive the 4–5 day zonal circulation and thus speed up the axial spin (section 4.2).
The thermal tide may also be responsible for dim ultraviolet radiation observed to come from the middle of the night hemisphere.
The thermal tide could carry molecules generated by solar uv radiation to the night side where they revert to other forms with the emission of uv radiation.
A similar mechanism may also yield the Ashen Light, a faint radiation at visible wavelengths and seen from the Earth to emanate from the night hemisphere.
The circulation of the massive atmosphere of Venus results in a very small difference in surface temperatures between the equator and the poles and between the night and day sides, a few Kelvin in both cases.
Moreover, the axial inclination and orbital eccentricity of Venus are so small that seasonal variations are negligible.
4.4.2 Surface volatiles today
If mixtures of certain types of rocks including carbonates are held in a sealed evacuated chamber at a temperature equal to the surface temperature of Venus then CO 2 is given off and the pressure builds up until an equilibrium is reached in which the pressure of the CO 2 in the chamber equals the pressure of CO 2 at the surface of Venus.
This suggests that the atmospheric CO 2 on Venus is in equilibrium with these types of surface rock and that there exist on Venus accessible surface repositories of CO 2 mainly in the form of carbonates.
At the much lower surface temperatures on the Earth most of the CO 2 remains in the carbonates and therefore the partial pressure  of atmospheric CO 2 is low.
Nevertheless, on Venus it remains possible that no such surface repositories exist and that the correspondence of pressures is coincidental.
Sulphur compounds are probably present at the Cytherean surface, and the partial pressure of SO 2 and other gaseous sulphur compounds is probably determined by equilibrium with these surface repositories, as suggested for CO 2 .
Likewise, oxygen-rich compounds at the surface probably control the oxygen abundance in the lower atmosphere, though such oxygen has yet to be detected.
Surface deposits may control the atmospheric abundances of other trace gases too.
It is not known how large these surface repositories are.
But in the case of nitrogen, which can exist as nitrates and nitrites, the surface temperatures are so high that the amount retained in such repositories must be small compared to the amount in the atmosphere.
The high surface temperatures also mean that there can be no accessible repositories of water in which the water exists as H 2 O whether as a separate phase or in some molecular combination.
Water could, however, be present in the hydroxyl form (section 2.1.1).
For example, on the Earth water in hydroxyl form occurs in clays, and if similar clays were exposed on the surface of Venus then the abundance of water in the atmosphere would be roughly that observed.
However, the abundance of atmospheric water is also consistent with a gas-phase equilibrium with the sulphuric acid and water in the cloud droplets and it is therefore far from certain that significant accessible repositories of water exist, even with water in the hydroxyl form.
In any case, it is unlikely that any such repositories contain anywhere near the amount of water in the Earth's oceans.
This likely scarcity of water on Venus is one of the main topics of the next section.
4.4.3 The evolution of the atmosphere
If the Earth were to be moved today into the orbit of Venus then the ice caps would melt, the oceans would start to evaporate, the carbonate rocks would begin to yield up CO 2 , and various other surface reservoirs would begin to lose volatiles.
The greenhouse effect would be enhanced, and this would further raise the surface temperatures and thus increase the amounts of volatiles lost by the surface repositories.
Before very long on a planetary time scale the surface temperatures would reach Cytherean values.
The increasing role of the greenhouse effect in this transition has been called the runaway greenhouse effect.
But in one important respect the Earth and Venus would differ: the atmosphere of the new Earth would contain at least as much water as there is CO 2 in the present Cytherean atmosphere.
Was Venus born dry, or did it become dry?
Water can be lost through dissociation by solar uv radiation and the subsequent loss of hydrogen to space from the exosphere.
Without this loss an equilibrium would be reached in which only a small proportion of the water in the atmosphere would be dissociated.
However, the temperature today at the base of the Cytherean exosphere rarely exceeds about 300 K, which is too low for the thermal escape of very much hydrogen even over 4600 Ma, and chemical escape might not make a lot of difference.
But atmospheric conditions may have been different in the past.
An indicator is the abundance of the rare isotope of hydrogen, deuterium D, compared to the common isotope 1 H. D is twice the mass of 1 H and therefore 1 H will normally escape faster, enhancing D/ 1 H. The D/ 1 H ratio in the Cytherean atmosphere today is about 100 times that on the Earth, indicating more 1 H on Venus in the past, though still a good deal less than on the Earth.
However, it can be shown that the runaway greenhouse effect, had it acted on an Earth-like quantity of water, can perhaps lead initially to a copious escape of hydrogen with no enhancement of D/ 1 H during this process.
It is thus possible that Venus did once possess a large quantity of water.
Conversely, evidence that no more than a modest quantity of water has been lost comes from considering the fate of oxygen liberated.
It would not escape to space in appreciable quantities, and so combination with surface materials provides the only repository.
However, it is difficult to believe that sufficient quantities of suitable substances could have appeared at the Cytherean surface to mop up anywhere near the amount of oxygen that would be liberated from an Earth-like quantity of water.
Indeed, chemical evidence from the sulphur-bearing gases in the lower atmosphere of Venus can be shown to indicate that the surface rocks today do not contain the maximum amount of oxygen possible.
However, if Venus has always had as little water as it seems to have today then it may never have been able to achieve such high surface temperatures.
The luminosity of the Sun in the early history of the Solar System was probably only about 70% of the present value.
Under these conditions most of the CO 2 presently in the Cytherean atmosphere would have resided in carbonate rocks.
As the solar luminosity rose some of this CO 2 would have been liberated, but it can be shown to be unlikely that sufficient CO 2 would be liberated to yield present conditions.
But a small extra quantity of water could enhance the greenhouse effect to the point where present conditions would result.
This extra water could subsequently be lost without reversion to cooler conditions, and such a relatively small quantity could be lost by uv dissociation as outlined above.
Thus, the present water is sufficient to help sustain the temperatures but not to produce them.
A trace of ammonia could also have sufficiently enhanced the greenhouse effect, though there is no other evidence that such a trace ever existed.
It is possible that, perhaps for as much as its first 2000 Ma, Venus enjoyed  clement conditions, with small open bodies of water, and rivers.
This water could have left features visible today, such as dendritic channels.
Unfortunately, the spatial resolution of the best radar images so far obtained is too poor to have revealed such tell-tale signs.
It is also possible that life developed, and if the rate of evolution was about twice as rapid as on the Earth then intelligent beings may have been among the organisms roasted to death as the Sun's luminosity rose, the small oceans evaporated, and the CO 2 emerged from the rocks.
4.5 A brief (and well-protected) visit to the Cytherean surface
One of the most familiar things is the surface gravity, about 0.91 of that of the Earth.
Also, in spite of the canopy of thick cloud it is not dark during the day, but is rather like being beneath very thick thunder clouds on the Earth, though the cloud base on Venus is far higher, and, as revealed by Venera 14, the sky is orange.
At night the landscape glows a dull red, which emanates from the surface of Venus: the rocks, hotter than a domestic oven, glow just enough to be seen at night.
Lead melts.
The thick, unbreathable atmosphere carries traces of what to us are corrosive and poisonous substances.
The surface winds are fairly light, but from time to time can raise dust.
Now and then a fine drizzle of sulphuric acid droplets may fall, plus other cloud particles, and the occasional thunderstorm high overhead can give a heavier rain.
But otherwise the weather on Venus varies very little, either with place or with time.
The landscape is a stony desert, smeared here and there with sulphur compounds.
There are mountains, canyons, perhaps impact craters, and perhaps volcanoes, some of which may even be still active.
And the ground may shake to the occasional ‘Venusquake’.
FIGURE 4.9 The view over the horizon on Venus.
The horizon on this Earth-sized world lies at about the same distance as on the Earth.
But unlike on the Earth we can see well beyond the horizon.
The reason is illustrated in Figure 4.9 (a).
It can be shown that the decrease of  density with height which occurs in all planetary atmospheres results in the bending of em waves including light.
For this reason we can see a little way beyond the horizon H even on the Earth.
But on Venus, because of its much more massive atmosphere the bending is more marked and we are able to see well beyond the horizon, particularly because the lower atmosphere of Venus is usually very clear.
If one were in the middle of a flat plane, conveniently marked with a square grid, then the outcome would be as in Figure 4.9 (b).
The bending of the light is sharper than the curvature of Venus, and the impression is therefore of standing at the bottom of a shallow bowl.
If there were any Venusians (perhaps made of asbestos!) they would have no immediate knowledge of other worlds.
High above them the constant roof of clouds would merely lighten and darken in a long solar axial period of 116.8 days.
They would have to await the invention of radio astronomy to ‘see’ beyond the clouds.
4.6 Summary
Cloud-shrouded Venus remained a mystery until the advent of radar and visitation by spacecraft.
It is still a relatively poorly explored planet.
Its size and mass are similar to the Earth, but too few data exist for it to be known whether its interior composition and structure are as similar.
There is evidence for some geological activity on Venus, and though it is unlikely that Plate Tectonics ever got going this conclusion is not yet beyond doubt.
If it has been considerably less geologically active than the Earth then the reason is not clear, though one or two plausible suggestions have been made.
The reason for the low upper limit on the internal magnetic dipole moment is not properly understood.
The Cytherean atmosphere is far more massive than that of the Earth, and the surface temperatures are considerably higher.
This is because of Venus's smaller distance from the Sun which has resulted in a runaway greenhouse effect.
However, the present scarcity of water in the atmosphere is a puzzle.
It seems likely that there was a greater abundance of water in the past, though it is unlikely ever to have been as large as the abundance of water on the Earth.
I shall return to this puzzle in the next chapter.
4.7 Questions
1.
Outline how observations of Venus ruled out the Ptolemaic model of the Solar System.
2.
State briefly, in relation to planetary observations, the advantages of radar over the receipt of naturally emitted radio waves.
3.
Give two reasons why ‘radar’ with light waves would not be a very useful probe of distant planets.
4.
List the sorts of information about a planet that could be obtained by radar and which would be difficult to obtain by other means.
Name one type of information not readily obtained by radar.
5.
Imagine a planet with a small axial inclination which has a retrograde sidereal orbital period of 100 days, and a sidereal axial period of -100 days.
Discuss whether the planet is in synchronous rotation around the Sun.
What is its solar axial period?
6.
List two quantities that you would like to know, or to know better, plus two types of observation you would like to make, or to make better, in order to extend our knowledge of the Cytherean interior and of the level of geological activity past and present.
7.
Outline four ways in which Venus is known to resemble the Earth, and four ways in which it is known to be strikingly different.
What are the possible causes of the differences?
List also two important ways in which it is not yet clear whether Venus and the Earth are appreciably different from each other.
8.
Describe the three types of region recognized on the Cytherean surface.
9.
Why are the seasonal changes so small on Venus, and why is the polar climate so similar to the equatorial climate?
10.
Outline some of the evidence from which it is believed that water has not been lost in large quantities from Venus, and the evidence which indicates that some may have been lost.
THE ACQUISITION OF VOLATILES BY THE TERRESTRIAL PLANETS
Though volatiles represent only a tiny fraction of the masses of the terrestrial planets, they endow Venus, the Earth, and Mars with interesting phenomena such as atmospheres, oceans, polar caps and, at least in the case of the Earth, a biosphere.
The Moon and Mercury are far less well endowed with volatiles as you will see in subsequent chapters.
The acquisition of volatiles by the terrestrial planets is a subject which, in the main, has been developed on the assumption of an accretionary mode of planetary formation rather than a protoplanetary mode (section 2.1.5).
Therefore, the following discussion is in accretionary terms, though some of the considerations would doubtless apply in protoplanetary theories.
There are three main ways in which the terrestrial planets could have acquired their volatiles.
First, it is possible that the volatiles were borne on the small bodies from which the planets accreted.
If all these bodies bore similar complements of volatiles then this homogeneous accretion (of volatiles) would have given the initial distribution in Figure 5.1(a).
Alternatively, the accretion could have been heterogeneous, and Figure 5.1(b) shows the result of volatile-rich materials arriving later.
FIGURE 5.1 Different ways of acquiring volatiles.
Second, it is possible that as the mass of the planet built up the volatiles were captured as gases from the planetary formation medium (PFM) by the gravitational field of the (growing) planet.
This is illustrated in Figure 5.1 (c).
Third, it is possible that the volatiles were acquired through the impacts on otherwise completed planets of volatile-rich bodies, as illustrated in Figure 5.1 (d).
In a sense this is an extreme form of  heterogeneous accretion of volatiles, though the separation of planetary accretion from the veneering by volatiles is so complete that it merits separate consideration.
If volatiles are acquired during accretion then most of the volatiles are initially buried deep in the planet.
And they will remain there unless the interior becomes hot enough for the volatiles to escape.
The most difficult volatiles to dislodge will be those borne in compounds such as carbonates and hydroxy silicates.
The transfer of volatiles from the interior of a planet to its surface is called outgassing.
In the case of the Earth outgassing occurs today via volcanoes, and also via fumeroles which are holes in the ground which emit volatiles but which emit little ash or lava, and therefore, unlike volcanoes, do not build mountains.
There are also less dramatic seepages of volatiles on to the Earth's surface.
It certainly seems likely that the interior of the Earth has been hot enough for most of any deeply buried volatiles to have found their way to the surface, particularly if convection extends throughout the mantle.
But the present existence of outgassing from the Earth's interior does not prove that the Earth's volatiles were initially deeply buried.
It is clear that most of the volatiles being outgassed today have been outgassed before: they are being recycled by geological processes, particularly by the subduction of plates.
It is possible that nearly all of the outgassed volatiles have always been the result of recycling.
In earlier chapters the possibility has been raised that the atmosphere of the Earth, and perhaps of Mars and Venus, originally contained CH 4 and NH 3 rather than CO 2 and N 2 .
Today, the Earth outgasses lots of water, with CO 2 and N 2 prominent, and negligible CH 4 and NH 3 .
However, the internal conditions long ago might have yielded CH 4 and NH 3 .
It is also plausible that such planets were veneered by CH 4 and NH 3 .
In either case the atmosphere would subsequently revert to CO 2 and N 2 , as outlined in section 2.4.
Clearly therefore, the present outgassing of the Earth, and the possibility of an early atmosphere containing CH 4 and NH 3 , provide no firm bases on which to decide between the various ways in which the terrestrial planets could have acquired their volatiles.
5.1 The evidence of the inert gases
A source of evidence that is often brought to bear on this question is the relative abundances of certain inert gas isotopes.
The inert gases are so called because they do not readily form chemical compounds.
They are also gases at all but extremely low temperatures.
The complete family comprises helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar), krypton (Kr)(from which the authors of Superman got the name of his home planet), xenon (Xe)(pronounced zenon) and radon (Rn).
Certain of the various inert gas isotopes have to be excluded, some because they are of sufficiently low mass to escape in appreciable quantities from the terrestrial planets, others because they are produced by the radioactive decay of isotopes of elements other than inert gases, and others for both reasons.
Some are omitted on grounds of scarcity.
The survivors are shown in Figure 5.2 (along with certain isotopes of H, C and N to which I shall turn in the next section).
Figure 5.2 shows for the Earth, Venus and Mars the abundances of the inert gas isotopes as the number of atoms in the atmosphere per kilogramme of the whole planet.
This leads to very large numbers, but don't be misled into thinking that the inert gases are extraordinarily abundant: a kilogramme of a typical solid contains about 10 25 atoms.
Note that in Figure 5.2 a logarithmic scale of abundance has been used, in which equal distances correspond to equal multiples.
This is to accommodate the large range of abundances.
Note also that the abundance of 132 Xe has not yet been measured for Venus.
Figure 5.2 also includes the solar relative abundances of the same set of isotopes, and these are taken to represent the PFM.
The mass of the PFM is unknown and therefore the abundances are not to be regarded as the number of atoms per kilogramme of PFM,20 Ne being arbitrarily placed at 10 22 atoms per kilogramme to facilitate comparison with the graphs for the planets.
FIGURE 5.2 Planetary abundances of inert gases and of some elements which form mainly volatile compounds.
It is at once clear from Figure 5.2 that the PFM graph is a different shape  from those of the three planets, which are broadly similar to each other.
The capture of inert gases from the PFM cannot by any plausible means lead to this discrepancy and therefore this is ruled out as the major mechanism by which these planets acquired these inert gases.
You might imagine that somehow the discrepancy in Figure 5.2 can be explained by supposing that the planets have withheld from the atmosphere different proportions of their supply of the different isotopes.
However, the chemical inertness of the inert gases means that though they can be physically trapped in rocks they cannot be chemically combined to form significant quantities of non-volatile materials.
Physical trapping is likely to be about as effective for neon, argon and krypton.
It may be more effective for xenon, which has a comparatively large and massive atom and would therefore leak out less readily than the others.
In the case of the Earth it has been estimated that this could lead to an underabundance of xenon in the atmosphere of a factor of 10 or more.
However, as shown in Figure 5.2, this makes the discrepancy worse.
If the gas density in the PFM was appreciable then the terrestrial planets could have acquired substantial atmospheres, and these would have been representative of the PFM, with H 2 and He dominant.
As the PFM dissipated then H 2 and He alone would largely escape.
However, Figure 5.2 indicates that the present inert gases are not the surviving remnants of such an atmosphere, and therefore these planets have lost any such atmospheres.
This brings me to volatiles borne by small bodies, either during accretion, or subsequently as a veneer.
Small bodies, like planets, can acquire small quantities of volatiles by the direct capture of gases from the PFM, which are then adsorbed on to their surfaces.
The surface area of N small bodies is roughly the cube root of N larger than a single body formed by their accretion.
In the case of a planet N is very large and therefore a considerably larger quantity of volatiles can be acquired by the planet by this means than it could acquire by capturing gases directly from the PFM.
The small bodies will have themselves accreted from even smaller bodies, the surfaces of which would carry traces of volatiles.
This can lead to volatiles trapped inside the small bodies, that is, occluded in them.
Moreover, some of the small bodies that reach the Earth could come from regions of the PFM far colder than the region where the Earth formed.
In such regions the temperatures could have been low enough to permit certain volatiles to condense yielding volatile-rich bodies which could survive passage to the Earth.
The abundant volatiles particularly prone to such condensation are H 2 O, CO 2 , CH 4 and NH 3 , that is, the common icy materials.
Small bodies can also bear volatiles in less volatile compounds, such as carbonates from which CO 2 can be obtained, and hydroxy silicates from which water can be obtained.
Through all these means small bodies can bring to the terrestrial planets volatiles in sufficient abundance to match the observations.
It is sometimes argued that if the Earth, Venus and Mars were veneered by volatile-rich bodies subsequent to the main phase of accretion, then the inert gas graphs for the three planets in Figure 5.2 should lie roughly on top of each other.
That this is not so, it is argued, shows that the volatiles must have been acquired during accretion.
The argument rests on the assumption that the number of volatile-rich bodies that would be captured by a planet after it has accreted is roughly in proportion to the mass of the planet.
However, this proportionality with mass need not hold.
Moreover, the argument is insecure on other grounds.
Thus, it could be that because the three planets lay in different parts of the PFM they captured somewhat separate populations of volatile-rich bodies.
Also, conditions inside the three planets could be sufficiently different that different proportions of their volatile endowments have come to be withheld from the atmospheres.
Moreover, if the planetary volatiles were acquired during accretion then it is still necessary to explain the displacements of these graphs in Figure 5.2.
There are plausible ways of doing this, but this does not rule out post-accretional veneering.
Another argument ranged against post-accretional veneering is based on the inert gases in meteorites, particularly the carbonaceous chondrites (section 14.5) which many scientists believe typify the small bodies from which much of the Earth accreted.
This is plausible but by no means necessarily the case, and therefore the evidence from meteorites has to be treated with considerable reserve.
However, were the graph for the inert gases in carbonaceous chondrites to be plotted in Figure 5.2 it would have the same shape as that of the planets.
This can be regarded as support for the view that such meteorites typify much of the material from which the three planets accreted.
More convincingly, it shows that the acquisition of inert gases by small bodies can yield a different graph from that of the PFM.
But when the graph is used to argue against post-accretional veneering certain difficulties arise.
A major difficulty is that the inert gases account for only a small fraction of the volatiles known at the surfaces and in the atmospheres of the three planets, where the volatiles almost entirely consist of CO 2 , H 2 O, N 2 and O 2 , or of compounds derived from them such as carbonates, hydroxy-silicates and nitrates.
The relative abundances of such volatiles in meteorites does not match those of the three planets.
This is hardly surprising, because the chemical non-inertness of the dominant volatiles and the considerable differences in volatility between one volatile and another and between their compounds lead to numerous possible ways in which differences could arise.
However, this leaves open the possibility that the Earth, Venus and Mars acquired most of their volatiles from volatile-rich bodies by post-accretional veneering.
Thus, whilst the similarity of the inert-gas graph for meteorites to those of  the planets in Figure 5.2 certainly supports the view that those inert gases were acquired during accretion, it remains possible that the dominant volatiles were acquired by the capture of volatile-rich bodies after accretion.
5.2 The evidence of hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen
Figure 5.2 also displays the abundances of the most abundant isotopes of hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen.
These are constituents of the abundant volatiles H 2 O, CO 2 , N 2 .
Oxygen has been omitted because nearly all the oxygen in a planet resides in non-volatile oxides and silicates and it is extremely difficult to estimate how much of this oxygen has been liberated into more volatile forms and conversely how much oxygen originally in volatile forms has been lost by combination with various oxides and silicates.
Sulphur, a component of the volatile SO 2 , is excluded for the same sort of reason.
By contrast hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen are all associated with volatile compounds or with compounds such as hydroxy silicates, carbonates and nitrates that yield up volatiles relatively readily.
For all three planets the atmospheric quantities of H, C and N are included, where these elements mainly reside in H 2 O, CO 2 and N 2 respectively.
In the case of Mars the atmospheric quantity for N has been multiplied by 10 to allow for the escape of N to space.
In the case of the Earth the known surface repositories have been included, mainly the oceans for H, carbonates for C and nitrates for N. Surface repositories have not been included for Venus and Mars.
Figure 5.2 shows that on all three planets the relative abundances of carbon and nitrogen with respect to neon (and therefore with respect to the other inert gases) are far greater than in the PFM — remember the logarithmic scale.
This indicates that the inert gases were acquired by a different means from carbon and nitrogen.
Moreover, this possibility is strengthened by the neglect of surface repositories, because regardless of how the various volatiles were acquired it is likely that a smaller fraction of the inert gases are retained in such reservoirs than are carbon and nitrogen.
Therefore this is evidence for the view that whereas certain volatiles such as the inert gases were acquired during accretion, others such as carbon and nitrogen (and hydrogen) were acquired subsequently.
However, planetary chemistry is sufficiently complicated that this cannot be regarded as a firm conclusion.
Figure 5.2 can also be used to make comparisons between the three planets.
You can see that Mars is depleted in H, C and N with respect to the Earth by factors of between about 100 and 1000.
Were all the surface repositories on Mars to be included then the depletions would be reduced, but it is not certain that they would be eliminated.
This possible depletion can be explained in several ways.
First, if Mars acquired volatiles during accretion then the interior could be less thoroughly outgassed than that of the Earth, and this is in accord with the evidence for the lower level of geological activity on Mars.
Second, Mars could be fairly thoroughly outgassed but accreted from materials less well endowed with volatiles than the Earth.
Third, Mars could have been less well veneered with volatiles after accretion was complete.
It is not known which of those possibilities represents the truth.
In the case of Venus you can see from Figure 5.2 that the abundances of C and N are fairly similar to those on the Earth, and it is possible that this is true of the planets as a whole.
However, the deficiency of H is clear, and there are no plausible means by which H can be retained in the interior in substantially greater quantities than C and N. In section 4.4.3 certain difficulties were noted of Venus losing to space large quantities of H. To these difficulties must now be added the difficulty that if Venus has lost large quantities of H to space then the Earth, with its warm exosphere and Mars with its low gravitational field, should also have lost large quantities of H. This supports the conclusion that Venus has always been deficient in H, but it does not help explain why.
The volatile endowments of the Earth, Venus and Mars clearly present a challenge to our understanding.
5.3 Mercury and the Moon
The surfaces of the Moon and Mercury are extremely depleted in volatiles compared to the Earth, Venus and Mars.
The lunar surface is also depleted in moderately volatile substances, and the same is probably true of Mercury.
There are four possible reasons for these depletions.
First, Mercury and the Moon could have accreted from materials that were far less well endowed with volatiles than were those from which the Earth, Venus and Mars accreted.
This explanation relates to the acquisition of volatiles during accretion.
Second, if volatiles were acquired after accretion, from the impacts of volatile-rich bodies, then Mercury and the Moon could have failed to capture the volatiles made available in this way.
The extent to which an atmosphereless planet can hold on to such volatiles depends on the impact speed of the volatile-rich body and on the gravitational field of the planet.
It is plausible that Mercury and the Moon allowed the volatiles to ‘rebound’ into space.
Third, Mercury and the Moon could have allowed nearly all of their original volatile endowments to escape to space.
The rate of thermal escape depends on the temperature of the exosphere and on the gravitational field.
The rate of chemical escape also depends on the gravitational field and also on the details of chemical reactions in the upper atmosphere.
Though it is plausible that Mercury and the Moon could have lost large quantities of volatiles to space it seems unlikely that this explains the extreme extent of their depletions.
Finally, Mercury and the Moon may be much less thoroughly outgassed than the other terrestrial planets.
However, it is hard to see how their surface regions could be so extremely depleted in volatiles if the interiors are not significantly depleted.
5.4 Summary
It is extremely difficult to determine how Venus, the Earth and Mars acquired their volatiles.
However, it is very likely that capture of gases from the PFM by a largely formed planet can be ruled out as a major source.
Mars, compared to the Earth, may be depleted in H, C and N, and it seems fairly certain that Venus is heavily depleted in H. The surfaces of Mercury and the Moon are very heavily depleted in all volatiles, and in the main this is probably because of a smaller initial endowment.
5.5 Questions
1.
In Figure 5.2 you can see that the Earth has about 10 21 atoms of 12 C per kilogramme of the Earth.
If no repositories of 12 C have been overlooked then approximately what fraction of the atoms of the whole Earth are 12 C?
2.
List the different ways in which a planet can acquire and lose its volatiles, and in each case indicate the degree of outgassing required to concentrate the volatiles at or near the surface.
3.
Why is the evidence from the inert gases, and from H, C and N, inconclusive with regard to how the Earth, Venus and Mars acquired volatiles?
4.
Outline four possible reasons for the near absence of volatiles on Mercury and the Moon.
THE MOON
The Moon orbits the Earth and is sufficiently close that we can see its disc with the unaided eye.
The features of the ‘Man in the Moon’, recognized by many cultures, consist of dark and relatively smooth areas called maria (singular ‘mare’, pronounced ‘ma-ray’) lying amidst bright rugged areas called highlands.
‘Mare’ is Latin for sea, because when this  appendage was given in the seventeenth century it was believed that this is what they were.
However, it is now known that the Moon is devoid of seas, and devoid of an atmosphere as well.
It has been extensively explored by spacecraft and is the only extraterrestrial body on which men have stood.
The first manned landing was by Apollo 11 in July 1969.
6.1 The Earth and the Moon
The Moon is in synchronous rotation around the Earth, and therefore within the limitations imposed by its orbit always shows much the same face to the Earth.
Figure 6.1 (a) shows this familiar face, and Figure 6.1 (b) shows the far side which was revealed by spacecraft.
The most abundant landform on both sides is the impact crater, the larger of which are visible in Figure 6.1.
You can also see that the maria are largely confined to the near side.
When the Moon moves between the Earth and the Sun it is seen from the Earth to move across the Sun, and this is called a solar eclipse.
The Moon's angular diameter, as seen from the Earth, is comparable to that of the Sun, and therefore in many solar eclipses, from a rather narrow region across the Earth's surface, the Sun will be totally covered by the Moon.
This is a total solar eclipse.
The narrowness of the region, and its variable position from one eclipse to the next, means that at a given point on the Earth's surface total solar eclipses are rare.
In 1973 I was fortunate enough to see a spectacular total solar eclipse at Lake Turkana in northern Kenya, with the bonus that this wild and exotic region is worth visiting in its own right.
Largely because the Moon is acted on to a significant extent by both the Sun and the Earth its orbital elements are subject to relatively rapid changes.
Consequently the dates of total solar eclipses form a rather complex sequence.
Those occurring in the near future are listed in Table 1.2.
FIGURE 6.1 Both sides of the Moon.
(a) the familiar side imaged from the Earth,(b) the far side imaged by Lunar Orbiter 4 with Mare Orientale at the centre.
North is at the top in both cases.
The synchronous rotation of the Moon around the Earth is one of several consequences of tidal interactions between the Earth and the Moon, ocean tides being a more familiar example.
Tidal interactions are important throughout the Solar System.
6.1.1 Tidal interactions
Consider two bodies in orbit around each other, such as M and m in Figure 6.2 (a).(As outlined in section 1.1, they will orbit around the centre of mass, the position of which depends on the masses M and m.)
The gravitational attraction between them will be strongest between their closest points, a and a', and weakest between their furthest points, c and c'.
A force which, as in  this case, varies across a body is called a differential force, and a differential gravitational force is called a tidal force.
FIGURE 6.1 (continued)
The tidal forces between M and m tend to distort the bodies from their spherical shapes, producing elongations along the line joining the two bodies as shown in Figure 6.2 (a).
These tidal forces are opposed by the internal gravitational forces which tend to make bodies spherical, and by nongravitational intermolecular forces which resist the separation of molecules.
If the tidal forces are not too powerful then an equilibrium will be reached in which there is a certain degree of distortion.
This distortion is called a tide.
(If, as on the Earth, there are outer ‘shells’ of oceans and atmosphere then tides will appear in these too and they will generally be greater than in the rest  of the planet thus producing variations in oceanic and atmospheric thickness around the planet.)
Suppose that the two bodies in Figure 6.2 (a) are not in synchronous rotation with respect to each other.
It follows that the tides tend to get carried off the line joining the two bodies, and they can only keep on line if the tides move like slow waves across the surface of each body.
In practise these tidal waves cannot quite maintain the alignment, resulting in the tides making a small and roughly constant angle with respect to the line joining the two bodies.
FIGURE 6.2 The influence of tidal forces on planetary rotation.
A particular case is illustrated in Figure 6.2 (b).
The axial spin of the more massive body M tends to carry the tide ahead of the orbital motion.
The less massive body m is in synchronous rotation and the orbital eccentricity is small, and therefore the tide on m always lies along the line to M. Because the tide on M is misaligned then m can exert a twisting force on M called a torque and this tends to produce alignment.
This torque will gradually reduce the axial spin rate of M until it too is in synchronous rotation.
Had the axial spin of M been slower than that of synchronous rotation then the torque would have acted to speed it up until synchronous rotation was achieved.
Thus, tidal forces can lead to synchronous rotation.
It can be assumed that m in Figure 6.2 (b) has acquired its synchronous rotation through the operation of such forces.
Such forces also reduce axial inclinations.
If the orbits of M and m around each other are not circular then, with or without synchronous rotation, during each orbit the tides on each body will oscillate around the average orientation, the axial rotation rates being constant.
This effect can be shown to reduce orbital eccentricities.
Tidal forces can also change the semi-major axis of an orbit.
From the principle of conservation of angular momentum, which you shall meet in section 6.5.1, it can be shown that if the combined axial spin of the two bodies is decreasing then the semi-major axis must be increasing, and vice versa.
For example, in Figure 6.2 (b) the axial spin of M is slowing down whereas that of m is constant.
Therefore, the two bodies must be moving further apart.
Moreover, as their separation increases, tidal forces will also cause m to slow down to maintain its synchronous rotation.
This contributes to the separation.
Whether m and M move apart depends on the semi-major axis of the orbit in relation to that of the orbit of Keplerian co-rotation.
This is the orbit in which the less massive body m would have a sidereal orbital period equal to the sidereal axial period of M, as illustrated in Figure 6.2 (c) and (d).
It can be shown that if m lies outside this co-rotation orbit then ultimately M and m will move apart, but if m lies inside this co-rotation orbit then ultimately M and m will move nearer.
A simple case occurs when M is far more massive than m, in which case m has little effect on the axial rotation of M and changes in the semi-major axis of the co-rotation orbit are negligible.
Tidal forces can also heat a body, because the movement of a tidal wave through a body means that the material of the body is being flexed, and this will generate heat.
The energy for tidal heating can come from a reduction in rotational energy consequent upon the various changes in axial and orbital motion.
Tidal forces can also tear bodies apart.
The closer two bodies are together the greater the tidal forces between them.
There will be a limiting distance within which the more massive of the two bodies will disrupt the other, and a smaller limiting distance within which, had it survived, the less massive body would have disrupted the more massive body.
This is called tidal disruption.
People and spacecraft are far too strongly bound by non-gravitational forces to be tidally disrupted by any bodies in the Solar System.
However, the larger the body the less important become its non-gravitational forces in comparison with its internal gravitational forces.
This is because the gravitational forces are appreciable over much larger distances than the non-gravitational forces.
Ultimately there is a direct contest between internal gravity and the tidal forces.
The minimum radius of the body for which this direct contest is established depends on the density of the body.
For bodies consisting of rocky or icy materials the minimum radius is about 1000 km.
In such a direct contest the limiting distance within which the more massive body disrupts the other is called the Roche-limit after Edouard Albert Roche (1820–1883), the French scientist.
The Roche-limit depends on the mass of the more massive body and on the density of the less massive body: the greater the mass the further the limit, and the greater the density the smaller the limit.
6.1.2 Tidal interactions between the Earth and the Moon
Figure 6.2 (b) can be taken to represent the Earth and the Moon today, though it is not to scale and the tides have been greatly exaggerated.
Only the Moon has acquired synchronous rotation because the tidal forces of the Earth on the Moon are greater than those of the Moon on the Earth.
However, the residual eccentricity of the lunar orbit, plus other effects, means that we can see over half, about 59%, of the lunar surface from the Earth.
The axial rotation rate of the Earth is directly observed to be slowing down, such that the sidereal axial period is lengthening by about 1.5 × 10 -5 second per year.
Moreover, from the annual and diurnal growth patterns of organisms, preserved as fossils, it has been established, for example, that about 380 Ma ago there were about 400 ‘days’ in the year and as the orbital period of the Earth is very unlikely to have changed the ‘day’must then have contained only about 22 hours.
Far into the future the Earth and the Moon will both be in synchronous rotation about each other, the sidereal orbital and axial periods all being about 55 days.
The orbit will be circular and the Moon will be about 1½ times as far away as it is now and so total solar eclipses will not occur.
The axes of the Moon and the Earth will be perpendicular to their orbit around each other, and because this orbit will be less inclined to the ecliptic-plane than is the Earth's axis today, seasonal variations on the Earth will be less.
It is just possible that this far-off configuration will be unstable, and that the Sun will draw the Moon away into an independent orbit around the Sun, leaving the Earth Moon-less.
6.2 The interior of the Moon
6.2.1 The evidence of gravity
The mass of the Moon has been obtained from the position of the centre of mass of the Earth and the Moon which lies 4748 km from the centre of mass of the Earth.
This position was long ago determined from the slight motion of the Earth around this point.
This gives the mass of the Moon as a fraction of the mass of the Earth, and the mass of the Earth is known.
The mass of the Moon has also been determined from spacecraft paths in the lunar vicinity, and from the Doppler-shifts in the wavelength of spacecraft radio transmissions to the Earth, shifts induced by the motion of the Earth around the Earth-Moon centre of mass.
The Moon's mass is 0.01230 M E and its mean radius is 1737 km.
Therefore, its mean density is 3340 kg/m 3 .
Because of the low gravity of the Moon the uncompressed density will not be much less.
The uncompressed density of the Earth is considerably greater than that of the Moon and this  strongly implies that the Moon is strongly depleted in metallic iron compared to the Earth.
The polar moment of inertia of the Moon C has been determined from J 2 , and from the physical librations which for the Moon have played an equivalent role in determining C to that played by the rate of polar axis precession in the case of the Earth (see section 3.2.1).
The physical librations arise because the path of the Moon around the Earth is not perfectly circular.
As a consequence the main lunar bulge does not always lie along the line from the Moon to the Earth.
This enables the Earth to exert a torque on the Moon which causes small but observable oscillations.
These are the physical librations.
From these librations, and from J 2 which is obtained from the orbits of spacecraft, C can be calculated.
For the Moon C is not very different from that of a homogeneous sphere and indicates a very slight overall increase of density with depth.
However, because of the low gravity of the Moon the compression inside it is also small, and the slight increase of density with depth is more than can be explained by the compression of a homogeneous material.
The Moon is not homogeneous.
The way of obtaining C outlined above does not assume that the Moon is in hydrostatic equilibrium, which is just as well because it is not.
Moreover, its observed non-hydrostatic mass distribution cannot readily be understood as a hydrostatic state ‘frozen’ from an earlier environment, such as when it was closer to the Earth.
This suggests that the Moon, or at least the outer 200 km or so, has never been flexible enough to reach hydrostatic equilibrium and therefore that these outer regions have always been cold.
However, it is also possible that the outer 200 km or so cooled and became rigid whilst they were deformed by internal turmoil which destroyed hydrostatic equilibrium.
Further evidence for a rigid outer Moon comes from the 5 km  offset (towards the far side) of the centre of figure from the centre of mass.
This offset has been determined from spacecraft orbits which locate the centre of mass of the Moon, and from the measurement of the altitude of a spacecraft above each point on the lunar surface over which it passes by timing the journey down and back of light pulses from lasers on board(compare section 4.3).
6.2.2 Seismic evidence
The astronauts of Apollos 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16 placed seismic stations on the Moon.
Seismic data were returned to Earth over a period of a few years from these five stations, though they were reduced to four when the Apollo 11 station stopped working.
These data are insufficient to establish the variation of seismic wave speeds with depth in the Moon to anything like the same extent with which this has been possible in the Earth.
Figure 6.3 is about the best that can be done with the lunar data at present.
FIGURE 6.3 P-wave and S-wave speeds in the Moon.
At the Apollo 17 site an experiment was carried out by the astronauts which gave the seismic wave speeds down to a few kilometres depth in the vicinity of the site.
Some evidence for a layered structure was found, but whether this is anything more than a local feature is unknown.
In Figure 6.3 the rapid increase of speed with depth in the outer 10 or 20 km is due largely to the increasing compaction of a fragmented medium as the overburden increases: it is not possible for solid rock to give this behaviour.
Moreover, the lunar seismic signals were of a very different nature from those seen in the Earth, and this can be explained by the prevalence of a fragmented medium in the outer regions of the Moon.
The signals also indicate that these regions are free of gases and liquids.
There are several other sources of evidence for the fragmented nature of the outer Moon.
At all sites at which there have been landings, manned or otherwise, the lunar surface is almost entirely blanketed in fine dust, with a few stones and boulders here and there.
The middle distance of Figure 6.4 is typical.
Moreover, Earth-based photometric studies have indicated that most of the lunar near side must be blanketed in such dust.
Direct sampling of the dust at various landing sites has indicated that it extends downwards for at least a metre or so.
Photometry of the Moon with Earth-based radar shows that over much of the near side the dust extends downwards for at least about a hundred metres.
Analysis of the radio waves emitted by the Moon indicate that the thermal conductivity of the outer Moon increases rapidly with depth, just as would be expected from the increasing compaction of a fragmented medium.
However, it remains an open question whether the dust continues beyond about 100 metres, becoming fully compacted rock at 10 to 20 km, or whether it gives way to broken rock somewhere not far beyond 100 metres depth.
Certainly, little fragmentation could exist beyond about 20 km because of the high pressure of the overburden.
Beyond this depth the compression of solid rock such as silicates can account for the increasing wave speeds.
FIGURE 6.4 The lunar surface at the Apollo 17 site, imaged by the Apollo 17 astronauts.
At about 50 km depth, as you can see from Figure 6.3, the wave speeds suddenly increase.
This could result from a structural change in a single solid material, though no suitable materials are known.
It could also result from a change in composition, and thus indicates that the Moon has a crust.
However, because all the seismic stations have been placed on the near side the wave speeds down to this depth only reliably apply to the near side.
There may be no crust on the far side, and even on the near side it may be confined to certain regions, such as beneath the maria, though the majority view is that the Moon does have a global crust.
If there is a lunar-wide crust then one explanation of the offset of the centre of mass from the centre of figure is that the crust on the far side is, on average, thicker than on the near side.
Plausible values are 75 km and 50 km respectively.
At depths greater than about 100 km the wave speeds are rather uncertain.
Figure 6.3 is not a unique analysis, but does correspond to a medium consisting mainly of silicate materials.
You can see that there may be a compositional change at about 300 km depth, and there may be a core about 170 to 450 km radius.
You can also see that the S-wave speed decreases from about 50 km depth, and that beyond about 800 km it may not be possible for S waves to traverse the Moon.
These observations can be explained by a modest increase of temperature with depth, the material becoming very plastic, perhaps partially molten, beyond about 800 km.
There are three sorts of seismic wave sources on the Moon.
First, there are surface impacts from space vehicles and from meteorites.
Second, there are interior sources which have only ‘fired’ once during the several years of observations.
Third, there are a few sources which fire repeatedly: these lie at depths between about 300 km and 800 km and may be the result of tidal stresses produced in the Moon by the Earth.
Most seismic sources in the Earth lie no deeper than about 100 km and generate much more seismic energy than all the lunar sources put together.
They are largely the result of geological activity.
Clearly the ‘seismic quietness’ of the Moon indicates a low level of geological activity.
6.2.3 Other evidence about the lunar interior
Spacecraft observations have placed an upper limit on the internal magnetic dipole moment of the Moon of 10 -7 of that of the Earth.
Thus, if the Moon today has a small liquid iron core then either its small size or the lack of a solid inner core or the slow axial spin of the Moon (sidereal period 27.32 days) has prevented it generating an appreciable magnetic field.
Weak magnetic fields have been detected in surface rocks.
In some cases these seem to have been produced by surface impacts, but in other cases exposure to a rather strong magnetic field in the past seems to be required.
A possible source of such a field is an internal lunar dipole source, since vanished, though other possible sources are the Earth's field and the Sun's field if they were a good deal stronger in the past than they are today.
Some indication of the internal temperatures in the Moon has been gleaned from a weak magnetic field that is generated by the solar wind (see section 9.1.1).
Because the Moon has no atmosphere nor any significant magnetic field of its own to deflect the solar wind, it sweeps near the lunar surface.
The solar wind carried its own magnetic field, and as this sweeps past it causes electrical currents to flow in the Moon.
These currents generate their own magnetic field which can be distinguished from the various other fields.
(Indeed, were the fields in the solar wind much stronger in the past then this is another way in which the magnetic fields that reside in the surface rocks could have been produced.)
The magnetic field generated in the Moon by the action of the solar wind enables the electrical currents flowing in the Moon to be deduced, and this enables rough estimates to be made of the internal temperatures, the higher the temperatures the greater the currents for a given solar wind field.
The temperature seems to increase with depth, reaching  about 1000 K at about 300 km and about 2000 K at about 1000 km.
It is not known whether the temperature continues to increase towards the centre.
These temperatures are consistent with the apparent rigidity of the outer 200 km or so of the Moon and with the strong attenuation of S waves beyond about 800 km, and with the large area to mass ratio of the Moon.
The rate at which heat is flowing out of the Moon was measured at the Apollo 15 and 17 landing sites, but because of the unknown distribution of energy sources in the Moon, the poorly known thermal conductivity of subsurface materials, and the likelihood that the Apollo 15 and 17 results do not typify the whole Moon, the heat-flow measurements do not much constrain models of the lunar interior.
6.2.4 Models of the lunar interior
Figure 6.5 is a model of the lunar interior, many features of which would be accepted by most scientists, though a minority would argue that it has yet to be established that the Moon has a global crust.
FIGURE 6.5 A model of the Moon.
Some modification of this model is certainly possible.
For example, the average density of any crust could be increased and the density or size of any core could be correspondingly decreased within fairly broad limits.
Also, any core may consist largely of iron, or of iron-rich compounds such as iron sulphide (FeS) and various iron oxides (FeO, Fe 2 O 3 ), or of some mixture of iron and iron-rich compounds.
However, it seems fairly certain that the Moon is depleted in iron with respect to the Earth, not only in iron alone but also in iron-rich compounds because iron and these compounds are too dense to be sufficiently abundant to make up the iron abundance to that of the Earth.
It also seems fairly certain, from the seismic wave speeds and from the densities based on the polar moment of inertia, that though the outer 300 km or so very probably  consist largely of common silicates this detailed composition is not the same as in the Earth's mantle.
6.3 The lunar surface
The most common feature on the lunar surface is the impact crater.
And yet until the Space Age it was not at all certain whether the lunar craters were of impact origin or of volcanic origin.
But the close scrutiny of the lunar craters and examination of lunar samples plus theoretical investigations and laboratory experiments have established beyond reasonable doubt that all, or very nearly all of the lunar craters are of impact origin.
Such craters are now known elsewhere in the Solar System as you have already seen in the case of Mars, and therefore the mechanism by which they are formed is of widespread relevance.
6.3.1 The formation of impact craters and associated features
When a sizeable body from space strikes a planet's surface the impact speed will not be less than a few km/s.
Therefore the impact is very violent.
Most, or all of the impacting body will vaporize, and the resulting bubble of gas will expand with explosive violence, much more rapidly than the speed of the body during its final stages of  deceleration .
Therefore, the outward motion of the expanding bubble is not significantly biased in the direction of the impact, and a roughly circular crater is excavated.
Only when the angle of impact is less than about 20° above the surface is the direction of the body preserved, as an elongation of the crater in the impact direction.
Material is thrown out by the impact in various forms, collectively called ejecta.
‘Bounce back’ of the compressed planetary surface aids the ejection of material.
Among the ejecta there will be vaporized material, some from the impacting body, but largely from the surface of the planet.
This will condense and form a fine dust much of which will return to the surface, most of it a long way from the impact.
Another far-flung component will be droplets of liquefied rock.
These will rapidly solidify to form small beads of glass, a type of solid with a disorderly molecular arrangement.
The impact will also generate brecchias (bretchi-ars).
These are rocks formed by the welding of rock fragments by heat and pressure, producing a rock in which there is little empty space but in which the original fragments can be discerned.
Conversely, impacts will also shatter rocks into small fragments.
Some of the brecchias and rock fragments will also be scattered far away.
Other forms of ejecta lie fairly close to the impact, and unlike the far-flung material can normally be associated with a specific impact.
Among this material there will be the ejecta blanket (section 3.3.5).
There may also be bright rays, roughly resembling the spokes of a wheel radiating from the  crater ‘hub’.
Such rays consist of bright subsurface material.
There are also likely to be secondary craters, caused by large blocks of material flung out by the primary impact.
Secondaries can usually be identified because they cluster around the larger primary, often forming chains and other small groups, and because the impacts producing them are at low angles and low speeds and so the craters are usually elongated.
There may also be signs that liquid rock flowed around the crater, from impact melted materials.
The ejecta volume exceeds the volume of the impacting body, usually by a large factor, and because little of these ejecta fall back into the crater the crater will also be larger than the impacting body by a similar factor.
It is the energy of the impacting body that largely determines the volume of the crater, the larger the energy the larger the volume.
The energy rises as the mass and impact speed of the body rise.
The composition of the impacting body has a smaller effect.
The impact speed depends on the mass of the planet as well as on the orbit of the body.
The resulting crater and its ejecta will also depend on the direction of the impact, the nature of the planet's surface, and the nature of any atmosphere.
The shape of a crater depends on its size.
Usually it is only the smallest craters that have a simple bowl shape with the cross-section shown in Figure 6.6 (a), and craters less than 1 km diameter may even have no noticeable rim.
Larger craters are less simple, as follows.
FIGURE 6.6 Cross-sections through different types of impact crater.
Figure 6.6 (b) shows a crater with a central peak.
There may be several such peaks, and there are several ways in which they can be produced.
The largest craters of all, more than about 300 km in diameter, are usually called impact basins.
A typical form is shown in Figure 6.6 (d), and you can see that there are several concentric rims, in which case it is called a multiringed basin.
These rings could be the result of surface waves spreading out from the impact through the solid surface, or the result of a succession of wall slumps in a once deeper basin.
Wall slumps can also occur in smaller craters yielding the typical form in  Figure 6.6 (b).
Such slumps could be triggered by seismic waves.
They could also result from impact in a stratified surface.
A relationship has been established between crater diameter and crater depth, the greater the diameter the smaller the depth to diameter ratio.
This trend is apparent in Figures 6.5 (a) and (b).
Floors in craters of any size can be flattened by infill as illustrated in Figure 6.6 (c).
This infill could come from ejecta falling back into the crater, including molten rock from the impact, lava from volcanic activity, and dust from the walls and beyond.
In applying the depth-diameter relationship allowance must be made for unusual degrees of infill.
In the larger craters there will be some upward movement of the crater floor towards isostatic equilibrium, material having been removed by the impact over a wide region.
If there is subsequent substantial infill this could complete the isostatic adjustment or even produce a mass excess if the crater region has been compressed by the impact and is fairly rigid.
At the other end of the size range there is microbombardment, that is, bombardment by micron-sized particles.
This does not produce craters but an erosive effect akin to that produced by wind-borne dust on the Earth.
6.3.2 Lunar impact craters
Figure 6.7 is a typical fairly large lunar crater, named Copernicus after the Polish astronomer Nicholas Copernicus (1473–1543).
It is about 100 km diameter, and making reasonable assumptions about the impact speed would have been excavated by a rocky body about 10 to 20 km diameter.
You can see several of the topographic features discussed in the preceding section: a floor lower than the terrain beyond the rim; the central peaks; the wall slumps; a floor flattened by infill; an (rather degraded) ejecta blanket; small surrounding craters, some of which can be shown to be secondaries.
Elsewhere on the Moon other crater features can be seen.
Thus, in Figure 6.1 (a) you can see crater rays and in Figure 6.1 (b) you can see a multiringed basin.
All of the various topographic features observed in lunar craters  indicates their impact origin.
Moreover, the diameter-depth relationship is as expected for impact craters on the Moon, and brecchias and glass particles are common.
Only in a few cases is it unclear whether a crater is volcanic or from an impact, and in comparably few cases does it seem more likely that a crater is of volcanic origin.
All these doubtful cases are small craters.
The lunar maria, nearly all of which are located on the near side, also seem to be of impact origin, with subsequent infill by rather dark material.
I shall return to the nature of the infill in section 6.4.
FIGURE 6.7 The lunar crater Copernicus, imaged obliquely by the Apollo 17 astronauts.
The crater is about 100 km across.
There are several strong indications that the maria are the result of impacts.
First, each mare is encircled, or nearly encircled by tall mountain  ranges that could be the remnants of the rim of a large impact basin or the most prominent rim of a multi-ringed basin.
Second, gravitational data show that the maria are sites of excess mass called mascons such as could be produced by infill of an impact basin as follows.
It has been estimated that an impact which would have excavated a basin the size of, for example, Mare Imbrium (Figure 6.1 (a)) which is about 800 km diameter, would initially have produced a bowl about 150 km deep.
But even with a rigid outer Moon gravitational forces would have raised the floor most of the way towards isostatic equilibrium.
However, even if such equilibrium was achieved the floor would still lie below the surrounding terrain, because of permanent compaction of the floor materials by the impact.
It is estimated that the basin would have become no deeper than about 5 km, and as today Mare Imbrium is of negligible depth there could be up to about 5 km of infill.
Such infill could not only explain the mascon but could also explain why no Imbrium impact features are visible within Mare Imbrium and why the surface is fairly smooth.
Moreover, on the far side of the Moon there are a few basins that, if  filled, would resemble  mare .
Mare Orientale on the far side (Figure 6.1 (b)) is partially filled, but displays a mass deficit (a ‘negative mascon’) indicating that full isostatic compensation did not follow the impact.
The smaller the crater diameter the more numerous the craters, and this remains the case when secondary craters, which are smaller than their primaries, are excluded.
This suggests that the smaller the mass the greater the number of impacting bodies.
Bodies massive enough to excavate maria have been few in number though such bodies need not have exceeded about 100 km in diameter.
It is not hard to find suitable populations of bodies that could give rise to the observed range of crater sizes today — more on this in section 6.4 and in Chapter 8.
However, it is curious that the maria on the near side of the Moon significantly outnumber the maria and large basins on the far side — more on this in section 6.5.
6.3.3 Other surface features
Apart from impact craters, including mare basins, the most prominent lunar feature is the mare infill, about 17% of the lunar surface consisting of such infill.
Most scientists believe the infill to be lava, and though there are no features yet seen on the Moon that are definitely volcanic, floods of lava from fissures that are buried beneath their own lava are known on the Earth and could account for the mare infill on the Moon.
However, it seems unlikely that the mare basins could each have been filled in one outpouring.
Any such deep body of liquid is likely to rise to a level corresponding to isostatic equilibrium, and there would be none of the observed mascons.
Moreover, the mare surfaces are slightly tilted, whereas a deep pool of liquid would solidify with a horizontal surface.
Therefore, most of those scientists who believe that the infill is lava believe that it issued in a series of sheets, each a few tens of metres thick.
This could yield mascons and tilted surfaces.
The best evidence for such sheets comes from Mare Imbrium (Figure 6.8), which exhibits winding scarps — short steep slopes leading to flatter terrain.
Each scarp is a few tens of metres high and could be the solidified flow front of a lava sheet.
No such scarps have been observed on other maria, perhaps because any lava there was of such low viscosity that it spread out into very thin sheets before solidifying.
Further evidence exists for lava infill of the maria, though, as is common in planetary astronomy, it is also inconclusive.
The seismic data which show that dust or fractured rock constitute much of the outer 10 or 20 km of the Moon apply also to the maria.
However, the scarcity of craters on the maria makes it difficult to understand how lava could have been extensively fractured leave alone reduced to dust.
It may be possible to reconcile the seismic evidence with fractured rock beneath the lava, which is no more than a few kilometres thick, particularly if the first few sheets that flowed were heavily fractured and were then covered by the sheets  we see today.
There is no doubt that the outer few tens of metres of the maria are fine dust, but this could be the result of many impacts too small to leave visible craters and of dust from large impacts elsewhere.
FIGURE 6.8 Part of the lunar Mare Imbrium, imaged obliquely by the Apollo 15 astronauts.
The scarcity of infill in the basins on the far side can be explained in the lava model if the Moon has a global crust and if it is thicker on the far side: the thicker the crust the less available would lava have been from beneath it.
There is no evidence that Plate Tectonics ever developed on the Moon, and therefore even if the maria are filled by lava the Moon has been far less geologically active than the Earth.
This low level of activity indicates a lack of extensive interior melting, or a thick lithosphere, or a lack of stress in the lithosphere, or some combination of all three, all of which can result from a long history of low internal temperatures.
As outlined earlier, low temperatures past and present are also indicated by the evidence that the Moon has a long history of outer rigidity.
There are no surface features on the Moon which suggest that the Moon ever had an atmosphere or oceans.
Topographic features are degraded by the impacts of bodies smaller than a few millimetres, by finely divided ejecta, by the solar wind and by seismic waves.
It is also possible that surface dust is mobilized by electrical forces: indeed, such forces are of great importance to the minority of scientists who believe that very little lava if any has flowed from the lunar interior.
I shall return to this in section 6.4.
It has been estimated that these various small-scale erosional processes require tens of Ma to overturn a few millimetres of dust.
It seems very likely that apart from Moonquakes the Moon is geologically moribund today.
However, ever since the invention of the telescope the occasional reddish glow and small patch of mist has been reported.
These are called lunar transient events and their very transience makes it hard to determine whether all of them are illusory.
Therefore, a very low level of geological activity today cannot quite be ruled out.
6.3.4 Lunar samples
About 400 kg of lunar material has been returned to the Earth from nine different sites on the Moon.
Nearly all of this material was obtained by scooping the top of the surface, or by picking up small rocks up to about fist-size, or from cores a few centimetres in diameter and up to 2.4 metres deep.
In only one case was a sample obtained from a large lump of rock, these being scarce on the lunar surface.
This was at the Apollo 17 site where a sample was chipped from a boulder several metres across.
It is a brecchia.
Nearly all of the 400 kg consists of dust-size particles of rock.
This dust is sometimes called fines, and it is also called soil but this is a poor term because it implies an organic component, which is absent.
When it lies on the Moon the dust plus any small rocks is called the regolith.
Brecchias are very common among the rock samples.
Silicates are the dominant compounds.
The core samples, which consist of dust plus small rocks, exhibit layering.
However, at a given landing site the sequence of layers in one core does not correspond to that in a neighbouring core, and therefore the subsurface material does not consist of a number of extensive thin sheets.
Many detailed studies have been made of the lunar samples.
Here, in broad outline, are some of the more general and important conclusions.
At no site can the regolith be the broken-up product of a single type of rock.
If there were originally regional differences in surface composition then these have now been lost because of the widespread scattering of impact ejecta and because of any other processes that can transport material over large distances.
However, this mixing has not made the surface composition the same everywhere: this is clear from the lower albedo of the maria and from differences between the samples at one site and those at another.
The differences between the sites lie not so much in the dust, which has a  broadly similar composition at all sites, but in the rocks.
The clearest difference is between rocks from mare sites and those from highland sites.
A greater proportion of the mare rocks resemble basalts on the Earth and are called mare basalts.
Basaltic silicates are comparatively rich in iron, titanium and magnesium, and it is the extra iron and titanium that is largely responsible for the lower albedo of the maria.
By contrast the highland rocks contain more silicates rich in calcium and aluminium.
The mare basalts are denser than the rocks which typify the highlands.
But whereas the mare basalts are too dense to represent the lunar mantle, the highland rocks are not dense enough.
This suggests that the mare basalts and the highland rocks have both been derived from mantle rocks of intermediate density.
This possibility is supported by the lack of any known chemical pathway by which the mare basalts can be derived from the highland rocks.
Mantle compositions that could yield both mare basalts and highland rocks are consistent with the constraints on the interior outlined earlier.
Of course, this does not mean that the surface rocks were derived from the mantle.
The lunar samples show some striking differences from Earth rocks.
There is a broad tendency for the lunar samples, compared to the Earth, to be enriched in refractory materials and depleted in volatile materials.
The depletion of volatiles is extremely marked in the cases of H, C, N and their volatile compounds as noted in Chapter 5.
Moreover, the traces that are found can readily be accounted for by relatively recent contamination by the solar wind and by volatile-rich materials.
There is evidence that volatile materials have always been scarce on the Moon.
For example, there are no clays, no carbonates, no carbon compounds, and the presence of tiny particles of metallic iron in the lunar samples shows that the amount of free oxygen, such as would arise from the photodissociation of CO 2 , has always been negligible.
This scarcity of volatiles is in accord with the lack of any topographic evidence for a lunar atmosphere or oceans.
Among the refractory materials found in the lunar samples are refractory compounds of uranium and thorium.
These elements are major sources of radioactive heating.
If the surface abundances were typical of the whole Moon then, except for a very thin surface layer, the Moon would be entirely molten.
Clearly the abundances of these materials at the surface exceeds those of the Moon as a whole and this could either be because of upward differentiation or because such materials were added late in the formation of the Moon.
6.3.5 Dates of lunar surface events
Most of the lunar highlands are close to being saturated with impact craters, notably on most of the far side and around the south pole (Figure 6.1).
The remaining highlands bear fewer craters and this could largely be the  result of partial burial by ejecta from basin-forming impacts, because these regions border such basins or the subsequent maria.
Moreover, where these regions have been sampled brecchias are very common.
The number densities of craters on the maria are far lower than on the highlands, indicating, as outlined in section 3.3.4, that the maria surfaces are younger.
Younger still are a few areas smaller than maria which bear yet lower number densities of craters.
Individual craters can be time-ordered, as outlined in section 3.3.4, on the basis of their state of degradation.
In the case of the Moon this is aided by the existence of crater rays (section 6.3.1), as follows.
Lunar surface materials are darkened by the combined action of the solar wind, by the bombardment of submillimetre particles, and by cosmic-rays which are high-speed fragments of atoms and which thinly pervade interplanetary space.
Bright rays have not yet been darkened by these means and thus represent ejecta from craters of relatively recent origin.
At the Apollo 16 landing site ejecta from the crater South Ray was examined for the effects of exposure and it is estimated to have been exposed on the surface for about 2 Ma.
A crater called Bruno (after the Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno (1548–1600)) is particularly crisp, and it also has bright rays emanating from it.
No close scrutiny and therefore no exposure age has been established.
However, it is possible that a bright flash observed on the Moon by five English monks in the summer of 1178 was the formation of Bruno, in which case it is about the only lunar crater that has ever been observed to form.
Extensive radiometric dating of the lunar samples has been performed.
The data are extremely complex and are not fully understood, but here are some broad conclusions.
Most of the highland-type rocks, even those found on the maria, have ages between about 3800 Ma and 4300 Ma, which suggests that a lunar-wide heating took place a little over 4300 Ma ago resetting the radiometric ‘clocks’.
Some highland-type rocks are a bit younger, down to about 3600 Ma, whilst others are a bit older.
The oldest rock of all is 4600 Ma old and is a silicate type called dunite.
This is not a typical highland rock but could be typical of the mantle.
Several of the mare impacts have been dated from the radiometric ages of the welding of the surrounding brecchias to which these impacts probably gave rise.
The results are shown in Table 6.1.
Also shown are the ages of the corresponding mare basalts, and you can see that they are several 100 Ma younger than the brecchias.
If the samples of mare basalts are chips off basaltic lava infill then this infill occurred or was continuing several 100 Ma after the basin-forming impact.
Individual grains of dust are too small to be individually dated and thus each age determination of the dust samples corresponds to the average of many grains.
The ages range from 4300 Ma to 4900 Ma, and dust from maria  sites displays much the same range as dust from highland sites.
Most of the rocks are younger than this.
Therefore, if the dust ages are correct then little of it could have come from the sort of rocks found in the lunar samples.
However, it is possible that the dust ages are erroneously high because of the loss of the initial isotopes other than by radioactive decay (section 2.1.15).
TABLE 6.1 Ages of mare impacts (from brecchias) and mare basalts
But if most of the dust does indeed predate the rocks then its fairly uniform composition and age across the Moon could be because it was originally distributed uniformly from space.
Otherwise, impact scattering and condensation from impact vapour must be responsible for this uniformity.
You can see that with the possible exception of a few dust samples there are no radiometric ages older than 4600 Ma, which is additional evidence for this being the age of formation of the planets.
No radiometric ages less than about 3000 Ma have been obtained for any lunar samples except for a tentative date of 850 Ma for material thought to have been ejected and heated by the formation of Copernicus (Figure 6.7).
Thus, most of the lunar surface is extremely old: probably only about 1% of the surface is younger than 3000 Ma, whereas less than 1% of the Earth's surface is older than this.
Much of the resetting of the lunar radiometric clocks is probably the result of impact heating, except that if the mare basalt samples are chips off lava infill then the resetting here would correspond to the solidification of geologically produced lavas.
From the ages of the samples it is possible to establish the length of time for which certain regions on the Moon, particularly the maria, have been exposed to bombardment.
From the number density of craters on these regions it is thus possible to establish the lunar cratering rate over a considerable period of time as shown in Figure 6.9.
Note the logarithmic scale of crater-production rate.
The solid line on the graph in Figure 6.9 extends from 3900 Ma ago to 850 Ma ago, this being the age range of dated regions on the Moon.
It has been estimated that the cratering rate today (see section 8.1) is about 3 times what  it was 850 Ma ago, and Figure 6.9 is brought up to today on this basis.
Beyond 3900 Ma ago two possibilities are shown, labelled A and B. Curve A corresponds to the tail end of formation of the Moon.
The earliest part of curve B corresponds to this, then there is a lull, and then a broad peak in bombardment from a fresh supply of small bodies the possible nature of which I shall discuss in section 8.2.
FIGURE 6.9 Impact crater production rates on the Moon, where N is the number of craters greater than 1 km diameter produced per 10 6 square kilometres per 10 Ma.
In both cases it can be shown that the saturated areas of the Moon have ages of about 4200 Ma.
It follows that few clues can be expected from the Moon about the development of its surface before about 4000 Ma ago.
From about 3900 Ma ago to about 3300 Ma ago it is clear from Figure 6.9 that the Moon was subjected to its last heavy bombardment.
This is called the late heavy bombardment.
During this period all the dated maria impacts occurred.
Between about 3300 Ma ago and about 2500 Ma ago you can see that the heavy bombardment gave way to a fairly constant light bombardment which persisted until comparatively recent times.
This was probably the result of a separate population of small bodies from that which produced the earlier far heavier bombardments.
Whether the increase in comparatively recent times points to a third population is a subject for Chapter 8.
6.4 The evolution of the Moon
6.4.1 Orthodox theories of lunar evolution
These theories are orthodox in the sense that they are believed by most lunar scientists.
Here are the broad features of such theories.
About 4600 Ma the Moon accreted homogeneously from a medium that, relative to the Earth, was depleted in iron and in volatiles.
If there were any volatile-rich bodies that made late impacts on the Moon then the weak gravitational field of the Moon would have allowed nearly all these volatiles to  escape to space.
Any core could have accreted first, thus introducing some inhomogeneous (heterogeneous) accretion, or it could have later separated.
During the later stages of accretion, at the very least, the outer 100 km or so of the Moon melted, large areas being molten at the same time.
From such melts the lower density silicates separated upwards to form a crust.
The crust solidified and was heavily bombarded by later impacts, the bombardment tailing off about 3300 Ma ago.
This bombardment fractured the crust.
To some extent the interior of the Moon cooled and the lithosphere became rather thick.
But then interior temperatures began to rise as a result of radioactive heating.
Some (or all) of the materials of the mantle melted and as the temperatures rose the upper boundary of the partially melted material also rose, and by about 3800 Ma ago was sufficiently shallow to provide surface lava through the mare basins which were weak points in the crust.
The far side crust is thicker and therefore the basins gave rise to less weakening there, and consequently far less lava emerged into those basins than into those on the near side.
By this time the interior was differentiated, and much of the radioactive material had moved to the surface regions (section 6.3.4).
When the abundances of the radioactive isotopes had declined considerably the interior began to cool again, the upper boundary of partially melted material sank to greater depths, and by about 3000 Ma ago lava was no longer available to the surface.
The interior was never sufficiently plastic close to the surface for long enough to cause widespread geological activity such as Plate Tectonics, largely because the Moon has a large ratio of surface area to mass and thus loses heat relatively rapidly (section 2.1.16).
The small rocks and fine dust have been produced by impacts throughout lunar history, and dust production has been enhanced by microbombardment.
Non-brecchia rocks have been produced by impact-disruption of large sheets of various highland rocks and of mare basalts, and brecchias have been produced from fragments of these rocks.
You can see that much of what is known about the Moon can be accounted for by these theories.
Indeed, they can account for the variety and juxtaposition of rocks in a rather more detailed way than the above outline suggests.
However, these theories have to face certain major difficulties.
Here are some of those that have been raised by various scientists.
1.
The global scale non-hydrostatic state of the Moon cannot be the result of a largely molten outer Moon solidifying in any gravitational environment to which the Moon is likely to have been exposed.
2.
Some astronomers think that the more rapidly a body accretes the hotter it gets, and that for the outer Moon to have melted it is necessary for the Moon to have accreted in roughly 0.01 Ma.
Therefore, orthodox theories cling to curve B in Figure 6.9, because curve A is associated with protracted accretion.
However, theoretical and experimental studies of the accretional  processes show that it is unlikely that a body with the low mass of the Moon could have accreted in less than about 10 Ma.
This would not result in extensive melting of the outer 100 km or so.
The late heavy bombardment, whether it was the end of accretion or a separate event, is even less likely to cause widespread melting.
Radioactive heating can help overcome the likely ineffectiveness of accretion in melting the Moon, particularly if there were short-lived quick-acting isotopes in the early Solar System such as 26 Al (Al = aluminium).
However, even with their aid it is thought by some to be unlikely that the outer Moon could have been melted quickly enough to yield those highland rock samples that have given radiometric ages of about 4300 Ma and older.
3.
It is hard to see how global melting of the outer Moon could yield a crust with a different thickness on one side of the Moon to that on the other.
4.
Most of the mare basins were in place by the time Mare Serenitatis was filled with lava (Table 6.1).
The lava was therefore available and yet it did not fill, for example, Mare Imbrium until 500 Ma later.
5.
Layered bodies of rock, such as might have come from a succession of lava flows, are rare on the Moon, and those observed might be the result of other processes, such as impacts.
6.
The radiometric ages of the dust exceed those of the rocks from which the dust is supposedly derived.
There are plausible reasons for adjusting the dust ages downwards, but some scientists find these reasons uncompelling.
All theories have difficulties to overcome, and there is certainly no need to abandon the orthodox view.
But there is an alternative theory of lunar development which overcomes the difficulties outlined above, and which also overcomes several other difficulties, though it does have its own particular set of difficulties to face.
6.4.2 An unorthodox theory of lunar evolution
This theory is largely due to Thomas Gold (b. 1920), an Austrian-born astronomer who has spent most of his working life in Britain and in the USA.
I have called it an unorthodox theory because few adhere to it.
However, this does not mean that it is wrong.
In a nutshell, orthodox theories are based on homogeneous ‘hot’ accretion, the high temperatures leading to differentiation.
This unorthodox theory is based on inhomogeneous ‘cold’ accretion, the only differentiation being the separation of any lunar core that might exist because of the increase in temperature expected towards the centre of any planet (section 2.1.16).
Any boundary at a depth of about 300 km (Figure 6.3) would be the direct result of inhomogeneous accretion.
The ‘crust-mantle boundary’ at a depth of 50 km on the nearside could be confined to mare basins, the result of the mare impacts.
If it is a global feature then it too could be the direct result of  inhomogeneous accretion, or of the final stages of compaction of accreted bodies under an overburden that grows with depth.
The same two kinds of explanations could also apply to the layering of the outer few kilometres of the Apollo 17 site.
The 5 km offset of the centre of figure from the centre of mass need not be explained by a change in crust thickness from 50 km on the near side to 75 km on the far side, but by an asymmetry spread over a greater depth and consequently slight on a global scale.
The surface of the Moon is the result of accretion and of subsequent impacts and slow-acting erosional processes.
There are no flows of lava from within, the only liquid rock at the surface being the local result of impacts.
Compounds bearing radioactive elements are acquired late, and are therefore confined near to the surface thus avoiding the problem that would otherwise be posed by the observed surface abundances (section 6.3.4).
Small rocks would survive impact, with some fragmentation.
Larger rocks would yield molten material and brecchias.
Clearly a great variety of rock types would result.
The variety at the surface is greatly increased by the excavation through impacts of different layers of accreted material, thus converting an initial vertical variation in composition into the horizontal variability observed.
The greater abundance of mare basalts on the mare than in the highlands is not explained in any detail, but the greater variability of rocks within the highlands could be the outcome of the maria impacts which excavated the Moon to large depths and thus brought up a great variety of layers.
Dust is expected to be common in the PFM, and in this theory the direct accretion of such dust accounts for its abundance at the lunar surface, though smaller quantities are tiny impact-fragments and the result of condensation from rock vapour generated by impacts.
The observed uniformity of dust on the near side of the Moon is to be expected if most of this dust fell from space.
Moreover, the generation of dust by impacts would not disturb this uniformity.
You might anticipate that dust from space accounts for the mare infills, but this is not the case.
By the time the mare impacts occurred there would probably have been too little dust available to fill the maria.
Moreover, infall alone would not level the mare floors.
It is therefore proposed that the mare infills are the result of dust migrating into the mare basins from elsewhere on the Moon.
Such migration need not disturb the uniformity of the dust type across the lunar surface.
Clearly, the dust must have been far less mobile on the lunar farside.
Theoretical studies and laboratory experiments have indicated that lunar dust could be mobilized by electrical forces which on the Moon could arise from electrically charged particles which impinge on the lunar surface.
The difference in dust mobility between the two sides of the Moon could be the result of the Earth's magnetic field as modified by the solar wind, which, as  outlined in section 9.1.1 produces a magnetotail stretching away from the Earth, roughly in a direction pointing away from the Sun.
This magnetotail could steer larger quantities of charged particles on to the near side than on to the far side.
This mobilization continues today and can explain many features on the Moon.
Try for yourself, in relation to Figure 6.8, the ‘Gestalt switch’ from lava scarps to a very slow-moving surf of dust.
When the mare basins were excavated the fragmentary material beneath them must have been compressed to a higher density than before.
Thus, even if, as seems unlikely for a cold Moon, isostatic equilibrium was subsequently achieved there would still be a residual basin.
The dust infill then produces the mascon, borne by the cool rigid outer Moon.
The unorthodox theory also provides a satisfactory explanation of exposure age.
When a cosmic-ray encounters solid matter then in most cases it penetrates only a few millimetres and leaves a detectable track.
In the case of a dust grain the number of tracks indicates for how long the grain has been unshielded by other material.
This is the exposure age.
Throughout the lunar core samples, which extend well below a few millimetres, the exposure ages of the grains are similar at all depths and correspond to a few million years exposure to the cosmic-ray intensity in the present Solar System.
In this unorthodox theory this is interpreted as the typical time for which a dust grain moved through space after it was formed and before it accreted to the Moon.
Orthodox theories argue that the turn over of the dust at the lunar surface has produced the observed uniformity of track densities.
But this turnover is so extraordinarily slow that each grain could only have been exposed during the last 4600 Ma for a total time much less than a million years thus requiring considerably higher cosmic-ray intensities in the past, which though possible is thought by several scientists to be unlikely.
The greater radiometric age of the dust is readily explained by the unorthodox-theory, and so too are the great ages of the rocks.
However, it is not clear whether the ages of the mare basalts date the infill by dust.
If not then though the general features of the graph in Figure 6.9 remain, they are based on fewer data.
The greatest difficulties faced by this unorthodox theory are to do with the compositional variations across the Moon.
The greater abundance of mare basalts on the maria, their smaller ages than most highland rocks, the possibility of deriving the highland type rocks and the mare basalts from a common source material in the mantle, and many other compositional relationships, are glossed over in an unsatisfactory manner.
It remains to be demonstrated that this theory can overcome such difficulties.
6.5 The origin of the Moon
The aspect of lunar origin with which I shall be primarily concerned here is how the Earth came to get its Moon.
There are three types of theory of how the Earth came to get its Moon: fission theories; capture theories; and binary-accretion theories.
But first, some basic science.
6.5.1 Angular momentum
The angular momentum of a system is a measure of its rotation.
A point has to be specified with respect to which the rotation is measured.
In Figure 6.10 this point is P, and in our case would typically be the centre of a planet.
Suppose that a small mass m is made to go around P in a circular path radius r as shown and that its speed is s.
The angular momentum of m is defined to be the product of m, r and s.
Any body can be thought of as consisting of lots of small masses m, and the angular momentum of such a body around a point P is obtained by combining the products mrs according to certain rules which I shall not describe.
FIGURE 6.10 Illustrating angular momentum.
A very important property of angular momentum is that if no angular momentum is transferred to or from a body then, regardless of any internal changes in the body, its angular momentum remains fixed.
This is the principle of conservation of angular momentum.
For example, if r is somehow reduced in Figure 6.10 without transferring angular momentum to or from m then, because the angular momentum mrs is constant, s must increase.
6.5.2 Fission theories
Fission theories rely on the rotational disruption of the Earth.
There are several types of fission theory.
The type I shall outline is illustrated in Figure 6.11.
In Figure 6.11 (a) the Earth is rotating almost fast enough to begin to lose mass from its equatorial regions.
The iron core of the Earth has partially segregated, and therefore the outer regions are depleted in iron.
Further gravitational segregation of the iron core means that denser material moves inwards displacing less dense material outwards.
The effect on the Earth's rotation is the same as moving the mass m closer to P in Figure 6.10: the Earth rotates faster.
The 1% of the Earth's mass necessary to form the Moon  is thus flung off.
It is assumed that the Earth is hot enough for its outer regions to have previously been vaporized, in which case it can be shown that the material flung off forms a thin disc of gas as in Figure 6.11 (b).
The gas cools, materials condense and accrete to form the Moon as illustrated in Figure 6.11 (c),(d) and (e).
Because of core segregation in the Earth the Moon is depleted in iron, and because of the vaporization of the outer mantle of the Earth a degree of chemical segregation is plausible by means of which the Moon comes to consist largely of materials that differ to the required extent from those of the Earth's mantle.
FIGURE 6.11 A fission origin of the Moon.
The eccentricity of the material around the Earth is the result of the oblique viewpoint.
There are, however, two grave difficulties facing all fission theories.
First, all fission theories place the Moon in an orbit of very low inclination with respect to the Earth's equator.
This inclination today is 5.15°, and no convincing explanation has yet been found of how the inclination could have increased to this value from about 0° 4600 Ma ago.
Second, the axial spin rate of the Earth 4600 Ma ago can be estimated using the principle of conservation of angular momentum by giving the Earth all the present angular momentum of the Moon plus the orbital angular momentum of the Earth and the Moon around their centre of mass: the Earth spins nowhere near fast enough to have spun off lunar material and no very plausible means have been suggested whereby the Earth-Moon system could since have lost the necessarily copious amount of angular momentum.
6.5.3 Binary-accretion theories
In these theories the Earth and the Moon accrete separately from a common pool of dispersed materials.
For various reasons the accretion of the Earth  proceeds more rapidly, leading to a situation resembling that in Figure 6.11 (c) but without this material having to have an inclination close to 0°.
Moreover, the Earth need never have been spinning particularly rapidly.
Thus, the two grave difficulties facing fission theories do not arise.
The Moon accretes from the ring of material.
These theories can account in broad terms for the compositional differences between the Earth and the Moon, but only by making a number of fairly detailed assumptions about the conditions in the PFM in the region where the Earth and the Moon formed.
6.5.4 Capture theories
These theories yield the compositional differences between the Earth and the Moon by forming their materials in widely separated parts of the PFM.
This requires few assumptions about conditions in the PFM.
The Earth then captures lunar material.
In the most dramatic of these theories the Earth captures the Moon after the complete Moon has accreted elsewhere.
Capture is most readily achieved if the Moon and the Earth approach each other at fairly low speeds.
Unfortunately this means that they occupy fairly similar orbits and could not have been formed in widely separated parts of the PFM.
At higher speeds it is difficult to dissipate sufficient of the energy of motion of the Moon for it to be captured and at the same time yield an Earth-Moon system that resembles the one that actually exists.
Capture is made considerably easier if the Moon was captured in small pieces, because interactions between them, or between circum-Earth gases and such pieces would readily place some of them in orbit around the Earth.
This again leads to a situation resembling Figure 6.11 (c) from which the Moon accretes.
However, the greater the ease of capture the more difficult it becomes to explain why the Earth has a large satellite but not Venus, Mercury and Mars.
In one version of such theories the pieces are of submillimetre size.
They form well beyond the Earth and spiral inwards through the Poynting-Robertson effect.
You can think of solar radiation as consisting of a rain of tiny bullets moving outwards from the Sun at the speed of light.
For a body moving in orbit around the Sun the surface facing the direction of orbital motion will be struck by more ‘bullets’ than the trailing face, just like the front of you gets wetter than the back when you run through a storm of vertically descending rain.
The body in orbit is thus slowed down slightly.
This is the Poynting-Robertson effect, and is named after the British physicist John Henry Poynting (1852–1914) and the American physicist Howard Percy Robertson (1903–1961).
Any reduction in orbital speed by the  action of an additional force can be shown to lead to shrinkage of the orbit.
Thus, the body spirals inwards.
In the Solar System the Poynting-Robertson effect will produce appreciable inward spiralling only of bodies of submillimetre size.
Recent evidence based on oxygen isotope ratios in the Earth and in lunar samples suggests that the Earth and the Moon may not have formed in widely separated parts of the PFM.
However, the extent to which this poses a difficulty for capture theories is not clear.
6.5.5 The late heavy bombardment of the Moon
In many fission theories the late heavy bombardment is a consequence of the final stages of accretion of the Moon from material within the Earth-Moon system.
It is observed that the maria and the large unfilled basins tend to lie in the equatorial regions of the Moon.
This could be the result of a tendency for the larger bodies in the final stages of accretion to lie in the orbital plane of the Moon, with the Moon already possessing an axial inclination similar to that of today.
Moreover, if the Moon was already in synchronous rotation around the Earth, and if there was more spare material between the Earth and the Moon than beyond the Moon, then the rather greater number of large basins on the near side than on the far side can be explained.
The several hundred Ma delay in the basin impacts after the main phase of accretion can also be explained, because it can be shown that the more massive a body the longer it is likely to survive before being collected by the Moon (or by the Earth).
In some binary-accretion theories the story is much the same.
In others of these theories the large basins are produced by bodies which come from beyond the Earth-Moon system, in which case the smaller number of large basins on what is now the lunar far side has to be put down to chance, which is just plausible.
In these theories the late heavy bombardment can be separate from accretion, as in curve B in Figure 6.9.
In capture theories more possibilities open up: the Moon could have suffered its late heavy bombardment as it tumbled through space before capture; it could have suffered it from debris already in orbit around the Earth or the large basins alone could have arisen from such debris; or it could have been bombarded by material which entered the Earth-Moon system after the Earth had captured the Moon.
6.6 Summary
Though the Earth and the Moon can be regarded as a double planet system this is not an association of twins.
The Moon contains less iron than the Earth, far less volatiles, and, at least on its surface, a greater abundance of  refractory materials.
There seem also to be other compositional differences, such as in the silicates which make up the greater part of both planets.
The Moon has been far less geologically active than the Earth, and there has been no weathering.
Consequently, the surface is peppered with impact craters, many of which date back to within a few hundred Ma of the Moon's formation.
Homogeneous ‘hot’ accretion of the Moon with subsequent differentiation and subsequent cooling is currently the more fashionable view of lunar development than heterogeneous cold accretion.
If the Moon were ever hot then it would tend to cool rapidly because of its small size and consequent large surface area to mass ratio.
There are many viable theories of how the Earth came to acquire its Moon, reflecting the considerable uncertainty as to how it actually happened.
It is correspondingly uncertain as to why its composition differs from that of the Earth.
6.7 Questions
1.
In what one way does a tidal force differ from any other type of force?
2.
Suppose that the Moon has a crust which solidified when an appreciable tide, due to the Earth, existed in it.
Why is this not an explanation of the lunar crust being thicker on one side than on the other?
3.
An artificial satellite is in the Keplerian orbit of co-rotation above the Earth's equator.
What is its sidereal orbital period around the Earth?
4.
Two rocky bodies, masses m 1 and m 2 , densities d 1 and d 2 , are in orbit around a planet of mass M. Both bodies are several hundred kilometres diameter.
If m 1 is greater than m 2 and d 1 is less than d 2 , which of m 1 and m 2 has the closest Roche-limit to the planet?
Why is the diameter of the bodies relevant?
5.
List the items of evidence which indicate that the lunar interior is cooler today than that of the Earth, and probably always has been.
6.
List the main differences in chemical composition between the Earth and the Moon.
7.
Name seven different forms of ejecta from impact craters, and four topographic features that impact craters can bear.
What factors influence the type of crater and associated features formed by an impact?
8.
Outline how the lunar cratering rate over much of the last 4600 Ma has been estimated.
9.
Prepare a short table showing the features of the Moon readily explained by orthodox theories of lunar development and those readily explained by unorthodox theories.
List also the main difficulties faced by each type of theory.
10.
If, without any transfer of angular momentum to the Earth-Moon system, the Moon were shifted into a circular orbit half the radius of its present orbit (which is nearly circular), discuss whether its sidereal orbital period would initially increase or decrease.
11.
In relation to each of the three types of theory of how the Earth got its Moon, outline how the late heavy bombardment might have happened.
MERCURY
The orbit of Mercury, like that of Venus, lies within the orbit of the Earth.
Indeed, it is the closest planet to the Sun and at its maximum elongations is never more than about 28° from the Sun.
This makes Mercury hard to see from the Earth.
‘Mercury’ is the name of the Roman messenger of the gods: an elusive figure.
By the middle of the nineteenth century it had been firmly established that there was something curious about Mercury's orbit.
With respect to the distant stars the major axis of the orbit moves in the prograde direction at the rate of 574 seconds of arc (′) per century, as shown for 200 centuries in Figure 7.1.
This is called precession of the perihelion, and is not in itself curious because it had long been known that precession of the perihelion is one result of the gravitational influence on a planet's orbit of all the other planets in the Solar System.
But when allowance was made for the influences of all the other planets on Mercury then there was a residual precession unaccounted for of 43′ per century, as shown for 200 centuries in Figure 7.1.
FIGURE 7.1 Precession of the perihelion of Mercury.
The viewpoint is perpendicular to the orbital plane.
One of the earlier attempts to account for this residual precession was by the astronomer Le Verrier, to whom I shall introduce you more properly in Chapter 13.
In 1859, from the residual precession he predicted that within the orbit of Mercury there either existed several small bodies, or a single planet.
Soon afterwards it was believed that such a planet had been discovered in transit across the Sun.
It was named Vulcan.
However, its  existence was never firmly established, and today it is believed not to exist.
In 1915 the German physicist Albert Einstein (1879–1955) published his General Theory of Relativity.
This had grown out of his very successful Special Theory of Relativity which he had published in 1905 and which can account for two-thirds of the 43′ residual.
The Special Theory replaces Newton's Laws of Motion and the General Theory also replaces Newton's Law of Gravity.
With the advent of the General Theory the whole of the 43′ residual could be explained to within observational uncertainties, and this was a major success for the General Theory, a success it has since built on.
Nevertheless, since 1915 other theories of gravity have been advanced, though the great majority of scientists today accept Einstein's General Theory and the explanation that it offers of Mercury's precession.
The residual precession is greater the closer the planet to the Sun and the larger its orbital eccentricity.
For these reasons the residual precession is greater for Mercury than for any other planet.
It is insignificant for all satellites because the residual precession is smaller the smaller the mass of the primary body, and no planet is anywhere near as massive as the Sun.
For nearly all purposes in the Solar System the far simpler Newton's Laws are adequate.
7.1 The exploration of Mercury
Before the advent of radar the best measurements of Mercury's radius were made when Mercury was in transit across the Sun.
The result was 2440 km.
The mass of Mercury was first determined from its influence on the orbit of Eros, an asteroid which was discovered in 1898 and which often passes close to Mercury.
The calculated mass was 0.056 M E , which gave a mean density of 5500 kg/m 3 .
Early in the nineteenth century it was wrongly deduced, on the basis of scanty observations of surface features, that the axial sidereal period was about 24 hours, prograde.
Mercury is a small planet, which combined with its small angular separation from the Sun makes it a difficult planet to observe.
Therefore, it was not until 1890 that this erroneous period was revised, not by an hour or so, but to about 88 days prograde.
This was sufficiently close to the sidereal orbital period of 87.97 days for it to be generally concluded that Mercury was in synchronous rotation around the Sun, and therefore that the sidereal axial period was also 87.97 days.
The earlier period of about 24 hours seems to have resulted from the observation that the elusive surface markings of Mercury lay in roughly the same positions on consecutive nights.
Clearly this is consistent both with a period of about a day and with a very long period.
Then, in 1965 radar echoes from Mercury showed that the planet did not after all have a period of 88 days, but about 60 days.
Subsequent radar  observations, plus Earth-based telescope observations guided by the 60-day period, ultimately established beyond doubt that the axial sidereal period of Mercury is 58.64 mean solar days.
The spacecraft Mariner 10 flew by Mercury in 1974 and 1975.
It confirmed this period, but did not improve on its accuracy.
It can be shown that many of the observations adduced to support the 87.97-day period also support the 58.64-day period, largely because these periods have the simple ratio of .
Nevertheless, there were older observations that would long ago have shown that the longer period was wrong.
Doubtless these were given too little weight because it was reasonable to expect that tidal forces of the Sun had given Mercury synchronous rotation.
FIGURE 7.2 The axial rotation of Mercury.
The line on Mercury is fixed to its surface at the equator.
Indeed, Mercury is in a form of synchronous rotation around the Sun.
The  ratio of Mercury's orbital and axial sidereal periods means that, as illustrated in Figure 7.2, for every orbit of the Sun Mercury rotates one and a half times around its axis.
You can see that it therefore presents the same face to the Sun at every other perihelion and that any tidal bulge would lie along the Sun-Mercury line every perihelion.
Mercury's orbit is fairly eccentric, and therefore a tidal bulge would be acted on by the Sun a good deal more strongly near perihelion than elsewhere in the orbit.
The tidal braking would therefore be greatest around perihelion, and it is this that has presumably led to the partial synchronization observed.
Radar observations have also shown that the inclination of the spin axis is less than 3°.
This is consistent with Earth-based telescope observations.
Observations by Mariner 10 have not enabled this upper limit to be reduced  but if the  synchronization is stable then the axial inclination must be much closer to zero.
Mercurian surface temperatures have been determined from observations of thermal radiation from the planet's surface.
The hottest place is at the equator at perihelion, which, because of the  synchronization, at all perihelia is one of two places on the surface.
The temperature is about 700 K, about the same as the surface temperature everywhere on Venus.
On the night hemisphere much of the surface is at about 100 K. Were Mercury to keep the same face to the Sun then the night hemisphere would be close to 0 K. The higher temperature that actually exists has been known since 1962.
At that time it was still believed that Mercury did keep the same face to the Sun, and therefore this temperature was used to support the idea that Mercury had an atmosphere, because such an atmosphere would transport heat around from the Sun-facing side, thus raising the night-side temperature.
There was, however, little other evidence that Mercury had an atmosphere, and therefore when the correct axial rotation period was established in 1965 most astronomers quickly settled on the correct view that Mercury has no appreciable atmosphere.
Radar observations yielded a radius for Mercury of 2439 km which has an observational uncertainty about 50 times less than earlier values.
Radar also reduced the uncertainty in the mass, by a method similar to that used for Venus (see section 4.1.2).
In 1974, just before the spacecraft Mariner 10 flew by Mercury, the best Earth-based optical resolution of the surface was about 300 km.
This means, for example, that a feature on Mercury the size of Sri Lanka would be a featureless blur.
Such indistinct features were, in the end, good enough to accurately establish the axial rotation rate but tell us little about the nature of the Mercurian surface.
Radar was unable to improve on the optical resolution of surface features.
However, radar reflection spectra did indicate that the surface of Mercury consists largely of dust to a depth of at least a few metres, and that the dust could be composed largely of silicates.
These conclusions are supported by the optical reflection spectra, and by polarimetric and photometric analyses of the thermal radiation emitted by Mercury, day and night.
These radar and optical data are rather similar to corresponding data for the Moon.
Mercury is also similar to the Moon in having a Bond albedo of about 7%.
Mariner 10 is the only spacecraft to have yet visited Mercury.
It was launched on 3 November 1973, passed fairly close to Venus on 5 February 1974 returning pictures and other data from that planet, and flew by Mercury on 29 March 1974.
The orbit of Mariner 10 around the Sun is such that it passes close to Mercury about every 2 × 88 days.
Data were returned from the first fly-by and from the next two, on 21 September 1974 and 16 March 1975.
Then, the fuel required to adjust and orientate the spacecraft was used  up, and it now tumbles uselessly around its orbit.
Because the Mariner 10 orbital period is about twice the orbital period of Mercury, and because of Mercury's own  synchronization, much the same hemisphere of Mercury was sunlit during each of the three fly-bys.
The optical images are thus of half a planet.
The images were returned by the on-board TV cameras and yielded detail on the Mercurian surface down to about 1 km across, about as good as the Moon viewed through a telescope with a magnification of × 120 and about 300 times better than the pre-Mariner 10 images.
Parts of the surface were imaged with a resolution of about 0.1 km.
The surface is dominated by impact craters.
This came as no surprise: the lunar-like data outlined above, the small size of Mercury and the corresponding likelihood of little geological activity, the absence of a significant atmosphere, the abundance of craters on Mars, all led to the expectation that Mercury would have craters.
No satellites of Mercury were discovered, and therefore any satellite cannot exceed about 3 km radius.
7.2 The interior of Mercury
The occultation by Mercury of the radio signals from Mariner 10 yielded a radius of 2440 km, which is no improvement on the radar value.
However, from the gravitational influence of Mercury on the orbit of Mariner 10 a mass was obtained with 5 times less observational uncertainty than radar had yielded, to give a mean density of 5430 kg/m 3 .
This lies between the mean densities of Venus and the Earth, but because of Mercury's low gravity the uncompressed density is not much less that 5430 kg/m 3 , whereas the uncompressed densities of Venus and the Earth are considerably less than the planetary values.
Mercury thus contains a much greater abundance of denser materials, the strong implication being that it is rich in metallic iron.
If Mercury consists of a largely iron core and a largely silicate mantle, then the core would account for about 80% of the mass and about 40% of the volume, which would make Mercury richer in iron than any other planet.
An alternative is that it consists of a few per cent silicates, all the rest being iron-rich compounds such as FeS and FeO, which have densities between those of metallic iron and silicates.
This, however, makes silicates and iron surprisingly scarce and FeS and FeO surprisingly abundant.
The flattening f of Mercury is very slight.
The several occultations by Mercury of the radio signals from Mariner 10 yielded radii of cross-sections inclined at about 2° and 68° with respect to the equatorial plane, and the radii are the same to within about 0.5 km.
Only an upper limit on the flattening can thus be established, but this is a good deal less than the flattening of the Earth.
This is not surprising, because of the slow axial spin of Mercury.
These measurements also make it clear that Mercury is a good deal more spherical than the Moon, perhaps because it has not been subjected to the tidal forces of a nearby planet.
Only upper limits have been established for J 2 , the smallest being from Mariner 10.
This upper limit is very small, and this is consistent with the slow axial spin and nearly spherical shape of Mercury.
This nearly spherically symmetrical mass distribution helps explain why the synchronous rotation of Mercury is only partial (compare section 4.2).
An upper limit for J 2 can also be obtained by calculation from the upper limit off and the axial spin period T a , on the assumption of hydrostatic equilibrium.
The calculated value is less than the upper limit from Mariner 10, indicating that Mercury is close to hydrostatic equilibrium.
However, if hydrostatic theory is then used to calculate the possible range of values of the polar moment of inertia C from the axial spin period T a and the allowed values up to the upper limit of either f or J 2 , the calculated range of values of C is so wide that no useful constraints on the variation of density with depth are obtained.
There are no data of any significance on smaller-scale gravity variations.
Observations by Mariner 10 have demonstrated that Mercury does have an intrinsic magnetic dipole moment.
Its value is about 0.00005 of that of the Earth, it is inclined about 12° from the spin axis, and its polarity is the same as that of the present Earth's field.
The existence of such a field came as a surprise.
Recall that planetary dipole fields are thought to require liquid conductors plus rapid axial spin.
When Mariner 10 reached Mercury the following data on planetary magnetic fields were to hand: the Earth rotates quickly, almost certainly has a large molten iron core, and has a strong dipole field; Mars rotates quickly, but probably has no molten iron core, and has no detectable dipole field; Venus probably has a sizeable molten iron core but rotates slowly, and has no detectable dipole field (perhaps also because it has no solid inner core — see section 4.2); the Moon rotates slowly, probably has no liquid iron core, and has no detectable dipole field.
Therefore, though the high density of Mercury suggested it might well have an iron core, Mercury was known to spin slowly and its large surface area to mass ratio indicated that its interior was cool enough for most or all of any core to be solid, and thus no detectable dipole field was expected.
It has been suggested that the magnetic field observed outside Mercury and which is consistent with an interior dipole source, arises instead from magnetized rocks near the surface, which happen to produce a net field which mimics that of an internal dipole source with the observed and expected low inclination with respect to the spin axis.
This could be the result of an earlier internal field, lost when Mercury cooled.
It has also been suggested that the field is a remnant of a time when Mercury had suffered less tidal slowing of its axial spin, at which time the core was molten, Mercury having cooled less than today.
In this case a  substantial internal magnetic dipole moment is expected.
As the core cooled it would form a solid outer shell, and as this shell further cooled through the Curie temperature it could retain today the magnetic field of the remnant liquid iron core within it.
The Curie temperature is simply the temperature above which a substance cannot retain a magnetic field in the absence of a generating process, and is named after the French physicist Pierre Curie (1859–1906).
For iron it is about 1000 K. This is a plausible explanation of the Mercurian field, though it is not certain that a slowly cooling core would end up with an appreciable magnetic dipole moment.
However, Mercury's magnetic dipole moment does indicate that Mercury has an iron core, and leaves open the possibility that some of the core may still be molten.
It could even all be molten if Mercury possesses a powerful source of internal heating, and this would certainly remove some of the mystery surrounding the dipole field's origin.
FIGURE 7.3 A model of Mercury.
Figure 7.3 is a model of the Mercurian interior consistent with the various (weak) observational constraints.
The core and mantle could be the result of heterogeneous formation, iron first then the silicates, or it could be the result of homogeneous formation with the Mercurian interior becoming sufficiently hot for differentiation to subsequently occur.
The latter mode, as you saw in relation to the Earth (section 2.1.16), has the possible difficulty that the substances which would ultimately form the mantle may lose oxygen to iron, but until the present oxygen abundance of Mercury's mantle is known it will not be known whether this possible difficulty applies.
If any Mercurian core separated from the mantle then it is likely that mantle temperatures became high enough for differentiation within the mantle to occur, the less dense substances moving upwards to form a crust.
At present it is not known whether Mercury has any such crust.
7.3 The surface of Mercury
7.3.1 Impact craters
Figure 7.4 shows the two halves of the sunlit hemisphere imaged by Mariner 10.
The preponderance of impact craters is plain.
That nearly all are impact craters is clear by comparison with the impact craters on the Moon, with which they bear a striking similarity.
A few small rimless bowls may be volcanic.
There are, however, some differences between cratering on Mercury and the Moon.
For example, ejecta that can be associated with a specific primary impact lie much closer to the primary than would have been the case on the Moon.
I refer, in particular, to ejecta blankets and to secondary craters.
This is clearly a result of the higher surface gravity on Mercury, a little over double that on the Moon.
The older large craters can be identified by the relatively large number of small craters which they bear.
They differ from corresponding lunar craters by having no central peaks and by having rather smooth rims.
This is a kind of degradation which indicates that when they were formed the Mercurian surface may have been warm enough for it to be slightly plastic.
However, none of the other observed differences between Mercurian and lunar craters can be used to argue that there are, or have been, any other fundamental differences in the composition and nature of the lunar and Mercurian surfaces.
The surface of Mercury, like that of the Moon, could consist largely of fragmented silicates, even to the point of dust.
The surface of Mercury, broadly speaking, can be divided into two types of terrain, heavily cratered terrain, which accounts for about 80% of the imaged hemisphere, and smooth plains, which accounts for the remainder.
Heavily cratered terrain can be subdivided into two types.
First, there are areas in which the number-density of craters approaches saturation.
Second, and more commonly, there are less heavily cratered areas in which there are fairly well-spaced craters larger than about 20 to 30 km diameter, the spaces between being called intercrater plains.
This is a rather unfortunate name, which apparently arises from early low resolution pictures which suggested that they were flat areas devoid of craters.
By contrast these areas are rolling plains bearing many craters smaller than about 10 km diameter plus a few craters with diameters in the range 10 to 20 km.
Most of the smaller craters on the intercrater plains are secondaries, as indicated by their shallow elongated forms and their tendency to form clusters and chains.
The lower half of Figure 7.5 is a fairly typical example of this second kind of heavily cratered terrain.
FIGURE 7.4 Mercury imaged by mariner 10,(a) the approach view,(b) the departure view.
These are mosaics from pictures taken at ranges of a few thousand km.
North is at the top.
Close scrutiny of this second kind of heavily cratered terrain reveals that the subsaturation level of cratering is not the result of the partial obliteration of a once saturated surface, but the partial reworking of an old and largely   crater free surface.
It is possible that this surface, which is not entirely obliterated in the intercrater plains, predates almost all the craters on Mercury.
The surface would have suffered saturation bombardment during the final stages of formation but either the surface was too soft to preserve these craters, as indicated by the degradation of the oldest craters, or the surface was somehow ‘decratered’.
FIGURE 7.5 Mercurian smooth plains (top) and intercrater plains (bottom) imaged obliquely by Mariner 10.
The width of the picture is about 490 km.
The Moon has no analogue of the Mercurian intercrater plains.
The maria and small plains in the highlands can readily be seen to postdate the craters on their borders.
If the Moon also lost most of its craters from the final stages of formation then the apparent failure on Mercury of post-formation bombardment to saturate the intercrater plains may seem to indicate that Mercury was exposed to a less numerous population of small bodies than the Moon.
However, this need not be the case: the  lower surface gravity of Mercury could be responsible because it confines ejecta blankets and secondary craters closer to the primary than is the case on the Moon.
Of course, there is no direct evidence that the Moon has lost an appreciable fraction of its craters from the final stages of formation, except through any separate late heavy  bombardment which merely replaces one set of craters by another.
Smooth plains are distinguished from intercrater plains by a far lower number density of small craters and by clear evidence that on the smooth plains there has occurred the obliteration or partial obliteration of craters.
Both of these features should be apparent in the upper half of Figure 7.5, which shows a smooth plain.
Smooth plains material is younger than most of Mercury's craters, but is not as lightly cratered as the lunar maria.
Some smooth plains consist of infill in some medium sized craters.
The largest known expanse of smooth plain is an infill of the largest multi-ringed basin (section 6.3.1) known on Mercury, called Caloris.
This is just visible near the centre of the night-day boundary in Figure 7.4 (b), and more clearly in Figure 7.6.
It is one of the few features that can be identified on Earth-based drawings of Mercury.
The inner ring, Caloris Montes, is about 1300 km diameter and consists of lumpy terrain reaching to about 3 km above the adjacent plains.
A second, less distinct ring is visible further out.
FIGURE 7.6 The Caloris basin on Mercury (middle left) imaged by Mariner 10.
North is at the top.
Much of the area in and around Caloris is smooth plains infill.
This infill bears few craters, and only a few craters have been partially obscured, indicating that the whole Caloris basin since its creation has suffered few impacts and is therefore comparatively recent.
The plains are, however, scarred by ridges about 1.5 to 12 km wide and about 0.5 to 0.7 km high, and by cracks about 8 km wide and about 0.7 km deep (Figure 7.6).
The cracks are predominantly concentric with respect to the impact centre, though some are radial.
The ridges are more freely distributed in orientation.
If the smooth plains infill contracted then cracks are to be expected.
Other ‘cracks’ are probably grooves cut by impact ejecta, and some of the ridges may be ejecta deposits.
However, the origin of most of the ridges and cracks is a mystery.
Some short scarps and hummocks in this region probably also originate from the Caloris impact.
Diametrically opposite from the impact centre of the Caloris basin lies an area of lumpy terrain, consisting of hillocks about 2 km tall and hollows of about the same depth.
There are also a number of short, straight scarps.
This topography is probably the result of seismic waves radiating from the Caloris impact, which would be refocused on the opposite side of Mercury.
On the Moon similar disruption of the points opposite the Imbrium and Orientale impact centres is seen.
7.3.2 Other surface features
There is no very clear evidence for volcanic activity on the Mercurian surface and none at all for Plate Tectonics.
Moreover, the best lunar analogue for the Mercurian smooth plains are not the maria, which are the best candidates on the Moon for volcanic activity, but the lunar highland plains, which do not seem to have a volcanic origin.
This analogy is made on the basis that the lunar maria are more lightly cratered than the Mercurian smooth plains and have a lower albedo than the surrounding terrain, whereas the lunar highland plains are comparably cratered to the Mercurian smooth plains and like the smooth plains have a similar albedo to their surroundings.
(Until the landing of Apollo 16 in a highland plains area it was thought that the lunar highland plains might be of lava origin, but the discovery of copious quantities of brecchia indicates that the fairly level surface and the lower crater density than the surrounding highlands is probably because of an abundant fall of ejecta.)
The best topographic candidates for volcanic activity of Mercury are a handful of small rimless craters and certain ridges that could be solidified lava that once rose from fissures.
It thus seems that there has been very little geological reworking of the Mercurian surface since the apparent planet-wide obliteration of most craters at the beginning.
Planetary interiors are ultimately expected to experience declining  temperatures, and there is some fairly direct evidence that to some extent this has already occurred in Mercury.
The evidence is provided by a number of low scarps which wind for considerable distances across the Mercurian surface.
A segment of one of these is shown in Figure 7.7 (a).
Careful scrutiny reveals that the cross-sections of such scarps are something like that shown in Figure 7.7 (b), which in turn can represent the situation shown in Figure 7.7 (c) in which one piece of surface is thrust over another at a low angle.
Not surprisingly this is called a low-angle thrust fault.
By contrast a lava flow-front is more likely to have a cross-section something like that in Figure 7.7 (d).
Moreover, whereas a lava flow-front would have half buried any pre-existing craters a low-angle thrust fault would intersect such craters, as observed on Mercury.
FIGURE 7.7 Discovery Scarp imaged obliquely by Mariner 10, and its low-angle thrust-fault interpretation.
The largest crater is about 50 km across.
Low-angle thrust faults can be produced by the cooling and consequent slight shrinkage of the material beneath, the surface layer then being too large.
To produce the low scarps which wind across the Mercurian surface the radius of Mercury need only have decreased by a few tenths of a percent.
The decrease need not have been distributed uniformly along the radius.
A few sinuous ridges are seen, steep on both sides, and these too may have been raised by interior contraction.
As well as the winding scarps there are also some straight scarps, usually shorter.
These may be strike-slip faults which occur when solid material suddenly yields under stress as illustrated in Figure 7.8 (a) and (b).
There is often some vertical movement along the fracture line, thus yielding a low scarp as illustrated in Figure 7.8 (c).
Strike-slip faults could result from interior contraction, though they do not reduce the surface area.
However, in the case of Mercury it is likely that most of any strike-slip faults are the result of the tidal slowing by the Sun of Mercury's axial rotation.
This would explain why such faults tend to lie in certain directions.
Subsequent internal contraction could find such faults a ready site for producing further movement.
Also, the short scarps opposite the Caloris impact could be the result of seismic waves acting on such pre-existing faults.
FIGURE 7.8 Strike-slip faults.
In (a) and (b) the view is from above and (c) is a vertical section.
7.4 Mercurian volatiles?
The merest traces of various gases exist at the surface of Mercury, amounting to about 10 12 times less than the mass of the Earth's atmosphere and which can be entirely accounted for by capture from the solar wind and by the radioactive decay of certain isotopes in the surface materials.
There is an absence of weathering of any surface features, indicating that Mercury's atmosphereless state stretches back towards the beginning, and there is no evidence for any subsurface volatiles.
Explanations of the likely strong depletion of volatiles in Mercury were outlined in section 5.3.
7.5 The evolution of the interior and the surface of Mercury
One of the earliest events in Mercurian history of which we have any record is the widespread obliteration of craters near the end of formation, or soon afterwards.
This obliteration can be considered in relation to the two possible cratering histories shown in Figure 6.9 for the Moon.
The justification for applying this Figure to Mercury with roughly the same time scales will be made in Chapter 8.
If curve A in Figure 6.9 applies to Mercury then the erasure of craters must have occurred throughout a fairly extended period during the final stages of formation.
If curve B applies then the erasure could have been largely confined to the lull between formation and the subsequent peak in bombardment, possibly extending into that bombardment.
However, it is not at present possible to discern how these histories of cratering and erasure intertwine on Mercury.
The survival today on the intercrater plains of largely unaltered patches of that ancient crater-free terrain must owe much, as outlined earlier, to the fairly high surface gravity of Mercury, which confines most ejecta fairly close to the primary impact.
The erasure was probably not the result of weathering, because Mercury has probably never possessed a significant atmosphere and certainly not for any length of time.
It could have been caused by extensive lava flows or by a more extreme form of the sort of surface plasticity seen in many of the oldest surviving features.
In either case powerful heating is required.
This could have been from various modes of formation, or from the presence of appreciable quantities of short-lived quick-acting radioactive isotopes, such as 26 Al.
If Mercury was hot in these early times, and it formed homogeneously, then it would have differentiated early in its history.
Otherwise, differentiation could have occurred later if Mercury contained significant quantities of the longer-lived slower-acting radioactive isotopes, notably those of uranium (U), thorium (Th) and potassium (K).
It is also possible that Mercury formed heterogeneously, in which case it need never have become hot enough to differentiate, though it is then more difficult to account for any widespread crater erasure.
For Mercury to have an iron core which is wholly or substantially molten today it must either possess significant quantities of U, Th and K in the core and deep mantle, or tidal heating by the Sun must be particularly powerful, or the solar wind must be efficient at inducing electric currents in the core.
It is certainly possible that Mercury once had a molten iron core which has since partly or wholly solidified.
However, solidification of an appreciable fraction of any such core cannot have happened since the Mercurian surface as we now see it began to be created, because the volume shrinkage of iron when it passes from the liquid to the solid phase is so large that the amount of internal contraction of the Mercurian surface would be far in excess of that observed.
For the same reason solidification of an appreciable fraction of the mantle can also be ruled out over the same period of history.
The interior cooling recorded by contraction at the surface must have persisted over a long period.
The evidence for this is that some scarps cut across several sizeable craters, whereas others are cut by sizeable craters, indicating that there are scarps which are older than appreciable numbers of sizeable craters, whereas others are much younger.
You have seen that the smooth plains may well be of non-volcanic origin.
They may be composed of impact ejecta, some of which may have been molten.
In the case of Caloris some of the ejecta from the impact would have fallen back into the basin because of the fairly high surface gravity.
Elsewhere, much of the smooth plains material could have come from large impacts on the so far unseen hemisphere.
If mobilization of dust on Mercury occurs electrically, as has been suggested for the Moon (section 6.4.2), then this could help to spread out concentrations of finely divided ejecta.
It is very difficult to place dates on Mercurian events.
If the lunar curves in Figure 6.9 can roughly be applied to Mercury then crater erasure took place before about 4000 Ma ago, and most of the present craters, which may also have given rise to the smooth plains, were in place by about 3000 Ma ago, and little has happened on the Mercurian surface since except for the effects of tidal slow-down and interior shrinkage.
The most recent events may be impacts which have yielded craters with  bright rays (section 6.3.5) which may be no more than a few tens of Ma old.
The apparent lack of much volcanic activity over much of Mercurian history probably results from cooling of the outer mantle, because a planet with a large surface area to mass ratio should cool rather rapidly to fairly low temperatures.
7.6 Summary
At its surface Mercury resembles the Moon: atmosphereless, devoid of volatiles, and still bearing ancient craters because of a long history of geological quiescence.
This quiescence could be the result of its large surface area to mass ratio, leading to a fairly rapid cooling to fairly low temperature in the outer mantle.
The lack of volatiles could be the result of the various possibilities outlined in section 5.3.
However, in its interior Mercury differs from the Moon in that it is far richer in iron, and even has a weak dipole field which is almost certainly of interior origin.
It is a comparatively poorly explored planet, and therefore many questions remain regarding its interior structure, interior temperature and its evolution.
Its surface bears some evidence for an early period of crater erasure, and for a long subsequent period of slight internal contraction, presumably the result of cooling.
7.7 Questions
1.
How long does it take Mercury's residual precession of the perihelion to rotate the semi-major axis of Mercury's orbit around the Sun once?
2.
Use the arguments outlined in section 7.1 to account for a  synchronization of a planet in an eccentric orbit around the Sun.
3.
The mean density of Mercury indicates that its interior is substantially different from the interiors of the other terrestrial planets.
What is this difference?
4.
List the types of feasible observations you would make in order to better constrain models of the interior of Mercury.
5.
Draw a sequence of about six sketches to illustrate the development of the Mercurian surface, and where appropriate indicate possible associated developments of the interior.
6.
There are some indications that the interior of Mercury is hot, and other indications that the outer regions have cooled rapidly.
What are these indicators?
7.
Outline the evidence that Mercury has never had an appreciable atmosphere.
CRATER PRODUCTION ON THE TERRESTRIAL PLANETS
Only for the Moon have cratered regions with widely different number densities had their radiometric ages estimated.
This gives a rough indication of the lunar cratering rate over the last 3900 Ma as shown in Figure 8.1 which is based closely on Figure 6.9.
In the current absence of radiometric ages for the surface of Mars, Venus and Mercury, it is of considerable interest to see whether the graphs in Figure 8.1 can be applied to these other planets, possibly with modifications, and thus provide a basis for absolute age determination.
It is of equal interest to compare the cratering on different planets to elucidate the nature of the small bodies that have caused the cratering.
FIGURE 8.1 Impact crater production rates on the Moon (see caption to Figure 6.9).
In comparing craters on different bodies the distinction must be made between the exposure of a planet and the resultant cratering.
The exposure depends on external factors, in particular on the composition and masses of the population of small bodies that cause cratering, on their number density, and on their orbits as they cross the planet's orbit.
The resultant cratering depends on the exposure, but also on certain characteristics of the planet, notably the mass of the planet, the surface gravity, the surface composition, and the rate of resurfacing by erosion and by geological processes.
You have  already seen why some of these factors are important.
The importance of some of the others will emerge shortly.
8.1 Recent cratering
Figure 8.2 shows estimates of the present rate of cratering of four of the five terrestrial planets.
Venus has been excluded because of the paucity of information about impact craters on its surface.
The Earth is included because though only a few tens of impact craters are known, all of them are less than 500 Ma old and thus constitute recent cratering.
Figure 8.3 is a famous but small example.
Older craters on the Earth have been erased by weathering and by geological activity.
FIGURE 8.2 Present production rates of impact crater, where n is the number of craters greater than 10 km diameter produced per 106 square kilometres per 100 Ma.
Note that the absolute values of n are accurate only to a factor of 2 up or down but that the relative numbers from planet to planet are considerably more accurate.
FIGURE 8.3 Meteor Crater in Arizona.
The crater is about 1.2 km across.
This is an oblique view.
The estimates in Figure 8.2 are not based on observed cratering, which happens far too infrequently, but on the exposure of each planet to the small bodies that can be seen today to move among the terrestrial planets.
Broadly speaking there are two types of small body, as indicated in Figure 8.2, asteroids and comet debris.
The asteroids are small, mainly rocky bodies, most of which occupy orbits that lie between Mars and Jupiter.
Comet debris, as its name suggests, is derived from comets, and much of this debris lies in orbits that are far more eccentric than most of the asteroids' orbits, and which in many cases carry debris far beyond Jupiter.
Comets and asteroids are subjects for Chapter 14.
Craters smaller than 10 km diameter have not been included in Figure 8.2 largely because of the uncertainty about the numbers of the corresponding very small bodies that move among the terrestrial planets.
An independent estimate of the recent rate of cratering on the Earth can be made because extensive radiometric dating has been performed of its cratered surfaces.
The outcome matches the estimated rate in Figure 8.2, and this provides support for the rates for the other planets.
The present rate for the Earth is such that a crater over 10 km diameter is very likely to be produced somewhere on dry land at some time over the next 200 000 years.
Don't panic!
The Earth and the Moon are so close together that it has been estimated that the exposure of both planets to asteroids and comet debris has been much the same.
The estimated difference in the present cratering rate shown in Figure 8.2 is largely the result of the different characteristics of each planet.
The exposure of the other terrestrial planets, because they occupy different parts of the Solar System, has been different from that of the Earth and the Moon.
For example, though the population of asteroids that can crater Mars today shares some members with the population that can crater the Earth and the Moon, the populations have their own distinct members as well .
Moreover, even for the common members the speeds and angles with which they cross the orbit of Mars differ from those at which they cross the orbit of the Earth-Moon system, and this further changes the exposure.
When the different characteristics of each planet are also included the outcome is the different present rates in Figure 8.2.
If the present cratering rate on Mars can be extended into the distant past then it can be shown that among the light and moderately heavily cratered regions there is a great range of ages, from regions that may be no more than a few tens of Ma old, to regions about 3000 Ma old.
The more heavily cratered areas would then be more than 3000 Ma old, regardless of whether the cratering was higher in that distant time.
But if the relatively recent three-fold increase in cratering rate on the Moon applies also to Mars then many of these Martian ages become older because of the lower cratering rates in the past.
However, there is theoretical evidence that the Martian exposure to asteroids  was higher over the last few 1000 Ma than in more recent times, which scales the ages down such that all but the more heavily cratered terrain is less than about 2000 Ma old.
In the case of Mercury it is estimated that, just as is the case today (Figure 8.2), the slightly higher cratering rate than on the Moon has been a feature of the last few 1000 Ma.
If this has been the case then it can be shown that the Mercurian smooth plains are slightly older than the lunar maria.
For example, the smooth plains in Caloris would be about 3700 Ma old.
This would also be near the date of the Caloris impact, because the infill was probably derived promptly from some of the ejecta.
8.2 The late heavy bombardment
It has been established that on the Moon there was a steep decline in the crater-production rate between about 3900 Ma and 3000 Ma ago.
In the early part of this decline the crater production rate was high, and this is called the late heavy bombardment (Figure 8.1), or lhb for short.
Several populations have been suggested as the source of the lhb.
Some of these, for example debris within the Earth-Moon system, could not have been shared by the other terrestrial planets, whereas others, for example a general pool of post-formation debris moving in eccentric orbits through the terrestrial region, would have been shared.
There is certainly evidence that bodies other than the Moon suffered lhb: the present cratering rates on the terrestrial planets, when extended back for 4600 Ma, do not produce the crater-saturated regions observed on Mars and Mercury.
The final stages of formation are expected to be of the nature of an lhb.
In the case of the Moon this explanation of the lhb corresponds to graph A in Figure 8.1.
If this explanation of the lhb applies also to the other terrestrial planets then the degree of sharing of the population producing the lhb would be slight, because in the formation of planets each planet has access to what to a large extent is a private supply of material.
If instead a graph rather like B in Figure 8.1 applies then the prospects of a shared lhb population are enhanced, because a graph like B could correspond to the growing post-formation ‘transparency’ of the Solar System to a population of bodies in highly eccentric orbits traversing the whole terrestrial region and originating largely from beyond this region.
From graph B it can be shown that the heavily cratered terrain on Mercury extends back to about 4200 Ma, and the intercrater plains would then be older than 4200 Ma.
In the case of Mars, if the small bodies had aphelia between Mars and Jupiter then it can be shown that the crater-saturated regions on Mars would be older than 4000 Ma.
But if the aphelia lay well beyond Jupiter then it can be shown that these regions would be about 3900  Ma old.
(Note that the age of a crater-saturated surface is really the time when the saturation bombardment ended.)
Some evidence for a shared lhb population is provided by the relative numbers of craters of different sizes on the heavily cratered areas of the Moon, Mercury and Mars, making allowances for the influence of different planetary characteristics.
These relative numbers indicate that the three planets were exposed to populations of small bodies in which there were the same relative numbers of bodies with various masses.
This indicates, but does not prove, that the three populations were one and the same.
The apparent rise in relatively recent times of the cratering rate on the Moon raises the question of whether there could be a new heavy bombardment approaching.
This is very unlikely.
Over the  billennia there has been a general loss of small bodies from the space between the planets, partly to interstellar space and partly through impacts with the planets.
Unless matter enters the Solar System from beyond it is hard to see where any large and prolonged increase in exposure could come from.
The relatively recent increase could be the result, for example, of a collision between two asteroids which produced several smaller asteroids, or the disruption of a few large comets.
In both cases the recent increase may be relatively shortlived.
8.3 Summary
The cratering of the terrestrial planets today is largely the result of exposure to asteroids and comet debris, each planet sharing to a significant extent a common population.
The cratering rate on the terrestrial planets was much higher in the distant past, the end of this period being called the late heavy bombardment.
It is not clear to what extent the planets were exposed to a common population during this late bombardment.
The graph of the cratering rate for the Moon (Figure 8.1) can only be relied on to give a very general indication of the ages of the various cratered regions on the other terrestrial planets, even if considerable care is taken in adapting the data to these planets.
8.4 Questions
1.
Outline the distinction between exposure and resultant cratering and the factors which make them different from each other.
For any given population of small bodies is the exposure the same for all terrestrial planets?
2.
How many craters greater than 1 km diameter are likely to have been produced on 10 6 square kilometres on the lunar surface between 2000 Ma and 1000 Ma ago?
3.
On Mars how many craters greater than 10 km diameter are likely to be produced on a typical 10 6 square kilometre of surface over the next 10 6 years by (i) asteroids,(ii) comet debris?
Does the same population threaten the Earth?
4.
Outline the evidence that some sort of late heavy bombardment occurred on all terrestrial planets.
5.
Outline the arguments for and against the late heavy bombardment of a terrestrial planet occurring after its formation.
6.
To what extent can the data in Figure 8.1 be applied to the other terrestrial planets?
THE JOVIAN SYSTEM
Jupiter orbits the Sun well beyond the orbit of Mars, and though the solar radiation at Jupiter is about 25 times less than at the Earth, Jupiter is so large that only Venus, and Mars at the most favourable oppositions, outshine Jupiter in our skies.
Jupiter is about 11 times the diameter and about 1300 times the volume of the Earth, and in its size and in many other respects is a very different world from the terrestrial planets that you have so far met in this book.
Because of its large distance from the Sun Jupiter moves around its orbit rather slowly, and therefore the intervals between oppositions as seen from the Earth (the synodic orbital period) are only about a month longer than a year.
Doubtless the slow ‘stately’ motion of Jupiter in its orbit and its brightness were some of the reasons for which the Romans gave to this planet the name Jupiter, the Roman king of the gods.
Galileo was one of the first to observe Jupiter through a telescope, and in 1610 he discovered four satellites which we now call the Galilean satellites.
In order from Jupiter they are Io (pronounced as the letters I and O in succession), Europa, Ganymede and Callisto, and are named after four of many of Jupiter's  mistresses .
Their discovery helped overthrow the medieval concept of the Solar System and a few decades later, by a method that I shall not describe, observations of Io led to the first determination of the speed of light, which until then was thought by many philosophers to be infinite.
Jupiter is now known to have at least sixteen satellites, though the remainder are much smaller than the Galileans.
The satellites are listed in Table 9.1.
Figure 9.1 shows that on the basis of their orbits they can be divided into three groups.
The innermost group consists of eight satellites, including the four Galilean satellites, and it is only the outermost Galilean that is shown in Figure 9.1.
The other four lie within the orbit of the innermost Galilean (Io).
All eight move in prograde, low eccentricity orbits, of low inclination with respect to Jupiter's equatorial plane.
The middle group (Figure 9.1) move in highly inclined and rather eccentric orbits, and the outer group move in rather eccentric, retrograde orbits.
The Jovian satellites are the subject of section 9.4.
TABLE 9.1 The satellites of Jupiter
FIGURE 9.1 The orbits of the satellites of Jupiter viewed edgewise to the Jovian equatorial plane (only Callisto of the innermost group is shown).
For the sake of clarity the ascending-node longitudes have all been set equal to each other, though within each group they are in any case much the same.
The two innermost satellites are close to the outer edge of a system of tiny particles that constitute a ring around Jupiter.
The existence of this ring had been inferred after the fly-by of Pioneer 11 in 1974, which was the second of four spacecraft that have so far been to Jupiter.
But it was not until the fly-by of the next spacecraft, Voyager 1 in 1979, that the ring was directly imaged.
Another ring has been discovered, tenuous, and lying between the orbits of Amalthea and Io.
Both rings were imaged in greater detail by Voyager 2.
The rings will be discussed in Chapter 11.
The four spacecraft missions to Jupiter are listed in Table 9.2.
They have furnished a good deal of what we know about Jupiter.
As well as the sixteen satellites and the rings, Jupiter is also surrounded by tenuous clouds of atoms, ions, molecules and electrons.
These clouds have a complicated structure, determined largely by the magnetic field of Jupiter and by the interaction of this field with the solar wind.
The Jovian magnetic field exerts an influence out to near a surface called the magnetopause.
The magnetopause is closest to Jupiter on the sunward side but never lies closer to Jupiter than about twice the distance of the orbit of the outermost Galilean satellite.
The volume contained by the magnetopause is called the magnetosphere, though it is not spherical, the ‘sphere’ implying the sphere of influence of the Jovian magnetic field.
The magnetosphere is the subject of the next section.
TABLE 9.2 Successful spacecraft missions to Jupiter
The magnetosphere, the rings, the satellites and Jupiter itself, all constitute the Jovian system.
9.1 Magnetospheres
Jupiter has the most spectacular magnetosphere in the Solar System.
However, several other planets including the Earth are known to have magnetospheres and therefore a general section on such features is appropriate.
9.1.1 Planetary magnetospheres
The magnetosphere is the magnetic ‘sphere of influence’ of a planet, a domain which is limited by the interaction between the magnetic field of the planet and the solar wind.
The solar wind originates in the atmosphere of the Sun, and consists of a tenuous gas that has acquired sufficiently high outward speed to escape from the Sun.
Moreover, the temperature is so high that no molecules can exist, and most of the atoms are ionized.
Because the Sun consists mainly of hydrogen, the solar wind consists largely of ionized hydrogen atoms and electrons, that is, of protons and electrons, though overall the solar wind is neutral.
The solar wind is another example of a plasma (section 2.2.2) in this case a plasma in motion.
The outward speed of the solar wind is very high, about 400 km/s, and for various reasons hardly changes as it moves outwards.
By contrast, the number density of the ions and electrons falls in proportion to the square of the distance from the Sun, because roughly the same number of ions (and electrons) is being spread over a growing spherical area centred on the Sun.
At the Earth's orbit the number density of ions is typically 10 23 times less than the atmospheric density at the Earth's surface.
The wind is clearly very tenuous, but though it cannot sweep dust before it, it can sweep outwards some of any gas in its path.
The solar wind loses its identity in the  interstellar medium at a distance no less than that of the outer planets.
The number density of the atomic particles in the wind varies on time scales from days to years, in response to variations in solar activity.
The ions and electrons in the wind move with respect to each other in such a way that they constitute electric currents which sustain a magnetic field: it is not the outward motion of the wind as a whole which generates the field.
The origin of the field is, in effect, the magnetic field at the source region of the wind, that is, the surface of the Sun, though this is an extremely complicated phenomenon about which I shall say very little.
FIGURE 9.2 A cross-section of the Jovian magnetosphere.
The viewpoint in the main part of the Figure and the upper inset is such that the orbital plane of Jupiter is seen edgewise.
The viewpoint in the lower inset is oblique.
Not all magnetic field lines are shown.
When the solar wind encounters the magnetic field of a planet it has the effect of compressing the planetary field on the ‘upwind’ side, and of trailing it out into a long magnetotail on the ‘downwind’side.
The ‘upwind’ side is illustrated in Figure 9.2, which is the specific case of Jupiter.
Beyond the  surface marked ‘bow shock’ interplanetary space has been swept clean of the planetary field by the solar wind.
The term ‘bow shock’ arises because of certain similarities between Figure 9.2 and the conditions at the bow of a boat when it is moving through water.
Between the bow shock and the magnetopause the solar wind is greatly decelerated.
This leads to highly agitated motions and correspondingly high temperatures.
In the case of Jupiter the temperatures are about 300 to 400 million K, though the number density is so low that no glow is visible.
The magnetopause marks the inner boundary of the agitated region which itself is called the magnetosheath.
The three-dimensional picture roughly corresponds to rotating the bow shock and magnetopause around the direction along which the solar wind blows outward from the Sun.
The space inside the magnetopause is the magnetosphere.
In order for a planet to possess a magnetosphere it need not have an internal magnetic dipole moment.
Surface magnetization or an ionosphere can also provide a magnetosphere.
The small fraction of the solar wind consisting of neutral atoms readily crosses the magnetopause into the magnetosphere.
But most of the ions and electrons are deflected, and of the few which penetrate most do so up the magnetotail.
The same barrier exists to other external sources of ions and electrons.
Thus, unless there are appreciable sources of particles within the magnetosphere it will contain far less material than the interplanetary space beyond.
Inside the magnetosphere possible sources of particles include the exosphere of the planet, the surfaces or exospheres of any satellites, and the surfaces of any ring particles.
These sources yield particles which initially have comparatively low energies of motion.
Much more energetic particles can be produced by cosmic-rays, which themselves are so energetic that they can readily pass right through a magnetosphere.
However, if a cosmic-ray particle collides with matter inside the magnetosphere neutrons can be ejected from the atoms in the matter.
Such neutrons need not themselves be particularly energetic, but in a matter of minutes a free neutron will decay into an energetic proton and electron, though not so energetic as to readily escape from the magnetosphere.
Cosmic-rays can also eject atoms, ions and electrons from matter in the magnetosphere.
This is called sputtering.
Energetic particles can also be produced in collisions between particles, and particles can be accelerated via changes in the position of the magnetopause resulting from variations in the solar wind, and by changes in the magnetic field configuration in the magnetotail.
Both of these latter accelerating mechanisms are important, and they are also very complicated.
Particles can lose energy of motion by colliding with other particles, and by colliding with satellites, rings, or exospheres.
Collisions with satellites, rings and exospheres can also result in the loss of particles from the magnetosphere, and also, by sputtering, to the ejection of new ones.
Ions and electrons can recombine to form neutral atoms, and new ionization can result from collisions between particles and from solar uv radiation.
An important repository for ions and electrons is a radiation belt which encircles a planet, in which charged particles are fairly effectively trapped by the planet's magnetic field.
The equilibrium number of particles in a magnetosphere depends on the loss and gain rates.
Some of the loss processes are determined by the planet's magnetic field such that the stronger the planetary field the slower the overall loss rate and therefore the greater the equilibrium number of particles.
Also, the stronger the planetary field the larger the magnetosphere for given solar wind conditions.
There are several other phenomena associated with magnetospheres.
For example, leakage of charged particles into the upper atmosphere of a planet can give rise to emissions of em radiation called aurora.
9.1.2 The Jovian magnetosphere
The main features of the Jovian magnetosphere are shown in Figure 9.2, and have been mostly established by the four spacecraft in Table 9.2.
This is a very large magnetosphere.
When the solar wind is weak the upwind magnetopause can lie 100 Jupiter equatorial radii (R J ) from Jupiter.
In this case, were it visible from the Earth and if Jupiter were near opposition, the angular diameter of the magnetosphere would be nearly 3 times that of the full Moon.
When the solar wind is strong the magnetopause retreats to about 50 R J upwind.
The magnetotail is thought to extend downwind to beyond the orbit of Saturn, and it was detected by Voyager 2 en route to Saturn from Jupiter.
The large size of the Jovian magnetosphere is partly a consequence of the fairly low particle density in the solar wind at this distance from the Sun, and partly because the Jovian magnetic field is very strong.
The existence of a Jovian magnetic field was established in the 1950s by radio-telescope observations, which detected radio waves that seemed to arise from the motion of charged particles in a magnetic field and were certainly non-thermal (section 2.2.1).
Periodic variations in certain of these radio waves were observed, and now that Jupiter is known to have a large internal magnetic dipole moment and that the magnetic axis is inclined with respect to the spin axis, it seems fairly certain that it is the motion of the magnetic axis as Jupiter rotates on its spin axis that causes these periodic variations.
Therefore their period should be the axial rotation period of the Jovian interior.
The sidereal value is 9h 55m 29.710 s, and this is called the System III sidereal axial period.
Systems I and II will be introduced in section 9.2.
The internal magnetic dipole moment of Jupiter is about 19 000 times that of the Earth, which is a factor of 15 greater per unit volume of planet.
The field is inclined at about 10.8° from the spin axis of Jupiter, and the centre of the field is offset from the centre of mass of Jupiter by about 0.10 R J , mainly along the equatorial plane.
The polarity of the field is opposite to that of the Earth's field, but in view of the many known past reversals of direction of the Earth's field this is not of much significance.
The form of the Jovian field indicates that the currents which constitute the dipole source are largely confined to between 0.6 R J and 0.9 R J .
The current per unit volume is several times that in the Earth.
Beyond about 10 R J the form of the field departs appreciably from that corresponding to a dipole source, as shown in Figure 9.2.
This is because the dipole field rapidly decreases with increasing distance from the source and becomes comparable to the fields arising from the ions and electrons in the magnetosphere.
Most of these ions and electrons lie in the belt, torus and sheet shown in Figure 9.2.
Ions and electrons enter the Jovian magnetosphere by all of the means outlined in section 9.1.1.
A particularly copious source is the volcanoes of Io (see section 9.4.1).
These emit sulphurous gases, notably sulphur dioxide (SO 2 ).
By a variety of plausible means much of these gases can escape from Io and become dissociated and ionized.
This seems to be the source of the torus in the lower inset in Figure 9.2 (not to scale).
This is a plasma in which the dominant ions are O + , S + and S 2 +;.
Ions leak out of the Io torus and provide the magnetosphere with most of its ions that are more massive than H + (protons).
The number density of ions in the torus varies, presumably because of variations in the volcanic activity of Io.
There is evidence that ions and electrons are exchanged between Io and the Jovian atmosphere, constituting massive electric currents that could help heat Io and thus help maintain its volcanic activity.
These currents probably also contribute to the displays of aurora seen in the upper atmosphere of Jupiter's polar regions.
Ions and electrons are also lost from Io by sputtering.
This also seems to have produced a cloud of neutral atoms around Io (Figure 9.2) consisting mainly of sodium, potassium and magnesium.
Neutral atoms enter this cloud rather than Io's torus because they are not influenced by magnetic forces whereas charged particles are.
The belt surrounds Jupiter and contains ions and electrons with comparatively large energies of motion.
The number density of energetic ions and electrons is so high that were you or I to cross the belt we would receive 500 times the lethal dose of such particles.
The sheet also surrounds Jupiter and arises from the leakage of electrons and ions from the belt, though their large energies of motion are reduced to lower values more typical of the torus.
There are two reasons for this leakage.
First, the belt, because it contains matter at a higher density than beyond it, exerts a net outward pressure.
Second, the matter in the belt is largely ionized, and therefore tends to be swept around with the dipole field as Jupiter rotates.
The electrons and ions thus tend to co-rotate, that is, to have sidereal orbital periods equal to the planet's sidereal axial period.
It can be shown that electrons and ions co-rotating at distances from Jupiter greater than the Keplerian orbit of co-rotation (section 6.1.1) tend to move away from the planet.
These two tendencies for electrons and ions to move away from Jupiter are opposed by the Jovian dipole field, which tends to contain the electrons and ions.
However, it can be shown that the containment is weakest at the magnetic equator, and the outcome is leakage from the belt beyond about 20 R J .
Thus, a co-rotating sheet of plasma is spun out in the plane of the magnetic equator.
At greater distances, because of the decline in strength of the dipole field, co-rotation is partially lost and the sheet rotates at a rate between that of co-rotation and the far lower rates required by gravity at these distances from Jupiter.
The declining magnetic influence also means that the outer region of the plasma sheet is perpendicular to the spin axis, giving rise to the warp in Figure 9.2.
The motion of the ions and electrons in the sheet is such that it gives rise to a net current around Jupiter.
This current generates its own magnetic field which adds to the Jovian dipole field, as shown (not to scale) in the upper inset of Figure 9.2.
This produces the observed departures from the dipole field beyond about 10 R J .
The field of the sheet varies in accord with variations in the solar wind, though of course the dipole field does not.
Note that the sheet and the fields in the upper inset of Figure 9.2 correspond to one-half of a sidereal axial period of Jupiter different from the situation in the main body of the Figure.
Note also that in the main body of the Figure for the sake of clarity only one magnetic field line is shown in the space well beyond the plasma sheet.
Leakage of ions and electrons from the Jovian magnetosphere is partly to Jupiter the rings and the satellites, and partly outwards particularly along the magnetotail.
Some of the very energetic ions and electrons which reach the Earth and which we observe as cosmic-rays probably originate from Jupiter.
Even now a fast ion may be shooting through you that escaped a few days ago from the Jovian magnetosphere.
9.2 Jupiter's clouds and atmosphere
9.2.1 The face of Jupiter
Figure 9.3 shows a typical picture of Jupiter from a recent spacecraft fly-by.
Spacecraft missions have yielded pictures with up to 500 times the  resolution obtained from the Earth.
Even so, the larger features in Figure 9.3 are visible from the Earth and many have been observed to hardly change over the 100 or so years for which Jupiter has been subject to extensive and continuous observation with powerful telescopes.
In particular, the banded appearance, the positions of the boundaries between them, and even the general colour scheme, have not changed for at least 100 years.
However, there have been changes of contrast and changes of detail on time scales from years to days, and for at least 100 years it has been widely realized that we are seeing the tops of richly coloured clouds that cover the entire planet.
FIGURE 9.3 Jupiter imaged by Voyager I from a range of 32.7 × 10 6 km.
North is at top left.
The orientation of the spin axis has been determined from the rotation of details in the bands, and it is clear that the bands are parallel to the equator.
The light bands are called zones and the dark bands are called belts.
At latitudes greater than about 40° the banding is less clear, and in the polar regions it is replaced by smaller-scale cellular features.
There is a wealth of small-scale detail within the bands, particularly at the boundaries, and some of this detail is visible in Figure 9.3: there are wavelike features of all sizes and colours, and there are ovals, sometimes called ‘spots’, also of various sizes and colours.
These small-scale features are not permanent, though there is a correlation between size and longevity, and the largest of these features, the Great Red Spot, is comparatively long lived.
This feature is visible in Figure 9.3, and measures 25 000 km by 13 000 km.
It was probably first recorded by the British physicist Robert Hooke (1635–1702) in 1664, and more clearly by the Italian astronomer Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625–1712) in 1665.
It has remained at approximately the same latitude since its discovery but it has changed in size, reaching its maximum size of 40 000 × 13 000 km about 100 years ago.
By contrast, some of the smallest features seen have lasted for only a few hours.
The wavelike features move relative to each other along the belts and zones, and display a complicated set of interactions.
It is also possible to discern rotary motion within the larger ovals, particularly cloud features which circulate clockwise in the northern hemisphere and anticlockwise in the southern hemisphere.
The smallest ovals of all, which are very numerous, have life cycles which suggest that they too are in rotary motion.
However, these same life cycles also suggest that they may have a different nature from the larger ovals.
I shall return to this in section 9.2.4.
The east-west drifts of the various small-scale cloud features can be interpreted either as wave motions, or as mass flows, that is, winds.
Powerful evidence against the wave interpretation is the lack of any correlation between the size of a feature and its rate of east-west motion, a correlation which would exist in the case of waves.
Moreover, theories of atmospheric circulation on Jupiter yield winds rather than waves.
However, a minority of features may be the result of waves which influence cloud formation as they move through the atmosphere.
The speeds of the east-west winds have been obtained, in effect, by subtracting from the axial sidereal rotation rate of a cloud feature the System III sidereal rotation rate.
On the basis of the observations of numerous features in pictures acquired by Voyager 1 the wind-speed graph in Figure 9.4 has been obtained.
These are the east-west wind speeds at the cloud tops.
The north-south winds are very weak by comparison.
The wind speeds did not change appreciably from Voyager 1 to Voyager 2, and certainly seem to be more constant than the small features from which the speeds were obtained.
There is some correlation between the wind speeds and the bands, and there are substantial changes in wind speed across belt-zone boundaries which are where most of the small features occur.
There is less difference  between the two hemispheres with respect to wind speeds than with respect to the pattern of the bands.
FIGURE 9.4 East-west wind speeds on Jupiter based on Voyager I data.
Speeds greater than zero correspond to flow from the west to the east.
Observations from the Earth of the east-west motion of small features in the Jovian clouds led some time ago to a sidereal rotation period for the equatorial region of 9h 50m 30.003s, and 9h 55m 40.632s for the rest of Jupiter.
These are the System I and System II periods respectively.
Similar periods can be obtained from the recently observed System III period and the recently observed wind speeds, which indicates the longevity of such winds.
9.2.2 Atmospheric composition and vertical structure
The composition of the atmosphere above the clouds has been largely  determined from Earth-based spectrometric studies, starting with the detection of methane and ammonia in the 1930s.
By the early 1960s it was established that molecular hydrogen (H 2 ) is the dominant constituent.
Helium (He) has been detected by spacecraft though it has such a weak spectral signature that its abundance has been estimated by indirect means.
The relative numbers of molecules in the atmosphere above the clouds are as follows: 90% H 2 ; 10% He; 0.07% CH 4 ; 0.02% NH 3 ; 0.0001% H 2 O; plus traces of many other gases.
Hydrogen, helium and methane would not condense to form cloud particles at the pressures and temperatures through the cloud regions and therefore their relative abundances apply throughout the atmosphere.
Within observational uncertainties these are the same as the solar relative abundances, which are about 0.16 for He/H 2 and about 8 × 10 -4 for C/H 2 , compared with about 0.11 and about 8 × 10 -4 respectively for the Jovian atmosphere.
Pressures and temperatures in the Jovian atmosphere have largely been determined by spacecraft, using a variety of techniques.
The outcome is shown in Figure 9.5.
These are globally averaged values of altitude variations, the zero of altitude being taken at a pressure of 1 bar: see section 3.3.1 for the reasons for which a pressure value is an appropriate choice of zero for altitude.
FIGURE 9.5 The vertical structure of Jovian atmosphere.
At altitudes below that at which the pressure is 0.2 bar the lapse-rate has the adiabatic value for Jovian conditions.
This indicates that thermal convection (section 2.2.2) is the dominant mode of upward heat transfer, and that there are powerful sources of heat deep in the atmosphere.
The few percent of solar energy that filters down is just one of these sources — I shall discuss the other sources in section 9.3.3.
The dominance of thermal convection is aided by the infrared opacity of the atmosphere below 0.2 bar altitude, which reduces the effectiveness of radiation transfer as a competing  heat-transfer mechanism.
The opacity is largely due to gaseous traces of methane, ammonia, and water.
The measurements of pressure and temperature do not penetrate beyond about the 1 bar level, but it seems certain that the adiabatic lapse-rate persists to far greater depths.
In Figure 9.5 I have continued it down to 10 bars, the pressure versus altitude being calculated from adiabatic lapse-rate conditions.
It certainly continues beyond 10 bars but this is deep enough to include the main cloud layers that are likely to exist.
The lapse-rate is less than adiabatic above about 30 km altitude, and at about 35 km altitude a minimum temperature of about 105 K is encountered.
This indicates the breakdown of thermal convection as an important upward heat-transport mechanism, and by analogy with the Earth's atmosphere the region where it is important is called the troposphere and its upper boundary is called the tropopause.
This breakdown above the tropopause arises from the greater infrared transparency of the atmosphere at such altitudes due to the lower atmospheric densities, and because the atmosphere there is appreciably heated by the direct absorption of solar radiation which tends to give an increase of temperature with height.
Absorption by methane certainly accounts for much of this solar heating, but its abundance may be insufficient to produce the whole effect, in which case there may be an as yet unidentified absorber such as a thin suspension of black soot from the photodissociation of methane.
Temperatures increase with altitude above the tropopause, and from here to where the atmosphere becomes negligible it can be called the thermosphere.
The details of the temperature variation with altitude are uncertain above about 150 km altitude, but high in the thermosphere temperatures are typically 850 K and can be as high as 1300 K. Calculations indicate that absorption of solar uv radiation would only raise temperatures in these regions to about 200 K. Clearly, extra sources of heating are required.
Upward-moving atmospheric waves could greatly heat a rarefied atmosphere.
Alternatively, it could be heated by energetic ions and electrons from the magnetosphere or by some unknown uv absorber.
The temperature at the base of the exosphere is about 1300 K, high enough for there to be an appreciable loss of electrons and ions to the magnetosphere, though at comparatively low energies.
However, the net energy transfer between the magnetosphere and the upper atmosphere is downwards.
High in the thermosphere lies the ionosphere, where the dominant ion is H + .
The ionization is produced by solar uv radiation and by energetic ions and electrons from the magnetosphere.
Several different atmospheric constituents can form clouds in the Jovian atmosphere.
A substance can condense to form a cloud if its temperature and its partial pressure lie within the liquid- or solid-phase regions of its phase diagram.
You can refer to Figure 2.5, and replace pressure by partial  pressure: the partial pressure is the contribution the substance makes to the total pressure, and is proportional to its abundance.
If a cloud forms then it will deplete the atmosphere above it of the substances of which the cloud particles are made.
In the Jovian atmosphere the most likely condensates, that is, cloud-making substances, are ammonia, water and a compound of ammonia and hydrogen sulphide (H 2 S) called ammonium hydrosulphide (NH 4 SH), and though H 2 S has not yet been detected in the Jovian atmosphere small amounts should be present.
It can be shown that if all the constituent elements in these compounds are present beneath the clouds in solar relative abundances then the bases of the three types of cloud will lie at the altitudes shown in Figure 9.5.
In all cases the cloud consists of particles in the solid phase.
The cloud bases are fairly sharply defined because of the steady decrease of temperature with altitude.
For the same reason, any cloud particles which settle downwards quickly evaporate.
The convective state of the troposphere tends to raise cloud particles above the base, and at these higher altitudes they do not evaporate, because of the lower temperatures, and thus a cloud can have a considerable thickness perhaps extending towards the tropopause, above which convection is weak.
You can see from Figure 9.5 that the uppermost cloud is ammonia, though it could carry traces of other cloud particles borne up from below.
It has not proved possible to determine the composition directly, which is difficult for a condensate, but the measured abundance of ammonia in the gaseous phase above the top of these clouds is about what would be expected were this ammonia in equilibrium with solid ammonia at the typical cloud top conditions of 0.5 bar and 148 K. There are thought to be relatively few breaks in the ammonia clouds, though the cloud tops need not be at the same altitude everywhere.
The existence of the ammonium hydrosulphide clouds and water clouds is not firmly established.
Each of the three types of condensate in Figure 9.5 would scatter light uniformly across the visible spectrum, and therefore each would appear white.
However, the rich variety of Jovian colours could readily be produced by traces of other substances in the cloud particles, traces that are far less abundant than the main constituents of such particles.
No suitable candidates have yet been detected, but it is readily understood how such traces could arise: solar uv radiation and the thunderstorms which are known to occur in the Jovian atmosphere could act on various atmospheric constituents to produce a rich variety of coloured substances.
Indications that such processes are occurring are provided by the existence of molecules such as C 2 H 2 and C 6 H 6 , which can be produced from CH 4 through the action of solar uv radiation or thunderstorms.
Detailed temperature measurements have revealed a correlation between  colour and temperature in the Jovian clouds.
The highest temperature regions are blue, then comes brown, then white, and then red in the coolest regions of all.
Support for the correlation comes, for example, from the observation that white clouds cover and uncover blue and brown clouds.
The white clouds are therefore higher, and in the troposphere the greater the altitude the lower the temperature.
The correlation of colour with altitude means that the belts and zones and the smaller-scale features are largely associated with cloud tops that lie at different altitudes.
However, the altitude range is only a few kilometres, and therefore with a few exceptions the major condensate on view may be ammonia in all regions.
The association of colour with temperature is not in principle surprising, because chemical reactions are very sensitive to temperature.
Moreover, the intricacy of the colouring can, and seems to be, influenced by horizontal and vertical circulation patterns in the atmosphere and by waves, both of which can transport material to altitudes where its colours are unstable but where insufficient time has elapsed for chemical reactions to have reached a new equilibrium corresponding to different colours.
But though the general principles controlling the coloration of the Jovian clouds are understood, there is as yet no detailed understanding of how particular features acquire particular colours.
You can see from Figure 9.5 that there exist regions in the Jovian atmosphere where temperatures are about 300 K and the corresponding pressures are a few bars.
Given the likelihood of a rich set of different types of molecule, including carbon compounds, the question arises of whether life could have developed and exist today in such regions.
However, this seems unlikely, largely because any life-precursing molecules would be carried into regions where they would be destroyed.
The next topic is the circulation of the Jovian atmosphere.
But first you need to know a little about the Coriolis effect, named after the French physicist Gaspard Gustave de Coriolis (1792–1843).
9.2.3 The Coriolis effect
In Figure 9.6 the grid lines form an imaginary network of longitude and latitude at a fixed altitude in a planet's atmosphere, the grid lines rotating with the planet.
Imagine a ‘parcel’ of atmosphere moving polewards from P and confined by gravity to the altitude of the grid.
Its distance from the planet's spin axis must therefore be decreasing.
In section 6.5.1 the principle of conservation of angular momentum was outlined.
If this principle is applied to the situation in Figure 9.6 then it is clear that as the parcel's distance from the spin axis decreases then the speed of the parcel around the spin axis must increase.
For example, if at P the parcel had no motion in the  east-west direction across the planet's surface and the planet's axial rotation is prograde then it will pick up motion across the grid towards the east, and in moving northwards will end up for example at Q. If it were in the southern hemisphere and moved southward it would also pick up an eastwards movement.
By contrast, movement towards the equator will induce a westwards movement across the planet's surface.
FIGURE 9.6 Illustrating the Coriolis effect.
Another way in which the parcel can change its distance from the rotation axis is by vertical movement, as for example in tropospheric convection, and this too will induce eastward or westward movement.
These east-west movements are examples of the Coriolis effect, which in more general terms is the inducement of motion arising from the conservation of angular momentum.
It is sometimes called the Coriolis force, but this is very misleading.
For example, in Figure 9.6 there is no force acting to push the parcel to the east: the only forces are gravity, which keeps the parcel on the grid, and the force which propels the parcel polewards.
From the planet's surface you might think there is an eastward force, but there isn't, and if you were not rotating with the planet then this would be obvious.
9.2.4 The circulation of the Jovian atmosphere
The Jovian atmosphere has been observed down to about the 1 bar altitude, and throughout this region the predominant motion is east-west.
This is because of the rapid axial rotation of Jupiter which yields a powerful Coriolis effect.
The motions which feed this east-west trend are probably exemplified by the smallest ovals of all.
These seem to be whirls of motion of a particular kind called eddies, and at the cloud tops they are very numerous.
Figure 9.7 illustrates how they feed the east-west flow.
Eddy lifetimes are typically a few days.
FIGURE 9.7 The transfer of energy of motion from an eddy to an east-west wind.
Time t is in days (d).
These eddies seem to be a product of the upward convection in the troposphere, and their energy source is therefore that which drives this convection.
Solar energy is one source, but in section 9.3 you shall see that the major source is of internal origin.
Clearly a good deal more solar radiation falls per unit area of the Jovian atmosphere in the equatorial regions than in polar regions, and yet in the observed troposphere there is very little north-south movement.
If this were the end of the story then there would be large equator to pole temperature differences in the observed troposphere.
But the measurements show that these differences are small, for example only a few Kelvin at the tropopause.
Furthermore, the radiation to space at planetary wavelengths is much the same at all latitudes.
Clearly therefore equator to pole heat transfer is occurring at greater depths in the atmosphere than those for which wind patterns have been established.
However, there is evidence that the east-west flow persists beyond where the atmosphere has been observed, at least for some distance: the stability of the east-west winds would be difficult to understand if only the comparatively small mass of atmosphere above the 1 bar level were involved.
I shall discuss circulation at greater depths in section 9.3.3.
It is tempting to regard the larger ovals, perhaps even the GRS, as large eddies.
However, their longevity is greater than that predicted by the theory of eddies.
Therefore, they are probably not eddies, but though there are several non-eddy models there is as yet no consensus on their nature.
For reasons that are not clear the banding is absent from polar regions, but the generally ‘granulated’ appearance probably arises from upward convection.
In the Earth's atmosphere a far smaller fraction of the atmospheric energy of motion lies in eddies and in any motions to which they give rise than is the case in the Jovian atmosphere.
This difference between the two atmospheres  is largely a result of the large internal heat source in Jupiter, far more (per unit mass of planet) than in the case of the Earth.
However, the transfer of energy of motion from eddies to rapid east-west flow does occur in the Earth's atmosphere, at mid-latitudes and high altitudes.
These terrestrial east-west flows are called jet-streams.
9.3 The Jovian interior
9.3.1 Observational evidence
The mass of Jupiter was first calculated by Isaac Newton in the seventeenth century from the orbits of the Galilean satellites.
This method has been used since, and others have been added to it, including methods based on the effects of Jupiter on the paths of fly-by spacecraft.
Jupiter's mass is 317.893 M E , which is more than 2½ times the mass of all the other planets put together.
The equatorial and polar radii have been measured by various means and correspond to some level above the cloud tops.
When these values are adjusted to the 1 bar altitude, which lies at a fairly small distance below the cloud tops (Figure 9.5), then the equatorial radius is 71 400 km and the polar radius is 66 550 km.
Jupiter is therefore appreciably flattened, though this is not surprising in view of its rapid axial rotation.
The mean density of Jupiter is 1340 kg/m 3 .
This at once indicates that hydrogen is the dominant constituent of the whole of Jupiter.
No other substance at the enormous pressures that must exist at even relatively shallow depths in Jupiter could possibly be compressed to so comparatively slight an average density.
The gravitational field has been explored in some detail by observations of the satellites and of the paths of fly-by spacecraft.
The departures from a spherically symmetrical gravitational field are so big that J 2 is large enough to have been measured very accurately, and for the same reason this is also the case for the next gravitational coefficient in the series, J 4 (jay-four).
The variation in strength of the gravitational field at a constant distance from the centre of mass of a planet associated with J 4 is shown in Figure 9.8.
This Figure is drawn in a similar manner to J 2 in Figure 3.5 (b), except that in Figure 9.8 only one quadrant is shown.
The other three quadrants are the same, as for J 2 .
J 4 and J 2 are also similar in that the variation is the same at all longitudes.
They differ in that whereas the component of the gravitational field associated with J 2 has one zero per quadrant, the component associated with J 4 has two.
For Jupiter J 4 is sufficiently large that in modelling the density variation with depth it must be included along with J 2 , and the methods outlined in section 3.2.1 have to be modified.
Recent models of Jupiter have been  constrained by J 2 , J 4 and the axial period, rather than by the polar moment of inertia.
These models assume hydrostatic equilibrium.
This assumption can be tested by calculating the flattening from J 2 , J 4 and the System III period, assuming hydrostatic equilibrium.
The calculated value agrees with the observed flattening to within observational uncertainties, indicating that Jupiter is in hydrostatic equilibrium, and further support for this conclusion comes from smaller-scale details of the Jovian gravity field.
This result is no surprise for a planet of Jupiter's mass.
The large values of J 2 and J 4 , like that of f, arise from the rapid spin of a planet in hydrostatic equilibrium.
FIGURE 9.8 The J 4 component of the gravitational field.
The powerful magnetic field of Jupiter indicates that a significant fraction of the Jovian interior consists of an electrical conductor in the liquid phase.
Evidence that much of the interior is liquid also comes from the properties of hydrogen, to be outlined in section 9.3.2, and from further observations, particularly one outlined next, which indicates that the interior is hot enough to be liquid.
As you shall see in the next section, the predominance of hydrogen in Jupiter means that it does not have to have high interior temperatures to be liquid.
There is, however, separate evidence which shows that the Jovian interior is indeed hot, namely, that Jupiter radiates energy to space at a greater rate than that at which it absorbs energy from the Sun.
The energy radiated to space has been calculated from detailed observations across the Jovian disc of radiation at planetary wavelengths, and the energy absorbed from the Sun has been calculated from the Bond albedo, which measurements have shown is about 35%.
It is clear that Jupiter radiates energy to space at a rate somewhere between 1½ and 2½ times the rate at which it absorbs energy from the Sun.
In order to explain this excess radiation additional inputs of energy to Jupiter from beyond the planet have been considered, but none seem anywhere near large enough to make up the difference.
It has also been suggested that the Bond albedo was lower within  the last few hundred years and that the atmosphere is still cooling as Jupiter adjusts to its new higher albedo.
But there is no independent evidence for this, and even if the albedo in the past was zero, any change would probably be unable to account for the present excess radiation.
Therefore, it seems likely that Jupiter has powerful internal sources of heat, and to account for the excess radiation these would make the interior hot.
I shall consider these internal sources in section 9.3.3.
Further evidence for a hot Jovian interior is provided by the satellites, as you shall see in section 9.4.4.
Because hydrogen accounts for most of the mass of Jupiter, and, as you shall see, of Saturn, it is very important to consider the behaviour of hydrogen within such planets.
9.3.2 The behaviour of hydrogen in the Jovian interior
It is likely that several per cent of Jupiter consists of helium.
However, the story can be simplified without losing its essence by neglecting the helium for the time being.
FIGURE 9.9 The phase diagram of molecular hydrogen (H 2 ).
Figure 9.9 shows the measured phase-diagram of molecular hydrogen.
At the greatest depth in Jupiter penetrated by direct measurements the temperature is about 170 K and is rising along the adiabatic lapse-rate.
This temperature is already well to the right of the point marked c in Figure 9.9, which is the critical-point.
The temperatures deeper into Jupiter will certainly  not fall below 170 K. Thus, although the measured value of 170 K is only at a pressure of 1 bar, the pressure-temperature path on the molecular hydrogen phase-diagram as we descend to higher pressures never crosses the line ending at the critical-point.
This line divides the pressure-temperature conditions for the liquid phase from those for the gaseous phase.
If the path had crossed this line then a clear surface would have been encountered some distance below the clouds.
Above this surface the hydrogen would have been gaseous, and below it the hydrogen would have been liquid: Jupiter would have thus been covered in hydrogen oceans.
Instead, as we go deeper and deeper the gaseous hydrogen gradually gets denser and denser until imperceptibly, and at pressures considerably in excess of those in Figure 9.9, it acquires a density more characteristic of a liquid than that of a gas.
Therefore, as we descend into Jupiter we encounter no surface, but gradually find ourselves amidst an ocean.
The question arises of whether a solid surface of hydrogen is encountered in the ocean.
In Figure 9.9 this would occur if the boundary between the solid and liquid phases were to move to the right as pressures get large.
Laboratory studies have been made up to about 10 6 bars, at which pressures molecular hydrogen is still liquid even at 170 K. However, such pressures are encountered at depths of only a few 1000 km below the clouds, and therefore theoretical studies have to be used to obtain the phase-diagram at greater pressures.
These studies confidently predict that at any plausible temperatures in Jupiter no solid molecular hydrogen surface is encountered.
These studies also predict that at a pressure somewhere between 2 × 10 6 bars and 5 × 10 6 bars an interface is encountered with liquid molecular hydrogen above and liquid metallic hydrogen beneath.
Metallic hydrogen is expected to be produced at very high pressures because the molecules of molecular hydrogen (H 2 ) will be forced so close together that each of the two hydrogen atoms in the H 2 molecule is attracted to atoms in neighbouring molecules as much as to its partner.
At this pressure the H 2 molecules break up.
Moreover, the single electron that orbits the nucleus of each hydrogen atom will also become equally attracted to neighbouring atoms, and so the atoms break up too, and the hydrogen will consist of a ‘gas’ of electrons moving among the hydrogen atom nuclei.
Many of the characteristic properties of metals arise from the existence in them of such ‘electron gases’, and therefore the term ‘metallic hydrogen’ is appropriate.
One of the properties that an electron gas gives to metallic hydrogen, and to most other metals, is high electrical conductivity.
Thus, electric currents in liquid metallic hydrogen are an obvious candidate for the source of Jupiter's large internal magnetic dipole moment.
Moreover, the transition pressure is encountered somewhere between 0.7 and 0.85 R ,and the location of the dipole source at no great depth is required by the external  magnetic field measurements (section 9.1.2).
However, a significant contribution to the internal magnetic dipole moment from liquid iron and other materials nearer the centre of Jupiter cannot quite be ruled out.
9.3.3 Internal heat sources for Jupiter
For a massive planet consisting largely of hydrogen and helium there are two main sources of heat for the interior, each of which could account for the excess radiation.
First, there is heat left over from the formation of Jupiter.
For almost any likely means of planetary formation, Jupiter is of such large mass that initially the internal temperatures would have been very high.
During the first few tens of Ma Jupiter would cool so quickly that it hardly matters what the initial temperatures were provided that they were at least a few times 10 000 K. After a few hundred Ma, the exact time depending on the initial temperatures but in any case a small fraction of Jupiter's lifetime, the rate of cooling would be far less.
By this stage the outer regions of the atmosphere would essentially be controlling the radiation rate, as follows.
In the hot, liquid interior, thermal convection will be the dominant mechanism by which heat is transferred outwards.
This is a very efficient heat-transfer mechanism, and if it existed all the way into the region of the atmosphere which radiated to space then by today the Jovian interior would have lost almost all of its heat of formation, and any remnant could not be a significant source of internal energy.
However, as you can see from Figure 9.5, the adiabatic lapse-rate, which indicates heat transfer by thermal convection, is not followed at altitudes above about 30 km, which is below the altitudes from which most of the radiation to space (at planetary wavelengths) originates.
The atmosphere thus acts as a ‘bottleneck’, and could have retained sufficient heat of formation for it to account for the present excess radiation.
The Earth's atmosphere has not played a similar role, because of the comparatively low rate of heat transport from the interior, via solid phase convection.
The rate of loss of heat of formation can be reduced even further if the absorption of solar radiation in the atmosphere occurs mainly in the troposphere and largely occurs below where the radiation to space originates.
If both these conditions are satisfied then the solar radiation can to some extent provide the upward flow of heat by convection, thus reducing the outflow from greater depths.
I shall call this effect solar choking of the flow.
In the case of Jupiter it has probably had only a small effect on the rate of loss of heat.
However, the greater solar input at the equator than at the poles would produce greater solar choking at the equator, and this can be shown to aid equator to pole circulation in the Jovian interior, thus distributing solar energy more uniformly and leading to the small equator to pole temperature  differences observed in the upper troposphere.
The second main source of internal energy is heat from gravitational separation.
You have already met an example of this in the heat generated when the iron core of a planet separates downwards.
The source of energy is gravitational.
In the case of Jupiter the downward separation of helium has to be considered.
In any plausible way of forming Jupiter the hydrogen and helium are initially well mixed at a molecular level.
Moreover, at all plausible temperatures for the Jovian interior then or now any mixing on a molecular scale is maintained even in the liquid phase.
This is because, though the helium atom is twice as massive as the H 2 molecule, the random collisions between atoms and molecules overwhelm the tendency for gravitational separation.
However, if droplets of helium form then the random collisions of atoms and molecules on the droplet largely cancel out whilst the tendency for  gravitational separation rises in proportion to the number of atoms in the droplet.
Thus the droplets may separate.
However, one further condition must be fulfilled, namely that the upward speed of convective motions must not be sufficient to bear the droplet aloft.
In the case of Jupiter this condition is probably fulfilled, and therefore the gravitational separation of helium hinges on the extent to which droplets form, that is on the degree to which helium is miscible in hydrogen, and this depends on the pressure and the temperature.
Gravitational energy can be released in a different way by the growth of the metallic hydrogen region at the expense of the molecular hydrogen region, because metallic hydrogen at comparable pressures and temperatures is the denser.
This interacts with helium separation because helium is probably more miscible in molecular hydrogen than in metallic hydrogen, and therefore the growth of the metallic phase can enhance the rate of gravitational separation of helium.
Gravitational separation of helium from hydrogen is a self-regulating rather than an unstable process: the higher the temperature the greater the miscibility of helium and planetary temperatures increase towards the centre.
The miscibilities of helium in molecular and metallic hydrogen at temperatures and pressures appropriate to Jupiter are very uncertain, and therefore the importance of this source of internal energy in the past and today is uncertain.
However, it seems plausible that this source of energy has been of little importance in the past because Jupiter is so very massive that it probably formed very hot, though Jupiter may now be sufficiently cool for helium separation to have recently become significant, or for it to become significant in the relatively near future.
9.3.4 Models of the Jovian interior
You have seen that there exists convincing evidence that the Jovian interior  is hot and that convection is the dominant mode of heat transport outwards.
Therefore the lapse-rate is close to adiabatic to very great depths.
Most of the recent models of Jupiter have incorporated this feature.
A typical approach is to assume a ratio of hydrogen to helium which is the same or fairly similar to that measured in the atmosphere, and to assume that there is a small fraction of heavier elements and their compounds which may be concentrated in a core or dispersed to a greater or lesser extent.
The helium may also be separated to some degree.
The temperature at a pressure of 1 bar is taken as a reference point from which, using the adiabatic lapse-rates of the particular mix of materials at each depth and their equations of state (section 2.1.4), calculations are made of the temperatures pressures and densities at greater depths.
The details of the model are adjusted until it can simultaneously yield values acceptably close to the observed values of: the equatorial radius (usually at 1 bar); the mean density; the axial rotation rate; J 2 ; J 4 ; and the radiation excess.
The model must also be consistent with the existence of a magnetic dipole source at no great depth, have plausible relative abundances of the various elements, and in representing Jupiter today can be the outcome of a plausible evolution from the birth of Jupiter to the present.
FIGURE 9.10 A model of Jupiter.
Figure 9.10 shows the main features of one such model of Jupiter that satisfies the various constraints.
The gravitational separation of helium is negligible and in this model always would have been, because the evolutionary sequence that yields this present state has a hot start from formation 4600 Ma ago, the atmospheric regulated loss of the heat of formation bringing Jupiter to its present state.
However, it is possible that Jupiter  resembles Figure 9.10 today without having followed this particular evolution.
The most certain features of Figure 9.10 are that Jupiter consists largely of hydrogen, that much of the interior is liquid/gas, that there is no atmosphere/surface interface, that there is some concentration towards the centre of icy and rocky substances (this is required by the density versus depth), that the hydrogen exists in metallic form beyond a fairly modest depth, and that the interior is hot.
At a more detailed level considerable variations are possible from model to model, such as the exact ratios of hydrogen to helium and of hydrogen to the other substances.
Many of the differences between the various models arise from limited knowledge of the miscibilities of helium and other substances in hydrogen, and from limited knowledge of the equations of state of the various substances.
The equation of state of molecular hydrogen at high pressures and temperatures is particularly important and yet it is poorly known.
Moreover, the simplification cannot be made, as it can in the terrestrial planets, that the influence of temperature on density is slight compared with the influence of pressure: the temperature change with depth in adiabatic lapse-rate models of Jupiter is much too large for this to be the case.
Nevertheless, a broad understanding of the present Jovian interior, and how it could have got that way after its initial formation, now exists.
The initial formation itself is a subject for Chapter 15.