

Chapter Ten
Autumn was coming.
He could feel it in the bite of the breeze, the faintly golden light of the afternoon.
Summer seemed to have flitted by in a space of days.
His shadow was strewn off to his right like a capering phantom as he kicked his steed northwards from the walls of the Rorim towards the ever-rising hills that surged out of the Dale into a heather-thick rampart of blue and purple heights beyond.
The Circle was almost empty of people.
Most, it seemed, were in the Rorim itself or its environs — crowding the inns that squatted at its foot, making merry to mark Bragad's visit.
Hugh's visit.
Hugh and Jenny.
Christ.
He passed flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, and his mount nickered at other horses running free upon the common pastures.
But the grass was stripped nearly bare now, and what was left was yellowing and cropped.
There were houses of stone and thatch dotted in thorps and hamlets throughout the Circle, but there were also newer dwellings of hastily thrown up sod walls and heather roofs.
And there were practice grounds where the Dalesmen were being taught to fight.
He turned away from them, and rode onwards to where the Circle began to grow more empty to the north, and soon there was only the long bar of the outer wall between him and the hills.
Somewhere out there a facsimile of Jenny roamed, mute and afraid.
And in here was her double — a black-garbed temptress, as Bicker had said.
What the hell was going on with this place?
What is happening here?
There were no answers, just agonising riddles he could not solve.
Sourly he wondered who would be next to pop up out of his former life.
Doody, maybe — that would be a laugh.
Or Anne Cohen —
He reined in the horse suddenly as an idea dawned on him.
One that had gone even as he groped for it.
Nurse Cohen…
No.
Gone.
He cursed, and spurred his long-suffering mount onwards again.
When he reached the Outer Wall he halted and dismounted, his cracked bones shouting at him.
He grunted with annoyance and sat down in the sparse grass with his back to the worn stone and let the meagre sun warm him.
It was quiet there; his horse grazed contentedly, its reins trailing on the ground.
He pulled his awkward cloak about his shoulders and closed his eyes, emptying his head of preoccupations.
Autumn was not a bad season.
There were gales, of course, but the bracken turned the mountainsides to copper, and there were mellow days scattered through it, like summer flotsam set adrift in the waning half of the year.
The sea would start to roar at night, and the curlews would be hurled down the glen like dun-coloured bullets.
That was a time for peat fires and firelit talk, with the wind a symphony to set stories to.
Autumn on Skye.
‘Hello, stranger.’
He opened his eyes to see Jenny there with a horse at her side, and he smiled.
The sun picked the deep brown tints out of her hair and made her skin like honey.
She raised her eyebrows and returned his smile, but there was something about it, something
He scrambled to his feet, throwing his cloak aside and hissing at the stiff pain of his collarbone.
‘What are you doing out here?’ he demanded, his voice shaking.
Her smile faded.
‘I had thought to ask you the same thing.
I felt like going for a ride and when I saw you take horse I followed, seeking companionship.
It is not welcome, I see.’
He stared at her, mouth set in a bitter line.
This world would not leave him alone, it seemed.
She went to remount her horse, but he stepped forward.
‘No.
Wait.’
And she halted, turning to him.
‘Do you know me?’
She seemed puzzled.
‘We have met before?’
His eyes bored into her, glittering, searching her face.
But no.
He bowed his head, teeth clenched.
‘No.
You don't know me.’
She came forward, arm outstretched, palm down.
‘I am Jinneth, wife to Bragad of Garrafad…’
He supposed he was meant to kiss her hand, but he did not move.
He was frightened of touching her.
Her arm dropped and she frowned, the dark brows crowning her eyes.
‘Wherever you are from, courtesy is not one of your virtues,’ she said tartly.
‘I don't belong here,’ he answered at once, stung.
She stared at him.
‘So you are not of Ralarth, then,’ and she smiled again.
‘And what are you?
Lord…or Hearthware?
You are no lord of Ralarth that I know of — and I know them all.
But you are no Hearthware either, I think.
You do not have the look of a warrior.’
Cheers.
She moved easily towards him, and he would have backed away but for the stone wall against his shoulders.
‘You have not yet told me your name, stranger.’
‘Michael Riven.’
He thought for a second, just an instant, there was something there, something in her eyes like a flicker of uncertainty, but it was so brief he was unsure if he had imagined it.
‘Michael,’ she said, testing the word.
Her accent was strange.
It was not the way his wife spoke.
Had spoken.
‘A strange name.
Are you from the north?
From the cities, perhaps?’
He shook his head dumbly.
He could smell the fragrance of her.
Her nearness dizzied him.
‘You're not my wife,’ he whispered.
Her hands caressed his cheek, brushed his beard, and he froze.
‘Why so stiff?’ she asked.
‘You are as tight as a bent blade.
Are you afraid of the wife of a lord such as Bragad?
Be not so.
We have an understanding, he and 1, and I am very discreet.’
‘What do you want?’ he croaked.
‘Your eyes never left me in the hall.
What have you been told of me?’
‘Nothing.
I know nothing about you.’
Except what he had made into a story.
Except for whatever part of her that might once have been Jenny.
‘What do you do here in Ralarth?’
Her fingers touched his neck, the knot there where the linen sling supported his arm.
‘You have been hurt.
How?’
‘Fighting Giants.’
Her brow cocked.
‘So.
A warrior after all, perhaps.’
The finger touched the scar on his forehead, making him flinch.
‘You are  much marked by injury, some of it not so recent.
Are you a Sellsword then?’
‘A what?’
He hardly heard what she was saying.
He was losing himself in the grey surf of her eyes, his heart threatening to smother him with its frenzied pounding.
‘A mercenary.
A paid soldier.’
‘I was, once.’
Lieutenant Riven.
‘Ah.’
Her gaze sharpened.
‘And you are not now?’
‘No.
No more.’
There were warning bells tolling in his head.
This woman was not his wife, and she had not come out here to seek conversation.
Wheels within wheels were moving, and he wanted no part of them.
‘I must go back,’ he said.
‘I'm expected.’
‘By whom?
The frowning girl who stood by your side in the hall?
She is only a child, surely.’
He pushed her aside suddenly, roughly, and saw her face grow sallow with anger, but she did not protest.
His collarbone throbbed.
A groan burst from his lips as he mounted his horse, and for a second the world swam before his eyes.
When he focused again she was staring at him intently.
But there was no concern upon her face — only curiosity.
‘We'll meet again,’ she called after him, but he dragged his mount's head around without replying and kicked it into a gallop back to the Rorim.
Late that afternoon, before the banquet was due to begin, he told Bicker, Ratagan and Murtach everything.
They sat in his room whilst the wind whistled about the eaves of the Manse, and listened to him in silence.
When he had finished, Bicker strode to the window and looked out at the tumbled clouds of the late day and the gathering darkness of the deserted hills.
‘I know now why you did what you did in the hall,’ Murtach said.
He fondled Fife's ears until the wolf emitted a growling sing-song of pleasure deep in his throat.
‘I am sorry.’
‘It's nobody's fault,’ Riven told him.
‘Except maybe mine.
I should have known that she'd be here.
I put her here, after all.
In the story.’
‘But not in quite the same way, I take it,’ Bicker said over his shoulder.
‘No.
Not quite.’
‘I should have realised myself,’ the dark man continued.
‘There was a resemblance between her and the girl wandering the Isle of  Mists.’
He turned away from the window.
‘But it is not perfect.
They are different somehow.
Why?
Why should this happen?
Two images of your wife in this land, one a wanton, the other a waif.
It beggars deciphering.’
‘Guillamon's territory, I think,’ Ratagan put in.
There was a flagon of beer forgotten in his vast fist.
‘And this man you knew in your own world — the one who helped you with your stories.
He is Bragad.’
Bicker shook his head.
‘My friend, no wonder you wanted to be alone this afternoon.
It is enough to drive a man to distraction.’
‘Maybe Riven should not be seen at the feast tonight,’ Murtach suggested.
The dark man disagreed.
‘That would raise more suspicions than it would allay.
Bragad knows he is here now, that he is a stranger.
There is no point in fuelling speculation.’
‘We need an identity — a harmless counterfeit for our ex-Sellsword here to cling to,’ said Ratagan.
He sat a hand on Riven's good shoulder and rocked him slightly.
‘How are you at playing a part?’
‘I'm dressed for it,’ Riven replied in a disgruntled tone, and the big man laughed.
Some of the tension went out of the room.
Bicker smiled.
‘What would you like to be, Michael Riven?’
‘Well, she said I looked no warrior.’
He was surprised at the bitterness in his voice.
I was a soldier once.
Once upon a time.
Maybe not in this world — but a soldier nonetheless.
‘If she had seen you the night of the Giants she might have thought differently,’ Ratagan said gently.
‘A merchant then,’ Murtach suggested.
‘He does not know the reality of the country well enough,’ Bicker returned.
‘And besides he wears a Ralarth sash.
Whatever he is, it must be of the Dale itself.’
‘A Teller!’
Ratagan said, thumping a fist down on to the table so that the two wolves started.
‘What?’
Riven was aghast.
‘By all that's holy, why not use your true profession?
A Teller from the west come to take service in Ralarth and learn a few more tales from the Dales people.
Yes!’
Bicker nodded.
‘The nail hit on the head.
What say you, Michael Riven?’
‘I can't do that.
I can't tell bloody stories any more.’
‘You won't have to, with luck.’
Ratagan grinned.
‘Just sit in a corner and appear thoughtful.
If someone asks you for a tale, tell them you're learning the story of the Dwarf and the Firewood.
It goes on for ever.
They'll leave you alone then, in case you decide to start telling it to them.’
Bicker chuckled.
‘He speaks from experience, I fear.
But, yes, I think that will suffice.
I will tell Gwion to warn ok our own people.
Half of them think Riven is some sort of magical warrior from across the southern sea.
They must be enjoined to remain silent.
He is simply a Teller, come to seek new stories.’
And maybe that is not so very far from what is true.
Ratagan swigged at his beer and swallowed gratefully.
Bicker rubbed his nose, deep in thought.
‘It might not be a bad notion, though, to spirit the Teller out of the Rorim soon after the feasting is over.
That way he will not be bumping into the Lady Jinneth again in such a hurry.
Her husband had obviously told her to find out who and what he is.’
‘None of us can accompany him without arousing suspicion,’ Murtach pointed out.
‘We could if it was a patrol,’ the dark man said.
‘You and Ratagan could take one out tomorrow, stay for a few days and have a look around at the western fiefs.
You could visit home, my red-bearded friend.’
‘Ivrigar, eh?’
Ratagan took another long pull at his beer, an unaccustomed frown flitting on to his face.
‘Home.
I don't think that —’
‘Aelin would be glad,’ Bicker said gently, and Ratagan's frown deepened.
‘She'd be glad,’ he repeated.
‘For a while.’
Bicker thumped him lightly on the shoulder.
‘It is settled then.
After the feasting tonight you three will leave the Rorim with an escort on a few days’ patrolling.
It is only prudent with most of the Dale's ‘Wares tied up here at the fortress.
No suspicions will be aroused.
Stay at Ivrigar for a time, or until I deem it safe to return.’
‘Bragad will miss us from the negotiations,’ said Murtach.
‘Let him,’ Bicker replied promptly.
‘It will keep him on his toes.
Besides, you will not be the only ones.
Both Mullach and Lionan are departing directly after the banquet is over, leaving Marsco to plead their case for them — so thick, it seems, these three have become.
They have the excuse of securing their northern borders.
Apparently things are getting a little hot up there.
We had a messenger from Drynoch this evening.
There are grypesh out in force to the north.’
‘A convenient point for Bragad to push home,’ Murtach murmured.
The dark man nodded, exasperated.
‘Marsco emphasises his own side in this way, sending two lords back to secure their fiefs in the middle of a council.
Dramatic, but effective.’
‘And true, I take it?’
Murtach asked.
Bicker shrugged.
‘We have no way of knowing.
But it is a good excuse for us to send out a patrol of our own.
A strong one.
And it explains your absences from the council quite nicely.
That leaves us only tonight to get through.’
‘I take it I can get drunk as a lord should on such an occasion?’
Ratagan said, smiling; but Riven was sure he was only half in jest.
‘Mind what you say, and who you say it to,’ Bicker warned.
‘The same goes for you, Michael Riven.
If Bragad guesses at your real identity it could cause us a world of difficulties with some of the lords.’
‘Another stick to beat the Warbutt with,’ Murtach said in disgust.
‘You had best impress upon the household the need for discretion.
There are a few feather-brains about who know too much as it is.’
‘Not Madra,’ Riven said, startled out of a reverie.
‘No.’
Murtach's face was oddly savage.
‘Not Madra.’
The Rorim was busy with scores of preparations.
In the Manse the household occupied themselves with the task of preparing a feast fit for the assembled lords.
The kitchen was a chaotic babble of activity, with Colban issuing orders in all directions and striving to keep an eye on those attendants who were entrusted with the care of vital sauces and gravies.
Several animals of various sizes were roasting entire on slow-spinning spits, basted by anxious boys, whilst a stream of young people ferried foodstuffs from the pantries to the Great Hall above until the trestles set up there creaked under their load.
A rumbling filled the air also, as casks of beer were trundled from the depths of the cellar, the barrels thumping on the stones and resounding like the indigestion of Giants.
Others brought to light with more care slim, dark bottles of wine with the dust and cobwebs thick upon them.
In a corner quieter than most a knot of musicians tuned their strings and  tightened their drumskins.
Through it all, Gwion paced with his pate shining in harassment and a gaggle of attendants in his wake seeking instructions, advice and permission.
Some were sprinkled with pine needles, having just been engaged in decking out the hall with fresh sprays of evergreen.
Others reeked of herbs or were powdered with flour.
A few Hearthwares who were stalking the corridors of the Manse backed away hurriedly when they met them, for fear of grubbing their highly burnished armour.
More than one was caught by a pair of squealing girls, who gleefully anointed them with kitchen grease and then fled with the warrior clanking in pursuit.
Walking through the Rorim was like living a medieval pageant.
Riven was enchanted.
He, Ratagan and Isay were wandering the fortress and taking in the holiday atmosphere for want of something else to do before the feast began.
Ratagan had procured beer for them from somewhere with magical ease, and they were supping the malty liquid from brimming tankards as they went.
The big man had a word for everyone he met, and produced blushes and laughs from the serving maids in equal quantities.
Even Isay unbent a little, and grinned at a raven-haired wench when she made a lewd pluck at his staff.
Riven received many odd looks, and was the subject of much behind-hand whispering, but it seemed the result of awe more than anything else.
And the more beer he drank, the less he thought about it.
He was content to give himself up to the occasion, similar to others he had described in his own books but none of which had ever seemed to possess the colour, the noise, the smell, the sheer vibrancy that was before him now.
He was seeing the Rorim as it should be, without the threat of ruin hanging over it — though tomorrow these same people would be stinting themselves to eke out their supplies through the winter.
But for now they were as careless as swallows.
Riven realised with no surprise that he could love this world and its people, despite the heartbreak it had wrought on him.
Which was fitting, since in one sense he had created it, had made these folk to people it.
He had chosen this world, Minginish, out of all the others he could have thought up because it had seemed good to him.
And it was, despite the black-garbed temptresses and ambitious warlords who walked it.
It was worth saving for its own sake, not just to give Jenny the peace she deserved.
He smiled at his own thoughts.
Maybe I'll write them down some day, if I get the chance.
They ran into Madra, nearly upsetting the jugs she held in her fists.
Ratagan relieved her of one of them whilst she looked on with an eyebrow arched.
‘For our health,’ he explained, refilling their three tankards.
‘It'll be a long night, with much talk, and we must fortify ourselves beforehand as best we may…’
He winked at her, and her mouth twitched.
‘Will you be at the feast tonight?’
Riven asked her.
‘I am to be your server,’ she said.
‘Mind you don't neglect him,’ Ratagan told her with mock severity.
But she did not take her eyes from Riven.
‘I won't,’ The rare, grave smile winged her face, then she reclaimed her empty jug with a reproachful glance at the red-beard, and continued on her way.
They watched her go, silent for a second.
‘She was not in your story, was she?’
Ratagan asked.
Riven started.
‘No.
No, she wasn't.’
But again, there was that odd feeling that they had met before.
Ratagan gripped his good shoulder for a second, and then tipped back his tankard with a deft movement.
‘Ah,’ he sighed, wiping froth from his upper lip.
‘Life is not wholly unattractive.’
Isay helped him dress for the banquet that evening, showing no resentment at having to double as valet as well as bodyguard.
Riven found that a set of finer clothes had been left out for him, probably by Madra.
The sleeveless tunic looked to be made of doeskin, supple as linen, and worked into the left breast was a flame symbol, picked out in scarlet and yellow thread.
He asked the Myrcan about it, and was told that it was the badge of a Teller.
The fact that it lacked heraldry around it was a sign that he belonged to no particular lord, though the blue sash announced he was attached to the Household of Ralarth.
The tunic fitted over a loose linen shirt and was belted snugly by the sash that Riven was coming to see as his own.
He did not put on his sword, for no weapons were permitted at such occasions, though Ratagan had told him a gory tale of a banquet where a certain disagreement had been settled with eating knives, which the victors had subsequently continued eating with.
Riven took a place halfway down the hall from the high seats  where the lords clustered and the Lady Jinneth adorned her husband's elbow.
Ratagan and Murtach were close by whilst Isay was at his side, as usual.
Riven caught Bicker's eye as he had that afternoon, and the dark man threw him a rueful grin.
He would no doubt be fending off the polite questioning of Ralarth's lords throughout the meal.
Tragically, this meant he had to stay relatively sober.
Ratagan had promised to quaff Bicker's portion of ale for him, to make sure none was wasted in these frugal times.
Jinneth was looking at him.
Riven was caught by her eyes, grey as shingle.
Her hair was down, making a black foam about her shoulders and setting off her silver circlet.
Her gown was low cut, exposing creamy shoulders and the shadow between her breasts, and there was a slim chain about her white neck from which a single gem hung like a firelit star.
Desire kindled in Riven like a coal, and he remembered times when he had held that body's twin in his arms and searched out all its secrets.
But the woman he had held was dust in a sea-girt grave, his love buried with her.
He met Jinneth's gaze steadily, until her smile faltered and she turned away to speak into her husband's ear.
He listened to her intently, even with deference, and Riven, remembering Hugh on the occasions when he had met Jenny, thought that perhaps there was a twisted sort of logic to this world after all.
Music began with the beating of a tabor and the whistle of pipes, and then the servers began trooping in in their dozens with great platters of heaped food and jugs of ale.
Riven blinked, and realised he had been staring at nothing for a long minute.
Ratagan was leaning across the table and pouring him some of the dark, malty beer, but he could make no sense out of the big man's words.
The beer he had already consumed that evening fogged his brain, and the brightness of the torches and the tall candles daggered his eyes.
For a second he felt like retching.
But then there was a calm hand on his shoulder, and Madra was leaning past him to set a tray on the table, her hair swinging over his arm.
He could have buried his face in it, seeking darkness, but she set her cool fingers on the back of his neck and his head seemed to clear.
And she left him with a quick glance from her eyes, dark as an otter's pelt, and a smile that was like a gift.
A cold nose nuzzled his knee, and he reached under the table with a scrap of venison for Fife — or Drum, he was not sure which.
The wolf took it from his hand as delicately as a cat, and licked  his palm.
He met Murtach's eyes across the table, and the shape-shifter grinned like a gnome.
‘Don't spoil him,’ he said.
‘Half the hall will be feeding my two friends tonight.’
He raised a tankard which condensation had jewelled.
‘Here's to life, health and happiness, and the time to enjoy them.’
Half the board raised their own flagons in answer — most of them seemed to be Hearthwares — and they answered him thunderously, Ratagan loudest of all.
Riven downed a great gulp of the cold beer and felt it alternately chill and warm his gullet.
His brain cleared.
Slainte.
It grew warmer in the hall, and noisier as beer and wine loosened throats.
The feasters attacked great joints of beef and mutton and venison, picked at pheasant and partridge, munched apples and pears and sweet onions, nibbled at cheese and rye bread, and washed it down with more beer.
The few ladies present were given the privilege of drinking out of goblets, some of pewter, some of glass, some of wood.
Wine bottles began to cluster at tables like sentries.
Bones were flung to the floor and quarrelled over by the hounds, who gave way to Murtach's two wolves when Fife and Drum desired some particularly meaty scrap.
Hearthwares argued over past skirmishes and hunts, the lords over family history and precedence, the arguments becoming more fantastic as they put away more ale.
Riven saw Bragad gesticulating at Bicker, who sipped wine reflectively.
Marsco's cold gaze was fixed on Jinneth as she leaned forward to speak to him, her hand on his amid the clutter of the table.
Lionan, the dandy, was talking behind his hand to the brutal Mullach, who was gulping his beer moodily and staring at the serving maids as they passed him in a bustling procession.
He sucked one corner of his black moustache absently.
Guillamon's eyes were two icy fires in the haze.
He smiled at Riven's roving stare and raised his goblet in salute.
Riven did the same, unsmiling.
He remembered a steel-eyed wizard from his second book, and wondered if Guillamon were he.
It was hard to tell, sometimes, which of these people he had written about, now that they sat down yards from him.
He shook his head and sank more of the strong beer.
He did not feel hungry, and the alcohol sent his imagination soaring into the smoky roof beams, so that he lost the thread of the story Ratagan was telling him — the one about the Dwarf and the  Firewood, he thought muzzily.
Instead he was thinking of Jenny.
Jenny in his arms.
And, oddly, that gave way to thoughts of Madra.
When she bent to pour for him her breasts swung against the fabric of her robe and he could see the press of the nipples.
He felt an urge to cup them in his hands, but gulped at his beer savagely and prised his eyes away.
Only a youngster, for Christ's sake.
Besides, I'm married.
Married.
Here in a world where she never existed, with people who do not exist in mine.
Where her doppelgangers wander the hills or flirt in banqueting halls.
He bent his head.
She's dead and buried in a grave in Portree.
And where is that?
He swilled down the beer.
And where am I.
Madra's forehead shone in the heat, and with those dark eyebrows she looked as though she were concentrating hard on not spilling the wine.
Spots of it stained the thighs of her robe.
Riven thrust aside his sling.
It was picked up by Isay, who glanced at him.
Riven wondered if he saw sympathy there, but laughed harshly.
Myrcan sympathy, like milk from a bull.
The eating had ended, and the drinking was in full swing.
The scene reminded Riven of many a drunken episode in a saga.
Even Bicker seemed to have lost his wary watchfulness and was grinning with the rest.
Someone was dancing crazily on the trestles, sending wooden plates flying.
His blue sash marked him as a Hearthware, and his face was red with heat and wine.
Laughter and clapping surrounded his antics.
Watching him, Riven felt the return of bonhomie and contemplated touching Madra's hair next time she came round.
His collarbone ached, and he dug at it with his good arm, massaging the stiffness with his fingers.
He wanted her to do it for him, but she was busy across the hall.
He met her eyes and for a second time; she smiled her shy smile at him, but his swimming head filled it with invitations.
He remembered Nurse Cohen holding him, remembered Jenny underneath him, making soft noises at his ear in the dark.
Christ, I need air.
But he was not sure he could stand up.
Isay would help him, capable soldier.
for a moment he thought Isay was his corporal in Derry, and began smiling at him; but he was dead.
In pieces, like the Hearthwares in his room.
Like Jenny at the foot of Sgurr Dearg, the Red Mountain.
Everywhere there was blood in his  memories, and now he was drinking it himself.
The blood of this world which he had created and which he was slowly killing.
Hero.
Soldier.
Husband.
Mourner.
He stood up, one hand on the table; his bad arm.
He swore vaguely, pushed away from the board to see the enquiring looks.
Big Ratagan and ferret Murtach, grey Guillamon and dark Bicker.
‘Need some air.’
He turned to Isay and was lent a Myrcan shoulder.
‘Get me out of here.’
The floor plunged at him, the faces at the feast blurring with noise; he made out Bragad watching him with sharp eyes.
Wondering who I am.
He almost tripped up over his own drunk feet, but Isay supported him.
Out of the hall, lurching, swimming, swaying, feeling shamefully sick and gritting his teeth together to stop his stomach from heaving.
And then the dark, the blessed dark, and the cold night air that iced him and ripped the mist from his brain, steadied his legs, poured pain into his shoulder.
Real pain.
My pain.
He breathed in deeply, bent double.
Felt a hand on his back and a quiet voice telling Isay he'd be all right.
I'll be all right.
Leave me alone.
‘Leave me alone.’
But the hand was still there, warm now on the nape of his neck; and the hand guided him as he lurched forward again, the firm body beside his, holding him upright; helping him up dark stairs and through a pitching doorway.
His room, moonlit by the silver-flooded windows.
He stood with his back against a wall and closed his eyes.
He could feel the sweat of the hall still on him, cold now; working up towards a shiver.
His breathing became steady.
He opened his eyes to the quiet darkness, the moonlight, the breeze from the window that his helper had opened.
She stood worriedly in front of him, brows pulled together, feathery hair over her shoulders and clinging in fine threads to the sweat of her forehead.
He reached out and caught her hand, pulled her close.
Dark eyes, unreadable as mist.
Then he hugged her to him, feeling her warmth and softness, the length of her thighs against his, the muscles of her back under his palms, the satin of her neck at his mouth.
He kissed her there, gently, and she turned her head, offering him her mouth.
He closed his own over it, but her questing tongue met only his teeth.
He kissed her forehead, her chin, cupped her face in both hands and kissed shut her eyes, the tears falling from his own.
In his  mind he spoke another girl's name; a girl long dead, and asked her to forgive him.
He slept late, and when he awoke the wind was rising in the rafters.
He lay curiously content in the warm bed for some minutes, then frowned.
Abruptly he jumped up and tore away the bedclothes, searching the rug on which he had lain.
There, dried in, the small patch of blood.
He searched farther; long hairs on the pillow.
But the room was empty.
He closed his eyes and groaned.
Not a dream.
You bastard.
He drank water from the pitcher, then staggered over to the basin on the table and thrust his head into it, the chill water making him gasp.
He shook his head, spraying drops over the room, over his clothes discarded on the floor.
He knuckled his eyes.
She's only a child.
‘Oh God,’ he groaned aloud, then rubbed himself dry.
He dressed and looked in the polished mirror, seeing a scarred, bearded face glaring out at him.
The door was knocked and opened, and Madra entered bearing his breakfast on a tray.
She set it on the table, avoiding his stare, and made as if to leave, but stopped before she reached the door and looked in his eyes.
Was it only his fancy, or were her eyes older?
‘Do you want me to stay?’ she asked simply, and he knew she was not just talking about leaving the room.
He stared at her.
Even now he hungered for her again, seeing the light in her hair, the length of her leg under the robe.
It had been very sweet.
She's only a child.
He wanted to put flowers in her hair and make her laugh; but he would never be able to do that.
‘I'll see you about, later,’ he said, hating the clumsiness of the words.
And she was gone.
‘Well,’ said Ratagan, ‘for the next day or two it seems hardly likely that I will be wetting my throat at all, so perhaps it is just as well I indulged in a draught or three last night.’
He hardly limped now, and leaned only seldom on the haft of his axe.
Riven did not reply.
They were making their way round to the stables at the back of the Manse.
He wore his sling again, for Isay had returned it to him wordlessly earlier that morning.
The Myrcan followed them  as they made their way towards the smell of horse piss and hay.
‘Still, I am out of the council at least,’ Ratagan went on.
‘Those meetings are about as bearable as a boil in the wrong place — though this one should be more interesting than most.
Ralarth will not combine, but Marsco will not take that too well and his Ringill is in a delicate position.
A ticklish business altogether.
I am glad it is Bicker's backside that is warming a council chair instead of mine.’
‘We're going to your home,’ Riven said absently.
Ivrigar.
The place had been a quiet country house in his books.
Domestic bliss and all the rest.
But Ratagan frowned suddenly.
‘Aye.
We are.’
They reached the stables and found Murtach waiting for them with his sword strapped to his back and a quiver of arrows at his hip.
He gripped a pair of reins in his hand and behind him a blaze-faced chestnut nosed at the cobbles, whilst the two wolves sat by his feet.
‘Tardy again, Master Ratagan; and now you have not even a real limp to excuse you.’
Behind him were a crowd of men and horses; Hearthwares in full armour, their breaths steaming in the coolness of the morning, Myrcans standing impassively, indifferent to the cold but nodding to Isay as he approached, and a pair of pack mules trying to bite each other 's manes.
‘It's my head this time,’ Ratagan confessed, the cheer restored.
‘It berates me for the way I mistreated it last night.’
‘And our knight — or resident Teller, I should say.
How is his head this morning?’
Riven searched his blue eyes for any hidden meanings, but they were closed to him.
He did not answer, and Murtach raised his eyebrows but made no further comment.
He found that a quiet bay gelding had been saddled for him, and mounted along with the others, the Hearthwares hissing with effort as they pulled the weight of their armour into the saddle.
Riven's slung arm hampered him, and he pulled the sling off irritably and stuffed it down the front of his jerkin, moving his arm in circles.
The collarbone complained, but it was bearable, and he was sick of bandages.
Ratagan edged his mount over.
‘Are you sure you are up to this?’
Riven nodded.
‘It'll be good for me.
I need the air.’
Ratagan grinned.
‘This morning we all need the air.’
There were fourteen of them.
Riven, Ratagan and Murtach, then Isay and two other Myrcans — Luib, whose hair was peppery  with age, and Belig.
And then there were eight Hearthwares, seven of whom were in full armour.
The eighth, a black-bearded, brown-faced man named Tagan was the tracker.
All except Riven and the Myrcans had sheathed shortbows and full quivers hanging from their knees in addition to their personal weapons.
They had food in their saddlebags for two days, and the pack mules carried grain and hay for the horses, there being little forage in the hills the patrol would traverse for the first two days.
After that they planned to pick up more provisions at Ivrigar, Ratagan's home, and return to the Rorim on the third or fourth day, by which time the council would be winding down, or even finished.
The wind was strengthening in their faces, and more than one man looked up at the sky in puzzlement.
Autumn was here, on the heels of a mutilated summer, and it had arrived with preternatural speed.
Almost from the moment he had seen Jinneth, Riven thought, and then scowled, putting the idea out of his head as though it were unlucky.
There were too many things to think about this morning.
Somewhere in the hills perhaps another Jenny walked with the beasts, no memory of him in her head.
And in the Manse behind him was a girl, a child whom he had taken last night in a fit of lust and self-pity.
He snarled at himself.
I'm a real hero, I am.
But it had been…good.
He had lost himself in her, and she had been willing to take him.
And afterwards he had lain in her arms as though they were a world away with the waves breaking on the shore outside.
And he had known peace, for a little while.
Not now.
Now it was a grey morning with the drizzle beginning to veil the hills.
But he was looking forward to leaving the Rorim, to being in the open.
Always, for him, problems had seemed much simpler in such places.
As simple as lighting a fire or finding a dry place to sleep.
Nothing ever followed him there.
Not in my own world, anyway.
The tracker, Tagan, took point, the rain beginning to mist his beard and the black mat of hair that covered his forehead, and they followed on, Fife and Drum looking wet and unenthusiastic already.
‘What's the plan?’
Ratagan asked no one in particular.
‘West to the Skriaig first, to check the border,’ Murtach told him.
‘Then north to view Suardal and Corry.
We'll see if we can't catch sight of Mullach and Lionan as they head back north.
And then down to Ivrigar on the second night.’
Ratagan grunted.
They left the Rorim and set their faces towards the hills.
Tagan rode to the rise in front as they left the Dale behind.
After him came Murtach, who seemed to be leading the patrol; then Ratagan, Riven and Isay, and the other seven Hearthwares with the mules.
Luib and Belig brought up the rear, and the two wolves loped alongside.
They rode in single file, for the ground became broken as they climbed higher and the hoofs of their mounts dislodged loose stones that clattered down the hillside.
Tagan's eyes were as much on the ground as on the land ahead.
They were heading westwards to where the land rose more precipitously and broke into a grey surf of scattered granite.
The rain remained a moist guess in the air, though they had to tug on their cloaks against the cold in the wind.
It reddened their faces and made their mounts steam.
There was nothing of summer left in it.
They halted on a rocky ridge where heather poked up through gaps in the stones, and looked back to see Ralarth a green patch below them.
Riven's legs were complaining about the unaccustomed riding and the wind made his eyes water.
He pulled the double thickness of the cloak tighter around him and wondered briefly why he had not worn his hiking clothes.
But they would have looked ridiculous alongside the others.
He smiled at himself.
Vanity.
‘This is the Skriaig,’ said Murtach, standing up in his stirrups and staring west across the summits of the lesser hills.
‘What you might call our border.
Beyond it lives no man, and even the hunters cross the ridge only seldom.
There is nothing beyond but the hills, and mountains in the far west; and the beasts.’
‘Here be dragons,’ Riven murmured, eyeing the empty spaces below.
He felt the hilt of his sword.
‘We are skylined here,’ said Tagan after a few moments.
‘Everything for miles around can see us.’
Murtach nodded.
‘We will continue down along the eastern slope of the ridge.’
He pointed with one gloved hand, then clicked his tongue and urged his mount forward.
They continued on their way, the hiss of the wind and their horses' hoofs the only sounds.
The ridge ran north to south for miles, with an occasional saddle where a foaming river had scored its way through it.
The country reminded Riven of Skye; it was harsher than Ralarth.
The only life they saw were a few curlews, and once an eagle far off in  the west, circling the heights.
They continued riding through the afternoon, by which time the dull cloud above their heads had become unbroken, and it looked as though they were in for a wet night.
They had seen no tracks and sighted nothing in the land below them, which Ratagan said was unusual for deer were not uncommon here as well as hill foxes and hares.
But there was nothing in the emptiness, not even a field mouse.
It darkened, and they made camp.
A fire was lit at the base of a broad crag, and they sat around it whilst a Hearthware took sentry and the night was blown in around them.
Riven was stiff all over, hardly able to stretch himself flat.
But once the horses were unsaddled, rubbed down and hobbled, he spread a blanket on the hard ground and took his place at the evening meal with the others.
Thick slabs of bacon sizzled on a pan that sat by the fire, and they mopped up the fat with grainy bread, washing it down with spring water.
A drizzle ran in streams down the rocks and dewed the horses, but the fire kept the worst of its effects from them.
The burning heather curls gave off a bright, intense heat but burned quickly, and they each took their turn at collecting a pile so the fire could be kept going through part of the night at least.
Then the watches were arranged.
Riven drew the watch before Murtach, who, as leader, took the last watch before dawn.
They talked quietly amongst themselves for a while of inconsequential things, content to watch the fire and feel the tiredness in their muscles; then rolled themselves in their cloaks and slept.
Riven was woken for his watch in the dead of night by a yawning Hearthware.
‘All quiet,’ said the man in a low voice.
‘Murtach is on after you.
You might build up the fire a little.’
Then he left for the warmth of his blankets.
Shivering and sore, Riven stood up and buckled his sword.
The fire was a mess of glowing embers that spat at the light rain.
He searched around and found the pile of heather, and fed the fire until the flames licked up to warm him.
He blew through his hands.
The rain had soaked into his cloak as he slept, and it hung in heavy damp folds on his shoulders.
He thought of his bed at the Rorim; then he thought of Madra in it, her warmth under him and her hands on his back, her hair in his mouth.
He checked the horses, but they were quiet, standing resting one leg with their eyes half-closed.
The wind had dropped, he  noticed.
The rain fell silently and invisibly, kissing his scarred forehead.
A soft night.
It was the click of rock beyond the firelight that made him turn.
He stared out into the wet darkness, and heard it again.
He wanted to wake up the sleepers; but it might merely be a rabbit, or a fox.
He stood still, and heard then the sound of pebbles shifting under feet — more than one set of feet — and there was the rattle of loose scree.
He drew his sword and held it in front of him, the pulse pounding in his temples, but he was not yet afraid enough to wake the others.
And then he saw them come into the amber flicker of the firelight with the flames lighting green lamps in their heads.
Three wolves.
Two were winter wolves, pale as ghosts in the night, but the third was a dark, short-haired animal, larger than the others.
Its mouth was open and it seemed to be grinning at him.
The two smaller animals padded towards him and lay down beside the fire with contented sighs, hardly giving him a glance.
They were fife and Drum.
The third sat on its haunches in that twilit area between the light of the fire and the rainy blue darkness of the empty hills.
Riven stared at it, wonder widening his eyes.
And even as he watched it blurred.
The lights in its eyes faded and he saw the pricked ears descend.
It whined deep in its throat, as though in pain, and he saw the body grow paler as the fur sloughed away into nothing.
The forepaws grew thicker, the hind legs longer, the torso broader.
And then Murtach was crouched there naked in the night, watching him.
Riven lowered his blade, hands shaking.
The little man stood up and came over to join him at the fire.
‘Well met, Michael Riven,’ he said quietly, and the words were distorted in his mouth, as though it were not yet the right shape for them.
He was shivering, and fumbled in his bedroll for a cloak, which he pulled about his shoulders before crouching beside the fire once more.
Fife and Drum followed him with their eyes, showing no surprise.
‘Christ,’ said Riven at last.
He sat down on the bare rock and shook his head.
Murtach grinned, showing canines that were still long and wolfish.
‘Do you believe in magic now, my friend?’
Werewolves.
Bloody hell.
‘What were you doing?’ he asked, not sure if he truly wanted  to know.
The little man shrugged, losing his gaze in the fire.
His skin was goosepimpled.
‘A wolf can travel faster in this country than a mounted man — and more silently, too.
I thought we might take a tour round the surrounding hills and make sure there were no hidden surprises.
And besides, it has been a while since I have wandered four-footed with my children.’
Your children.
‘It's one thing to write about it…’
Riven said dubiously.
Werewolves.
Bloody hell.
‘We did find something,’ Murtach went on.
He looked at Riven closely.
‘A few miles out to the east we glimpsed the dark girl you and Bicker described from the Isle of Mist.
She was wandering the crags.
When we approached she took to the steep places where we could not follow, and so we left her.’
He buried his eyes in the fire again.
‘Wolves can smell fear, and she was not afraid.
They can smell other things also: she is dying, Riven.’
‘What do you mean?’
A chill caught him in the stomach.
‘I mean she is dying.
She is bloodied and starved, though still swift on her feet.
But how she is surviving out there I cannot say…’
He trailed off.
‘Is she really your wife?’
‘I don't know.’
He saw dark eyes with no recognition in them.
But Bicker had seen her wandering Glenbrittle, and she had been to the bothy.
She had tried to come home.
I don't know.
‘I don't know what she is,’ he said, blinking hard.
‘She doesn't know me.
She hardly seems real.
I don't know what she is.’
The little man pulled his cloak tighter about his shoulders.
The drizzle was already soaking it darker.
‘I'm half inclined to pursue her tomorrow; perhaps if we had her we would have a few more answers to all this.
But I'm not sure we could catch her if we tried.
I don't think it is meant to happen.
She is not merely a girl.’
He paused.
‘Maybe she is suffering the same fate as Minginish,’ he said obscurely.
And then he stood up in one fluid movement.
‘It is my watch.
Dawn is not far off.
I'll dress and let you get some sleep.’
But Riven did not think he would sleep again that night.
By dawn the sky had cleared and was a hard, pale blue.
They creaked awake and set to rousing the fire and cooking breakfast, the Hearthwares cursing the chill weight of their armour, hopping  up and down to get the blood moving through their limbs.
They ate breakfast standing, Riven wishing momentarily for coffee.
But then Ratagan handed him a battered silver flask with a wink and he spluttered over strong barley spirit, the last of the cold burnt out of him.
They rubbed down the horses roughly, saddled them, and then were on their way again, their fire circle buried under stones and heather tufts.
They began to pick a path down out of the high land to where the towns and villages of Ralarth and its fiefs stretched green below them into the far distance, silent under the early sunlight.
They were heading north-east, the morning light in their right eyes and their shadows cast back towards the Skriaig and Ralarth's western border.
If they strained their eyes they could make out the clusters of houses and farmyards that were Suardal to the north, the pencil-thin bars of smoke already rising from them and the meagre herds moving across the open country like ants.
The day passed with little talk.
It seemed the silence of the hills was infectious.
They rode steadily downwards until it was grass under their steeds’ hoofs instead of rock, and there were trees and calm rivers meandering in the dips of hills.
The sky clouded, grew overcast and heavy, and they waited patiently for the rain to start in on them again, knowing they would be in the warmth of Ivrigar by nightfall.
Riven kicked his mount ahead until he was level with Murtach at the front of the column, Fife and Drum trotting effortlessly off to one side.
Oddly, they did not seem to bother the horses.
Perhaps they had been in the Rorim long enough for the animals to become used to each other.
‘Tell me about the shape-shifting.
Tell me about magic,’ Riven said.
Murtach looked at him with raised eyebrow.
‘Your own stories go a long way towards doing that.’
‘Tell me.’
The little man sucked his teeth for a moment.
‘Magic.
Now there's a thing.
A strange thing.
Do you know, Michael Riven, that I and my father are two of the lucky ones?’
He turned to Riven.
‘They had witch hunts here a generation ago, or more.
They rooted out those folk who were not…ordinary, and banished them from Minginish. people are afraid of what they cannot understand.’
Werewolves and wheelchairs.
Riven nodded.
‘The Warbutt was my father's friend.
He saved him from a mob.
He could not save my mother.’
There was no inflection in Murtach's voice.
It had gone flat as flint.
‘As time went on, Guillamon became a trusted adviser, and eventually what you see now.
But to do that he had to forswear his…abilities.
He has hardly used them since.
perhaps he has lost them by now.
It is of no matter.
These days we can joke about it, ask him to turn people into toads.
Myself — I do not forget.
An entire society was uprooted and destroyed, vanishing into the high mountains never to return.
And why?
Because people were afraid of differences.
My father has told me.
There were witches who healed children and cattle, wizards who worked great things for lords.
They were all swept away.
And the land was made the poorer for it.
The weaker.’
He smiled.
‘Mayhap if we had a few more wizards among us we would not now be in the straits we are in.’
Then the smile left him.
‘But there are those who blame the present plight of Minginish on the misdeeds of the past.
They believe that the wizards and warlocks are still up there, in the mountains, working this evil on the land in revenge.
People like Bragad believe this.
They would be content to see another purge of the suspects, such as myself.
It is one reason why you are here now, my friend.
To keep Bragad from seeing another wizard in you.
Such things would give him the freedom of action he craves.
There would be pyres up and down the Dales and himself lighting them, redeeming the people.
And they would believe him.
In times like these they are frightened enough to believe anything.’
He seemed to sniff the air.
‘The year turns already.
It winds down into winter, and yet by rights it should be barely midsummer.
There is indeed magic walking the earth.
Perhaps it is in you.
Perhaps it is in the dark girl who looks like your dead wife.
I do not know.
I think you carry our ruin in your pocket, Riven, but I cannot say how.
And Minginish itself — it has a hand in it also, I believe.
Your books do not tell the whole story.
One man never can.’
‘Where did the magic come from?’
Riven asked.
‘You know the tale — you wrote it yourself.
From the Dwarves, the Deep Ones of the Greshorns, the oldest folk of the earth.
They gave the magic to a cripple named Birkinlig, and he took it to the lower land and in turn bestowed it upon his friends, his household.
People came from far and near to see the wonders they wrought, and eventually, like the Myrcans, some of them accepted service  with the lords of Minginish.
Others went their own way, delving farther into the secrets that had been revealed to them, living in the deep woods of the high crags, visited by petitioners who sought aid.
And so they scattered over Minginish, becoming the Hidden Folk.
And now they are gone.’
‘Why a wolf?’
Riven asked him.
‘I can be anything up to a bear if you like.
Or anyone.
I found Fife and Drum as cubs, the dog-wolf slain by hunters, the she-wolf dying.
And so I became a she-wolf myself, and rescued them and suckled them.
And they became my children.
Does that shock you, Michael Riven?’
‘A little.’
Murtach chuckled.
‘It is not in your book, at any rate.
In it I am an unreliable type, with too much of the wolf within me — is that not so?’
‘The stories are not always exact pictures.
You know that.’
‘Yes, but it is interesting all the same.
And now we find that the people who are troubling the Dales most at the moment are out of your own world — Bragad and Jinneth.
Is there anyone else we should know about?’
Riven shook his head wearily, though he thought there might be.
Then he rejoined Ratagan down the column.
Talking to Murtach was like fighting a duel at times.
Jenny is out there now, in those jagged hills to where the magicians and witches of the world were banished.
He was beginning to see a glimmer of sense about this world.
They began to meet people in their travelling, and actually came upon a gravelled road that some lord of Ralarth had laid down decades or centuries ago, the wagon ruts deep in it.
The Hearthwares and Myrcans were greeted with friendliness and something like relief by the people they came upon — merchants in covered carts, farmers with flocks and herds, women bent under loads of firewood or water, children trailing behind them and eyeing the armoured figures on the big horses in wonder.
Fife and Drum received a few wide-eyed stares, but for the most part the people seemed to recognise them and their owner.
Murtach was greeted by name more than once, and one of the Hearthwares bent to receive a spray of honeysuckle from a dark-eyed girl who ogled him with adoration, to the amusement of his comrades.
At each village they came to Murtach halted the company and  paused to talk to the headman.
Riven could not hear their speech, but there were always shakings of heads and grim looks.
Some villages had wolf skins pinned to their doors, freshly flayed, and one they came to had the head of a Rime Giant set on a stake outside the headman's house.
The eyes had sunken in and the skull was showing through the thinning hair of the pate.
A crow perched on it while they watched, and poked hopefully at the sockets.
They moved on quickly, for they would have to retrace part of their way to make Ivrigar before nightfall.
Murtach had learned of a great wolf pack that seemed to roam west of the Skriaig and had been seen by a few desperate hunters seeking deer beyond Ralarth's borders.
It was as great as an army, they said, and Rime Giants walked with it like shepherds.
It was heading east.
And there were grypesh also — the rat-boars who haunted the forests at night and stole into the streets when the moon was dark.
They had carried off children.
And where had the Hearthwares been then?
And where had been Lionan's fighting men, the retainers who were bound to protect Suardal as the Hearthwares were?
No one had seen them for days.
And the gates of Rim-Suardal were closed.
They rode on.
One village had slain three men from the north who had tried to steal food, and they hung like scarecrows on a crude gibbet.
Murtach ordered them cut down, white with anger.
Hearthwares were the law in the land.
He told those responsible their hamlet would burn if it happened again.
They listened to him in stony silence — a dozen half-starved men with their womenfolk clustered behind them, infants whimpering at their skirts.
The column gave them what food they had left, and rode on.
The farther west they went, the worse it became.
They passed two prosperous-looking farmsteads that had been abandoned completely.
One of them had the carcasses of wolves and grypesh, leathery and stinking, littering its yard.
The mood of the party grew sombre.
Even Ratagan seemed to have forgotten how to smile, and the sternness of the Myrcans deepened.
They turned south at last and began heading towards Ratagan's home as their shadows lengthened and the second day of the patrol drew to a close.
None of them had any particular wish to be abroad after dark.
It began to rain, a steady stream that blew in from the east and beat against the stony flanks of the western hills.
The Hearthwares shifted uncomfortably as the water ran down inside  their armour, and fumbled oilskin cloaks from their saddle bows.
The Myrcans let it run down their faces unheeded.
Then Tagan, the tracker, stopped and stood in his stirrups, his head up and his eyes narrowed.
Murtach joined him.
The two wolves stood by his horse with their ears pricked, and suddenly they began growling deep in their throats.
Tagan pointed into the darkening hills, and Riven followed his finger.
There was movement there amid the tumbled rocks that the dusk was making into a maze of shadow.
A thin sound beside him, and Ratagan had unsheathed his axe from its case at his pommel.
The rain dripped from it.
It ran down his forehead and into the deep-set eyes below, trickling into his beard.
‘I believe we have company, my friend,’ he said softly.
Down the line, swords hissed out of oiled scabbards.
A mule began to bray in alarm and a Myrcan struck it at once with his staff until it fell silent, blood oozing from its nose.
‘Grypesh!’
Murtach exclaimed quietly.
They were moving in a dark tide along the contours of the hills.
Riven could not make out individual animals, only the shape of the pack.
‘How many?’ he asked.
‘Three, four score,’ Isay said from behind him.
There was a dreadful eagerness in his voice.
Riven tried to dredge up images of their foes from his books, but the reality of the rain, the darkness, and the approaching pack left him no time to think.
Murtach spun his horse around like a centaur.
‘There are too many,’ he said.
‘We must ride — ride for Ivrigar.
Luib, free the mules.
Leave them.
Tagan, lead on!’
And they sped forward with the squeals of the pack to their right as they were sighted, the clods and stones scattering from their horses' hoofs, into a full, tearing gallop in the twilight.
The rain beat at their eyes and the lurch of the uneven ground roller-coasted beneath them, jostling them in their saddles despite the grip of their tired knees.
Riven felt a thrill of fear in his stomach, like ice poured liquid into the bottom of his lungs; and then it was all he could do to steer his terrified horse in Murtach's wake, and stay aboard as it swerved past rocks and bushes, and leapt hollows with the thunder of the other horses like a storm in his ears, and the rain a freezing hail in his face that blinded him.
Behind they heard the death screams of the abandoned mules, and their steeds accelerated even more whilst the grey ghosts of Murtach's wolves darted beside them at an impossible speed.
They clattered downhill as though they were chasing an enemy.
But the enemy was behind them.
They could hear the squealing roars of their pursuers over the tumult of their mounts' hoofs.
The horses were terrified, the foam flying from their muzzles and their eyes circled with white.
But they were nearly spent also.
Ahead Murtach shouted and slowed.
In a wide bowl there was the night glimmer of a stream which was churned to flashing silver as they thrashed through it, the spray soaking them to their thighs.
And beyond it there was the great black bulk of a building rearing up against the night sky with lights flickering yellow and bright in its blankness.
They milled together and dismounted, the two Myrcans immediately running to the rear to intercept the pursuit.
Riven saw something like a black tide sweep out of the stream, and then there was the green glow of eyes everywhere in the chaotic darkness, and the Myrcan staves were whistling and cracking down to break bones and shatter skulls.
The air filled with a crescendo of screams in which the horses joined.
Riven hung on to his mount's bridle grimly whilst it bucked and reared in a desperate effort to get away.
Warm slobber hit him in the face.
He heard Murtach shouting, someone banging on timber frantically.
Armoured figures drew their swords and shouted incoherently, joining the fight to the rear.
He saw Ratagan's axe flash like a star and bury itself in a hairy snout, splintering black blood.
Grypesh.
They were like something out of a nightmare.
They had the heads of rats; rats five feet long.
But from the sides of their mouths projected the glistening tusks of boars, and they were crowned with great, bristling manes of stiff hair that ran down to the base of their spines.
Their feet were clawed, but the legs were squat and powerful, the bodies ending in a hairless snake of tail.
They squealed and roared alternately.
Riven saw a Hearthware go down as one charged and sent him flying.
He was immediately engulfed by three of its fellows.
His iron-clad limbs flailed in a scrum of fur and claws and wet teeth.
But then Luib had stepped in, braining the beasts left, right and centre, hauling the stricken man back.
There was a rumble, and then torchlight spilled out over them as the gates of Ivrigar were opened.
They laboured inside, trailing their horses by the reins, half of them fighting a ferocious rearguard  battle whilst the grypesh massed within the gate and strove to win through to the courtyard beyond.
The rain grew heavier, slicking the ground.
Riven drew his sword.
The horses were free in the courtyard now, cantering about in terror whilst Ivrigar's people tried to control them.
Others were fighting to shut the gate, pushing against the sheer bodyweight of the beasts in the gateway.
They're trying to get to me.
The thought came to him in an instant as he stood, hesitating over whether to join the fight.
The grypesh were clawing over their own dead to get through the gate whilst swords and staves and Ratagan's axe took a fearful toll.
But why?
And then Ratagan went down with a grypesh at his throat, and Riven forgot about hesitating.
He waded in with his sword swinging, and felt the jar down his arm as it almost decapitated an animal.
He swung again and again, and felt the slow, red pain in his shoulder and ribs grow with each swing.
The world flickered in his sight.
He helped Ratagan away, the big man leaning on him for support and cursing his lameness.
And then it was over.
The gates boomed shut, and the last grypesh in the yard was slain.
The rain covered Riven's face, trickling off the armoured Hearthwares in streams.
They were gasping like sprinters.
Outside they could hear the rest of the pack throwing themselves against the timber of the gate and the outer wall.
There was desperation and hate in their squeals.
Riven felt sick.
‘Well met, my friend,’ Ratagan croaked.
‘We are for ever saving each other 's neck, you and I.’ He halted, striving to get his breath.
‘A fine tradition.
Long may it — may it continue.’
And his grin was a flash of teeth in the torchlight and the flame-kindled rain.
‘Ratagan.
My lord.’
A woman's voice in the crowd of warriors and attendants, and a slight figure appeared, hooded against the rain, the Ivrigar people making way for her.
She threw the hood back, revealing gold hair that shone in the rain.
‘Come inside.
You are hurt, and I must welcome you back to your home.’
Ratagan's grin faded.
There was no light in the room save that of the fire.
It was a large fire, the mantle above it the height of Riven's shoulders, and it  was as long as a bed.
The flames licked up round thigh-thick logs and made the iron firedogs into burning icons.
The fire filled the room with a tawny, saffron light and poured pools of impenetrable shadow in the far corners.
Its light revealed a high-ceilinged room barred with black rafters, a flagged floor, and a long, heavy table set with unlit candles and piled with clothing and weapons of one sort or another.
Before the fire Ratagan and Riven sat on two high-backed wooden settles.
The big man had a full flagon tilting in his fist and a tense cast to his face.
They had both changed into dry clothes.
Ratagan cocked his head to listen to the race of the wind outside that creaked the rafters.
A door opened, and Isay entered with a tray of platters of food.
The woman followed him.
There was a scrape as she brought a taper forth from a tin box and leaned towards the fire to light it.
Ratagan took it from her wordlessly and held it in the flames till it had caught.
She smiled at him, but he buried his nose in his beer.
The candles were lit and the room brightened, suddenly becoming bare as the high walls leapt into view.
‘What news?’
Ratagan asked the firedogs.
‘The beasts have drawn off,’ the woman said.
She had a high voice, and there was something of a shake in it.
‘Murtach and the others are going round some of the outlying tenants now, to ensure they came to no harm.’
‘It was a fine fight,’ Isay said, and his eyes were shining in the candlelight.
Ratagan grunted.
‘Would have been finer still had the invalids but been allowed to stay in it.
I'll have words with Murtach when he returns.’
‘It was a running fight at the last,’ Isay said.
‘Your leg — and the Teller's weakness — would not have let you stay with it.’
‘The Myrcan speaks truly, Ratagan,’ the woman said.
She set a hand on one huge shoulder.
‘Must you always be straining at the leash to bloody your blade?’
She was small, slim, with the pale-gold hair plaited behind her head, and steady blue eyes.
Aelin.
Ratagan's wife.
‘It is one of the few things in which I excel,’ Ratagan said.
‘Another is drinking.’
He emptied his flagon and after a minute's hesitation she took it over to the table to refill it.
Riven shifted uneasily.
Aelin had brought them inside and the battle had restarted, Murtach attacking the grypesh still outside.
But now it was over, and Isay had rejoined them along with a trio of wounded Hearthwares who were being tended in the hall below with their armour stripped off beside them.
And Murtach was out with the others, harrying the defeated pack on foot and doing the rounds of the surrounding farms.
And since then Ratagan had hardly said a civil word to his wife, though she looked at him almost imploringly at times, and Riven had seen him gaze at her when her head was turned, brow creased in pain.
It was a side of Ratagan that he had never guessed at.
Riven was not sure he wanted to know the reason.
He had had enough experience of strangers probing his own hurts without wanting to pry into those of others.
Aelin brought them food on wooden platters.
It was good wholesome fare: rye bread and cheese, apples and meat.
But the apples were wrinkled from long storage, and the meat had been salted to preserve it.
‘How are things?’
Ratagan asked her quietly, slicing into his cheese.
She joined him on the settle.
‘Fair enough, for the times.
We have had losses, but not so many as some.
The patrols pass here as regularly as always.
We have had a few of Lionan's men here once or twice, some wounded.
It is worse in the north, they say.
Something will have to be done.’
She flicked a quick look at Riven, taking in his scarred forehead and the Teller badge on his breast, its thread shining in the firelight.
‘There are rumours of people in the mountains…’
‘What people?’
Ratagan asked sharply.
‘The Hidden folk.
Some say it is they who are bringing about these times that are upon us.
Lionan's men said that the Dales needed to be purged and united.
They said there was evil walking the hills in many guises — that there are witches in the high places, and warlocks who seek the fellowship of men.’
Again, she looked at Riven.
Abruptly, Ratagan threw the chunk of bread he had been gnawing into the fire.
‘Horseshit!’
He hobbled upright and put his back to it.
‘These are Lionan's people who say this, and Lionan consorts with Bragad now.
These tales are to suit the aims of Garrafad and Carnach.
Times are bad enough without men running up old horror tales of the Hidden Folk in the mountains.’
‘Then what is doing it?’ she asked, her face tilted up to him and her throat a fine line in the firelight.
‘I…’ he faltered.
‘I don't know.
No one does.
Not even Guillamon.’
‘He of all people should know, being what he is.
There was something of a sneer in her voice.
Ratagan's brow contracted.
‘I did not come here to wrangle with you.’
‘Why did you come here then — when I have not seen your face this six months?’
‘Moon and stars, woman!
Do you think I want to be here?’
And then he shut his eyes.
She stood up, and spun away.
‘Aelin — no.
Wait!’
But she had left the room on silent feet, and the door had closed without a sound behind her.
I say set to drying the weapons on the table, though they were already dry.
Riven chewed bread which had turned to sand in his mouth.
The big man sat down again.
‘I did not make a great job of that, did I?’ he asked.
Riven handed him his flagon.
‘Nope,’ he replied.
‘Always Bicker and Murtach try to get me out here, and always it is the same.’
Ratagan shook his head and smiled, but there was an odd brightness about the eyes.
He knuckled them quickly, and addressed the beer again.
Behind them Isay left bearing an armful of equipment and banged the door behind him.
‘Ratagan —’ Riven began.
‘I got her with child,’ Ratagan said.
‘When she was nothing but a child herself.
The child died, and she never had another.
All innocence and sweetness it was, when she became my lady.
She is lovely still.
But now there is that between us.
And the fighting.
And the drinking.
There is no help for it.’
He gulped at the beer again.
‘A running fight indeed!
I'll tan Murtach's hide when he creeps back.’
He filled Riven's flagon for him.
‘I'll tell you a tale,’ he said.
‘And a fine, funny one it is too, if you've the patience to take it in…’
The wind howled outside, battering the heights of the western mountains and bringing winter in its wake.
Chapter Eleven
They did not linger in Ivrigar.
Murtach and most of the company came in late that night, and by early the following afternoon they were preparing to go on their way again.
Over thirty grypesh had been slain and the rest of the pack had dispersed in the western hills.
Little damage had been done to the surrounding farms since the beasts had concentrated their efforts on following the patrol and striving to enter Ivrigar.
Riven, remembering the Rime Giant's attempt on his life in Ralarth Rorim, could not help but wonder how many more times he was to be the focus of a battle.
Aelin wished them goodbye, members of her household helping the injured Hearthwares to mount their steeds.
She kissed her husband dutifully, and for a moment Riven saw her and Ratagan exchange a look which had in it something of despair.
Then they were formal again, and the company was trooping out of the courtyard and into the cold breeze that billowed down from the distant mountains, their faces set towards the east.
They rode through the stink of pyres where local men were burning the bodies of the beasts killed the night before, and then the land dipped and they were back in the Dales proper with the hills behind them and some of the chill wind cut off.
Riven pulled his cloak up about his neck, his bones aching and stiff and his legs still complaining about the horse between them.
But he would have a drink and a warm bed awaiting him when he got rid of it.
And Madra there, also, he suddenly remembered, and groaned aloud as he thought of the complications ahead.
This world was more complex than his stories had ever made it.
Because it is real.
It is not a story.
It never was.
Then why Jenny, and Hugh?
Why the spillover from his own life?
He thought of his books.
If anyone knew the answers in this country, it was the Dwarves.
But how to get hold of them?
There were none in Ralarth, none in the south.
The only place they  lived was in the northern mountains, the Greshorns.
He shivered, remembering a dream where he had been riding north into the mountains with a woman who was not his wife.
Time to move on, maybe, to search for some answers before the whole thing comes down around my ears.
‘Riders ahead,’ Tagan, the black-bearded scout, said up front.
‘Half a dozen.
‘Wares, I think.’
‘Not Ralarth's ‘Wares, though,’ Murtach said, his blue eyes narrowed against the wind that watered them.
They rode on at an easy trot, eating up the ground, until finally Murtach said in disgust: ‘Bragad's lady — out for a ride, it seems, with five of her husband's escort for company.’
And he spat over his mount's shoulder.
The small group of riders spied them and altered their course to meet the patrol.
In minutes they stood facing each other across a few feet of upland grass, the fresher horses of Jinneth's escort stamping impatiently.
She was dressed in black, as always, making Riven wonder sourly if she were mourning someone, but there was a bright smile on her face as she took in the battered condition of Murtach's patrol; the bandaged Hearthwares, the clawed mounts and the weary eyes of them all.
‘My lords Murtach and Ratagan,’ she said gaily.
‘You have been sorely missed from the council chamber.
My husband was eager to meet the axe man and the shape-shifter of Ralarth once more.’
Murtach scowled, but said nothing.
‘Surely your errand was urgent to take you away from such an important gathering in your own Rorim, and you have the foreign Teller with you also, I see.’
Her gaze flicked over Riven cursorily, and he stiffened as though he had been struck.
‘But here!
I notice you have been fighting, so maybe your errand was not so slight.
I trust you were the victors of whatever engagement you became embroiled in?’
‘We were,’ Murtach said succinctly.
A low growl from Fife was silenced by his glare.
‘It might be better though, my lady, if you were not to wander the open Dale with such a small escort.
There are evil beasts abroad in great numbers, and even a well-armed group such as ours has its difficulties.’
‘My husband's Hearthwares are equal to any task he sets them,’ she replied, her smile becoming frosty, like brittle icing on an old cake.
There was a low derisive murmur from the Ralarth ‘Wares at  this.
Bragad's men in their red sashes set hands on sword hilts.
Jinneth ignored them.
‘And we will be moving on now, if you don't mind.
The day wanes, and if your words are to be believed then I had best be back in the security of your Rorim before nightfall.’
She gathered up her reins, but Murtach's voice stopped her.
‘What of the council — is it yet over?’
She checked, irritated.
‘No.
It continues, and will for another day or so at least.
Your Warbutt and his son prove intractable, though their own lords disagree with them.’
Murtach cocked a brow.
‘Indeed?
But then there are strange bedfellows about in these times, are there not?’
She whitened, and Riven saw the knuckles bunch on her riding whip.
But then she jerked her horse around savagely, and wheeled off with her escort in pursuit.
The Ralarth ‘Wares grinned at her receding figure, but Murtach was sombre.
‘The council goes on too long,’ he said.
‘There is something here that smells bad.’
And he led them in a weary canter down to the Rorim.
They entered the Circle by the South Gate, the Hearthware lieutenant Dunan greeting them as they arrived, and walked the tired horses with their injured riders up alongside the Rorim's stream to the Inner Circle, and the Manse with its blue pennants snapping in the brisk wind.
There were many people about working at the common land between the walls, and more than a few seated outside the few inns they passed.
Everyone acknowledged the Ralarth ‘Wares and Myrcans with nods or bows, and someone, recognising Ratagan, swung him a tankard of beer.
He drained it at a draught and threw it back, the dark mood that had kept him silent from Ivrigar falling away.
They rode through the market with its gaudy awnings and crammed stalls, its pens of bawling sheep.
Many of the pens were empty, however, and the shepherds who lounged on the rails there had a hopeless look.
The big horses shouldered passers-by aside, for which Murtach courteously apologised, and the wounded ‘Wares, bloodstained and tired, drew stares from everywhere.
There were concerned looks from burly matrons, and longing admiration from boys.
They caught a brief glimpse of the struggling figures on the practice grounds, the clash of their weapons on the wind.
Then  they entered the barbican of the Rorim itself, and clattered on the cobbles of the Inner Court where Riven had battled Giants.
They came to a halt before the doors of the Manse and grooms ran out to take their horses, unarmoured Hearthwares helping their comrades from the saddle.
Bicker was there, looking as tired as if he and not they had been riding and fighting in the past three days.
And Madra was with him, the worry clear on her face a hundred feet away.
Her eyes ran over the company for a moment, and then she turned away to go inside again.
Riven and Ratagan exchanged a look, and Riven realised that the big man knew everything.
Ratagan thumped his shoulder lightly, a crooked smile playing in his beard.
‘Women, eh?’
And they shared a laugh, dismounting together in the clatter of the crowded court.
Later, as night crept over the Rorim, they met in Riven's room and shared a few pitchers of ale.
Guillamon and Bicker were there as well as Ratagan and Murtach, and Isay took up his usual post at the door.
Fife and Drum sprawled contentedly on the floor.
There was no sign of Madra, Riven noticed with a pang, and the beer was brought up to them by a serving maid he did not know.
Well done, Riven; another good deed done.
They sat savouring the malty brew for a while with the darkness silent outside the windows.
Both Bicker and Guillamon were pre-occupied and frowning, and Ratagan's attempts at jokes fell flat.
‘How is Aelin?’
Guillamon asked hopefully at last.
Murtach shot his father a warning glance, but the big man merely shrugged, his deep eyes becoming shrouded by the overhanging brows.
‘Much as she was before.
And so am 1.
There is no profit to be made there, Guillamon, not any more.
I wish my friends would take that to heart.
And my mother, also.’
He sipped at his beer.
A savage look flitted across his face and was gone.
Guillamon grimaced.
‘Fair enough.’
They fell silent again.
Murtach had already told Bicker of the fight at Ivrigar, and a strong patrol was being sent out in the morning under Ord.
There were reports of other attacks to the north and west, but still no word had come in of Lionan or Mullach, and Murtach's patrol had not sighted them.
They and their forces seemed to have vanished from Ralarth.
‘But these talks, Bicker,’ Murtach was saying.
‘Why do they  continue so long?
Why does Bragad not give in?
What does he hope to gain?’
The dark man looked harassed.
‘He has the support of three of Ralarth's lords — a fair foothold, I would say.
Theoretically they should follow the lead of the Warbutt if he commands them; they are his vassals.
But you know, Murtach, that in the past the Warbutt has waived a point when there is a majority of the lords against it.’
‘Not with this one, he won't,’ Ratagan snorted.
‘I know, but the precedent is there.’
‘Well,’ the big man declared, ‘I see two lords sitting here who will not change their minds.’
‘The axe man and the shape-shifter,’ Murtach murmured.
He appeared uneasy.
‘Bragad wants the pair of you present at the council.
It is one of the reasons he has been delaying us these three days, I think,’ Guillamon put in.
‘He thinks he can change our minds?’
Ratagan asked derisively.
‘I don't know.
He wants to canvass every one of Ralarth's lords.’
‘He is killing time,’ Bicker grated, ‘and I would like to know why.’
No one answered him.
Ratagan refilled their flagons from the pitcher on the table.
‘One more day,’ Guillamon said.
‘Two, perhaps.
Then we'll give him another feast and send him on his way.’
‘And maybe have a word or two with the more bothersome of our lords,’ Murtach said darkly.
‘I'm thinking it's no bad thing that we've Druim training a militia and extra Hearthwares for us.
A small show of strength might be called for to teach men like Marsco who is overlord in Ralarth.’
Guillamon nodded.
‘The very thing he feared he may well have brought upon himself anyway.
We cannot have the lord of a place such as Ringill intriguing with the likes of Bragad.’
‘Or Bragad's lady,’ Bicker added, and he darted a look of apology at Riven.
Riven said nothing.
He was becoming used to the idea that Jinneth was not Jenny, that Bragad was not Hugh.
But it reminded him of what he wanted to say.
‘I've been here in Ralarth a fair while now,’ he began, and the others stared at him.
‘There are things and people here who were in my books — whom I created, in a manner of speaking.
There are people here from my own world who have somehow been translated into Minginish.
And there are people, places, history in  this country I'd never even guessed at, though I sometimes feel I know them anyway.’
He met their eyes steadily.
Fife and Drum lifted their heads off their paws and seemed to sniff the air.
‘It is here, in Ralarth, that the thing begins — here that the main characters come from, just as they did in the book.
But it doesn't end here, and the answers will not be found here in the Dales.
I'm sure of that now.
By staying here I'm just the target for further attacks, with the Rorim between me and what's trying to.kill me.
But the story has to move on.’
‘The third book,’ Bicker said quietly.
‘The last one.’
‘You know how the story goes,’ Riven said.
‘A trio of heroes set out in winter to save the land in a quest to the north.
‘To find the Dwarves of the Greshorns,’ Murtach said.
‘And Sgurr Dearg, the Staer, is in the middle of those mountains,’ Riven told them.
‘That's where it began.
That's where it will end.
I'm sure of it.’
‘Had you planned the third book?’
Bicker asked, his eyes like two black holes in his sharp face.
‘Part of the way, yes.
But I couldn't get to grips with it.
I couldn't write it.’
He remembered sitting at his desk in the bothy before Bicker arrived, trying to tear the story out of himself and filling pages with blizzards and killing.
He wondered if that was what was before them, but did not say anything.
Best not to know.
‘The story has to be finished, and I must be the one to finish it.’
The words were like stones in his mouth.
He felt he had said them before, and thought he could sense death sniffing at his shoulder, as he had that day on the Red Mountain.
But that did not matter now.
There were more important things.
‘I must leave Ralarth.’
He remembered the dream where he had been riding north with Jinneth into the mountains, and he was sure that something of that figure had been Jenny.
Jenny telling him what to do, perhaps.
‘It is a long way to the Greshorns,’ Guillamon said.
He seemed suddenly old.
‘And through a land that is every day stepping one pace closer to anarchy.
Are you sure this is where you must go?’
‘I am,’ Riven said.
He knew what he was asking these people to do and he did not like it, but there was no other way.
‘A curious time you have picked to tell us of this, Michael Riven,’ Murtach said, smiling wryly.
‘You will turn Bicker grey before you are done.’
‘The northern mountains,’ Bicker said, ignoring Murtach's comment, ‘are almost a thousand miles away.
At least six weeks’ travel.
And as Guillamon said, these are arduous times…’
He shook his head, doubt written all over his face.
‘I'll go alone if I have to,’ Riven snapped with sudden irritation.
‘I don't like this any more than you do.’
‘But you are sure?’
He clenched back his own fears and doubts.
‘Yes.
It has to be done.’
Bicker sighed, and threw back half the beer in his mug.
‘Strange times,’ he said, wiping his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘Indeed,’ Guillamon agreed.
‘Horses you will need, and an escort.
Hearthwares we can ill afford.
Supplies.
A guide.’
‘I know the Greshorns, the path to the Red Mountain,’ Bicker said heavily.
‘I, for one, must go.’
‘Things here are not so settled that you can all of a sudden disappear,’ Guillamon said.
The dark man nodded.
‘First things first.
We must wait until this thing with Bragad is resolved.
The Rorim must be secure.’
‘What will the Warbutt say?’
Ratagan asked.
Bicker cursed.
‘His son on his wanderings again.
I will not be popular, but there is no help for it.’
‘I always wanted to see what the Greshorns looked like,’ Ratagan said.
‘They are not so appealing that I relish the idea of seeing them again,’ Murtach retorted.
‘Three lords — two of them our most able captains — leaving us on such a quest.’
Guillamon was grim.
‘I don't like this.
I do not know if you can all go.’
‘Strange times,’ Bicker repeated.
‘But I agree with the Teller.
Nothing is being accomplished by his remaining here.
Half the Dale believes him to be some sort of wizard out of the western mountains, and folk such as Bragad will use the rumours.
The clearances of thirty years ago are not forgotten.
The Hidden Folk are still feared.
If it is not those of Garrafad and Carnach we will soon have to face, it may be our own people.
They are afraid.’
‘We're all afraid,’ Ratagan growled.
‘Doesn't mean we have to start the burning and the exiling again.’
‘No, but Bragad will use fear to help himself.
He has our own lords turned to his way of thinking already.’
‘Then we must turn them back,’ Murtach said sharply, his blue  eyes glinting.
‘A purge of our own, perhaps.
There used to be such a thing as loyalty in this Dale.’
‘Maybe,’ Bicker mused.
‘Maybe.’
He looked at Riven.
‘All right.
We will do it.
We will aid you in your quest.’
He smiled slightly, for a second becoming entirely the quicksilver character of Riven's stories.
‘It is, after all, what we brought you here for — to resolve our problems for us.’
And my own, also.
‘I suppose I had better go, to keep an eye on you,’ Ratagan said absently, but he was grinning.
Murtach did not speak.
His face was closed.
‘I also,’ a voice said, and they looked up, surprised, to see Isay by the door, his beer gripped in one knotted fist.
‘I am the Teller's bodyguard.
I must go.’
‘So you are set on it, then,’ Guillamon said heavily.
‘I suppose you are right.
We are not accomplishing anything keeping the Teller here, except to fuel more rumours.’
He paused.
‘Who else do you suppose should go?’
‘Tagan is our best tracker,’ Ratagan said, ‘and he has been to the Greshorns.’
‘Luib will go,’ Isay informed them.
‘He becomes old, and would be glad for the chance to see the hills around Merkadale again before he dies.’
‘All right.’
Guillamon became brisk.
‘Later we will organise this.
It is enough to know for the moment that you are going…
But do you know what you will do when you get there?’
‘Find the Dwarves,’ Riven answered him.
‘They say that Birkinlig, the Father of Sorcerers, dwells still in the high mountains, perhaps with the Dwarves.’
‘They say also that the Greshorns are the end of the world,’ Murtach said shortly.
His father smiled at this.
‘My son, for someone with your heritage you are over-fond of scepticism,’ which made Ratagan chuckle.
‘I believe in magic,’ Riven said, meeting Murtach's eyes.
‘Maybe that's what I'm looking for.’
‘You may not have to look far,’ Murtach said, obscurely.
Guillamon stood up.
‘Indeed.
But it is suppertime soon, and this old man needs his board, magic or no magic.’
He turned to go, but stopped.
‘Say no word of this to the household at present.
We do not want the Rorim humming like a top with news like this, and Bragad here.’
Then he left, nodding to Isay as he went.
Ratagan sat back in his chair till it creaked, and blew air out through pursed lips.
‘Such tidings!
My head spins.
We live back in the time of fairy tales.
A quest awaits us, no less, and who can say what it will bring?’
‘Or how it will end,’ said Bicker, watching Riven as, he stared out at the darkness beyond the window.
The next morning saw a sky heavy with rain hanging over the hills.
Murtach and Ratagan had joined the council, and Riven was left largely to his own devices.
He sat and stared out at the drizzle-veiled Circle for a while, and then buckled on his sword and left his room.
The Rorim was almost subdued this morning, though from the upper storeys of the Manse he could see Hearthwares busy with horses and harnesses in the yard outside their barracks.
They were packing mule yokes also.
He wondered if these were preparations for the journey he had suggested last night.
The day's patrol had already left under Ord's leadership.
They would be in the hills above Ivrigar by now.
Peering farther, beyond the ramparts, he could see the two longhouses in the Circle where the ‘Wares of Bragad were billeted, but they held no sign of life.
Probably out riding with their lord's wife.
Bragad had brought quite a few men with him — a dozen or so though some, of course, were Mugeary's, if that made any difference.
Riven felt momentarily uneasy thinking about them, and remembered Bicker's question of the night before.
Was Bragad killing time here?
And where were Mullach and Lionan?
Wheels within wheels.
Not my business.
Or was it?
He felt responsible for having Bragad here.
He was, after all, a facsimile of someone who was from Riven's own world.
He wandered around for a while and ran into a few of the household busy with their duties.
Then, afraid of meeting Madra, he decided to go outside, to where the trainee Hearthwares were at work in the practice fields.
Isay followed him unquestioningly as always when he passed through the gates of the Rorim proper to the open space beyond.
A large square had been beaten into the dirt there, muddy with rain.
Jutting out of it were a series of tall posts, high as a man, and attacking them were a score of figures whilst thirty others looked on, wooden swords in their hands, and three Myrcans directed the whole group.
Riven watched in  fascination, for he had never seen the Myrcans more animated.
They jumped about in the mud, correcting a swing here, a stance there; demonstrating how to stab with the bodyweight behind the thrust, how to parry, how to club with the pommel.
Riven forgot why he had come, and stood in grudging admiration for their speed and sureness.
Their pupils were covered with red mud from slips and falls, but the teachers were unmarked except for ochre spatters that streaked their mailed tunics
When he finally stepped into the group and asked to join there were murmurs from the trainees at the blue sash he wore.
The leading Myrcan looked him up and down critically, then his gaze passed over Riven's shoulder to Isay.
He seemed to see something there, and nodded.
‘Remove your sword belt and take up a practice weapon.
Join the large group there, and do as they do.’
So it was that Riven found himself attacking a wooden post with a wooden sword that was slippery with mud, and being lectured by the unsmiling Myrcans.
It reminded him of Sandhurst, except that the instructors there had always bellowed their orders and called their charges by various unsanitary epithets.
The Myrcans were quiet, darting here and there to adjust and correct.
They never had to shout, and no one ever argued with them.
He trained on until dark, when it was just he, Isay and the three Myrcan instructors who were left on the practice field.
He realised dimly that if he had volunteered to go on training all night his teachers would not have objected.
They radiated a fierce interest in their work which was at odds with their taciturn manner.
And Riven was eager to learn.
Even so, by the time he finally put down his wooden weapon and rebuckled his sword belt, his recently healed collarbone was shouting at him and the older injuries over his body joined in.
He was stiff with mud and thick-headed with tiredness as he and Isay trooped back through the gatehouse to the Manse.
The first candles were being lit, and the stars were out.
The night was clear, and arched up from the hills with a new moon rising over their crests.
Usually he ate with the others in the hall in the evenings, but this night he asked Isay to see Colban and have a tray brought up, and some hot water.
He felt better than he had for a while, with hard work aching in his bones and the knowledge that he had decided what he must do at last.
Savour it, while you can.
The mirror showed that his face was smeared with mud, and it had stuck in his beard also.
He grinned tiredly at himself, and wondered where the young officer had gone.
Staring out at him were a pair of steady eyes that had lines of pain and care etched round them.
There was a frown line bitten deep between the brows, and the forehead was intaglioed with scars.
The mouth was harsh, downturned at one corner, though it lifted when he smiled.
Sir Michael, Knight of the Isle.
And now he has a quest.
He unbuckled his sword belt, then unlaced his jerkin and began to slip it over his head.
There was a knock on the door, and when he grunted muffled assent it opened and someone came in.
He managed to free his head and threw the jerkin to the floor, to see Madra there with a heavy tray at the table.
Half a dozen stupid hellos passed through his mind, leaving him with nothing to say.
She lit more candles without a word, and shut the tinderbox with a snap.
‘You should wash before the water gets cold.’
He stared at her for a minute, then stripped to the waist and started to scrub the clay off in the basin of steaming water.
He thought she would leave, but she did not.
As he blinked the drops out of his eyes she handed him a towel.
He realised, looking at her then, that the line of her jaw could be formidable, that there was stubbornness under those brows.
She seemed older.
He pressed the towel to his face until the lights started behind his eyelids, then pulled on a fresh shirt.
His boots were still caked with mud, but they could wait.
He sat down at the table and began eating without tasting the food.
‘You're going away up north, aren't you?’
He stopped chewing.
‘How do you know?’
‘Colban finds everything out, one way or another.
The kitchen is always full of talk.
There are Hearthwares preparing for the journey even now.’
‘It was supposed to be a secret.’
She sat down.
‘Keeping a secret in the Manse is like hiding a fire under straw.
You are travelling to the Greshorns.’
Riven said nothing.
‘Are you going back to your own world, to the Isle?’
He liked the steadiness of those eyes, the earnestness of the face; but they confused him.
‘I don't know.’
Her hand darted out to his across the table.
‘Take me with you.’
‘What?’
‘Let me go back with you.
Let me stay with you.’
He pulled away his hand with a jerk.
‘You're kidding!’
‘You're alone back there.
Ratagan told me, and Bicker says that the Isle of Mists is an empty place, full of mountains and deserted coasts.
I cook well.
I can work hard.
I am not afraid.
Please take me with you.
I —’
‘Shut up!’
He knew what she was about to say; something he had never thought to have heard said to him again.
The tears jumped into her eyes and she bent her head, hugging her arms to her breasts.
A hurt child.
But she terrified him, because he wanted her and he liked having that grave face near him, and she was willing to have him even with the ghosts crowding at his shoulder.
He stood up at the same time as she did, and caught her as she made for the door.
A brief struggle and she was still, her face set, but tears on her cheeks.
He wiped them away, held her in his arms and buried his face in her hair.
Bastard.
Her voice was muffled by his shoulder.
‘I thought you wanted me.
I thought —’ And she pressed harder into his embrace.
But she was seeking comfort, nothing else.
Then she raised her head and looked at him, hair caught in her mouth.
He could not keep her gaze.
She left him and went to the table.
‘You've hardly eaten anything.’
She laughed through her tears.
‘That is my fault, keeping you from your food.’
She took up the basin, spilling muddy water on the floor.
‘Colban will be wondering where I have got to.’
Then she left.
He unsheathed his sword and grimaced at the blue steel.
He swung it in a glittering arc, and it sliced through the table as though it were butter, carving its way through the heavy wood and jarring his arm, striking sparks off the stone floor.
Isay peered in.
‘I heard a noise.’
He saw the great slice that had been hacked out of the table.
Riven met his eyes with a wild glare.
‘Just practising,’ he said, and the door was closed again.
The next morning found him on the practice fields as soon as the sun was up, battering his post as though it were a mortal enemy.
The Myrcans looked on with what he could have sworn was approval.
Old Luib, the chief instructor, took his arms and adjusted the swing.
‘Put all your weight behind it, but move on the ball of your foot, ready to recover if the swing does not strike home.’
The white stripe on his face glistened in the early light.
Riven halted, panting, as the other trainees trotted over.
He nodded to them and asked Luib, partly because he was interested, partly because he needed to get his breath back: ‘How many of them will make Hearthwares?’
Luib shrugged fractionally.
He studied his charges as the other instructors put them through their paces.
‘Five; maybe six.’
Riven whistled softly.
‘What about the rest?’
‘They are to remain in the Circle under arms and defend the Rorim so that the Hearthwares will be freed for duties beyond the wall.’
‘And what about the Myrcans?
Where do you get your new recruits from?’
Luib met his eyes with a slight frown.
‘Myrcans are born.
They travel from their home Dale in the north, and take service with whoever needs them.’
Riven's interest quickened.
‘Whereabouts in the north?’
‘West of Drinan.’
There was a pause, Riven trying to remember Minginish's geography, but a few moments later Luib put him back to work.
With every crack of the wood he was seeing Madra's face, and the tears springing into it.
He would have stayed there until dark again, but Ratagan and Bicker came out to find him.
He realised they had been watching for some minutes before he noticed them.
Luib took the practice sword from him with a nod, and he joined them at the edge of the field.
There was a wind blowing, clearing the sky of cloud wrack, and a pale moon was already inching its way above the brows of the hills.
It would be another clear night.
‘If you are not careful someone will mistake you for a Hearthware,’ said Ratagan, handing him his sword belt.
Riven pulled it on.
‘It passes the time.’
He slapped the scabbard.
‘And, besides, if I am going to wear it I may as well be able to use it.’
‘You use it none so badly,’ the big man retorted.
They moved off, toward the walls of the Rorim.
Bicker seemed deep in thought and he splashed through puddles without seeing them.
‘What is it?’
Riven asked.
‘Oh, things.
Too many little things are happening at the one time.
There is something in the air.’
‘Is the council over yet?’
‘It finished this afternoon.
Bragad was affable enough at the end — said that all things came to pass in good time if they were meant to.
Even Marsco seemed resigned to the fact that the Rorims will not combine.’
‘But you are worried.’
Bicker nodded.
‘He gave in too easily, at the last; too graciously after the time and prestige he has wasted here.
And there is more.
The Lady Jinneth went out riding alone this afternoon, and she has not yet come back.
And her husband is not worried; he says she will return in her own time.’
‘That she will,’ Ratagan snorted.
Bicker shook his head.
‘Too many people are wandering the Dales — important people.
Lionan and Mullach, for instance.
No one has heard from them for days.
And both Rim-Suardal and Rim-Drynoch are well-nigh deserted — or so Ord says.
He went round there yesterday on his patrol.’
‘Bragad has the strength of two Rorims behind him now, plus maybe the men of three of your own lords,’ Riven said quietly.
‘Do you think he would attack Ralarth?’
Bicker was startled.
‘Attack Ralarth?
But he himself is inside the Rorim.
‘Ever heard of the Trojan horse, Bicker?’
‘Tell me.’
‘If Bragad wanted to take Ralarth Rorim, what better way to begin than to get some of his men inside beforehand?’
‘There are twelve of his ‘Wares billeted in the Circle,’ Ratagan rumbled thoughtfully.
‘Lionan and Mullach, and Jinneth, could be out there somewhere now, waiting for a signal to attack — or Jinneth could have brought the signal herself.
Or the men in the longhouses could be tasked with sending it.’
‘That is surmise,’ Bicker said sharply.
‘Better safe than sorry.’
The dark man fell silent.
They walked through the barbican of the Rorim into the cobbled courtyard beyond.
There was a smell of hay and horse urine from the stables and a pair of serving maids, wrapped against the cold, were winding water up from the well.
‘The household knows about the journey north,’ Riven said.
Bicker nodded, and sighed.
‘Young Hearthwares.
They tell their lady friends, and then all secrecy is lost.
Your reputation as a wizard is secured, my friend.
Why else would you be seeking to travel to the Greshorns in such times?’
He spat, and rubbed it into the cobbles with his boot.
The three stood silent a moment, receiving stares from the girls at the well and a pair of passing Hearthwares.
Bicker swore suddenly.
‘All right.
You have a suspicious mind, Michael Riven, but my own goes along with it.
I will try to set up a few…safeguards in case our fears are proved true.’
‘The captains will be at the feasting tonight,’ Ratagan pointed out.
‘If it is defenders we need, who will lead until we can join them?’
‘There's Dunan,’ Riven offered.
‘And Luib,’ Bicker added.
‘He can lead the trainees.
We will divide our people — some to the Rorim and the Circle, and some to the outer wall to give us advance warning.’
‘The Warbutt will have to be told,’ Ratagan said gently.
‘Aye,’ Bicker said.
‘My task, I believe.
He will take some convincing, but it will be done.’
He looked up at the clearing sky, darkening now into dusk.
‘This is Bragad's last night in the Rorim.
If we are right, then it will be tonight.
Whatever he has planned will be tonight.
Some night for a feast.’
‘I'm not going,’ Riven said.
He was thinking of Madra pouring beer for him at the last one.
‘An extra man on the ramparts is no bad thing,’ Bicker said absently.
He turned and stared at the Manse.
‘I must go, then.
I have things to do…’
And he walked off slowly with none of his usual sprightliness.
Ratagan followed him with his eyes.
‘This is not Bicker's province,’ he said.
‘More Murtach's.
Bicker was never one to be tied down with intrigue and politics.’
‘Hence his wanderings in the mountains,’ Riven noted.
‘Aye.’
Ratagan hesitated.
‘You really believe Bragad is going to try and take our Rorim?’
‘Yes.’
Ratagan thought.
‘That would mean killing.
‘Wares against ‘Wares.
Perhaps even —’ He stopped.
‘No, he'd never get Myrcan to fight Myrcan.’
He frowned.
‘Is this sort of thing common in your world?’
‘Where I come from there is always a war going on somewhere  or other.
That is why I was able to be a soldier; we keep armies at the ready all the time.’
Ratagan shook his head.
‘Sounds like somewhere the Myrcans would love.’
Riven stared up at the Manse with its flapping pennants.
‘No,’ he said.
‘I don't think they would.
I think they would hate it.’
The big man gripped his shoulder.
‘I had best put in an appearance at the feast.
I am expected to be present where there is beer flowing.’
He bit his bottom lip for a moment.
‘Riven?’
‘What?’
‘Madra is…young.
I know I am not such a blameless one as should be saying it, but try and find it in your heart to be good to her, for she is lovely.’
Then he turned away.
Jinneth had still not returned when the feast began.
Riven walked the ramparts, watching the Dale under the young moon.
He heard the sounds of merriment coming from the Manse, and he knew that Madra would be in there, pouring wine for Bragad and suffering the leers of drunk men.
And he watched the high hills to the west, and knew that out there, also, there were other women whose faces he knew.
He continued his pacing, caught in contradictions.
Better to turn over in his mind the arrangements he and Bicker had organised, to search for loose ends, gaps in the plan.
Steps behind him; light, not like those of the Hearthware sentries.
They stopped at his side.
He could faintly smell her sweat, and also the lavender of the garland she wore in her hair.
She tugged it off and played with it in her hands as she watched the Dale with him, leaning on the stone of the wall.
You don't give up, do you?
He smiled weakly.
There was torchlight in the longhouse where Bragad's men were billeted.
They were making merry also.
He wondered if the whole Rorim were drunk tonight.
At least the Myrcans would be sober.
A wind stirred his hair, fanned Madra's out behind her.
It looked black in the starlight.
‘What is it you do in your world?’ she asked him.
The question caught him by surprise.
He realised that there were things he had done; but now he did nothing.
‘I was once a soldier, and then a storyteller.’
‘You loved someone.’
He grimaced.
‘She died.’
‘But you still love her.’
‘Yes.’
She squeezed his hand, and he looked at her.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘I didn't know before.’
‘Did Ratagan tell you?’
‘Yes.’
It was cold in the clear night, with the wind running through the Dale.
Her face seemed ageless in the dim light, and she was stifling shivers.
He brought her inside his cloak, and wrapped it around the both of them.
Her hands were chill, and she slipped them inside his shirt to warm them.
He could feel them at the small of his back, feel the scratch of the lavender garland which she still held.
‘How old are you?’
Her face turned up to him.
‘I have seen sixteen summers.’
Sixteen.
Jesus Christ.
‘How old are you?’ she asked.
‘Old as the hills.’
‘I do not believe you.
You are not even as old as Bicker, and he has no grey in his hair.’
He laughed and hugged her closer, unthinkingly.
He was responding to her presence.
Warning bells sounded in his head.
I'm supposed to keep my wits about me, and an eye on those longhouses.
But he did not push her away.
It was warm under the cloak.
Her palms were no longer cold against the skin of his back.
She rested her head on his chest.
‘You are leaving after Bragad's visit, aren't you?’
‘More news from the kitchens?’
‘It is all over the Rorim.’
He cursed.
Too many tongues wagged in this place.
And he wondered if Bragad knew, also.
An owl hooted nearby, and was answered by another farther away.
A lone sentry stood watching on the ramparts some way off.
The moon caught a glint of his metal armour as he turned in his walk.
‘Shouldn't you be in at the feast?’
Riven asked.
‘Bragad asked the Warbutt if the captains and the lords could drink alone in the hall.
The servers were sent out as well, as soon as the eating was done.’
‘Talking about matters of import,’ Riven said absently, though  uneasiness buzzed at him like a fly.
He watched the longhouses in the Circle.
The torchlight still flickered at the windows, and there were faint bursts of song filtering out.
Doesn't look as though they'll be up to anything tonight.
Dunan and twenty Hearthwares were out in the Circle to keep an eye on them anyway.
Luib was on the gates with his trainees.
The Rorim itself was not so well defended, but they had enough men to neutralise Bragad and hold the gates — for a while.
So why the uneasiness?
He looked down from the ramparts to see Isay standing with his arms folded and his staff tucked into his belt.
The sight reassured him.
‘Why did you not go to the feast?’
Madra asked.
‘I wanted to be on my own.’
‘Oh.’
She drew away, but he pulled her close again.
‘You are a strange man,’ she said.
‘You can get drunk and sing with the rest, and yet you like to be on your own.
You never lifted a sword before, yet you use one as though you are born to it.’
‘How do you know that?’
‘Isay told me.’
‘Isay!’
The exclamation was soft, so the Myrcan would not hear him.
He nuzzled Madra's hair.
‘You get told everything, don't you?’
She did not reply, but her arms pulled him tight to her with surprising strength and she kissed him fiercely on the lips.
Her thighs pushed his legs apart and she pressed herself against him.
‘Let me stay with you tonight.’
And there was that formidable cast to her jaw, the steady sureness of her eyes.
‘All right,’ he replied hoarsely.
The cloak fell away from her, and they walked along the ramparts to the catwalk stairs, the air cool on their hot faces.
But Riven tripped on a shadow, and would have fallen if she had not caught his arm.
He stared down.
‘Oh shit,’ he whispered.
It was a dead Hearthware, lying in a dark pool of blood.
He had been stabbed through the throat.
Riven straightened and glared over at the longhouses.
The lights were still there, and he could hear the singing.
‘Isay!’ he yelled.
The Myrcan was at the stairs in an instant with his staff in his hands.
His eyes fired as he saw the corpse of the Hearthware.
‘Get to the hall — tell them what has happened, and get them to secure the Manse.
There are enemies in the Rorim, and probably more on the way.’
Isay nodded and pelted off.
‘It is Phelim.
He was only two summers older than me,’ Madra said with tears in her voice.
She smoothed the hair back from the dead face.
Riven pulled her to her feet.
‘Go to the kitchens and warn them there.
We are about to be attacked.
Tell them to try and arm themselves.’
He shook her.
‘Tell them, Madra!’
She looked at him wide-eyed for a second, then ran off in the same direction as Isay.
Riven leant on the ramparts and drew a deep breath.
Think, Riven.
What does this mean?
What are they doing?
As he stood there one of the Circle longhouses where Bragad's ‘Wares had been billeted began to blossom with flame.
Two figures were at its eaves with torches.
Even as he watched, he saw lights flaming in the Dale in answer — and he saw Dunan and his men rush the longhouses with the moon glittering on their swords.
They are coming.
Luib's men were divided between the three gates in the outer wall.
If their attackers were in any strength it would not take them long to get through.
Or they might just clamber over the wall at any point.
The outer wall was a defence only against animals, not men.
It was to protect the flocks and herds within more than anything else.
Not for the first time, Riven cursed the trust of these people in…other people.
The longhouses were ablaze from gable to gable now, and Dunan's Hearthwares milled about them.
Then Riven was jolted as Isay nearly knocked him down.
‘They have taken the hall,’ he panted.
‘Bragad's men hold it, and all in it; his ‘Wares must have come over the ramparts in the night.’
And two left behind as a diversion.
Clever.
Was that a faint shouting he heard, away by the outer wall?
‘Run to Dunan.
Tell him to get his men into the Rorim, and to send a runner to Luib on the gates.
We have to get everybody back to man these ramparts.’
Isay turned to go, but Riven stopped him.
‘What about our Myrcans?
What are they doing?’
‘Two guard the hall doors with two ‘Wares.
Druim and Belig arm the household.’
‘Good.
Go on!’
Isay leapt over the wall and disappeared into  the depths of the ditch.
A moment later he was up and running towards the blazing buildings in the Circle.
Riven stood alone on the eerily deserted ramparts, and chafed with impatience.
Bragad's plan was clear now.
Hold the leaders hostage in the hall whilst the larger force punch their way through the defences to take the Rorim from its leaderless and probably drunk defenders.
His ‘Wares had left their billets and accomplished the first part of the plan, leaving some of their number behind to allay suspicions.
No doubt Jinneth and the two renegade lords of Ralarth were on their way with God knew how many at their back.
Dunan's group began loping towards the Rorim, leaving two bodies behind them on the moonlit ground.
They had half a mile to run.
From the outer wall came the faint but definite sound of fighting.
Riven rubbed his sword hilt with a white thumb, thinking for a second of Madra pressing against him.
He shook his head angrily, and heard a clatter of feet behind, coming up the catwalk stairs.
He met them with a drawn sword, but it was Gwion and Colban and a score of others armed with staves, kitchen knives and clubs.
Colban was sweating and breathless.
‘Well met, Lord,’ he gasped as his group trooped out along the ramparts.
Then he leaned on the wall and rubbed his face with his free hand.
‘I am too old for this sort of thing.’
Gwion was the only one of them who had a sword.
‘Our people are helping the Myrcans guard the hall doors,’ the Steward said.
‘My wife commands them.
There are many of Bragad's ‘Wares in there, holding the captains.
The doors have been barred.
All the others I could find I brought here.’
He put his fist to his chest and coughed.
‘You did well,’ said Riven.
Madra glided to his side with a knife in her hand.
Their eyes met for a moment, then he looked away.
‘Dunan and our Hearthwares will be here in minutes.
More of Bragad's men are on the way.
We have to hold the Rorim against them.’
There were frightened murmurs at this.
In the clear night air the sound of battle at the nearest of the gates was clearly audible.
Gwion ushered them about like sheep and positioned them along the wall.
Two-thirds of the ramparts were undefended.
There was a tumult at the gates, and in a few moments Dunan and the Hearthwares joined them.
‘A fine night for a fight!’ the Hearthware leader said, his teeth flashing and the blood shining on his sword.
Isay took his place at Riven's side once more.
As the ‘Wares positioned themselves amongst the household Dunan gazed out on the Circle.
‘Luib is pulling his men out in feigned flight; when the foe attacks us he and his men will take them in the rear.’
Riven nodded.
And here it was.
Four years in the army, and this is my first real battle — with a sword in my hand.
He felt Madra's arm encircle his waist.
‘Are you afraid?’ she asked.
‘You bet your life I am.’
Then he frowned.
‘You can't stay here.
You can't stay in the middle of a battle.’
‘There are other women on the ramparts.’
His face twisted as he glanced about him.
‘I know, but —’ He was conscious of the others there watching them.
And he saw the stubbornness under her brows.
‘Damn it.’
And he turned away from her smile.
The sounds of battle on the outer wall ceased, and the night was quiet except for fidgeting on the catwalk.
Madra was shivering again, her eyes fixed on the Circle beyond the burning longhouses.
There was a distant crash as a roof collapsed in flames.
A figure appeared, running past the blaze and stumbling his way to the gate, which boomed open and then closed behind him.
He lurched to the catwalk with the breath tearing in his throat and the sweat shiny on his face.
A Hearthware.
‘Where is Dunan?’
‘Here, Fimir.
What news?’
‘Luib has lost nine men.
He has pulled his lot away in flight.’
Fimir seemed to choke on his words.
‘It is Mullach and Lionan — our own lords!
They lead the attackers.
‘How many are they?’
Dunan asked sharply.
The Hearthware gulped for breath.
‘Luib tried to count.
At least a score of ‘Wares, and half a dozen Myrcans; maybe a hundred others, unarmoured like our trainees.
Some of them are Suardale men — and Drynoch men!’
Dunan cursed softly.
‘All right, Fimir; that was well done.
Get your breath back.
You'll be needing it soon.’
Fimir nodded and tottered away.
‘We have a fight on our hands,’ Dunan said.
He sucked his teeth.
‘Our own Dales.
And Myrcan fighting Myrcan.
I'd like to know how the fox persuaded them to that.’
‘Why would your people fight each other?’
Riven asked Isay.
‘I know not.
But they will have had a good reason.’
Doubt clouded his face, and he was troubled.
‘Just kill their ‘Wares for us then, and we'll try and take care of your countrymen,’ said Dunan dryly.
He spat over the wall into the darkness of the ditch.
‘I hope Luib's bunch bloodied their nose for them, or things are going to be rather tight around here in a few moments.’
They all heard the noise of feet at once, and instinctively leaned over the battlements, craning to see.
‘There,’ said Riven, pointing.
‘Coming into the firelight.’
Then they were visible; a dark crowd of men with the light glinting off armour and sword blades, and two figures, one slim, one broad, leading them.
They fanned out as they approached, and the Hearthwares on the catwalk produced bows from the sheaths at their backs and notched them with pale-fletched arrows.
‘Wait till the bastards get closer,’ Dunan grated.
The attackers halted and seemed to consult amongst themselves; then they gave a ragged cheer and charged, discharging a volley of arrows as they came.
They hailed down and clinked on the ramparts.
One of the household screamed and fell off the catwalk to the buildings below.
Then the Ralarth ‘Wares fired on Dunan's hoarse order.
There was a hissing sound in the night, clear above the roar of the attackers, and men began to crumple below, hitting the ground with the feathered shafts decorating them.
The charge hardly paused, however, and swarmed up to the gates in a rush.
They milled there for seconds, a dark mass glinting like beetles in the light of the moon — and then there were thin, spiked shapes being raised against the walls.
Slim tree trunks with the branches cut down to within a foot of the bole were placed against the battlements, and men began to climb up them.
The defenders pushed at the makeshift scaling ladders, and at least one went crashing back down into the crowd below; but those who exposed themselves to do it were immediately the target of a dozen archers.
Riven saw a Hearthware collapse with arrows in his face and neck.
A cook from the kitchens took one in the eye and stumbled backwards with his hands pressed to his temples.
Dunan swore viciously.
‘Those whoresons have twice as many archers as us.
They'll pin us down and then swarm all over us.’
Enemy heads began appearing over the wall.
Many died there, with spear points in their mouths or sword blades splitting their skulls, but defenders were falling also.
Riven hacked at the neck of one man who had a leg over the wall and saw the agonised face disappear.
I've killed a man, he thought, but the realisation meant nothing to him in that mad moment.
Armoured Hearthwares with red sashes belting their middles laboured on to the battlements with the defender's weapons pounding them like smith's hammers on an anvil.
They reeled under the blows, but the heavy steel saved them and they recovered to push back unarmoured householders.
Their comrades followed in a steady stream, like water widening a hole in a dyke — and then Riven saw Mullach top the battlements with his hammer whirling about his head and the black moustache framing a snarl of a mouth.
The fighting became hand-to-hand all along the wall, blades flashing wickedly in the moonlight.
Riven wanted to find Madra, for she was no longer at his side, but the man in front of him fell and he found himself confronting an enemy militiaman.
His brain switched off, his limbs doing their job automatically.
Their swords rang together, and Riven knew he was the weaker man.
He was forced to back away, almost tripping over bodies and becoming enmeshed in other fights.
He blocked blow after blow, but his healing bones were ready to collapse.
The man grinned, seeing the defeat in Riven's eyes, and beat down his blade.
He raised his own weapon again for the kill and then fell forward on to his face with a knife buried to the hilt between his shoulders.
Madra stood behind him, eyes wild, blood on her hands.
‘Are you all right?’
He nodded, fighting for air.
Isay staggered over with a crimson slash across his temple and gore clinging to his staff.
‘I was held back!’ he gasped, his face a maze of guilt and anger.
‘I could not come in time!’
‘It's all right.
I'm all right, for God's sake.’
The three stood in a momentary island of calm, whilst around them the fighting surged like surf beating up a beach.
Wedges of red-sashed men were driving in up and down the catwalk, cutting the defenders off into pockets.
Dunan was there, flailing like a maniac, whilst Mullach was laying about himself with something like ecstasy written all over his brutal face.
And Lionan had arrived now also, poised like a cat on a merlon and watching the fight intently, the rapier a silver sliver in his hand.
He wore a red sash.
Riven  wondered where Jinneth was — and the enemy Myrcans, also.
He could see none on the wall.
The fight swayed towards them again, and Riven cursed, pushing Madra behind him.
Chivalry and the rest.
He hated to see her with blood on her hands.
The fighting continued, spreading off the great curve of the ramparts down into the buildings below.
A fire started up somewhere, limning them all in orange and yellow.
Ralarth Rorim was burning.
There were lights in the Dale now, as the men who lived there came forward to investigate the tumult.
The night was a chiaros-curo of light and dark, moon and flame, steel and shadow, and the Rorim resounded with screams and shouts, the clash of metal, the crack of bone and thud of flesh.
All order became lost as the battle opened out and a struggling press of men fought for the ramparts, the rooftops, the alleys between buildings.
They slipped on the blood-slicked cobbles or tripped on the bodies that choked the ground.
And above the flames of burning houses rose up to drown out the moonlight and rush hot air into their streaming faces.
Where were Luib and his men?
Riven had time to wonder.
Then he heard Madra's despairing cry, and turned to see the enemy Myrcans surging on to the ramparts, their staffs swinging, cutting down the defenders like corn.
Isay pushed Riven aside and stood holding his staff at the ready as his countrymen approached.
‘Flee,’ he said.
‘The wall is lost.
I will hold them.’
‘Not on your life,’ Riven spat, and he took his place at Isay's shoulder.
They saw Gwion fall with a smashed skull, a Ralarth ‘Ware hurled down to the street below; and then the enemy Myrcans confronted Isay and Riven.
‘Will you fight your own people?
Have you fallen that far?’
Isay yelled at them, eyes wild.
The two leading Myrcans paused for a second.
One of them pointed his bloody staff at Riven.
‘You harbour in this place a lord of the Hidden Folk, an agent of this land's destruction.
It is from his like, here and in the mountains, that the ruin of the Dales is come.
Give him up and the fighting will end.
You are of the same blood as us, sworn to protect Minginish.
He would seek to destroy it.
Your service has been twisted by shape-shifters and wizards.’
‘Those are lies!’
Isay cried.
‘The lies of Bragad!’
But the Myrcans were already upon them.
Riven had no time to think before the Myrcan staff whistled around his ears, and smashed lights into his head.
Not again.
He fell, and was dimly conscious of Isay standing over him, swaying like a tree in a gale under the assault of his countrymen; then another figure joined him.
Her hair swung as she bent to pick up his sword and he tried to move, to stop her, but could not.
He saw the sword flash in his defence, and groaned.
Then there was shouting, and someone was crying: ‘Luib!
Luib has come!’
And he could have sworn that he heard Ratagan's roar above the din of the battle.
His head reeled.
He smelled the burning in the air, saw the stars dimmed by smoke above him.
The screaming would not stop, and he grimaced.
Dying in my own story.
Bad luck, that.
Scenes flickered in front of his closing eyes.
Lionan brought to bay like a wildcat, eyes blazing.
Mullach falling with that rictus of hate still contorting his face.
And Nurse Cohen above him, her head snapped back by a blow and the blood splintering from it.
But it was not Nurse Cohen, it was Madra.
He groaned again, but could watch no longer.
The dark took him, rushed on him like a cloud, and the noises stopped.
The visions fled, the pain died.
Chapter Twelve
All he could make out was a blur of a face with dark hair framing it.
‘Jenny?’
He said her name aloud, though it was someone else's voice that was cracked and whispering out of his throat.
The white light that was the pain in his head receded as something cool was pressed to it.
He could feel fingers on his brow.
Then there was nothing again but the darkness; the darkness that he knew waited for him at the foot of the mountain.
The hot stillness of the day made the water quiet.
The waves lapped into the bay in a murmur, and the sun set the sea dazzlingly alight.
Midges danced where the burn opened out into the bay; a haze shimmered off the rocks.
They were on a granite slab that had fallen centuries ago and lay by the shore with the water rippling at it.
The remains of their meal were scattered around them, and some paper sheets that were tugged by the slight breeze off the sea.
He had his head in her lap and his eyes shut, listening to the sea and the faint call of gulls.
She nudged him as the sleek dark head of a seal bobbed up scant yards from where they were.
Two liquid brown eyes gazed on them with mild curiosity, rising and falling with the pull of the waves.
They stayed quite still, smiling back at it, until it disappeared with a plop, leaving ripples of disturbance that were erased by the next wave.
He looked up at the face with the dark hair above him.
‘Where am I?’ he asked, rolling his eyes.
‘What happened?’
She grinned down at him.
‘You're near Glenbrittle.
You fell off a mountain.’
And she kissed him.
‘Michael,’ she said in a low voice, straightening.
‘Mmm?’
She gestured to the papers that were anchored to the rock by a heavy stone.
‘Don't put me in it.’
He blinked.
‘Why not?’
‘I don't know.
It's a lovely place in there, all clean and shining and untouched.’
‘They fight the odd war now and again,’ he said dryly.
‘Maybe — but the fighting in it is clear-cut and necessary, with less of the grey than there is in this world.’
He stirred.
‘You're in it already.
I can't take you out now.’
She made as if to poke him in the eye.
‘Again?
I knew it.
And you never even asked.’
‘Artistic licence.
Besides, there has to be a heroine.’
She shook her head, half-smiling.
Her eyes were looking out to sea.
He could feel the warmth of her thighs under his head, her fingers in his hair.
‘This third book had better be good,’ she told him.
‘It'll be a masterpiece.
It'll make our fortune.
We'll live in luxury for the rest of our lives.’
‘This is luxury.
Here.
Now.
We're on Skye, and it's summer.
What more could you want?’
‘You're distinctly odd, MacKinnon, you know that?’
She wrinkled her nose at him.
‘How about some climbing this afternoon?’
‘Where?’
She twisted and gazed back to where the Black Cuillins arced away in ridge after ridge of jagged stone, rearing up into a flawless sky.
‘Sgurr Dearg.
Let's climb the Red Mountain, and watch the world from the pinnacle.’
He was silent a moment, feeling the summer on his bones.
‘All right,’ he said at last .
An arm cushioned his shoulders, and his face was close to the softness of one breast.
He turned towards her, but the blankets entangled his legs and he fought his eyes open in irritation.
To see a strange room with a view of white hills out of the window, and a sheathed sword propped against the table.
He lay perfectly still, remembering, listening to Madra's quiet breathing.
He reached out his hand and touched her face gently, traced the line of her lips with one fingertip, felt her hair.
And  then he let the tears come for a while, to trickle down his temples and wet his neck.
Forgive me.
The girl lying beside him stirred and woke.
Her hand touched the compress on his head tentatively.
When she saw he was awake she made a sound that was half a sob, and buried her head in his shoulder.
He stroked her hair.
‘I'm not dead yet, you know.’
She laughed.
‘It took you long enough to decide.’
He raised his hand to the cut at the side of her eye, the black and yellow bruise there.
‘Was everything all right, in the end?’
‘Luib came, and the captains overpowered their captors in the hall and joined us.
We won.’
He wanted to hear nothing more for the present, and he put a finger to her lips.
But looking out of the window he saw the hills again.
‘Madra —’
‘You have been senseless for three days.
It snowed for nearly all those days, and the Rorim stream has frozen over.’
He saw the ice at the corner of the window panes, the hard blueness of the sky was not a summer colour.
‘Bicker and Ratagan want to see you as soon as you awake.
And Isay is outside.’
‘He's all right?’
She nodded.
‘What happened?’
You're in Glenbrittle.
You fell off a mountain.
‘I will let Bicker tell you.’
‘But you were there, with my sword.
I remember.’
‘The Myrcans struck me down.
It is in my mind that they did not want to kill me, but Isay was left to face them alone.
He kept shouting that they were wrong while he was fighting them, and in the end they listened.
By then Bragad's other men had surrendered, for they were surrounded and their lord was captive.
The folk from the Circle came to our aid also, hundreds of them.
They ringed the Rorim.
The enemy could not escape.’
There was a knock at the door, and then Bicker, Ratagan and Guillamon walked in with Isay behind them.
Bicker's face looked as though it had been ground out on a millstone, but Ratagan was beaming.
‘You look worse than I feel,’ Riven told the dark man.
He grinned ruefully.
‘The strain of victory.
I need another set of hands, and eyes in my backside.
But I survive.’
‘And I am getting used to picking you off battlefields,’ Ratagan added.
‘You have an unhappy knack, Michael Riven, of finding yourself in the thick of things.
It is lucky your head is so hard.’
‘Unhappy knack or no,’ Bicker said, ‘you have our thanks.
You did a lot towards ensuring victory.
Bragad took us by surprise.
We had not bargained on being trapped in our own hall.’
‘How did it happen?’
Riven asked.
Bicker shrugged.
‘It was so simple it shames me.
Ten of his ‘Wares crept over the ramparts in the night and before we knew what we were at they were holding swords to our throats as we sat at our wine.
Had it not been for Unish and Belig and a few others, we would be there still.
They broke through the upper windows and tumbled down in the middle of us.
That was a time and a half, I can tell you.
But we overpowered our captors and got out to find the battle in full cry and the north-west quarter of the Rorim in flames.
By that time Luib had gathered his men from the outer gates and was attacking the enemy rear.
We joined in with a will.
It must have seemed to Bragad's minions that we were falling on them out of thin air.
Many died, Marsco among them — and Lionan, and Mullach.
They will not be mourned.
Murtach is at Ringill now, setting up a garrison of our own people.’
‘Bragad and Jinneth?’
Riven asked, a little afraid of what Bicker would tell him.
‘Bragad is dead — slain by his own Myrcans,’ Bicker said grimly.
‘They do not like being deceived, the Soldier-folk.
They have sworn allegiance to the Warbutt now.
I have a feeling that it will not be long before Carnach's people do the same, for Mugeary is dead, killed by his nephew Daman.
He is our prisoner at the moment.’
‘So it looks as though the Rorims are under one leader after all,’ Riven mused.
The dark man nodded.
‘Of Jinneth there is no sign.
There are rumours that she has fled the Dales — perhaps to the cities in the north.
The snow will slow her flight somewhat, but we are not pursuing her.
There has been enough killing.
Enough fighting.’
‘Your own lords…’
Riven said softly.
‘Do people still think I'm a wizard?’
Ratagan smiled.
‘And a great warrior who stood steadfast under the attack of six Myrcans until he fell.’
‘People talk too much,’ Riven said.
‘If there had been less talk these past few weeks then perhaps  the rumours that aided Bragad's cause would never have arisen.
The household is rather more discreet now, those that are left of them.’
‘How many did we lose?’
Riven asked.
Bicker looked away.
‘Too many.
Far too many.’
He struggled to smile.
‘We have made Ygelda the new Steward, and she says it will be nothing new to her for Gwion was always running to her for help.’
There was a silence.
Madra's fingers lingered briefly over Riven's head.
‘It's snowing,’ he said.
‘There is almost a foot of it out there,’ Guillamon told him, his blue eyes like ice.
‘And midsummer is hardly past.
Many of our people are out in the hills bringing in the flocks, as are the Hearthwares — those we have left.
The Giants have been sighted in great numbers to the west.’
It was speeding up.
Riven felt incredibly mortal, but at the same time there was a rising restlessness in him.
He felt that time was slipping through his fingers.
The Greshorns were calling him.
And so was Sgurr Dearg.
He only wished he knew why.
Perhaps the Dwarves would tell him.
‘How bad is my head?’
Guillamon leaned forward and pulled down the lower lid of his eye.
‘The skull was not cracked, I think.
You need to rest for a few days, but you should be all right soon enough.
As Ratagan has observed, your head is hard, Michael Riven.’
Riven lay back and stared at the ceiling.
‘We must leave as soon as we can.
Minginish has been trying to keep me here, in the Rorim.
I don't know what we'll find in the mountains, but I know there are answers there.’
He smiled slightly.
‘In the book that is where the quest finds an end.
With the Dwarves.
And on the Red Mountain.’
‘We need time, here, to organise the Rorim,’ Bicker said.
‘That is for the captains to do.
And we have to think about Carnach and Garrafad Rorim; they are leaderless and almost unreachable through the snow.
With their garrisons at less than half-strength, and the Giants abroad, they are isolated and vulnerable.’
Riven sighed.
‘I know.
But if you want to tackle the problem at the source then we must be on our way soon.’
Bicker made as if to speak, but Guillamon set one hand on his arm.
‘Leave some of this with me.
I can reorganise the Rorim, with Udairn and Dunan to help me.
And Murtach has said he will lead a party to Carnach through the snows once Ringill is secured.’
‘That will be no soft journey,’ said Ratagan.
‘You've volunteered for a harder,’ Bicker retorted.
‘Or do you think we can grow wings and fly across the Greshorns?’
Ratagan laughed and bowed.
‘I am chastened.
But you are right, of course.
I talked to Tagan before the battle.
He knows the Greshorns and has some pretty tales to tell of them —’
Guillamon rose.
‘They can wait.
The Teller here needs rest from your voice, Ratagan, and from our arguments.
We will leave him to his nurse.’
He gave a surprisingly bright smile to Madra.
They left, and Isay remained alone by the door.
Riven caught his eye.
‘Thanks, Isay.’
‘I did my duty,’ the Myrcan said, ‘and reminded my people of theirs.
Your life is in my care.
Our world is in yours.
Ward it well as I would ward you, and I shall be content.’
He went to take his usual post outside the door.
Riven lay still, his head throbbing and Madra warm beside him.
He heard the wind in the rafters and watched the snow whirl outside.
Madra went to build up the fire.
He watched her tuck an unruly lock of hair behind her ear as she knelt at the hearth, and was pelted with a score of remembered images.
A dark-haired girl with firelight on her face, the smell of turf burning on a winter night, the sound of the sea raging at the shore in a fury of storm.
Winter.
It was winter back on Skye; and now that winter was here, in Minginish.
The curtain which divided them was wearing thin.
Memory and imagination were grappling at each other 's throats, and these people would lose if he lay here much longer.
Of that he was sure.
‘Ratagan and I will be coming with you, of course,’ said Bicker, ‘and Isay intends to watch over you.
As we decided earlier, Tagan will join us for his is the best woodcraft in the Dale; and Luib has agreed to come.
He has given over the training to Druim and Unish.
As Isay said, I think he wants to see the mountains around his homeland once again.
I think also that three other Hearthwares shall come, in case we need to fight our way out of some tight spot.
Rimir, Corrary and Darmid have volunteered.
They were on the ramparts with you during the battle.
That makes nine, which I reckon is enough.
Don't you?’
‘Seems fine,’ Riven answered him noncommittally, though he was fidgeting with restlessness.
‘What about mounts?’
‘We shall have the best in the Dale, and two pack mules for extra food and gear since we want to travel swiftly.
Winter gear is being readied at the moment, but it will be hard, all the same, travelling in such weather.’
Riven nodded.
The fire flickered about the walls of the room, but the wind was howling outside, lashing snow against the window and darkening the afternoon.
Ratagan sprawled in a chair, his long legs crossed in front of him.
His eyes were lost in the fire.
Bicker nudged him.
‘You are very quiet, my hale and hearty friend.’
‘I am already in mourning,’ the big man replied.
‘For the dearth of beer which I foresee on this trip.’
Bicker chuckled.
‘Do not be so quick to grieve.
There are towns and cities along our route which boast the best ale houses in the land, and whilst we cannot linger we can, I am sure, find the time to slake a thirst or two that the ice and snow have worked up in us.
Ratagan brightened immediately.
‘I had forgotten that, in my ignorance.
What it is to be well travelled!’
He stood up, his vast frame reaching to the ceiling.
‘I shall miss warm hearths, warm beds and willing wenches before long, I do not doubt; but to deprive a man of his beer, that is true hardship.’
He slapped Bicker on the back, staggering him, then turned to Riven.
‘The head is up to it, then?’
‘It'll do.’
Then Riven asked the question that had been gnawing at him for the last day: ‘What about Murtach?’
Ratagan's face clouded.
‘He stays in the Rorim, or at Carnach Rorim, where he is going after Ringill.
He will not be coming with us.’
‘Do I still make him unsure of where he is putting his feet?’
‘Something like that,’ Ratagan said.
‘Murtach has always been a deep one, trusting no counsel but his own.
He thinks you will find nothing in the mountains but stone and snow.
He wants you sent back to your own world.’
‘And you?’
The big man looked at him.
‘I told you once before what I believe in, Michael Riven.
I believe in friendship, also.
If you believe that you can aid this world by standing on your head then  I will hold your ankles for you.
It seems to me you have earned a little of our trust — while Murtach —’
‘Trusts you about as far as he could spit,’ Bicker finished.
‘And he has always…liked…
Madra,’ Ratagan said.
Bicker got up.
‘We will leave you to get some sleep.
You will need all the strength you can muster on this journey.’
When he had gone out, Ratagan lingered a moment.
‘Men do stupid things,’ he said quietly, ‘without ever considering them stupid.
But often such things cannot be helped.
We all fail in the end, Riven.
It's making a game of it before we go down that matters.
I know.
Regret is the bile of life.’
And he smiled a wrecked smile.
‘Murtach has never really failed, so he does not know such things happen.’
Then he left, wishing Riven a good night, and a better morning.
Two days later they were ready to leave, and sat on their horses in the square before the Manse.
There was still a smell of burning in the air, and around them the blackened shells of buildings were stark under a covering of snow.
Groups of men had been working ceaselessly since the battle to tear them down and salvage what they could of their contents.
The cobbles were littered with pieces of burnt wood.
My fault, Riven thought helplessly.
Everywhere he went in this land destruction followed.
Perhaps Bragad had been right.
Perhaps it was he who was truly destroying this place.
But Bragad was dead.
He wondered if Hugh was sitting in his office, watching the traffic outside and smoking his foul little cigarettes.
And had he felt anything as his twin was slain here?
Best not to dwell on it.
The snow had stopped falling and the skies were clear, but a bitter wind winnowed the Dale and they pulled their thick winter garments about their faces.
The horses nosed patiently at the ground as they waited.
Riven searched for Madra.
He had not seen her all day and badly wanted to say goodbye, but there was no sign of her in the crowd that had gathered to see them off.
The Warbutt had not come down from his tower to wish his son farewell, and Bicker was grim and silent with his cloak held up around his mouth and ice crystals forming on it where his breath froze.
Ratagan was like a great bear, and he rode something approaching a cart horse.
There was rime on his beard, making him appear grizzled and old.
The other members of the party, Myrcans and Hearthwares all, were similarly dressed, bundled in layers of wool and sheepskins, wrapped in cloaks of double thickness, with large saddlebags behind them.
Two of the Hearthwares, Darmid and Corrary, led the two pack mules.
Somewhere in those packs were the clothes Riven had entered Minginish with, though only Bicker knew that he had brought them along.
Guillamon stepped out of the Manse; he was grey and brittle in the cold but his eyes were flashing brighter than the hard sky.
Udairn was beside him, seeming younger than his son, and his wife Ethyrra was on his arm, looking like a frost-bitten starling.
Her eyes were red-rimmed but the set of her mouth was as severe as that of a judge.
Ratagan did not seek to meet her eyes.
Mira was there also, forlorn in the snowy courtyard as she contemplated Bicker leaving her yet again.
The dark man had embraced her before he mounted, and whispered something no one else could hear.
Now she stared at him as though she would never see him again.
‘Better weather,’ Guillamon was saying, eyeing the sky.
He surveyed the company critically.
‘Forgotten anything?’
‘We have enough for three weeks’ travel,’Bicker said.
‘That will take us to the cities where we can buy more.
We will make it easily, if the weather is kind to us.’
Guillamon turned to Riven and offered his hand.
Riven took it without speaking.
‘I hope you find peace,’ was all the grey man said, before releasing his grip and stepping back.
‘The blessings of the land be upon you.
May the way be kind and journey's end what you hope it to be.
Farewell.’
He lifted one hand in salute, and the household copied him.
Riven saw Colban there, smiling uncertainly; Dunan, Ord and others whose faces he knew.
But Madra was not there.
He kicked his horse with a small, angry sense of mourning and followed Bicker as they made their way out of the square to the gates of the Rorim; felt the wind rasp his face as they left behind the shelter of the buildings.
Then they were in the Circle, and the Dale opened out before them in a vast, dazzling whiteness, powdery snow blowing in clouds off the summits of the hills.
He stared at the icebound heights, remembering other mountains.
He was following a shadow, but now he had an idea about where it was leading him.
Bicker was conferring with Tagan about the way to the north.
They agreed over something, and Tagan rejoined his Hearthware comrades.
Bicker led, and after him came Ratagan and Riven, Isay and Luib, then Tagan and Rimir and finally Darmid and Corrary leading the pack mules.
The company buried their noses in their cloaks as their horses plodded through the hock-deep snow and the wind tore at their hair.
They had soon left the Circle behind and were climbing steadily into the hills to the north, their horses' hoofs turning stones underneath the snow, straining on the steeper parts.
Riven looked for a path, but could discern none through the snow and the frozen boulders.
The wind grew stronger as they rode higher.
The rocks began to assume a mantle of translucent ice that dripped in grey icicles from overhangs.
Drifts appeared, gathered up against sheer slopes and the larger boulders, and the snow blew across the hillside like smoke, coating themselves and their mounts with white and frosting their eyebrows.
Riven wriggled his toes inside his boots in an effort to keep them from going numb.
The hills levelled out as they reached the crests, and they could see a vast, rolling country expanding blindingly far northwards; a sea of white frozen breakers tumbling into an unknown shore under a clear sky.
The wind whipped at their cloaks and the horses kept their eyes half shut against it.
Riven was already thinking of bright hearths and warm beds as they made their way along the summits, following Bicker in single file now, their mounts' hoofs throwing up bobbles of snow that were swept away into the air as quickly as they were kicked up.
They halted for a short time near midafternoon to rest the horses.
They had to break away encrusted ice from the beast's muzzles and try to rub warmth into them in the lee of a blunt hill.
They ate meat and bread that was hardened by the cold, but Bicker would not allow them to eat snow.
Their water was unfrozen, hung in skins from the saddle pommels where the warmth of the horses' bodies would keep it liquid.
They could light no fire, and Ratagan prophesied gloomily that their camp that night would be cheerless.
They did not remain long, for the cold soon had them hopping about, and the journey was resumed.
Riven wondered if it would be like this for the next six weeks, and wiped his nose, thinking of the dark girl barefoot in the snows.
But when he tried to picture her face, all he could see was Madra, and the grave eyes under the dark brows.
The day drew on, and Tagan scouted ahead to look for a possible  camping site.
The tracker had ridden ahead more than once during the day, and to the rear and flanks also, though Riven could not imagine them being followed in cold such as this.
They finally halted in a rough copse of thorn that had lopsided boulders scattered about it and was sheltered from the wind by the long shoulder of a hill.
Ratagan set himself to starting a fire whilst the rest rubbed down the horses and searched for firewood.
There was much swearing, but the big man finally had a leaf of flame springing up to lick around the dried heather curls from the tinder sack.
When they had caught the less dry fuel was used, and the fire grew, much to the company's relief.
They set out their bedrolls and crouched round the flames, except for the unfortunate Rimir who had first watch.
‘How far have we covered today?’
Ratagan asked with a stiff-faced yawn.
‘Not far,’ Bicker replied, throwing more sticks on the fire.
‘The country is less broken farther on, so we should make better time tomorrow and be out of the hills the day after that.’
‘And then what?’
Riven asked.
‘And then the Great Vale, with the Great River, which we must follow north to Talisker.’
‘A long way,’ Ratagan said, and yawned again.
‘Tagan thinks we are being followed.’
They looked at him, then at the tracker where he squatted in his sheepskins with his brown hand tugging at his beard.
‘What, or who, by?’
Corrary demanded, the fire catching glints in his red hair.
Tagan shrugged.
‘I know not for sure.
But there is something in the hills behind us, I am certain.
I can feel the eyes in my back.’
‘Maybe we should double back and ambush them,’ Darmid suggested.
His red hair mirrored his brother's.
Tagan shook his head.
‘At the moment it is only a feeling of mine; a hunter's suspicion.
Let me be more certain before we go trekking over ground we have already covered.’
‘Sound wisdom,’ Bicker said.
‘I don't want to waste any more time if I can help it.’
He nudged a steaming pot nearer the fire.
‘But if all the Rime Giants ever spawned were after me I would still sit here, for I need some hot food in me to fight the ice in my bones.’
They shared out the thick broth and dipped their bread in it, licking their fingers.
Riven began to feel his ears and toes thaw out.
‘And this is summer,’ he muttered.
When they had finished eating they lay unsleeping though well-wrapped before the fire and listened to the mournful wind.
The horses stirred restlessly and the limbs of the thorns wriggled.
The cold of the ground slowly seeped through Riven's bedroll to chill his back, and he edged closer to the fire, sick of the aches in his bones and counting out in his mind the hours before he had to go on watch.
He was tired, but sleep refused to come.
The cold held it at bay despite the glow of the flames on his face.
But sleep came unawares, for he was woken by Luib in the dark and told by the peppery old Myrcan that it was his watch, and that Corrary was on after him.
Riven struggled out of the blankets and the cold ate into him at once.
He shivered as he buckled on his sword and took up his post, hating the chill darkness and the loneliness.
But the wind had dropped, and he could see the stars.
He stamped up and down at the limit of the firelight and listened to the silence of the hills.
And heard the crunch of brittle snow, out in the darkness.
Not wolves, this time.
A figure approached him with its arms wrapped around its chest.
It was bundled in furs and wore high boots.
He drew his sword and watched it come closer.
It moved stiffly, and yet there was something familiar there.
He saw two eyes and then the cloak was thrown away from the face and he could see that it was her, blue-lipped with cold, reaching for him.
She half fell into his arms and his sword slid to the ground.
‘Mother of God!
Madra, what are you doing here?’
She was shivering against him, and he helped her back to the fire and bundled her in his own bedroll; but she kept her arms about him.
‘Hold me,’ she whispered, and he tried to share his warmth, to stop her quivering.
At last her clutch on him became less desperate and her shivers less violent.
He looked at her in the light of the fire.
No one else had woken.
‘You followed us,’ he whispered.
She nodded.
‘I stole a horse and other things, and trailed you through the hills from a distance.’
‘But why, damn it?’
‘I wanted to come with you, to go with you to the mountains.’
‘You crazy kid.
We'll have to return to the Rorim with you now.’
‘No.’
Her eyes were blazing, but her voice was low.
‘I'm not going back.
I'd only set out again — and again — so you will have to let me come.’
‘I think we must leave that up to Bicker.
Have you any idea how long this journey is?’
‘Have you?
You know less about it than I do.’
He was silent in the face of her persistence, partly because he wanted to lose.
‘Where is your horse?’ he asked at last.
‘Round the side of the hill.
I'd best go and fetch him soon, for he is hobbled and there may be wolves about.’
‘No.
I will wake up Corrary in a minute.
He can do it.
You try and get warm.’
‘I am warm,’ she replied with the hint of a smile.
In the morning Bicker was ill-tempered when he was told of the latest addition to the company, but Ratagan was pleased.
They argued for a while.
Tagan was glad his suspicions had been vindicated.
The Myrcans were inscrutable and the Hearthwares dubious, but when they finally set out again there were ten in the company, and Riven had a new companion riding at his side.
Bicker muttered to himself as he rode in front, but they made better time for the wind had not risen and the sun was almost warm.
They were able to let their cloaks drop from their faces and enjoy the view.
The horses began to steam in the sunlit air.
Ratagan raised his face to the sun.
‘This is more like travelling weather.
If only it holds for a while.’
‘We begin descending into the Vale tomorrow,’ Bicker called from ahead.
‘The weather should be milder there, with any luck, and the going will be easier.’
‘And there may even be an ale house to brighten our way,’ Ratagan added.
He hummed to himself as they continued northwards.
The attack was so sudden that Riven had not even time to be afraid.
His stomach jumped as grey shapes poured from behind the boulders ahead and loped towards them.
Bicker's horse reared, and he shouted, ‘Grypesh!’
Then they were among them, milling about the horses, and the terrified animals were bucking and  screaming and it was all Riven could do to stay mounted.
Luib and Isay were the first to dismount, and Riven heard the familiar hiss and crack of Myrcan staves.
He saw Madra fighting with her reins, hair wild; then a face out of a nightmare lunged up at him, and for the second time he confronted the tusked maw of a grypesh.
With a twitch of its jaws it had ripped into his hide leggings.
His horse spun wildly, but the grypesh held on, one of its claws digging into the leather of the saddle, the other curled round Riven's calf.
He tried to reach for his sword but could not.
The beast's eyes shone at him and he felt the teeth touch his bare skin; then Isay appeared out of nowhere and brained it.
The heavy grey body fell to the ground with a scree and was lost to view amid the plunging hoofs of Riven's horse.
He saw that all the company had dismounted, and were fighting a desperate battle against the pack that surrounded them.
He swung himself off his horse and nearly fell, but managed to jerk his sword out of the scabbard.
Isay was beside him, wreaking carnage with his staff.
Riven held his reins in one hand and jabbed at the snarling grypesh with the other as they darted into his reach.
And then they fled.
As quickly as they had arrived, the pack scattered and disappeared upslope into the maze of boulders and gullies, the odd stone rattling to mark their passing.
They left the bodies of a dozen of their comrades lying lifeless on the ground behind them.
The company quietened the maddened horses, some of which had raking slashes along flanks or belly.
Riven examined his leg and found that his boot had been ripped open like paper, but that his calf was only scratched.
He felt sick at the memory of the beasts he had just seen.
Bicker mounted, and the Hearthwares hit the saddle an instant later.
‘rome on,’ Bicker shouted.
‘They will be back, and in greater numbers.
We must ride on at once and get out of the hills before dark.’
The rest clambered into their saddles, and followed him unquestioningly as he led them at a canter downslope to where the hills opened out and patches of ground could be seen where the snow was melting.
The horses were as eager to leave the scene of the attack as their riders, and the snow flew from their hoofs as they rattled along, blowing hard.
‘Look to the heights on our left!’
Corrary shouted, pointing.
the rocks, and kicked their horses on.
After a while, with their mounts winded, they halted.
It had begun to snow, and small flakes were drifting down to settle on their eyelashes.
They dismounted and walked the horses, Luib and Ratagan taking the rear.
The land was flatter here and there were fewer boulders strewn around.
Bicker estimated that they had put some three miles between themselves and the scene of the attack.
His steed was lame where one of the grypesh had gashed its fore-quarter, and he called a halt.
‘We'll camp here,’ he said wearily.
‘We need to see to the horses if they are to bear us any farther.
Tagan, you, Darmid and Corrary take a walk and see what you can see.’
The bearded Hearthware nodded, and stalked off with his younger companions in tow.
The rest of the company set to unsaddling the horses and building a fire.
The wind began to pick up again, moaning round their ears.
Riven occupied himself with trying to tie up what remained of his boot and leggings, whilst Luib and Rimir produced tarpaulins of waxed cloth from the packs and began constructing a crude lean-to to keep the snow from them.
Bicker doctored the hurts of the horses with some strong-smelling salve which he gouged from a small wooden box and smeared on their wounds.
The animals flinched as they felt it, but Isay held them firmly, talking to them in a quiet voice.
Madra helped Ratagan with the fire, and when Riven had done the best he could with his ripped clothing he wandered about the campsite looking for firewood.
There was a dried-up riverbed not far away, and along its banks were the skeletons of trees long dead.
He snapped off armfuls of branches and brought them back in piles to Ratagan.
He was soon helped by Madra and Isay, and the trio worked with a will in the growing twilight as the snow came down more thickly and visibility worsened.
When they returned with one last load Bicker stopped them -from going out for more.
He was sniffing the air worriedly, wondering where their scouts had gone.
The fire was built up higher than usual to guide them back to the camp, but also, Riven thought, because they were imagining the packs of grypesh coming after them out of the heights of the hills.
Tagan and the other two Hearthwares reappeared some time later with snow covering them.
They shook themselves before the fire and stood in the lee of the shelter.
‘There were some tracks quartering the ground to the south,’ Tagan said, rubbing his hands.
‘But we could not follow them far because of the snow.
It was a small pack, maybe eight beasts.
Not the one we fought.
But there is at least one larger pack on our trail.
This snowstorm might put them off, but we would do well to be extra watchful tonight.’
Bicker nodded.
‘Two to each watch, then.
But we'll eat before we fix them.’
The lean-to trapped the heat of the fire, and the hobbled horses on the other side of the flames reflected the warmth also.
It was crowded inside, but that made it warmer.
They spread their bedrolls whilst Ratagan and Isay prepared food for the company.
Madra lay next to Riven at the back, and he did not object when she piled the blankets over them both and pushed close to him.
The snow thickened as night fell, piling around their shelter and hissing at the fire.
Ratagan and Luib took first watch, whilst the rest lay and listened to the wind, felt it tugging at the tarpaulin.
It was hard to sleep with the image of the prowling packs on their trail.
Ratagan stood with his hands spread to the fire and the flames winking on his axe blade.
But he was looking outwards, to the wind-driven snow and the darkness.
‘A wearisome night,’ he said.
‘And a long time till dawn.
We need something to lighten the time.
What about a story?
Someone must have a tale to tell in our company.’
No one replied.
He bent and threw a log on to the fire.
‘Miserable wretches.’
‘I have a story,’ said Luib, surprising them all.
His lined face was indecipherable in the firelight.
‘It is a story of the Myrcans, and of the time when they first came to Minginish to take service with the people of the Vale and the Dales.’
He paused for a second, staring into the fire.
‘The Myrcans, when they were first created out of Dwarf-hewn and Giant-riven stone, took up residence in the broad Dale of Glen-arric, and in time that place became known as Merkadale, as it still is called today.
They built homes throughout the Dale up to the borders of what is now Drinan, and their chief town was at Dun Merkadal.
There they lived their lives, and prospered for a while; but there was a disquiet amongst them, for it was said that they had been created with a purpose in this life, and that the purpose had something to do with the manner of their creation.
They were — and are — a hardy people, full of energy and unafraid.
But they were never ones for the tilling of the soil; and they did not make great hunters.
Only to one thing were their hands turned with skill, and that was killing.
They thought then that they would set out as an army and conquer the rest of the land and rule over it; that was their mission.
But some doubted and one, Rol, who was a great war leader, mistrusted the feelings which prompted the Myrcans to wage war and was sickened by the killing, so he set off into the mountains to seek the Dwarves and avail himself of their ancient wisdom.
‘In the Greshorns he wandered alone through the passes, climbed the peaks and was exhausted by the journey.
Finally he lay down in the snow and determined to die, for his stamina had failed him and he had not found the Dwarves; and he did not want to go back to the life of killing he had led.
It was then that the Dwarves came to him, fed him, warmed him in their mansions and asked his purpose, for no mortal man had ever travelled so far into the mountains.
And he asked them what it was the Myrcans had been put on the earth to do, and they laughed.
‘If we knew that we would know the purpose of our own lives, and mayhap the secret behind life itself,’ they said.
‘But no one can know that who breathes upon the earth.’
‘In despair, Rol asked them what he could do for his people except lead them in the killing of others in the land.
‘They laughed again.
‘Not ours to answer that question,’ they said, ‘for you already have its answer within you.
Look less far than the mountains the next time you wish your questions answered.
Look at what has been given to you, and use it wisely.’
And then they were gone and he was lying in the snow of a mountainside, alone and cold.
‘He journeyed back to his own people, with many adventures along the way; and when he was in Merkadale he told the Myrcans that they had to stop the killing, that they were only trying to pick an apple that was already in their hands.
He told them to go amongst the people of the land and offer them their service, to defend Minginish instead of conquering it; for the most earth a man ever needs is what is piled in his grave.
So the Myrcans did so.
In small groups they went out across the land and offered their services in its defence against the beasts, or against the wandering brigands which sometimes harried it.
‘They were greeted with suspicion and hostility at first, and in more than one place they had to fight to prove they truly wanted  to serve rather than to rule, to harbour rather than destroy.
And some of the lords tried to misuse them, to pit them in small wars of conquest and pillage.
But the Myrcans slew these lords, and sought better ones to replace them.
Many faiths were broken before the people became convinced of the truth of the Myrcans’ mission, but after a while, when no Myrcan had turned against the righteous lords, and they had not tried to usurp the rule of the Dales and the Vale, then they were at last accepted.
This was long after Rol was dead.
They became the guardians of the land, the scourge of any who tried to harm it, and every new generation issued out of Merkadale to take the place of those who had fallen for Minginish.
The Myrcans found their purpose.’
The fire cracked, and Luib's story was ended.
The wind rustled the loose flaps of the lean-to.
Riven could feel Madra's soft breathing beside him.
Not a story.
More like a sermon.
After a while he dozed, and then slid into a dreamless sleep.
He disentangled himself from Madra before dawn to share his watch with Bicker, and the two of them saw the sun come up.
The snow had stopped falling by then, and the sky was beginning to clear.
The light grew over a white, silent world of vague hummocks and hollows, and the stars faded.
‘A quiet night, after all,’ Bicker said, his eyes on the flat land of the wide river valley ahead.
‘And today we will leave the hills behind, and go to the places where men dwell.’
‘The grypesh won't follow us, then?’
The dark man shook his head.
‘I think they would have lost our trail in last night's snowstorm.
If it had been Rime Giants following us we would have had a more difficult time of it; they enjoy such conditions.
But grypesh do much the same as we do: they hole up and wait for the weather to pass.’
The first sunlight touched the snow and picked shadows out of their faces.
‘It's so far away,’ Riven murmured, but Bicker heard him.
‘Are you that eager to get there?’
‘I don't know.
I was.’
‘Maybe it is not only the Myrcans who are looking for a purpose.’
Riven barked a mirthless laugh, and remembered Guillamon shaking his hand.
I hope you find peace.
‘I don't want anything,’ he said roughly, though he was no longer sure if it were strictly true.
He twisted away from the thought of the sleeping girl in the shelter.
The sun dazzled the company as they continued on their way.
The horses seemed to have recovered, but they kept to an easy pace as the snow was deep.
It was almost warm, and Riven hung his cloak by the saddle bow.
The country rolled endlessly beyond his sight, and he abandoned himself to the routine of riding, resting, eating and sleeping.
Three days passed with no signs of pursuit.
His limbs ceased to complain about the riding, and he slept more easily on the hard ground at night.
Tagan roamed the country to the north of the company, but it was deserted, empty of both men and beasts.
They saw a few hares, two of which the tracker managed to shoot for the pot, and there were buzzards overhead sometimes, but that was all.
Carnach Rorim was to their east as they continued, and Tagan saw one of its patrols once, far off, but the company went unnoticed.
They had no more snow, and the streams they crossed were free of ice; the unnatural winter was less severe now that they were out of the hills.
Ten days after they had left Ralarth Rorim they saw the silver sword-glitter of a river in the distance.
Bicker shaded his eyes and peered north with satisfaction.
‘The Great River.
We have made good time.
We shall reach it tonight, and tomorrow follow it northwards.’
He grinned at Ratagan.
‘And soon we will be within smelling distance of ale houses, my thirsty friend.’
‘Praise be!’ the big man responded.
‘My stomach had all but resigned itself to a life of poverty.’
As the day wore on they heard everywhere around them the rill of running water, and grass began to poke up through the snow in clumps.
Riven even heard skylarks sporting over the open meadows.
The company began to take off their winter clothes, and the saddle bows became piled with sheepskins.
‘We leave winter behind us, it seems,’ Tagan said, turning in the saddle to look back at the still-white hills.
He shook his head.
‘Strange times we live in.’
‘When the real winter comes to the land there will be lean times,’ Corrary said, spitting over his mount's shoulder.
That evening they camped beside the broad river on ground that  was free of snow.
The sun spangled on the water as it went down into a red wrack of clouds.
Luib studied it as the others set up camp.
‘A fine day tomorrow, and no more snow in the air.
We've been given back our summer.’
He glanced at Riven, and then began unsaddling his horse.
‘I am glad,’ said Ratagan.
‘Snow is a fine thing for children, but at my age it looks less pretty.’
‘You are not so comely yourself,’ Bicker laughed.
The river was almost half a mile wide, with several islets dotted throughout it that were alive with wildfowl.
Riven glimpsed the blue flash of a kingfisher as he set out his bedroll, and paused, memories of wheelchairs and white-clad figures nagging at him.
It stayed light till late, the last scarlet wash of sunlight lingering in the clouds at the brim of the horizon.
They sat around the fire, letting the horses graze freely with Rimir and Darmid to look after them, and listened to the birds that sang in the reeds thronging the riverbank.
The sky remained clear, and a mist rose out of the river as it darkened.
They brought in the horses, hobbled them and built up the fire.
Then they lay like the spokes of a wheel around it and heard the sound of the river and the night fowl before drifting off to sleep.
In the morning Riven lay half awake, listening to the sound of the water close at hand, and for a few moments thought it was a quiet tide outside the bothy.
He opened his eyes to be caught by the early morning sun, and to see that Bicker and the Myrcans were already awake and fixing breakfast.
It was warm under the skin rugs, and now that Madra had taken off most of her winter clothing he could feel the shape of her curved next to him.
He moved his hand and touched her breast through the robe she wore, found the nipple and stroked it until it hardened and she stirred.
Then he pulled himself out from under the rugs, feeling ashamed, and walked over to where the bank was free of weeds.
He stared down at the slow-moving water, seeing a vague, bearded reflection.
Then he knelt and thrust his head into the water, its coldness bringing a shout to his lips.
They moved on again with the river coursing slowly in the growing light beside them and the birds darting out in front of their horses' knees.
The Great River swept sluggishly through meads that were aflame with buttercups and dotted with the last patches of melting snow.
Copses of beech and alder appeared, straggling  along the banks with their roots lost in a tangle of briars and bracken.
The sun set alight the water drops that speckled their leaves and shadowed the ground beneath them.
Flies danced in the air.
It was Corrary who pointed, and drew their gaze to the dark shadow on the water.
They squinted into the sun and made out the shape of a boat near the midstream.
It was fiat and broad, and a crowd of sweating men on the deck were poling it upstream amongst the bird-filled islets.
Their voices were faint at this distance, but they could be seen gesturing towards the company.
A tall, dark figure who had no pole moved amongst them issuing commands, and slowly the flatboat drew over to the bank.
Bicker reined in his horse, and the rest followed suit, the Myrcans sliding their staves out of their belts.
‘River traders,’ said Ratagan.
‘Not pirates.
They are probably heading up to Talisker.’
The poles slid glistening in and out of the water as the craft approached and then beached with a bump.
Men jumped on to the bank to secure it, and the man who had given the orders leapt overboard with a silver plash, two others behind him.
He held up an open hand in salute.
‘Greetings, fellow travellers!
We are well met on this fine day indeed.
Finnan is my name, and you see my craft and my trade before you.’
He bowed.
He was very tall, taller even than Ratagan, though only half as broad.
He had a bright head of closely cropped golden hair that the sun turned to silver, and a darker, neat moustache on his upper lip.
He was dressed in weather-stained leather that was decorated with scarlet and yellow thread, and there was a slim sword hanging from his hip.
The men behind him were brawny and short-haired, their bare arms reddened by sun and wind and their bare feet wet and muddy.
They eyed the company, especially the striped faces of the Myrcans.
‘For Talisker we are bound, with a pitifully small cargo of hides and grain that the weather has played havoc with.’
Finnan had a cheeky grin that had nonetheless something guarded about it.
He reminded Riven a little of the Bicker he had known at the bothy.
Bicker did not dismount, but leaned forward in the saddle and nodded to the river pilot.
‘I was wondering,’ Finnan went on, ‘seeing your company so finely decked out for travelling, if you were by any chance headed the same way?’
‘And if we were, would it concern you?’ the dark man asked politely.
Finnan laughed.
‘Why, of course.
We can both aid the other here if we've a mind to.
Passengers would make my trip profitable after all, and the river journey would be quicker and save the horses.
It is a long way to Talisker, and there are fewer beasts to be met on the river than on the land these days.
What do you say?’
‘And how much do you charge for your ferrying?’
Ratagan called out to him.
‘A modest amount, no more.
I am not a greedy man.
Say a knuckle of silver from each of you; no more than you would balance on a fingertip.
As I say, I am not a greedy man.’
‘You are not,’ Bicker admitted.
‘That is a fair offer — but why be so generous?’
Finnan shrugged.
‘I am tired of poling the river, telling the same stories and hearing the same ones in return.
My crew would like to hear some new news from the Dales.’
‘Indeed?’
Bicker's gaze had suddenly sharpened.
‘And is there no news forthcoming lately?’
‘Much, but all of it hearsay.
You have Hearthwares and Myrcans with you.
Some of you have the look of lords, yet you bear the mark of hard travelling and your steeds are scarred.
I have heard of a battle, of Myrcan fighting Myrcan, and many upheavals amongst the Rorim to the south.
I am curious to know more.
That to me is worth more than silver, for I think much about the state of the land in these strange times, with snow falling in midsummer and the Giants wandering the hills.’
‘And you think we can sate the curiosity you harbour?’
Finnan smiled.
‘I am sure of it.
We carry beer on board.
It is a fine thing to talk the evenings away, when the river work is done, with a mug in your hand.
A weakness in me, some call it.
I say a foible that any man is entitled to.’
Ratagan let out a deep laugh.
‘Well said, waterman.
What do you think, Bicker?
Do we take up Finnan's offer, or wear down our horses’ hoofs further?’
Bicker stared at Finnan for a long moment, then turned to take in the rest of the company.
‘Is anyone here against this?’
There were no answers, and he nodded.
‘Very well, Finnan.
Run out a ramp and we'll board our horses.
You shall have your silver and your news in return for a safe trip  upstream to Talisker's Rivergate.’
He spat on his hand, and Finnan stepped forward to slap it.
‘A worthy bargain, and a wise course for us all.
Welcome to the river, my friends.’
Chapter Thirteen
The flatboat was forty feet wide and at least twice as long.
At the stern was a large, squat cabin which had the steering oar on its roof.
There was an open hold half full of sacks and bundles of cured hides, and here the horses were put.
Large tarpaulins were pulled over the hold whenever it rained, and most of the crew slept in their shelter.
Finnan's passengers stowed most of their gear in the hold and the Hearthwares slept there, but there was room for the others in the three-sided cabin, though the roof was so low they bumped their heads.
The boat had a crew of twenty, and they laboured from dawn to dusk in two shifts to keep the clumsy craft moving against the current, poling it away from sand-bars and small, reed-covered islands.
But Finnan was true to his word, and there was beer that night to drink when they had beached and set the horses to graze ashore, and lit their fires on the bank.
And they could see for the first time the lights of settlements off in the dark distance of the Vale.
Finnan labelled them as they ate their evening meal.
‘Corriad, Bemnor, Drum Larad; and that larger one there, that is Conwere.
It used to be a good town for the hides trappers brought down out of the hills, but that trade is gone now, along with many another.
Times are hard even here.
They'll be harder before we see the spring, if the spring is to come when it should.
The way the year is running we could have a drought at midwinter and snowdrops at harvest time.
Very unsettling.’
‘Have you sailed the rivers long?’ red-haired Darmid asked him.
‘A fair number of years.
A good way to see the land without getting bow-legged doing it, or flat-footed.
The river is placid here, where it becomes patient in its long run to the sea and decides to slow and look at the land it passes through.
A man can learn a lot from the river.’
Bicker leaned forward to toy with his mug.
‘How have the lands  in the Vale fared over the past year?
It is months since I have been near them.’
Finnan was staring at Madra, and Riven could see her staring back with one eyebrow raised, eyes steady.
The river pilot smiled crookedly and then turned to Bicker.
‘The villages down near the river have been almost untouched, but many farms in the hills are now deserted where their people have fled the grypesh and the Giants.
Packs roam everywhere at will and the few towns have not ‘Wares to police the whole countryside, so the farmers and herders are mostly left to fend for themselves and, as I said, the hunters are all but ruined.
Many of them have been slain, and those who still pursue their craft do so in large bands, which means for bad hunting, even while it keeps them alive.’
‘It is worse in the Dales,’ Ratagan put in.
‘There they raid right up to the walls of the fortresses, and within.’
Finnan looked down into his beer.
‘I had heard that.
I heard more, besides.
How much of it is true?’
He glanced at the two silent Myrcans, but Isay and Luib did not appear to notice him.
‘There was fighting,’ Bicker admitted with a frown.
‘There were misunderstandings, but all has settled down.’
‘There was a battle?’
‘Yes.
Many died.
The three western Dales are under one leader now.’
‘Would it be a man named the Warbutt?’
Finnan asked off-handedly.
Bicker shrugged.
‘It might.’
Finnan was thoughtful.
‘A great leader, if the rumours are true.
Bicker scowled.
‘I have heard that said about him.’
He rose abruptly.
‘I must go and see that the horses are secure,’ and he left the fires for the darkness where Rimir and Corrary stood guard with two of Finnan's sailors.
The river pilot watched him leave.
‘A man with much on his shoulders, if I am not mistaken.
How else can he ignore loveliness seated so close to him?’
Here he raised his cup to Madra and then drained it with a flourish.
‘Our journey will be the lighter for the sight of it.’
Then he stood up and stretched.
‘I have my own steed to see to, also.’
He went off in the direction of the river and the dark bulk of the flatboat.
Riven threw back the last of his beer.
None of my business.
I don't own anyone.
He looked at Madra, but she was gazing into the fire and did not see him.
The next morning was fine and clear, after a mist was burnt off the water by the rising sun.
Riven sat at the bow with his eyes in the dazzle of the water.
To him the passing of the water was interminable, the shining poles like the dipping legs of a stranded insect.
There were houses of turf and stone close by the river, and sometimes they passed rowboats, but the flatboat was sailing up against a rock wall it could not scale.
This world was real.
He had held it in his arms in the dark and kissed its eyes.
Somehow he had been infused with some of its magic — that word again, he thought wryly.
Well, it's as good as any other.
So he was a wizard, in a way.
He made the seasons change and brought facsimiles of his own world's people into this one.
But there was more to it than that.
Minginish itself had its fair share of magic.
Hence the dark-haired girl who did not know him and who wandered Skye and Minginish at will, searching for something she could not recognise.
If Riven were responsible for Jinneth, then the land itself was responsible for Jenny's other incarnation.
Two of them, here.
But how much of his wife was in either?
And here the rub, the wall which always halted him.
Was Jenny really dead?
Was she at peace, or was there a part of her that was even now wandering Minginish?
That idea he could not bear.
So he was travelling north, into the mountains.
And if he could not find the Dwarves, then he was going to Sgurr Dearg and home.
Try perhaps to write a happy ending for this world and the people in it.
Perhaps that would be enough for them, if not for himself.
Most of all, though, he had to make sure that his wife rested in peace.
So take it as it comes, for the moment.
Enjoy the trip.
Unwillingly, he found his gaze dragged to Madra.
She was on the cabin deck with Finnan, Bicker and Ratagan, a smile lighting her face.
Did she smile more often these days?
He dragged his eyes away again and watched the labouring backs of the sailors.
Darmid and Corrary sweated there too, whilst a grey-bearded, scrawny riverman criticised their poling.
The Hearthware armour was a shining pile on the lower deck.
Three quiet days went past in the slow slap and plop of the river.
They had warm days and clear, cold nights when they sat round  the camp fires or stood guard over the horses.
During that time they stopped to talk to no one, though they passed other craft on the river whose occupants stared at the company.
Apparently Myrcans and Hearthwares were a rarity in these parts.
There were straggling villages that trailed along the bank with a boat to each house and nets hanging to dry or to be mended.
The Great River was the highway for many towns and villages; the only highway that was still safe.
The horses of the company were making the most of their rest.
Their wounds had healed and they were in full flesh again, frisking by the riverbank when they were disembarked to graze.
On the fourth evening of their waterborne journey they tied up at a place which had thickets of hazel and birch growing near the water.
The ground was boggy underfoot, though there was grass in abundance between the trees.
They let the horses wander there with Rimir, Isay and two of Finnan's men watching over them, then found a relatively dry spot and set up camp in what had become their normal routine.
The cooking fires were lit and pots were set over the flames to boil.
Some of them gathered firewood, others drew water.
Riven wandered away from the camp into the trees, and shook his head to Isay's questioning look.
‘I won't go far.
I want to be on my own.’
He rubbed the muzzle of a horse when it nosed up to him, and scratched its ears.
Then he walked deeper into the trees as the twilight thickened around him and the stars began appearing among the branches over his head.
He sat with his back to the pale bark of a birch and hugged his knees to his chest.
Been here long enough.
Beginning to like it, that's my problem.
Leaves rustled behind, and he could not stop the smile when Madra sat down beside him.
A pleasant night,’ she said.
‘There will be a moon later on, and we'll have mist by the morning.’
She rested her head on his shoulder, and even at that slight touch he felt the familiar stirrings.
He moved slightly away, and she had to lift her head.
‘Why?’ she asked thickly.
Why?
Because there is a woman I love who may yet be out there with a heart that is beating.
But he said nothing.
‘Finnan asked me if I was spoken for by you.’
He looked at her for the first time and saw the tears on her cheeks that were glistening  in the starlight.
He put his arm about her then, and drew her close.
Oh, you hero.
‘I don't know what you want.’
He closed his eyes and leaned his head against the cool bark of the tree.
‘I'm not sure I do any more.
I'm sorry, Madra.
Getting to know me was a bad idea.’
‘But does it have to be that way?’
‘It does if you want your world to survive.’
‘But one moment you hold me, the next you push me away.’
He cursed softly.
‘I'm just a weak fool who can't do what he should.
I'm sorry.’
‘What is it you are going to do in the mountains?
Who is it you are going to meet?’
‘I don't know.
The Dwarves.
My — my wife, maybe.’
She stiffened, and whispered, ‘You said she was dead.’
Slowly, hopelessly, he said: ‘She is, in my world.
But somehow she is here, in Minginish.
I have seen her…here.’
Madra pulled away from him.
‘How can that be?
How can she be here?’
Riven's hands fell to the earth and the leaf mould.
‘I don't know.
I don't know how any of this happened.
I didn't ask for it.’
In a quiet voice, Madra said, ‘Neither did 1.’
They were silent for a long time.
Her eyes were very dark in the dim light, her hair like a hood that shadowed her face.
‘What was she like, your wife?’
It seemed he heard that question again, a thousand years ago and in another world.
‘She was…a lot like you in some ways,’ he said at last, admitting it.
‘More reckless, maybe, and afraid of nothing.’
But that was what had killed her.
That, and a rope he had forgotten to replace.
Madra touched his face, traced the old scars on his forehead.
‘You saw her die.’
Michael!
‘Yes.’
She pulled him to her and held him as though he were a child, kissing away his frown.
They lay still.
Off towards the river one of the horses nickered loudly.
Then the night was quiet again.
Except for the sound of feet on the leaves, thick as the patter of heavy rain on the floor of the wood.
Riven sat up, then jumped  to his feet as he saw the glitter of the eyes and the shadows moving amongst the trees.
He bent and seized Madra's hand, pulling her to her feet.
‘Come on!’
They pelted away with the leaves flying at their heels and the sound of the pursuing feet closer, along with the squealing as they were sighted.
They zigzagged around tree trunks and saw the dark shapes scurrying along out of the corner of their eyes.
The breath sawed in their throats.
Madra tripped and fell headlong in the leaf mould, and in an instant their pursuers were upon her.
She disappeared with a scream as a grypesh leapt.
Riven yelled incoherently and swept out his sword.
He buried the blade in the beast's back and it jumped off her, snarling.
Then a heavy body struck him from behind and knocked him down, the fetid breath on his cheek.
He rolled, and felt claws rake his ribs, but gripped his sword and thrust upwards.
Hot liquid and entrails spilled over him, and he scrambled out from under the thing.
He threw himself forward, startling the beasts that were tearing at the prostrate girl on the ground, and arced his sword round with manic strength, tearing the blade through two of them with one swing.
But there were others to take their place.
He raged at the futility of it, and shouted for help as his blade hissed and crunched, but his arms were tiring and he could feel blood running down inside his tunic.
Then men burst into view under the trees, and there were half a dozen others there with him, their swords shining in the moon.
Two Myrcan staves were splintering bones.
Riven heard Bicker's voice.
‘Get back to the boat before we're overrun!’
Two figures bent and picked up Madra, and half carried, half dragged her away whilst the rest fought a running battle with the maddened grypesh.
They could not be forced away, but came on in ever greater numbers, shrilling with pain and anger.
They emerged from the trees, and Riven could see that the open space before the river was alive with the great grey-furred beasts and their cold eyes.
They swarmed like lice over the camp, and there was a battle being waged at the boat which men were trying to push out of the shallows whilst others held off the beasts.
The moonlight splintered on the foaming water as they fought calf-deep in the river.
Already bodies were floating sullenly at the bow, and  others were drifting slowly downstream.
But they were not all grypesh.
Riven's group cut and slashed their way to the river without respite.
The animals which fought there gave little heed to defence; they massed around them and tried to engulf them.
There was a sudden space when the man at Riven's shoulder went down with a cry.
He did not come up again.
They splashed into the shallows and slipped on the smooth stones.
The boat was drifting into the current, the long poles dipping in the dark water and pushing her away.
They were floundering chest-deep, and Riven went to Madra's head, helping to hold it above the water.
The grypesh swam out after them, and there were battles fought there in a welter of blood and foam.
Riven could see nothing for the water in his eyes, but when the dark shape of the hull loomed up he pushed Madra towards it.
Other hands took her from him, and he grasped the side of the craft, too tired to pull himself up.
Teeth sank into his leg, and he was jerked under the water.
He choked for air, water gurgling into his ears and fighting to enter his mouth.
The teeth shook him.
His hands met a furry body and claws that flailed at him.
He dug his thumbs into the eyes, a red bonfire blazing at his chest, and heard an underwater bubbling squeal.
Then he was released, and whooping for air in the moonlight.
Something hooked under his collar, hauling him upwards and choking him.
He tried to fight it, but he had not the strength.
He was lifted out of the water and dumped with a smack on hard wood.
Then he lay there gasping and looking into the unreadable eyes of Isay.
Finnan was shouting commands and swords were still flashing at the beasts who fought to clamber on board.
Riven had lost his in the river, but he snatched up one of the long river poles and stabbed it down on the crowds of hairy heads which thronged the water, clicking against skulls.
But there were too many of them.
They swarmed on board with the agility of rats and leapt for the defenders.
The flatboat drifted helplessly downstream like a stricken beetle as the crew fought for their lives against the wet teeth and the rabid eyes.
Men went down with two or three of the beasts ripping at them; others fell overboard and were killed in a froth of churning water.
Riven managed to prise a knife from a dead sailor's hand and stood between Isay and Darmid as they tried to keep their attackers away from Madra's still form on the  deck.
The Myrcan stave was almost invisible as it smashed bones and cracked skulls, hurling the animals into the river, and Darmid's sword wreaked havoc also.
Riven darted in with a stab when he could, but there was little room between them.
He stepped back and chanced a look at Madra.
Blood marked her torn robe in many places and her eyes were closed, but she was breathing.
Darmid fell with his throat torn out and a grypesh worrying at it.
Riven stabbed his knife in deep behind its ear and it went limp.
Then he picked up Darmid's sword and met the next grypesh with a savage thrust that disembowelled it.
There were fewer of them now.
The flatboat was out in midstream and the current was carrying the swimming beasts away.
The defenders' plight was no longer so desperate.
They advanced steadily along the boat, forcing the grypesh back until the grey beasts were scrabbling on the cabin deck.
Bicker and Finnan killed the last one there.
Its body fell with a loud splash to be taken by the river.
Then the fight was over.
Bodies lay in heaps on the deck, in the cabin, in the hold.
The flatboat was dripping with blood.
Wounded men were groaning quietly, and a crippled grypesh bubbled with pain until a sailor finished it off.
Riven bent to Madra, but did not know what to do.
He glanced at Isay helplessly.
The Myrcan's face was a wilderness.
‘Twice I have failed you, Michael Riven.
Third time pays for all.
It will never happen again.’
Ratagan stalked over the bodies towards them with his clothes in shreds.
‘Is she alive?’
Riven nodded, but could not speak.
He took off his bloody tunic and wrapped it around her, smoothed the hair away from her face.
There was a lurch and a bump.
A grinding noise started from the hull, then was still.
They looked up, and saw that the boat had drifted against an islet in the river.
The current held it fast there, and it drifted no farther.
‘Over half my crew are dead,’ Finnan said.
The firelight flickered over a face that was grim as stone.
He poked the embers with a stick.
‘I am not even sure they will be enough to crew the boat upriver.’
‘We will take the place of some of them,’ Bicker said, ‘though our people have suffered also.
Three of our company were lost, Darmid, Rimir and Tagan, and the maid is grievously hurt.
That  leaves six to man the poles along with your eight.
It should be enough.’
‘Most of our gear has been lost, and all your horses,’ Finnan went on as if he had not heard him.
‘But why they attacked in such numbers and with such determination is beyond my ken.
They even took to the river.
Why would they behave in such a fashion?’
Bicker shrugged, but his eyes flicked over the fire for a second to Riven.
And Riven sat beside Madra as she lay on most of the bedding they had left, with strips of cloak bound about the wounds which bit into her, and Ratagan on her other side with his face twisted in concern.
She was conscious, but could not speak because of the gash at her throat.
She smiled for Riven though, and that smile was like a sword blade thrust in his chest.
He gripped her hand with white knuckles, and could say nothing, to her or to anyone else.
He felt he had finally been given the spade to bury himself with.
‘How many days to Talisker?’
Bicker was asking Finnan.
‘Just over a week,’ the pilot replied.
‘Maybe somewhat longer for us now, with everything.’
‘Too long,’ Bicker said with quiet savagery, burying his eyes in the fire.
They buried the bodies of those who had died on the boat, but had to leave the others where they were for grypesh could be seen prowling on the bank.
There were scores of the animals.
They were all set to poling now, and it was hard work navigating the flatboat upstream.
For Riven, it was agony.
He seemed to have cracked bones complaining all over his body, and when they stopped at night he ate, stayed by Madra for a while, and usually fell asleep beside her.
They moored in the evenings to various of the islets which dotted the river.
They did not dare camp on the western bank where the attack had been; the eastern bank showed no signs of life but the tangled strips of trees continued along it and they mistrusted what they might hide.
Even so, Bicker and Luib had to hunt on the eastern bank to supplement what food they had left.
They found deserted houses, sometimes whole hamlets left lying empty with mutilated cattle in the fields around them.
The land was dead and uninhabited, and the carrion birds were never out of the sky.
A week went past, and the picture did not change.
Madra's wounds began to heal, but her voice did not come back.
The rest  of the crew and the company poled doggedly on, and most days the silence was broken only by the plop of the water and the odd cry of wild fowl.
It grew warmer, and the mosquitoes that shimmered over the water began to plague them incessantly.
They lit smoky fires at night to keep them at bay, but were soon itching with bites.
After nine days they sighted Talisker through the haze.
The river curved in wide sweeps through the flat of the Vale, with hedged fields surrounding it, and in the middle of one great meander there was a steep-sided hill on which the city was built.
It was like a mountain of walls and houses and streets rising out of the Vale with the river curling round its feet, lapping at the high walls.
The light glinted off a white tower at the very summit of the hill, and Riven caught the glitter of metal on the battlements as a helmet or spear blade caught the sun.
In the river around the walls were crowds of boats filled with a multitude.
Their noise could be heard even at this distance, and a hint of the smell drifted down the wind.
‘And here we are,’ said Finnan.
All his gaiety was gone now.
‘That is the river market you see before you in the water.
On those boats you can buy anything from a loaf to a life.
I have kept my half of the bargain, though I never guessed how costly it would be for me.
Beyond the river market is the Rivergate.
We shall pass through there to the city docks.’
For a moment his eyes turned away from the city to the sleeping form of Madra.
‘What will you be doing for her?’
‘We must find a leech,’ Bicker replied.
‘In that great city it should not be hard.’
‘I know one,’ said Finnan.
‘I will take you.’
After a while they were poling through crowds of anchored boats which teemed with people.
The craft were tied together, and there were mazes of decks and gangways.
It was almost like a second, floating city in the shadow of Talisker itself.
Hundreds of voices were crying out their wares.
There were drunken brawls that rolled from one vessel to another and ended with a splash in the cloudy river, or there were glimpses of painted female faces, bodies barely concealed by thin silk shafts.
Invitations and threats, bargaining and cursing filled the air, coming from the mouths of men, women and ragged children and mingling with the sound of dogs barking, chickens fussing, mules braying.
The surface of the water was littered with scraps of cloth, pieces of rotten fruit, mouldy vegetables and human detritus, and the air was as crowded, with the smell of excrement, rotting meat, unwashed bodies and a thin sting of strong spice.
To try and take it in was like drinking too strong a wine.
Riven turned his attention to Madra, and brushed the flies away from her face.
Somehow Finnan made sense of the tangled labyrinth, and brought them through the lanes and alleys of boats until they could see looming ahead of them the solid sunwashed stone of the city wall.
It reared high above their heads and made the river market into a town of ants, the meaningless scurryings of insects.
A great dark arch appeared, and then they passed into shadow with the sounds of water glooping as echoes in the high tunnel and the light playing along the sides like silk in the wind.
The splashes of their poles bounced round them, and when they spoke their voices bounced with them.
Rats criss-crossed the water like caterpillars, their tiny screes a mocking reminder of grypesh.
Then the sun burned on the water ahead and they were dazzled by the sudden brightness.
They came out into a wide waterway which ended in docks.
The buildings of the city arced up incredibly steeply on all sides, covering the docks in shadow.
There were large boats there that could have been called ships; they were webbed with a confusion of lines and ropes, and had the spider figures of men clinging to them.
Cargoes were off-loaded on to the stone docks, and again they caught the sharp pungency of unknown spices.
Hoarse cries busied the air, and Riven heard the gulls screaming as they fought for odd fish on the quay and whirled round the masts of the ships, speckling the docks with guano.
Finnan knew the harbour master well, and found a berth for the flatboat.
The company helped make her fast, and then gathered what was left of their things together.
Luib carried Madra off the boat, and stood with her in his arms as they completed the formalities of berthing.
Two of the crew stayed to oversee the unloading of the meagre cargo, and the rest were paid by Finnan with the same silver knuckles that Bicker had purchased the company's passage with.
Then the sailors dispersed, shouting bawdy welcomes to others they knew who were busy at the bigger ships.
Finnan led the company through the curious stares of many to the end of the docks, and the steep climb up the hill to the city proper.
The streets were narrow, dirty and cobbled, and the gutters were clogged with all forms of evil-smelling filth.
Pails were emptied from upper windows, making their way hazardous.
More than once they saw a passer-by, soaking wet, shout threats and curses at an open window.
The city was a vast maze of narrow alleys pocked with ale houses and middens, shops and smithies, brothels and moneylenders.
Armed men stood in groups at many of the street corners.
They would start to jeer at the company, but stopped when they saw the Hearthware sashes and the Myrcan staves and whispered amongst themselves.
‘Sellswords,’ Finnan said ominously.
‘They have been hired in droves to police the lower city.’
They climbed ever more steeply, and the streets broadened, became cleaner.
Stone began to replace the wood of the lower city and there were fewer ambushes from above.
They encountered taverns with painted signs hanging outside, and shops with their wares displayed in the windows.
The people were better dressed, but just as curious.
At last Finnan stopped before a high stone house that had as its sign a serpent twisted round a staff.
He glanced at Madra, but she was asleep.
Riven fidgeted and glowered beside Luib as the Myrcan cradled her.
The river pilot turned to Bicker.
‘We are here.
Phrynius is a friend of mine.’
He laid an odd emphasis on the word.
‘Some folk in the city see him in a different light.
It is said he is one of the Hidden Folk — a wizard of sorts — and as such he is not always popular.
I stopped his neighbours burning his house once, and for that he owes me.
I know not what you people think of his kind, but he has never harmed a soul that I know of.
You have my word he will do his best to help the maid here.’
‘Not all people shun the Hidden Folk,’ Bicker told him quietly.
‘I see no reason to doubt you or your friend.’
Finnan nodded and smiled, then he hammered on the door with his fist.
‘Open up, father greybeard.
It is I, the river pirate, come to say hello!’
There was a long pause, then finally a rattle of bolts and the door opened a fraction; in the crack appeared one bright black eye.
The door was opened fully, and they saw a little dark man with a pointed grey beard and two eyes like black pebbles.
He beamed broadly at Finnan's grinning face, showing pink, empty gums.
‘My dear boy, how good to see you!
Come on in!’
Then he seemed to squint and see the others standing there.
‘Company?
Finnan, has there been trouble?’
‘That could be said,’ the pilot sighed.
‘Your help is needed, your way with hurts.
We have a patient.’
The little man stood back.
‘My task in life.
Come in, and bring your friends with you.’
They trooped inside and followed Phrynius down a shabby hall, then through another door to a larger room which had the shutters pulled down against the sun and which smelled slightly of ammonia and sulphur.
There was a fire burning in a brazier, shelves of dusty books and a large table littered with papers, vials, bottles and jars.
A threadbare rug covered the stone of the floor, and a human skull grinned to itself in the corner.
Riven half expected to see a crocodile hanging from the ceiling, but instead there were bulbs of garlic and bunches of other herbs which he could not identify.
Their tang permeated the room along with the chemical smells, making him blink.
He stared at the rows of glass jars below the books on the walls — and saw an eye staring back at him from one of them, and what could have been a human foetus in another.
Luib had laid Madra down on a faded red couch.
She was awake now, and looking about her in bewilderment.
Riven sat beside her and took her hand whilst Finnan introduced the company and told Phrynius something of what had befallen them.
The old man shook his head.
‘What times!
What times are upon us!’
He shuffled across to where Madra lay and shooed Riven out of the way.
Then he took his place and touched here and there with his thin, liver-spotted hands.
She flinched, but made no sound.
The old man spoke to them without looking round, and with surprising authority in his voice.
‘Finnan, heat some water and rip some bindings in the kitchen.
The rest of you must leave; no good in crowds.
The poor girl doesn't want you staring at her.
Get out.
Have a drink, polish your swords.
Go!’
They left, somewhat sheepishly, and followed Finnan into a tiny, grubby kitchen where he was setting a water-filled pot over the fire.
‘He's a funny old goat,’ the pilot said, ‘but he has more goodness in him than the rest of the city put together.
She's in excellent hands.’
‘All right,’ Bicker said.
‘I believe you.
So we wait.’
He glanced about him.
The company were crammed into the kitchen like a limpet in its shell.
He laughed suddenly.
‘But not here.
There's not enough room to scratch our heads.’
‘Beer,’ said Ratagan suddenly.
‘Beer!
By all that's holy, I'd almost forgotten we were in a place where they sell beer.
Our problem is solved.
We'll go and wet our throats.’
‘There is an inn, the Blackbird, just down the street,’ Finnan put in.
‘It has good ale, and the landlord has never cheated me yet.’
‘Then we are off,’ said Bicker.
‘I will stay,’ Luib said quietly.
The others trooped out of the healer's house on to the sunlit street, glad to breathe fresh air and to feel the breeze on their faces.
They almost ran down the road, drawing looks from the passers-by.
But they did not care.
They were glad to be free of the flatboat and the smell of death that had been with them ever since the battle.
Even Riven laughed with the rest as they piled into the inn Finnan had told them of, and Ratagan wished the landlord good day in a roar that made the poor man cower.
Soon they were kicking the bar with their toes, their noses buried in cold beer.
Only Corrary was still subdued, remembering his brother lying in a makeshift grave far from his home Rorim.
He had given Darmid's sword to Riven, to replace the one lost.
When the first beer had gone they ordered another, and turned to survey the inn.
It was quiet, but perhaps that was because their entrance had been so noisy.
A scattered crowd of locals was eyeing them in silence.
The landlord cleaned a tankard with nervous twists of his hand.
Ratagan belched, raised his mug to the other customers, then turned to lean on the bar again.
Isay was the only one not drinking.
He stood beside Riven fingering his staff thoughtfully.
‘So here we are,’ Ratagan said, ‘in Talisker, biggest city of the north, and the last before the mountains.
What now, Bicker?’
The dark man sipped his beer, then rubbed his finger in the condensation that was dripping on the outside of the metal mug.
‘The hardest part of the journey lies before us.’
‘The mountains,’ Riven murmured.
‘And no horses,’ said Corrary.
‘That is no great thing.
They would not get us far in the heights of the Greshorns anyway,’ said Bicker.
‘How far?’
Riven asked.
‘To the Staer, perhaps three weeks if the weather is kind.
That is what it took me in the spring of last year, at any rate.
It is a roundabout route we have to take to the mountain, avoiding the  horseshoe of high peaks that arc out from it.
If we leave the city by the north gate we will travel through the fief of Armishir before coming to the foothills of the mountains themselves.
Quirinus is lord there and he knows me, for it is with he and his Myrcans that I took up service over a year ago.
We can find help there…’
He frowned.
‘Though no doubt Quirinus would be more than slightly curious as to our errand in the Greshorns.
He has a mind like a blade, does the Lord of Armishir.’
Familiar names were going through Riven's mind as he tried to tie in what was real in this Minginish and what was in his stories.
Quirinus — the name rang in his head, and he remembered red wine and rich robes, a bald head and eyes like rain-scoured granite.
A laugh with an edge in it.
Quirinus.
‘There are many Myrcans up here, around Talisker,’ he said, making it half a statement and half a question.
Bicker looked at him in surprise, and then nodded.
‘Talisker is not so far from Merkadale, and it is the largest population centre in Minginish.
There are fifty of the Soldier-folk here in the city itself, under Odhar, and twice as many more in the surrounding fiefs.
And Talisker boasts at least five hundred Hearthwares.’
‘They have a job before them, in a place this size,’ Corrary remarked, but he sounded impressed nonetheless.
Riven saw him touch his sash unconsciously.
The Hearthware was dressed in a plain hide jerkin; most of their armour had been lost in the flight north and was at the bottom of the river by now.
There, or rusting around the bones of the dead.
The company had the appearance of hunted refugees, travel-stained and weary.
Only the faded sashes they wore, and the weapons they carried, marked them as anything but ordinary folk fleeing the marauders.
Those, and the presence of Myrcans in their midst.
‘Who rules here?’
Corrary asked.
‘I know nothing of this part of the world except for the tales sometimes told in the hall about the mountains.’
Bicker gulped at his beer.
‘Duke Godomar is head of the city council, and in theory has the last word when it comes to governing Talisker.
But the council is made up of powerful men — Saffarac, Valentir and others.
They head the guilds within the city itself, and control its trade.
The Duke must compromise with them in order to keep his own authority.
In the end, though, his Myrcans and Hearthwares are more than enough to overawe the retainers of the city lords, so there is a truce of sorts.’
‘A fine-balanced arrangement, if I'm not mistaken,’ Ratagan said absently, and downed more of his beer.
Conversation had started up among the customers in the tavern again, although two had left while the company had been talking amongst themselves.
The landlord was still looking a little ill-at-ease, however, and he flinched when Ratagan banged his tankard down on the bar with a grin and demanded a refill.
‘You're jumpy, my friend,’ the big man told him.
‘Why so nervous?
We're not brigands — merely men who appreciate a fine ale when it hits our throats.’
The landlord filled up the tankard from a keg below the bar.
As he straightened something like resolution crept into his florid face.
‘You're Sellswords, are you not, sir?
You've come here to take up with Sergius?’
Ratagan's face clouded, but Bicker laid a hand on his arm.
‘When did you last see a Myrcan Sellsword?’ he asked lightly, nodding towards a frowning Isay.
The landlord swallowed.
‘No offence was intended, sir, I assure you.
It's just that in these times…’
‘What times?’
Riven asked him with a snap.
He was suddenly tired and the beer was going to his head, making him think of Madra lying in the house they had left, and of the long journey ahead of them through the mountains.
He wanted no more adventure at present.
The landlord's eyes flicked to the dirty remnants of the Teller's badge on Riven's breast.
‘Forgive me.
I see you have come far, gentlemen.’
His voice steadied.
‘It is just that we are wary of strangers in the city these days, with so many of the surrounding folk seeking safety behind the walls, and the…the Sellswords flocking to Sergius's banner whether the Duke condones it or no.
There are so many of them in the city at present, and you are armed…’
He trailed off again.
Bicker sighed, and flipped a few coins on the bar.
‘Intrigue.
Politics.
Have we not enough problems?’
‘They say the Hidden Folk have come out of the mountains and attacked the Rorims to the south in league with the beasts,’ the landlord whispered confidentially.
‘There are rumours that the Rorims have been overrun.’
Bicker and Ratagan leaned on the bar, eyes blazing.
‘Who says this?’
Bicker demanded.
The landlord quailed.
‘It is a rumour — no more, sir.
Some  people fleeing from the south brought the news with them.’
‘What people?’
Ratagan asked, his red beard bristling.
‘I don't know.
Nobles.
A lord, or a lady.
Some say the Duke has a new bedfellow — a southern lady.
I don't know.’
Bicker swore viciously.
‘Jinneth.’
‘A coincidence maybe?’
Ratagan suggested, but the dark man shook his head.
‘It is her, I am sure of it.
Talisker may not be a healthy place for us.
I think it is best if we leave as soon as we can.’
Jinneth.
Here.
Riven felt somehow that it was fitting — Jenny's facsimile had come ahead of them.
He remembered the black foam of hair, the grey eyes, the ivory shoulders with torchlight playing on them, and grimaced.
No profit lay in that line of thinking.
A new bedfellow.
Oddly the thought still writhed within him — the thought of other men using the body he had loved himself, being given wholesale what he had been offered as an inestimable gift.
It's not the same.
But it writhed within him, nevertheless.
The door of the tavern banged open and a crowd of men entered with rain sheening their steel helms and the mail shirts under their cloaks.
They looked rough and ready.
They were unshaven or bearded, and dressed in leather and woollen breeches that were held together by scraps of hide with remnants of furs decorating their cloaks and the rims of their helms.
Each had also a band of black linen with a white stripe running through it tied round their upper arms, wound round their helmets or dangling from their sword hilts.
‘The Free Company,’ the landlord said in a whisper.
The newcomers spread out across the floor of the tavern, whilst customers dodged hurriedly out of their way.
None of them spoke, but Riven could feel their eyes taking in the strength of the group — Ratagan's size, Bicker's wiry frame, Corrary's longsword and Isay's staff.
They looked at each other, but still none said a word.
Finally one of their number stepped forward.
His black hair curled under the edge of his helmet and fell to his eyes, and there was a gap between his teeth.
‘Who are you and whence come you?’ he asked in a harsh rasp.
Ratagan stiffened and Isay brought his staff up into the ready position with a small, bleak smile adorning his face.
But it was Bicker who responded.
‘Who wants to know?’
The gap-toothed mercenary frowned.
‘I ask the questions here, and you answer them.
I say again: who are you and where are you from?’
‘Who gives you the authority to disturb honest men having a beer?’
Ratagan asked reasonably, his metal tankard grasped in one vast fist.
He grinned.
‘Would it not be better if you were asking us such questions with a beer in front of yourself and the taste of it warming your throat?
We could go about it in a friendly manner then — like people who have just met.
Would that not be better?’
Abruptly, his fist tightened and the tankard crumpled in his grip like clay.
Behind him the landlord backed away as far along the bar as he could.
Riven became exasperated.
It's like the fucking Wild West.
‘We're from the south,’ he said in the cracking silence.
‘We 're fleeing the beasts from the mountains.
We came here seeking refuge.’
The mercenary leader's eyes did not leave Ratagan's.
‘Where in the south?’
Riven blinked, and shared a glance with Bicker.
The dark man shrugged slightly.
‘Ralarth Rorim.’
The gap-toothed man nodded grimly.
‘Then you will come with us.
‘Where?’
‘To where we will take you.’
Ratagan threw the buckled tankard on to the stone of the floor with a clang, making the mercenaries jump.
He was still grinning, but there was no humour in his eyes.
‘Now this is hardly a courteous way to welcome visitors to your city.
Why not explain to us why we must perforce accompany you, and where to and suchlike, and mayhap things will be a little clearer.
That is the way for civilised men to behave, surely.’
‘We are in the employ of the City Council,’ the mercenary leader said in a strangled tone, ‘tasked with the policing of this city and the investigation of all unusual strangers — especially those from the south and the southern Rorims in particular.
Does that satisfy you?’
‘Almost entirely,’ Bicker said.
‘You have investigated us, and now you can go.
We are staying here to finish our drinks.’
‘You will come with me.’
The dark man smiled.
‘I think not.’
The mercenary looked them up and down once again, saw the almost joyful light in Isay's eyes, and then glanced at his own men behind him.
There were five of them, and they appeared none too happy at the prospect of battling a Myrcan.
‘I will return,’ he snarled.
‘And when I do, you will do my bidding.’
Then he spun around and strode out of the door, his men following after without a word.
Bicker groaned.
‘Isn't life difficult enough without Sellswords on our backs?’
He spoke to the others.
‘Time to leave.
We'll go to…where the others are.
It is not a great idea for us to be split up at this time.’
‘It isn't.
Talisker may not be too healthy for the likes of us at the moment, I'm thinking,’ Ratagan said.
‘And I'm thinking we need a talk with Finnan's healer friend,’ Bicker told him.
‘Come.’
And they filed warily out of the tavern in his wake.
The street was busy as they made their way to Phrynius's house, and they had to push folk aside to make headway.
The crowd was shouting and gesticulating, parents lifting children on shoulders to keep them out of the crush, fists punching the air, workmen's tools being waved like weapons.
The company had to halt as it became impossible to make any progress through the press of bodies.
They stood in a tight bunch and craned their necks to see what was causing the commotion.
It was Ratagan, with his great height, who saw first, and outrage and fury flooded his eyes.
‘What is it?’
Riven demanded of the big man.
Ratagan growled deep in his throat.
‘Something I had thought the people of this land had done with.
You'll see, soon enough.’
The roadway had cleared, the people packing themselves against the wall of the buildings that lined it.
Armoured men were pushing the crowd back with the shafts of their spears.
They were mercenaries, wearing the black and white linen bands of the Free Company, but there were two or three others in full Hearthware armour who seemed to be in charge.
Around their waists were black and white sashes, and swords were naked in their hands.
A ragged and halting procession made its way down the street, and the voices of the crowd rose into a single roar.
Spittle flew into the air and hit the cobbles.
A surge of people had to be thrust back by the Sellswords.
Riven stood on tiptoe to try and see what was going on.
A group of people was being alternately shoved and pulled down the roadway, the shafts of Sellsword spears hastening them on their way.
Their clothes were in tatters, and there was blood on their limbs.
When they stumbled a spear shaft was poked into their ribs.
There were both men and women there.
The women were only half-dressed and clutched rags in a pitiful attempt to cover themselves, but a grinning mercenary ripped away the scant tatters of one girl to send her sprawling nude on the cobbles.
The crowd was delighted, and the Sellswords again had to push back those who tried to lean forward and seize her.
She scrambled to her feet, sobbing, and continued on her way with her arms clamped around her breasts.
‘What is this?’
Riven asked in a daze.
Ratagan did not look at him.
‘This is the clearance,’ he said, his voice vicious with anger.
‘The Hidden Folk are being sought out once again, and driven from the city.’
Riven shook his head.
This was not the world of his books.
This was not the land he had created.
There was something terribly wrong here.
Beside him Ratagan was quivering like a nervous horse, his eyes on fire under the bristling brows, his hand clenched on the shaft of his axe.
‘Ratagan!’
Bicker said in a warning voice, and he reached across Riven to set a hand on the big man's arm.
A young blonde woman who had tripped against a Sellsword was shoved by him and sent flying across the roadway.
There was an audible crack as her head connected with the cobbles, and the mercenary swore then drew his foot back to kick her.
There had been something familiar about her, Riven realised.
‘Ratagan!’
Bicker shouted.
But the red-beard had already let out a roar of fury, and launched himself forward.
Oh shit.
Now we're in trouble.
There was a desperate look on Bicker's face though, oddly, Isay's eyes were as bright with anger as Ratagan's had been and the Myrcan staff was out of his belt and cocked in his fists.
Corrary's face was white, eyes blazing.
The big man powered forward like a train, flinging people out of his way as though they were dolls, that terrible roaring coming from his throat.
The mercenaries on the street looked up for one moment, eyes wide, and then he was upon them.
There was a confusion of bodies, a wave of pushing and shoving  as the crowd recoiled.
Riven was almost plucked from his feet, but Isay kept him upright.
The air thickened with screaming.
He pushed forward frantically, and together with Bicker, Isay and Corrary managed to force a path through the scrum to the roadway.
They almost tripped over the body of a Sellsword, his neck tilted at a weird angle; and then saw Ratagan.
He towered over his foes, and was flailing at them two-handed.
One fist gripped his axe, the other a mercenary sword, and together they wove a silver net of carnage around him.
Already bodies littered the ground at his feet, but the mercenaries were pressing in and he was backing away, the mad fury still burning in his eye but something else there now as well: a realisation of defeat.
Two Hearthwares, huge in their armour, lumbered over to join in the fray.
Bicker cursed, then he swept out his sword.
‘Ratagan!’ he yelled, making it into a battle-cry, and he pelted forward.
Isay followed, his staff upraised.
To his surprise Riven found that he had joined them, and Darmid's sword was naked in his hand.
The two Hearthwares turned to meet the new foes, but Bicker's blade had already slid into the throat of one, and Isay's staff had split the skull of the other like a bruised apple.
They crashed to the ground.
The four ran on, and the Sellswords became aware that they were being attacked in the rear.
They split and retreated, Ratagan following them without respite.
Riven held back as Bicker, Corrary and Isay piled into them.
The crowds were peeling away from the fight in terror, and most of the ragged people of the procession had disappeared, been engulfed.
The blonde girl lay as motionless as a corpse on the ground, a thread of blood ribboning her temple.
Riven started towards her instinctively, but then halted to check on the battle.
It was all but over.
The last of the mercenaries were running, flinging away their weapons as they went.
At least half a dozen of their comrades lay on the ground behind them.
Bicker spoke first, his eyes alight with anger.
‘You damned fool!’ he shouted at Ratagan.
‘We've got to get away from here — now!
There will be Sellswords crawling these streets in minutes.’
He paused for breath.
‘You fool!’ he exclaimed again.
Ratagan said nothing, though fire still smouldered in his cavernous eyes.
He dropped the mercenary sword, tucked his axe in his belt and then strode over the cobbles to the unconscious girl.
He lifted her into his arms and straightened swiftly.
‘Come on, then,’ he said quietly, and began to jog down the bloody street.
The crowd of people who remained there stared at him as though he were a ghost.
No one hindered him.
The rest of the company followed, Bicker's face ugly with ire.
Behind them they heard horns blowing the alarm in the upper city, but did not look back.