

BA Conference reopens the book club wound
It is often only when the battle is over that the divisions between allies become apparent.
Even as recession seems at last to be easing, the strains that recession has helped to create between booksellers and publishers were brought quickly to the fore at the Booksellers Association annual conference in Torquay this week.
Foreshadowed in The Bookseller last week, the much touted ‘unilevel playing field’ was a preoccupation of the presidents of both trade associations in their addresses at the start of the conference.
Bookseller vs publisher
‘Although, looking back, the recession was not perhaps as bad as it might have been, it did nevertheless cause some strains between booksellers and publishers,’ the new president of the Publishers Association, Sir Roger Elliott of OUP, acknowledged.
‘It cannot be denied that in the face of recession, publishers have been exploring all possible avenues for book sales.’
Sir Roger was responding to concern expressed by BA president John Hitchin of Phoenix Bookshops that books were now available to the public at differing prices, leading to confusion in a book market which research recently commissioned by the BA had shown to be ‘one homogeneous whole’.
‘Looking at today's retail scene and the role of the bookseller within it, I am struck by how important the issue of price has become,’ Mr Hitchin said.
‘I refer to the single biggest factor in the changing retail trade today, and the perception of the consumer: ‘Is it a bargain?’
When Kingfisher, the owners of Woolworths, declare that they regard price promotion as their biggest marketing weapon, I fear for our trade.’
There was no doubt that the average consumer had become much more price conscious, Mr Hitchin said.
However, to suggest that the abolition of the Net Book Agreement or denetting would somehow help would be ‘to overlook the fact that booksellers currently have no margin left to offer discounts.
There does not seem to be much evidence that heavy discounting would actually grow the market, which shows all the signs at the moment of being pretty inelastic.
‘But books are on offer at different prices, and the book buyer is undoubtedly confused.
Research which the BA has recently commissioned shows that, as never before, the book buying public is one homogeneous whole and not, as some people still believe, a series of finite and separate markets.
‘For example, there are about 5 million book club customers.
Only 28% of them (1.4m) buy from no other source.
Rather more (1.7m) buy for example from W H Smith.
Fully 3.6m book club customers also buy books from one or more retail outlets.
‘The view that the book club market has no great overlap with the bookshop market just won't wash anymore.
As this research has shown, our customers are the book club's customers.
‘So it makes no sense at all for the bookseller to be buying and promoting a new title at, say, £14.99 when a book club has already offered it to its public at £8.99 — as happened last month.
Or for the book to be available in a special, supposedly unique, edition being sold into offices and factories at £7.99.
Nor does it make much sense for the book to be on offer soon afterwards through a paperback book club that screams at it potential customers, ‘You write the rules’.
These paperback clubs have 1.8m customers who have a profile that also exactly mirrors the BMRB categories of top bookshop users.
‘We are selling publishers’ books at list prices, to the core market, and thus ensuring that publishers are able to recover their origination, only to see a mass of examples of the same book on offer elsewhere at cheaper prices.
It has got to the stage where it would be cheaper for stockholding booksellers themselves to buy the books from these cheaper sources — they'd get a better margin than ordering them from the publisher.
‘I don't want to give the impression that booksellers demand exclusive rights to be able to sell the book.
Publishers must be able to reach out to the widest possible audience.
But if the reaching out is achieved by huge price cuts, then booksellers have every right to complain.’
Limited sanctions
Sir Roger put the ball back firmly in the booksellers' court.
‘Speaking for the PA, I have to say that it is regrettable that some booksellers feel that the Book Club Regulations have been stretched.
The PA must and will continue to interpret these regulations fairly and deal firmly with any breaches.
But in the last resort a trade association has limited sanctions that it can apply, and if necessary it is for booksellers themselves to take appropriate action.
‘But I hope we can all keep this issue in perspective.
We believe that book clubs and other mail order outlets account for only about 10% of the total sales of the books which are the cause of concern.
The traditional bookseller remains the core of the publisher's business, and long may it remain so.’
He added that the figures quoted by Mr Hitchin from the BA commissioned research ‘need careful interpretation, but I assure you that publishers will be very interested in seeing and evaluating in detail the full survey.’
He agreed with Mr Hitchin, however, that this type of problem put further strains on the Net Book Agreement, ‘which already has enough problems arising in part from the activities of one of your large members, and in part from the decisions of the European Commission and European Court.
The PA will continue, with your help, its vigorous defence of the NBA as long as it is supported by the membership, and of course remains legal.
‘But there is no doubt that there are problems arising from the build-up of surplus stock of some net titles, and we are conscious that traditional methods like the National Book Sale now seem inadequate.
The PA had, he said, appointed a working party under Simon Master of Random House to report on these problem issues.
HC moves on wholesalers' terms
Wholesalers, including Bertrams, Gardners, Barnicoats, Heathcote and TBD, were somewhat shocked to find themselves approached, in turn, by HarperCollins to discuss terms in Torquay this week.
Coming so soon after Reed Consumer Books' attempt to redefine its trading terms with the major wholesalers, they were, not surprisingly, feeling under attack, though it seems the strategies of the two publishers are unrelated.
The HarperCollins discussions have focused on terms for small orders and credit periods.
‘This is not,’ stressed chief executive, publishing, Peter Winslow, ‘an assault on basic discount.
We see an absolutely vital role for wholesalers.
This is not a strategic move against them.’
It is, hover, a move against what HC sees as an intolerable trend towards wholesalers ordering in singles and twos, a buying pattern reflecting their own selling pattern.
‘Up to 40% of our business with wholesalers is falling into these categories,’ said Mr Winslow.
‘The cost is killing us, and what we are trying to do is make a proportion of business profitable once more.
Wholesalers should buy in greater quantities to service small accounts efficiently.’
The wholesalers have been asked to stock in greater depth.
HC says it will continue to service their single copy business, but not on wholesale terms.
In addition, it is seeking to bring the credit periods it offers wholesalers into line, at 60 days.
Merchandising wholesalers will be approached by HC next, though discussions with them are likely to focus on the level of returns.
The timing of HC's approach, explained Mr Winslow, was dictated by BA Conference.
Concern over the wholesalers' order profiles, however, had been put on the company's agenda some six months ago.
As other publishers are likely to be experiencing the same order profiles, wholesalers can probably expect to be approached by them too.
NEWS
Giles criticises ‘inward-looking’ conference
The 1993 Booksellers Association was an inward-looking event, poorly attended by independent booksellers, and one which said surprisingly little about the importance of the consumer for the modern retail market.
With these provocative remarks, Waterstones' managing director Alan Giles began the final session of the conference, titled ‘Investing in the Future — What Next?’
‘Having mot attended a BA conference since Eastbourne 1987,’ Mr Giles said, ‘I was surprised to discover that the conference was somewhat inward-looking, and that so little was said about the consumer, on whom our wages depend.
There also seem to be very few booksellers here, or their voices seem strangely muted.’
Mr Giles went on to outline his vision for the future, a future in which children and adults ‘had developed a real enthusiasm for regularly visiting bookshops and libraries’.
During his lively speech Mr Giles sharply criticised publishers for the overproduction of children's books, and poured scorn on their attempt to justify their differential treatment of book clubs and supermarkets.
‘Publishers should make sure that there really are adequate incentives for booksellers to showcase their ranges in prime locations which are attractively fitted out…
To me the biggest problem must be over publishing.
How can we possibly justify creating 7,000 additional children's books each year?
What bookseller can hope adequately to display more than a mere handful of these — and often then at the expense of much saleable backlist titles?’
He also urged booksellers to open their shops ‘across trading hours which match when customers want to shop, including Sundays’, and to create a bookselling environment in which children would feel comfortable and inspired.
To book business, he said, wasted too much money on ‘well intentioned but misguided advertising and promotional activity spread across a plethora of titles.
In my view, very little of this activity manages to scrape its way above the threshold of consumer awareness.’
Inequalities on airside
The pursuit of a level playing field appears to be catching on; inequalities are being sought high and low.
The latest to be brought to publishers' attention is the early export editions of UK mass market paperbacks, and, more specifically, the early availability of such editions in the airside bookshops at Heathrow, Gatwick and other major UK airports.
Philip Joseph, chairman of Books Etc, waged a campaign against this practice — or more accurately against the fact that UK booksellers have been unable to stock such books when airport bookshops can — over several years.
Now the deputy m.d. of Books Etc, John Monk, has written to 12 UK publishers who publish early editions demanding equal treatment.
Books Etc was, he said, ‘perturbed by the fact that we are still seeing a galaxy of British paperbacks at the airside of Heathrow terminals presented with a flourish as ‘unavailable elsewhere in the UK’’.
This, said Mr Monk, was despite the fact that, since 1st January 1993, trading conditions within the European Community were supposed to have changed.
‘Well, here we are in March 1993 and London booksellers are faced with this quite untenable situation of a fellow bookseller getting supplies some months before we do.’
In the opinion of Books Etc, ‘this unfair distribution method should now cease, and accordingly, may we please be given the opportunity of subscribing to your complete paperback list and obtain deliveries at the same time as all other bookshops in the UK?’
The issue was indeed, Mr Monk confirmed to The Bookseller this week, another example of an unlevel playing field.
‘Millions of people are streaming through those airports and they are all potential customers.’
Books Etc's demand gives publishers unpleasant options.
The early export edition of the UK paperback was initiated because Continental Europe has historically been an open market in which British and American editions of the same titles vie for sales — and in many cases, the Americans publish earlier than their UK competitors.
At the same time, UK paperbackers are contractually bound not to issue their paperbacks into the UK before the hardback editions of the same titles have had a chance to prove themselves in the bookshops.
All the while, of course, European single market law hovers over this fledgling little kerfuffle like a bird of prey.
With Brussels seemingly uninterested in the problems facing British trade publishers in trying to protect their UK territorial rights against single market requirements while US editions wash about the Continent, and with US publishers deaf to arguments that Community law effectively means the end of the open market of Europe, UK publishers continue to put out early export editions simply to compete with US publishers in a market that still behaves as if it were open.
UK paperbackers argue that the implications of Books Etc's complaint could mean no less than that UK paperbackers should effectively hand over the continental market to the Americans.
Mr Monk was unimpressed by these complex arguments.
‘British publishers have had it good for a long time.
A hell of a long time.
I am amazed that this practice has been allowed to go on for so long without anyone kicking up a fuss.’
Remaining on VAT alert
Concerns that the threat of an imposition of VAT on books remains live were aired at the BA a.g.m. this week.
President John Hitchin described the situation as ‘mercurial’.
‘Support one day can turn into lack of support the next.’
The trade associations would continue to monitor the situation, and, while they had so far funded the ‘Don't Tax Books’ campaign ‘from the petty cash’, ‘we may need to launch an appeal fund in due course’, Mr Hitchin said.
Booksellers were urged to continue lobbying their MPs.
However, on timing it was suggested that September/October would be the best time to build the pressure, with the expectation of an autumn budget statement at the end of November.
‘We need the right pressure at the time places at the right time,’ said BA director Tim Godfray.
Mr Godfray also suggested that the constructive approach would be to stress to MPs the importance of books in education and training — two of the government's pet issues — rather than concentrating on an anti-VAT message, which might fall on rather deafer ears.
Tim Godfray: be constructive
New posts for Callil, Coady at Random House
Gail Rebuck, chief executive of Random House UK, was expected to announce a set of new appointments this week, as a further stage in her reorganisation of the company.
The news will involve no redundancies: Ms Rebuck effected a swingeing cost-cutting (and job-cutting) exercise at Random House last year, and the company is currently trading well, with sales in the first quarter of 1993 up by 15% on the same period in 1992, despite (or because of) a reduction in new trade titles of 35%.
Instead, the new structure and appointments are intended to strengthen the company in an era which will no see a repeat of the 1980s boom, whatever politicians may say about the end of recession.
They are part of the endeavour to create the balance between ‘financial strength and creative vitality’ which Ms Rebuck described as the challenge facing Random House — a ‘pure’trade publisher, which cannot fall back on income from professional or reference publishing — when she first took over from Anthony Cheetham 18 months ago.
The Random House general book division will be divided into two operating groups, allowing editors to see their authors' books through from hardback to paperback publication (or to choose which they find most appropriate).
Frances Coady, founder publisher at Vintage, will head up the new literary group, which brings together Jonathan Cape, Chatto & Windus, Vintage and Pimlico.
The other group will consist of Century and Hutchinson, which already publish with Arrow and Legend, and which will continue under the overall management of Simon King.
The redoubtable Carmen Callil, who has held sway as managing director of Chatto for the past 11 years, will assume a new role as ‘publisher at large’ of the Random House Group.
Ms Callil is apparent delighted with this rather alarmingly styled position, which she will take upon her 55th birthday on 15th July.
She will continue to work in particular with Chatto in London and with Random House Australia, and she will assume the additional role of editor at large for the Knopf Publishing Group in the US (Vintage, Pantheon and Alfred A Knopf).
Caroline Michel will run the literary group's new marketing department, working with Frances Coady as associate publisher and as director of marketing of the four imprints, with all publicity directors reporting to her.
Jonathan Burnham, editorial director of Chatto, will become publishing director for the imprint, with Alison Samuel as his deputy.
Vintage and Pimlico will be headed by Will Sulkin as publishing director.
Within Cape, David Godwin continues as managing director (the only such in the new group), working with Neil Belton, Tony Colwell and Philippa Brewster, as before; and Georgina Capel will continue as deputy m.d. and as group rights director.
In the Century/Hutchinson/Arrow/Legend grouping, it is thought that Kate Parkin (currently publishing director of Century) will be appointed to the new position of publisher for Century and Arrow.
Further details on the appointments are expected next week.
New roles created for publishers clockwise from top left Jonathan Burnham, Carmen Callil, Kate Parkin and Frances Coady
Get into multimedia products, booksellers urged
Booksellers should begin to look seriously at the possibilities of stocking multimedia products, or run the risk of losing out to consumer electronics retailers and an erosion of their market.
The message came not only from multimedia boffins in attendance at the BA Conference in Torquay, but also from the presidents of both the Booksellers and Publishers Associations.
Both agreed that the future of the book was secure.
‘But,’ said PA president Sir Roger Elliott, ‘we must not dismiss the electronic revolution.
It is true that it has been forecast as being upon us for a long time, but things are now really moving in some areas.
‘There is already a global market worth many millions of pounds per annum for CD-ROMs, to say nothing of hand-held systems like the Sony Discman and the electronic books produced by Franklin and others.’
BA president John Hitchin was also enthusiastic.
‘I have a vision of the future,’ he said in his presidential address.
He saw a bookshop that would stock ‘a full range of publishers’ books both new and backlist, but also videos, cassettes, perhaps music, and certainly the new electronic media as well.’
The message was, not surprisingly, conveyed even more clearly in a session devoted to the subject of the new electronic media, entitled ‘Goodbye to Gutenberg’.
Paul Ayscough, until recently with Columbia TriStar, and Michael Kemp, of Franklin Electronic Publishers UK, described by the Sony Discman and Franklin's digital book system respectively, both making clear that while the numbers of software titles available with these systems were relatively small at the moment, they were growing rapidly.
And Dutch bookseller Jaap Buchli of Scheltema Holkema Vermeulen described a bookseller's successful incursion into the electronic media market.
There were, however, few booksellers present at the session, a fact remarked on by the chairman, multimedia consultant Tony Feldman.
‘Booksellers must not allow these new markets to pass into other hands,’ he said.
The sale of these products elsewhere would mean a ‘significant loss in market share for the traditional bookseller’.
1994 Conference
The 1994 Booksellers Association Conference will be held in Jersey from 24th to 2th April.
BA chief executive Tim Godfray said the attractive location should make for a popular and well-attended conference.
COMPANY NEWS CHEAPSIDE
High profile public office for Peter Davis
The Secretary of State for Employment, Gillian Shephard, has appointed Peter Davis chairman of the new National Advisory Council for Education and Training Targets (NACETT).
Mr Davis, chief executive and deputy chairman of Reed Elsevier, will head a 12-member council made up of employers, trade unionists and educationalists.
Announcing the formation of the new Council, Mrs Shephard said, ‘The National Education and Training Targets have been established to focus the nation's attention on the need to raise the standards of achievement in education and training.
The council will play a vital role in securing these targets.’
National targets are very much concerned with NVQs.
Included in the four Lifetime Learning targets are that 50% of the workforce should be aiming for NVQs or units towards them by 1996, and that by the year 2000, 50% of the workforce be qualified to at least NVQ level 3 or equivalent.
If book publishing is to play its part in meeting these targets, then by 1996 at least 10,000 publishing personnel (50% of the 20,000 employed) should be aiming for NVQs or units towards them.
As chief executive of one of the largest book publishing groups in the UK, Mr Davis is well placed to ensure that the book publishing sector at least has a chance of meeting that target.
Management changes at WHS
Terry Cudbird, W H Smith Retail marketing director, has been appointed retail business development director.
The position, which Mr Cudbird assumes on 1st June, involves planning the future growth of the WHS high street chain, as well as co-ordinating the marketing strategies and physical development plans of the group's UK retailing chains (WHS Retail, Waterstones, Our Price Music, Our Price Video and Paperchase).
Mr Cudbird will report to Peter Troughton, managing director of W H Smith Retail, and he will remain on the W H Smith Retail board.
There will be four general managers responsible for buying and marketing in WHS Retail.
Bing Taylor continues as general manager books and Europe, and Nigel Kenyon-Jones continues with music, video, computer games and Our Price Video.
Dean Cowley, formerly in charge of stationery, will now take on marketing services, including advertising and sales promotion.
Timothy Melgund, currently general manager of cards, news and Paperchase, will now also be responsible for stationery.
Nick Hern acquires Nick Hern Books from Random House
Nick Hern has exchanged contracts with Random House for the acquisition of Nick Hern Books, the theatre list he set up as a part of Walker Books in 1988 which joined Random House in 1990.
Negotiations for the sale have been in progress since Mr Hern left Random House last August, with agreement reached before Christmas, but the legalities consumed several more months.
‘But I've been travelling hopefully in the meanwhile,’ he said, ‘and I've got my first catalogue and two books ready.’
Mr Hern raised the funds for the acquisition from friends, family and fellow authors but also received a generous ‘life-line’ from Currency Press, his counterpart in Australia, which offered to print a proportion of his programme.
He is planning a relaunch for the list on 20th May, with books by Michael Billington and John Dexter and plays by Doug Lucie and Martin Crimp.
Later in the year will come a biography of Michael MacLiammoir, a fly-on-the-wall account of life at the Royal Court, a memoir by John Gielgud and the Complete Prefaces of Granville Barker — about 25 to 30 titles a year, all of them theatre related.
Representation is by Troika, and distribution by Tiptree.
Copyrights Company wins Queen's Award for Export Achievement
The Copyrights Company, specialist in merchandise licensing, has won a Queen's Award for Export Achievement.
The company says that overseas royalties it has earned on behalf of the authors, artists and publishers it represents have increased five-fold in the last three years, and that it currently licenses its properties in 25 countries.
‘Any award of this sort helps our exports further,’ says m.d.
Nicholas Durbridge.
Mr Durbridge set up Copyrights in 1984 with co-founder Linda Pooley, at a time when most merchandise licensing in the UK concentrated on licensing television characters into the toy trade.
Both founders came from publishing backgrounds (she from Collins and he from Michael Bond's Paddington & Company), and they set out to develop new market niches, through licensing book related characters and properties — such as Beatrix Potter's Peter Rabbit , Michael Bond's Paddington Bear and Jill Barklem's Brambly Hedge — and through widening the merchandise beyond toys, particularly into the gift trade.
From the start, Copyrights placed the emphasis on the international market and, instead of using sub-agents, opened its own offices.
Copyrights Europe opened in Hamburg in 1988, followed by Copyrights Australia in Melbourne in 1990 and an office in Tokyo in 1992.
The company has also insisted on product quality control, and personally oversees and approves each product licensed on behalf of its clients.
Developing new market niches: Linda Pooley and Nicholas Durbridge
Bookwatch wins cable TV consultancy
Bookwatch has been appointed book consultant to the new national cable television service, Wire TV, which goes live on Tuesday 4th May.
Their bestseller lists will be used on a 20-minute Thursday evening book slot on ‘Nighttime Live’ from 9.03 p.m., featuring reviews, interviews and ‘authors on tour’information as well as five bestseller charts, including one specialised category chart.
Bookwatch managing director Peter Harland commented: ‘We are pleased to have added Cable TV to the many media who use our lists.
Already we provide Peter Grose of Bestseller magazine with material for his books programme on LBC, and we have supplied both BBC and ITV with charts for networked shows, notably ‘The Write Stuff’ and ‘Saturday Live’.
We are now working on ideas to get our lists back on to the mainstream networks as well,’ he added.
Interbook ceases trading
Interbook, the gift service for the delivery of books, has gone out of business.
The company was set up by Jeremy Green last October, on the basis of market research showing considerable ‘pent-up demand’ for this sort of service.
It absorbed over £500,000 from Mr Green and his fellow private investors in the capital investment needed to set up the electronic links between the telephone ordering service and wholesaler Heathcote Books (which did not invest any money).
It also swallowed a healthy dollop of spending on advertising.
It would seem, however, that the demand for gift delivery of hardback books at a charge of £4.99 (plus the price of the book, of course) was not as great as had been hoped.
Mr Green was not available for comment.
Book Tokens reports flat sales
Book Tokens continues to report increased sales for the year to January ‘93, but ‘up by just 2%’, chairman Ainslie Thin reported to the Booksellers Association's a.g.m. this week.
Splitting the figures into Eire and the UK, the former was up 19.3% to the UK's 1.2%.
Eire sales now represent £1m.
The relatively low overall increase was, Mr Thin believed, a result of the recession.
‘Over the last two years our sales increase has flattened out.’
During recession, he went on, people often looked to spend less on gifts, but to select gifts which do not make this apparent.
‘One cannot hide the exact value of a book token, and therefore in recession we are somewhat disadvantaged.’
Book Tokens' income had also been hit by the reduction in interest rates.
‘A lot of our income comes from bank interest, and when interest rates are low like now, our income has been very significantly reduced.
Compared with 1990 our bank interest received has reduced from £450,000 a year to approximately £150,000.’
In view of this drop in income, Book Tokens was to reduce the amount of its subsidy towards the costs of door-to-door distribution of the BA's Christmas catalogue,Books for Giving .
‘We will continue with the subsidy but with a maximum of £80 per shop instead of the previous £120,’ said Mr Thin.
This still represented a subsidy to the catalogue of ‘about £17,000’.
The company had also trimmed £46,000 from its advertising budget, and would be putting up the price of cards from 20p to 25p.
Outlining Book Tokens promotional plans, Mr Thin said that this year, in addition to press advertising, Book Tokens would have 80 spots on radio, using Classic FM in the week before Christmas.
Other promotional activities included a competition with 60 prizes of £50 worth of book tokens for the public, and 60 similar prizes for bookshops.
Jilly Cooper had agreed to a revision of the promotional leaflet she featured in last year, and a mailing had gone out to every secondary and primary school in the UK.
This included a leaflet which encouraged them to ‘create their own school book token’.
Despite the effect of recession on sales, Mr Thin remained encouraged by Book Tokens' performance, quoting market research which showed book tokens coming fifth in a table of ‘vouchers bought in the last 12 months’, beaten only by Marks & Spencer, Boots, W H Smith and record tokens.
‘With nearly £18m worth sold last year, creating about £22.5m worth of book business (with added cash), book tokens are important to the book trade.’
Pearson switches on to Thames Television
Pearson last week agreed to buy Thames Television in a deal worth a total of approximately £99m.
Pearson received irrevocable commitment from Thorn EMI for the latter's 58.85% stake in Thames, and this automatically triggers a full bid.
The acquisition is part of Pearson's strategy to increase its involvement in the visual media, as a complement to its profitable but mature print based companies.
The group already owns stakes in BSkyB (17.5%) and Yorkshire-Tyne Tees, an ITV company (14%), but Thames will be its first wholly owned television production and distribution business.
It will form the heart of a new television division, and will be the base for the group's expansion into international broadcasting.
Pearson m.d.
Frank Barlow described the deal as ‘just an extension’ of the group's existing business, which was heavily based on the creation and exploitation of intellectual property rights.
The Financial Times added  that, although Pearson has not plans to dispose of its oil services and fine china businesses for the foreseeable future, the company is likely to move towards being a ‘more tightly focused media and entertainment group’.
The acquisition, which was widely expected, was welcomed in the City, and Pearson shares jumped up 10p to 429p.
Kraszna-Krausz Awards
The Kraszna-Krausz Foundation has appointed Andrea Livingstone awards administrator.
Until 1990, she was the assistant director of the Booksellers Association, where, among other duties, she was administrator of the Whitbread Book of the Year.
The 1993 Kraszna-Krausz Book Awards will cover books published between July 1991 and June 1993 concerned with the moving image (film, television, video, etc).
Prizes of £7,500 each will be given in three categories: the culture, the business and the technology of books on the moving image.
Entry forms are being sent to publishers this month.
Further information is available from Andrea Livingstone at  ().
Smarties judges
The judging panel for the 1993 Smarties Book Prize will be chaired by Sally Feldman, editor of Radio 4's ‘Treasure Islands’, who will be joined by author and broadcaster Floella Benjamin; Sonia Benster, manager of the Children's Bookshop, Huddersfield; author Tony Bradman; and author and illustrator Colin McNaughton.
The panel will meet in September to draw up a shortlist of 15 titles in three age categories, with the overall winner to be announced on 17th November.
A panel of young judges, to be chosen through a national competition, will announce its own winners.
Arts Council contacts list
The Arts Council has updated its 1993 mailing and press contacts lists.
These include details of national and regional newspapers, television and radio, periodicals and specialist publications.
Copies of the list, together with half-yearly updates which are issued free of charge in the summer, cost £22 each.
Cheques made payable to The Arts Council should be sent to the Press Office, The Arts Council,.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Jubilation at Menem's promise
An announcement by Argentina's President Carlos Menem rescinding a planned threefold hike in the duties on paper imported for book production was greeted with delight by hundreds of publishers and other book professionals from all over Latin America gathered for the official opening ceremony of the 19th Buenos Aires International Book Fair on 16th April.
The Buenos Aires fair has a greater trade and international emphasis that usual this year, as it is being held in conjunction with the third of the rotating Silar (Salón International del Libro Latino-Americano) events.
Two years of stability after a long period of severe hyperinflation have meant that Argentine publishing has begun to show some solidly healthy results.
The quality of books is improving, sales are increasing, and publishers are working out strategic growth plans.
Part of the reason for this recovery has been the reduction of import duties on foreign paper.
The duties had fallen to 5%.
News coming out recently from financial and government circles indicating government plans to increase duty on paper to 15% was met with dismay.
Newspaper and magazine publishers joined the book business in protests, which resulted in the government abandoning the planned increase — on everything except paper for books.
The gloom apparent among publishers when President Menem made his appearance to open the book fair was understandable against this background.
The only applause came when Atlántida's managing director Jorge Naveiro, president of the Argentine Book Foundation, referred to the amelioration of customs duties and proffered his hopes that the rise in duty on book paper would not actually be implemented.
But the mood changed abruptly to unalloyed delight during President Menem's speech when he took up Mr Naveiro's challenge and made a promise that the book paper import duties would not after all be raised.
A presidential remark in such a context is felt to have the force of law in Argentina, and the publishing business is confident that it is now safe for a while.
Special air fares to ZIBF
Overseas visitors and exhibitors at this year's Zimbabwe International Book Fair, taking place in Harare from 4th to 8th August, can take advantage of special air fares negotiated with the national carrier.
Air Zimbabwe.
Return tickets from London Gatwick start from £550, and include onward travel to Johannesburg, Lusaka, Lilongwe or any Zimbabwean destination outside Harare.
Arrangements for exhibitors at the 1993 fair are being streamlined in an attempt to create the best possible climate for business.
A ‘traders’ only’day will be introduced on 4th August to allow exhibitors and trade visitors to exploit the ZIBF's growing potential for negotiating rights and licensing deals.
Overseas exhibitors no longer have to pay import duties on books taken into Zimbabwe for either exhibition or sale.
The ZIBF Bookshop, through which Zimbabwean book buyers are able to pay for imported books in local currency, is being expanded, and an application has been lodged with the authorities for a significantly increased foreign currency allocation.
Exhibitors are being offered the additional option of selling direct from their stands.
Full details of trading and travel arrangements are available from the fair's Europe and North America agent, Margaret Ling, ZIBF (UK) Ltd,,(), or from ZIBF ,().
Learning about the German trade
The German trade association, the Börsenverein, will hold its 8th International Booksellers Seminar on the German Book Trade in Frankfurt from 29th September to 10th October.
It is aimed at young booksellers from outside the German speaking area who are interested in learning about the structure of German publishing and bookselling.
There will be visits to major publishers and a number of booksellers, offering participants a behind-the-scenes view of the German trade.
An excursion to the major German ‘Barsortiment’ will give practical insight into the German distribution and book export systems.
The programme is rounded off with a two-day visit to the Frankfurt Book Fair.
Those attending the seminar will be the guests of the Börsenverein, which will pay the costs of accommodation and all events, and will need only to meet their travel expenses to and from the seminar.
The seminar will be conducted entirely in English, although a basic knowledge of German would be helpful.
The number of participants is limited to 25.
Completed application forms must be received by 1st June.
Information and application forms are available from Ms Bärbel Becker, AuM-GmbH,.
Latvian publishers form association
Publishers in Latvia have recently established an association in Riga, largely as a result of the interest in the country shown by foreign visitors to the Latvian collective stand at last year's Frankfurt Book Fair.
The new association has 30 members and has elected as its president Maris Ozolins, whose company Vaga is contracted with Macmillan to produce ELT material.
Any enquiries about the association should be addressed to Maris Ozolins at Vaga Ltd Publishers,,().
New head for Dymocks chain
Jack McLoone has been appointed to head the Dymocks bookshop chain in Australia, reports Thorpe's Weekly Book Newsletter .
His position will be general manager, retail, reporting direct to Dymocks' managing director Ken Terry.
The bookshop chain has recently gone through a period of rapid expansion and now has 42 sites.
Mr McLoone is the former general manager of the University Co-op bookshop, which he left earlier this year amid much controversy and speculation.
In announcing the new appointment, Mr Terry said that he was satisfied that ‘it is clear that the recent problems at Co-op in no way reflect on the performance of Jack's management of the company’.
Greg Milne, Mr McLoone's predecessor at Dymocks, has accepted the position of group general manager of Australia's largest lingerie retailer, the 70-store Bras ‘n’ Things.
Wansbrough to Albin Michel
Albin Michel in Paris has appointed Elizabeth Wansbrough to head its children's publishing.
The post of director of Albin Michel Jeunesse had been vacant since Jacques Binsztok left the company last summer to run children's publishing at Le Seuil.
Ms Wansbrough started her career in children's books with Hamish Hamilton.
She also worked for Walker Books in New York, before returning to London to handle foreign rights for the Watts Group.
For the past two years she has been responsible for the rights department of Hachette's children's book imprints in Paris.
Dutch debut for English writer
The Dutch publisher Atlas is to bring out the translation of a debut novel,Essays in Love , by a 22 year old, Swiss-born English writer, Alain de Botton, in August — nearly six months before publication in the UK by Macmillan is due.
The author is enthusiastically placed ‘in the same rank as Julian Barnes’ by the Atlas editorial director Emile Brugman, who paid Dfl 6,000 for the rights.
Shortly after the Dutch deal was concluded, S Fischer in Frankfurt paid DM85,000 for the German translation rights.
New m.d. for Harlequin
Nancy Peters has been appointed m.d. of Harlequin Mills & Boon, Australia.
She has been with Harlequin for 12 years, in the UK direct marketing division for six years, and latterly in charge of direct marketing in Australia.
NEWS
PA a.g.m.
Bradley warns of UK market timebomb
PA chief executive Clive Bradley warned the a.g.m. that agreement between American and British publishers which divide up the Continental European market between different suppliers (typically, particularly in relation to works of fiction, when British publishers enter into rights agreements with American publishers, the British publisher obtains exclusive rights for the UK and Ireland, the American publisher secures exclusive rights for the United States, and they both have open market or non-exclusive rights for Continental Europe) could leave British publishers vulnerable to the importation of American books.
Mr Bradley said that under the Treaty of Rome, British publishers have no protection against the importation of American books — published as open market editions for Continental Europe — into the UK.
‘The situation is like a timebomb ticking away under our market.’
On a separate issue, Mr Bradley — implicitly acknowledging booksellers' concerns about the need for a ‘level playing field’ in dealings between themselves and publishers — said that publishers should attempt to avoid putting booksellers ‘into a position in which they are discriminated against by other deals’.
Scherer hints of possible conflict between PA, BA
At the Publishers Association's a.g.m. in London last week, Paul Scherer of Transworld symbolically changed chairs with his successor, Sir Roger Elliott of Oxford University Press, to mark the end of his two year presidency.
Mr Scherer, who said that he had not found his tenure as president unduly onerous, commented on the excellent relationship between the Publishers Association and Booksellers Association, though he hinted at areas of possible conflict.
‘The two associations worked profitably together during the VAT campaign and our relationship is very close,’ he said.
‘But there are several present disagreements between us which could prove contentious at both the BA Conference in Torquay and in the future.’
New technology heightens piracy
A major theme of the a.g.m. was the threat that developments in new technology continue to pose to the control of the end-uses of copyright works.
‘Piracy is widespread throughout the developing world,’ said Sir Roger Elliott, who, in addition to his presidential duties, is chairman of a PA working party set up to explore ways in which copyright can be tailored to the need of the new technologies, in particular electrocopying.
NVQs grow in popularity
At the 1992 PA a.g.m.
Judy Little, human resources director of Longman and chairwoman of the Publishing Qualifications Board, announced that increasing numbers of publishers were signing on for NVQs.
This year she reported further progress: 100 people have so far registered to take an NVQ; 18 people have achieved a full qualification or certificates in units; and there were 92 trained NVQ assessors.
‘Exempt books from sanctions’
During the Open Forum Gordon Graham, a former PA president and now editor of Logos , expressed concern that because of the United Nations sanctions against Serbia, British books were not reaching that country.
He reminded members that British publishers attempted to continue exporting books to Argentina during the Falklands War, and he called on the PA Council to reiterate its commitment to the free flow of information.
It is a principle that the PA has pursued consistently in time of crisis: successfully for books when sanctions were imposed on Rhodesia and South Africa, less so during the war with Argentina.
Focus on children's books
Under the chairmanship of Philippa Dickinson, children's editorial director at Corgi, the PA's Children's Book Committee had a successful 1992.
Ms Dickinson explained that the committee last year placed four advertisements, two of which appeared in a 16-page December children's book supplement in the Independent on Sunday .
‘The response has been tremendous,’ Ms Dickinson said.
‘It has meant that the Independent on Sunday has been able to devote more review space to children's books, and as a consequence many other newspapers are paying greater attention to children's books.’
Ms Dickinson also reported that discussions were currently taking place with various bodies, including the Arts Council, to investigate the possibility of setting up a National Children's Book Council.
Boost for Know How fund
The PA's international director Ian Taylor reported that the government through its Know How Fund for aid to eastern Europe had recently contributed £30,000 to the Senior Managers Attachment Programme (SMAP).
The programme was set up to enable publishers from eastern and central Europe to visit British houses for short working attachments.
Among the publishers that have so far acted as hosts are OUP and Pinter Publishers.
BOOKSHOP NEWS
Banker's guide to setting up shop
The Midland Bank's small business and branch managers have been issued with a business information guide to help them better understand the needs of people wishing to set up a bookshop or specialist comic shop.
The bookshop profile, along with profiles for over 250 other businesses, have been prepared for Midland by Project North East, a local enterprise agency based in Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
The bookshop guide gives information on the market, its customers, competition, advertising, legal requirements, further reading and useful addresses.
It also includes fact sheets on general business subjects such as choosing premises and location, writing a business plan, the duties of a company secretary and financing business.
Copies of the profiles are available to Midland customers.
BA Council election winners
At the a.g.m. of the Booksellers Association in Torquay this week, president John Hitchin announced the names of the 12 booksellers who had been elected to the revamped BA Council for 1993–94, following a postal ballot of the entire BA membership.
At the 1992 a.g.m. in Glasgow the BA agreed to reduce the composition of the Council from 28 to 16 members — four officers and 12 members.
The elected members of the Council are: Jo Adams, Stoke Newington Bookshop, London; Willie Anderson, John Smith, Glasgow; Jonathan Barnicoat, Barnicoats, Penryn; Peter Bell, Bell's Bookshops; Barry Benster, The Children's Bookshop, Huddersfield; Michael Berry, Blackwells, Oxford; Alan Bishop, Kings of Lymington; Bruce Coward, The Harbour Bookshop, Dartmouth; John Cudlipp, Easons, Ireland; Nicholas Grey, Pickering & Inglis, Glasgow; Elizabeth McWatters, The Bookshop of Queen's, Belfast; and Colin Marshall, Leicester University Bookshop.
Planning and environmental books by post
The Royal Town Planning Institute has launched a mail order bookselling service, Planning and Environmental Books.
The business will aim to offer a wide range of titles on planning and related subjects available in the UK.
The service will cater to the UK and international planning community, and will offer title information, free catalogues and a mail order service.
As ‘the foremost professional body in its field’, the Royal Town Planning Institute believes it is well placed to develop the business, and will run it as part of its subsidiary company RTPI Services Ltd.
The first catalogue will be mailed to a wide range of individuals and organisations.
Publishers interested in having their titles included in the catalogue should contact Planning and Environmental Books,,().
Welsh branch launched
The Welsh branch of the Booksellers Association has been officially launched.
At a dinner held in Llandrindod Wells, steering committee spokeswoman Gwyneth Craze of Wise Owl, Abergavenny said that they had received ‘encouraging responses’ from booksellers, publishers and the Welsh Books Council.
A questionnaire had been circulated earlier in the year, and from that the steering committee had outlined ‘valuable feedback’, indicating the sort of programme of events the branch needed.
It is hoped to develop a training programme and to hold social functions at venues throughout the Principality.
The committee would welcome input from booksellers within its constituency.
Mrs Craze can be contacted at Wise Owl bookshop at ,().
Retiring bookseller to give away shop
In an unusual move a bookseller is preparing to give away his shop, complete with a five year lease and £15,000 worth of stock at retail, because he has been unable to find a buyer for it.
Tony Baldwin of The Fairline Bookshop,, took over the 600 sq ft shop after he retired from teaching in 1983.
But after 10 years of bookselling he is keen to retire.
‘I am 66 and I really want to retire.
Now that the good weather has arrived I feel trapped in the shop, and I want more time to enjoy other interests such as cricket and walking.
The shop has been on the market for over a year, and I have been unable to find a buyer.
I am just not prepared to wait for the green shoots of recovery.’
Mr Baldwin's unconventional move has generated immense interest, and he has been interviewed twice on Central Television and on radio, and has been profiled in his local newspaper.
He accepts that his decision will cost him money, but he has no regrets about his career as a bookseller.
‘I don't enjoy losing money, but there are more important things in life than money.
Anyway, I don't depend on the shop for my living.
I have had a wonderful 10 years, but the financial pressures are mounting and it is time I moved on.’
John Menzies damaged
John Menzies in Old Broad Street, London EC2, damaged by the Baltic Exchange bomb last year, was hit again last weekend when the Bishopsgate bomb went off.
Manager Barry Forshaw said that the ground floor of the shop was ‘wrecked’, but added that it looked as if no structural damage had been done: ‘it looks worse than it really is’.
However, the shop has been forced to cancel a potentially lucrative signing session with Jilly Cooper that was to have taken place this Friday.
Nearby branches of Books Etc were untouched — although of course they could not avoid being affected by the disruption that was caused by the bomb to trading in the area.
In Lichfield, Staffordshire last week for the 17th Lichfield Literary Dinner were authors Joanna Trollope and Mark Wallington.
The event is organised annually by booksellers Ralph James and Cliff Redshaw, whose staff were photographed with the authors outside the James Redshaw establishment.
From left Susan Bradley, Joan Bayliss, Yvonne Redshaw, Mark Wallington, Joanna Trollope and Denita Williams
TRADE NOTES
Moves
A M Heath has appointed Sarah Molloy a director of the company.
Simon & Schuster Young Books has appointed David Vincent , preciously at AA Publishing, sales director.
Reed Illustrated Publicity's new team is now Liz Moore , publicity manager;Mark Hutchinson , formerly at Victor Gollancz, senior press officer;Stephanie Amor and Ruth Layfield are press officers; with Cathy Frazer as publicity assistant.
Parragon Book Service has appointed Gerard Kelly , formerly at Simon & Schuster Young Books, sales director.
He can be contacted on .
David Manson , formerly at Harper-Collins, has been appointed production director, and can be contacted on .
Emma Lawson , formerly at ABC, has joined Pavilion as a senior editor.
Harveys Books has promoted Barry May to business development manager for the UK.
He can be contacted on  or .
Charles Gwillim succeeds Mr May as area sales manager for central England.
He can be contacted on .
Carolyn Price , formerly at Reed Illustrated Books, has joined Virgin Publishing on the illustrated books list.
Representation
Annihilation Press ceases to be represented by Turnaround from 30th April.
Returns to Turnaround should be made before 31st May, and thereafter to Annihilation Press,.
Lloyd Cole's agent in Scotland and north of England is Jonathan Spender-Payne ,; Surrey and Sussex are covered by Neill Cox ,; and Oxon, Warks, Staffs, Notts, Derbys and Leics by Tulip Noble ,.
Gulf Publishing, distributed by Plymbridge, is represented in the UK trade by David Grant Marketing.
Bill Baird covers Scotland and the north-east of England ();Mike Wilson covers the north of England and the Midlands ();David Grant and Adele Rogers cover the south of England ().
Distribution
From May,Caliban Books will market and distribute its own titles.
Orders and queries should go to Caliban Books, Blaen-Cwmiar, Llanllwni, Llanybydder, Dyfed, Wales ().
Trade terms will be 35% discount on orders of two copies or more per title, 20% on single title orders; 30 days' credit for orders of two or more copies per title, but single copy orders should be accompanied with payment by cheque.
Gazelle Book Services now distributes the following publishers: Excalibur Publishing, United States; Ghinis Publishing Limited, Cyprus; Irvington Publishers, United States; Taylor Publishing, United States.
From May, Ragged Bears distributes to the trade the Mr Humpty range of children's cassettes.
Internos Books and Booth-Clibborn Editions are now distributed by Tiptree Book Services.
The Internos catalogue is available directly from the publisher at  ().
Ivanhoe Career Guides and the Charity Finance Handbook are now distributed by the Letts Distribution Centre in Scotland.
Orders should go to Charles Letts Ltd, Customer Services, Thornybank Industrial Estate,().
Customer services supervisor is Lindsay Williams.
Customers with special requirements should contact Philip Letts , Ivanhoe Guides,().
Ivanhoe Guides are represented in the UK by Roger Bayliss ().
Sunburst Books is no longer represented by ABS distributed by CBS.
The Ian Allan sales team now handles selling in the British Isles and the distributor is Bookpoint.
Subbuteo Natural History Books now distribute Hobby Publications; M D Gallagher, Oman; Birds of a Feather, Zimbabwe.
Enquiries should go to Subbuteo at  ().
Wheldon & Wesley has been appointed sole distributor for Europe and America by Yasaka Shobo Inc, Japan.
Terms
From May Printwise Publications will charge carriage on orders for less than £25.
Addresses
Peter Kilborn , formerly at Reed Consumer Books, now offers a management consultancy service to publishers, especially in the area of book production.
He can be contacted at ,().
Victoria Petrie-Hay has moved to Wesley Cottage,,().
White Cockade Publishing has moved to new premises at ,().
The company may be reached by fax.
Corrections
The price of two BBC audio tapes,Postman Pat and The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends , mentioned in the Audiobooks special feature in the issue of 9th April, was incorrect.
It should have read £3.99 each.
Last week's Trade Note regarding distribution of IMS Publications was incorrect.
From May,IMS Publications will be distributed by BEBC Distribution,().
A new catalogue of IMS Publications will be available during May from BEBC, or direct from IMS at .
The illustration of North America that appeared on page 22 of last week's Bookseller came from Goode's World Atlas , published by Rand McNally.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Piracy in Italy
From Ms Carla Tanzi
Sir, I read in your issue of 12th March a news report about ‘New countries in IIPA piracy list’, and I was slightly surprised to find Italy mentioned among them.
I am aware that the economic situation of Italy is at the moment rather troubled, but I feel confident that piracy is not among our bad habits.
Was it a typing error, or is there something I don't know about Italian publishing?
Yours sincerely ,
Carla Tanzi
Editorial Director
Sperling & Kupfer
.
Our report was based on the Association of American Publishers' Newsletter , which in a recent issue reported as follows:
‘The International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA) has targeted seven countries for particularly egregious abuses of US copyrights and has asked the new US Trade Representative, Mickey Kauber, to designate them as ‘Priority Foreign Countries’ under the Special 301 provisions of the trade act.
The seven are: Taiwan and Thailand (designated as Priority Foreign Countries in 1992); Italy, Korea, Poland, the Philippines, and Turkey.’
The newsletter added later: ‘Italy, Korea, Poland, the Philippines and Turkey are newly targeted for possible 301 action as a result of extensive piracy and ongoing failure to provide an acceptable level of protection.’
The alleged piracy need not, of course, by confined to books.
—Ed .
Reed and wholesalers
From Mr Peter Chambers
Sir, Your report (2nd April) regarding Reed's dealings with the major wholesalers filled me with dismay.
I would urge Reed to think again as wholesalers are a vital ingredient for effective modern bookselling.
Not only does the 24-hour delivery time achieved week in week out put most publishers to shame, but if it were not for their buyers' notes and regular representative visits, we as a small bookshop all too often ignored by publishers —The Bookseller apart, whose efforts are also appreciated — would not be made aware of new titles and promotions.
The wholesalers via their star ratings help us in our stock selections, and by provision of p.o.s. help us sell the books purchased.
Bertrams by their generous returns allowance also take away some of our worries and so give us more confidence in making subscriptions, which include Reed titles.
Only by co-operation between all sectors of the trade — publishers, wholesalers and retailers — can the book trade flourish.
Yours in trepidation
Peter Chambers
Hessle Bookshop,
.
Generic advertising
From Ms Alison Burns
Sir, Further to Andrew Hayward's rallying cry (Viewpoint, 16th April), I have long nursed a fantasy that we could catch the national imagination in all age groups with a simple generic advertising slogan as catchy as ‘Use Your Loaf’ and ‘Go to Work on an Egg’.
I have even dramatised it in my mind for television and big-screen advertising à la Barclaycard (i.e. funny ), starring — well, you name them.
The emphasis is entirely escapist enjoyment rather than self-improvement: books as an alternative to the pressures of life (work, family, politics, sex and shopping).
The potential of sitcom variations are limitless.
My suggested slogan is ‘Sorry, I'm Booked’.
Yours faithfully ,
Alison Burns
.
Moral rights
From Mr Ted Allbeury
Sir, There are, we read, schisms in the Church of England concerning rituals and rights, and it looks as if this is beginning to affect authors.
I have just bought David Lodge's splendid The Art of Fiction and there, on the verso page with the usual fruit-salad of publisher and ISBN, is something new, a statement with a line all to itself, isolated but defiant.
It says, ‘The author has asserted his moral rights.’
Well, well, I wonder what made him do that, and in public too.
It sounds pretty powerful stuff, but how do you do it?
Is there a ceremony?
Do you shout it three times pointing towards Canterbury?
I have heard of chaps being accused of asserting their conjugal rights, but asserting moral rights is obviously something else.
It sound more Writers' Guild than Society of Authors, but maybe we can all do it.
And how about those of us who would prefer to assert our immoral rights?
An ever more intriguing thought — when David did his asserting, whom did he do it with, or to?
Yours faithfully ,
Tel Allbeury
.
Romantic novel award
From Ms Sarah Broadhurst
Sir, Last week, Cynthia Harrod-Eagles won the Romantic Novelists' Association award for Emily .
I am almost tempted to produce some enormous prize for any bookseller who can furnish me with a list of the shortlisted titles, or even let me know if they have the winning title in stock: I feel confident that I would have no takers.
Isn't that sad?
I am appalled that so much obvious commercial mileage goes to waste.
I do not think that Boots' sponsorship helped the RNA, because it served to shut out the rest of the trade, but now that Boots has withdrawn and a new sponsor is being sought there is an opportunity to boost the award.
Surely it should have more potential than the Booker: the romantic novel has a wider mass readership, and there are few prizes for this end of the market.
What needs to happen is that the trade should be made aware of the shortlist; the media must pick up the vibes; and the winner should be available in paperback (Emily will be a Pan in October.
Much rests on the new sponsor, but if the right backer is found.
I hope the trade will support this award in future.
Yours faithfully ,
Sarah Broadhurst
Lodge's Rocks House
.
Bookshops systems
From Mr Simon Murdoch
Sir, I read with interest the A-Z feature on bookshops systems in The Bookseller of 16th April.
The feature implied that John Smith of Glasgow ran a Sweetens EPOS system.
To put the record straight, John Smiths are experienced users of bookshop systems: they have Sweetens' system in their mail order department, and Triptych's Bestseller system for running EPOS and stock control throughout the chain of retail shops, including the main St Vincent Street branch.
Yours sincerely ,
Simon Murdoch
Managing Director
Triptych Systems Ltd
addr;.
Orders from abroad
From Mr Trevor Naylor
Sir, Just to highlight the difficulties companies like ourselves have in non-English speaking markets, below is a copy of an enquiry from a client in Turkey.
See if you can spot the odd one out in the list, and then try to imagine the customer's reaction on receiving the book…
1
Climber's and Hiker's Guide to the World's Mountains
2
Climbing and Hiking in Ecuador
3
Himalayan Climber
4
Mountaineer: 30 years of Climbing the World's Greatest Peaks
5
Mountaineering in the Andes
6
Peruvian Andes
7
Some Beautiful Indian Climbers and Shrubs
8
The Turquoise Mountain
9
Climber's Guide to North America.
Yours sincerely ,
Trevor Naylor
Export Sales Manager
Peter Ward Book Exports,
.
Far from being on the shelf, the school library is playing a central role in the delivery of the national curriculum in secondary schools — actively used by teachers, an asset for the school and a haven of pastoral support for students.
Dr Peggy Heeks reports on research she has been carrying out for the British Library
The school library lives OK!
AS WE SEARCH the economic indicators for those green shoots of recovery, we should, perhaps be looking too for other signs to help restore confidence in a book world currently so high on gloom.
In the public library field stories of cuts are newsworthy: the fact that public libraries still spend around £120m a year on books is overlooked.
As for school libraries, the confusion caused by the complexity of educational change and the financial problems of local education authorities make it easy to believe that they have virtually ceased functioning.
‘There is no point in going into a school library now,’ said a well known author at a recent Arts Council seminar.
‘The shelves are empty.’
We are in danger of talking ourselves into a deeper decline in which only the bad news is given attention.
One way to give ourselves new heart is to go where books and readers meet, and this is what I have been doing for the past year, working in secondary schools on research funded by the British Library.
This direct experience of seeing books being valued and enjoyed has been a timely reminder of their importance in the educational process.
The specific focus of the Loughborough University research was the effect of the national curriculum on secondary school libraries.
Evidence was gathered in the project schools from questionnaires, interviews and observation.
Teachers were mainly in favour of a national curriculum, but often distressed and angered by the frequent changes made to programmes of study by the cumbersome assessment procedures and by the increasing constraints being imposed by the Department of Education — especially in English.
A minority approved, as did this departmental head, the greater emphasis being placed on factual information: ‘I welcomed the national curriculum.
It's putting history back as history, which is about facts.
You can't form opinions until you have facts.’
Confident users
Whatever the division among teachers about aspects of the new curriculum, most found that it has brought them into a closer relationship with the school library:
98% felt confident about using the library
94% regularly directed students to library resources
92% were regular library users
Most teachers (85%) used the library for borrowing books connected with their work but 58% looked for information on other subjects also, and over half came to the library to browse.
Perhaps most surprising was the high percentage — 73% — who came to discuss subject work with the librarian.
Here is the real change which has taken place in school libraries.
In our project schools the library is no longer isolated, a semi-relevant facility, respected but not used.
Rather, it was an integral part of curriculum delivery, actively used by teachers to help them through their work programmes.
This was a collaborative, creative partnership between teachers and librarians.
‘I send pupils up here for research, and beforehand bounce ideas with our librarian,’ commented a head of expressive arts.
‘The Space study required for the national curriculum is based largely on the library, and we have built up the tasks together, with an emphasis on group work,’ said a head of science.
Knowing what subjects are being taught is easier now that schools work through published programmes of study.
Librarians can, probably for the first time, know how to make their stock relevant to subject work.
Inevitably, it is going to lead to stocks that are narrower in range, but the benefits are already showing in additional use.
It was good, though, to note that recreational reading, of both fiction and non-fiction, is still important.
Nearly half the students in our sample used the library for this purpose, and it was the main aim of the students who thronged the libraries at break times.
Talking with students about their personal reading, I was reminded of the school library's role in extending interests and opening up new ideas and experiences.
In an educational climate of increasing prescription, this is vital.
Yet recreational reading can never, and should never, be the mainstay of a school library.
Its core purpose must be the advancement of learning through support of the curriculum.
Such a role has to be teacher-driven.
It has been advocated for decades, GCSE has helped the process, but it has taken the pressures generated by the national curriculum to bring an integration of library and subject work.
Closer ally
The library has become a closer ally of subject work partly because of the emphasis given by the national curriculum to study skills and information technology.
Study skills and information technology are both designated as required cross-curricular skills, and also appear in the subject documents.
Librarians have expertise to offer here and teachers are capitalising on it, often incorporating these elements in their lesson plans.
The gap between the library and subject departments is lessening in other ways too.
Several of the schools in the Loughborough survey kept one copy of each currently-used textbook in the library.
In some cases subject departments were also making a financial contribution to the library book budget.
Subject staff were asked about the resources available for national curriculum work.
It was recognised that ‘You never find a textbook that quite matches your teaching plan’, but most teachers found the materials available adequate.
They praised publishers for the work they were doing in making the national curriculum manageable, for example by relating content to attainment targets.
They had hard words for books which were ‘just a re-hash of old titles’.
English, with its changes of set book requirements, was presenting specific budget problems, and Science was seen as an area for going slow on purchases.
‘We have saved money for resources, but we daren't use it, because there is nothing that is right for us.
The constant changes are too much of a risk for publishers.’
Publishers were looked to for far more support than in the past, as the following interview comments show: ‘There's a change from the past, when we used worksheets predominantly, with textbooks just for backup.
Now we're basing much lower school work on one textbook series’; ‘We started by trying to do it all ourselves.
Now we're looking for clear guidance from textbooks.’
A recurring shortage was material for students with low reading levels at Key Stage 3.
The questionnaire responses backed up the interviews: Textbooks have moved ahead in importance: worksheets are less popular.
Overall, teachers are using a greater mix of materials, including library books, computer software and interactive video.
While selection of resources was apparently not a problem for teachers, there were several signs that school libraries would welcome greater help in stock selection.
In some areas the centralised School Library Service (SLS) was providing no, or severely restricted, support to secondary schools.
This means that previous display collection of new books were often no longer available.
Instead of being able to visit the School Library Service base to examine new titles (usually approval copies sent by library suppliers), school librarians were turning to browsing in local bookshops, buying from travelling discount booksellers, or choosing from publishers' catalogues.
In the longer term self-help groups may emerge, where librarians can pool views about recent publications, or library suppliers may see openings for a more active approach.
In the meantime, publishers' exhibitions will become increasingly important.
The annual Education and Library Resources Exhibitions could also be the occasion for direct selling, with an immediate purchase facility.
The book budgets allocated to the project libraries varied considerably, but straight comparisons were difficult.
Some schools had benefited from government funds allocated to implementing the national curriculum, with one reporting a grant of £20,000 over three years.
The sums are also complicated by amounts paid to School Library Services in some cases.
For example, to one library budget of £9,000 should be added another £5,000 spent on a subscription to the local SLS.
One librarian felt so hard up that she had begun looking for bargains at car boot sales —‘Adrian Mole in mint condition for 20p’— a practice which raises many questions about funding our schools.
This school, however, was an exception: in most, heads had managed to maintain or increase the budget.
The support of school managers did emerge as a key factor in library success.
Where libraries were seen to be furthering school purposes there was a strong case for supporting them adequately, in both financial and wider terms.
The majority of headteachers in our survey did see the library as a powerful aid to delivery of the curriculum, as well as an asset in furthering other school aims.
For example, much library work with students takes place on a one-to-one basis, and offers opportunities for a different adult/student relationship from that of the classroom.
Librarians were frequently observed in a tutoring role —‘I'm getting in a bit of a state about my essay.
I haven't got enough background information’; ‘I've got to find out about the First World War, and I'm not sure how to begin.’
Always the librarians were there, not telling the answers but guiding the students through the process of research.
Observing day after day, one saw that the library was also a place for pastoral support, a place for equal opportunities where each student was valued and encouraged.
The library can be an asset in promoting the school to parents, and the librarians in the Loughborough survey proved skilled in marketing techniques.
Their product — stock and services — was carefully targeted to the many different client groups in the school.
They understood the need to demonstrate value for money.
The library as place was taken seriously, and comments from staff and students showed the importance of the physical (and psychological) environment, variously described as civilised, welcoming, stimulating: ‘It's a place to have peace and quiet’; ‘The library is comfortable, and there is a nice atmosphere which is right for private study’; ‘I like the lively feeling of the place.
There's always something interesting and different to see’; ‘I go to the library for coffee, spiritual support and peace.’
Prime communicators
Promotion, as any marketing person knows, takes many forms.
There were displays of work which showed the link between library and classroom; the collection of photographs which boosted the school image.
Librarians were often the prime communicators with the press and feeder primary schools.
They were to be found on school working parties, at fund-raising events and parents' evenings.
They were continually spreading the message that the library is an integral part of the school's operation.
The news of busy, wanted school libraries can help all of us engaged in providing books and related services to schools.
The Loughborough research shows that librarians don't have to feel apologetic about being on the margins of school action.
The library, in reality as well as in conference rhetoric, can be a place where the school's purposes are worked out.
It can advance the school's agenda by assisting academic and personal development.
The book trade should have an interest in passing on that message.
Dr Peggy Heeks is currently working in the Department of Information and Library Studies, Loughborough University.
The research report SCHOOL LIBRARIES AT WORK (Heeks & Kinnell) is due for publication later this year by the British Library .
Analyse your successes (as well as failures): Sir John Harvey-Jones, trouble-shooter and company doctor, draws on his Managing to Survive to offer advice to take publishers successfully through the decade
Managing for the '90s
IN THE '90s a great many of the factors which affect us all in business will be so different that new management responses will be required, and I have sought to outline some of these elements in my latest book.
I have been asked to comment particularly on the applicability of some of these to the publishing trade.
I do so with considerable trepidation since, as an author, I am a beneficiary of the book trade's success and, moreover, despite my happy experiences of the trade and publishing in general, I do not have in-depth knowledge of the publishing business.
Rate of change
Nevertheless, there seems to be a number of factors at play in the business that correlate very closely to the forces which I see at work in broader fields.
The first area, which will be no surprise to readers of The Bookseller , is the mind-boggling rate of change that is affecting all businesses at the present time.
Indeed, the only completely predictable factor is the unpredictability of the changes with which the book trade in increasingly having to grapple.
Underlying everything, therefore, is a need for quick reaction, coupled with clarity and consistently about strategic aims.
Obviously people in the trade take a great pride in their ability to understand their customers and to predict their reactions.
The difficulty appears to me to be that there are too many people in the business seeking to compete in the same areas of demand, without any very great clarity about the sources of their own competitive advantages.
It has never been more important to concentrate on a particular area where your business can obtain a pre-eminent position, and to understand the basis of that pre-eminence.
It is as important to be ruthlessly clear about the underlying causes of success as it is to be analytical about the basic faults which have led to failure.
The second area which will particularly affect the book trade during the '90s is that of finance and financial strategy.
The ability of firms to compete will lie very largely with their success in managing their business ambitions and their financial capabilities in harmony.
This may sound obvious, but, sadly, business success will no longer automatically lead to financial success.
Businesses will have to remain in financial balance and take great care that their expansionist ambitions do not outpace their financing ability.
The management of cash and of the risk profile of the business will be even more important.
The third area where I believe firms in the book trade will have to examine their futures with great care is the balance between risk and safety.
On the one side ‘safe’ operations are unlikely to produce the high returns that will be needed in a prolonged period of financial stringency.
But equally, people who are risking money in business will wish to be assured that these risks are minimised.
Each business will need to have a solid safety net of low risk performance areas, whose task will be to reduce the cost base to the absolute minimum, supporting a much smaller proportion of high risk, hopefully high return ventures.
Publishers will need deliberately to set aside a proportion of ‘play money’, which they can afford to lose, but on which they will seek to recuperate the large returns that go with true risk investment.
Fourthly, there will be a greater realisation that the business depends on the strength of the whole chain of supply and sales, rather than on the individual performance of one part of it.
Publishers are dependent on the booksellers, and both in turn are dependent on the authors, printers, carriers, distributors and so on.
The future will lie with people who increasingly try to operate, not as a totally integrated team, but as a flexible chain.
The strength of your business is only as good as the strength of its suppliers and customers, and the relationship will need to be a much closer, less adversarial one.
There is more money to be made by trying to increase the efficiency and flexibility of the whole system than there is through having a series of adversarial breaks in the chain.
The fifth area relates to wholesalers and distribution costs.
One must wonder whether the book trade will continue to have the large and complicated distribution systems which it has been able to support in the past.
Just as manufacturers increasingly supply directly to stores, so I believe we will see changes in this area affecting the book trade.
Timescale and computers
The sixth area where one can foresee some substantial change is that of timescale and the use of computers.
The book trade is relatively undeveloped in its use of computers to change the whole way in which business is conducted.
I have long been concerned about the time lapse from the commissioning of a book to its appearance in the shops.
The fact that this lead time can be substantially reduced under special circumstances means that it is not impossible to produce books much more quickly.
Time is money, and one must expect to see more pressure being brought to bear to reduce to a minimum the time taken from the start of a project to the arrival of the product on the shelves.
All these processes will be helped immeasurably by the imaginative use of computer technology which, like accountancy, will no longer be seen as a service but as an integral part of the whole process.
These views of the future are inevitably personal ones.
Since the trends that I have observed are at work in most other fields of business activity it seems unlikely that the book trade will be able to avoid them.
The strength of the trade, and therefore the well being of all of us involved with it, will depend on its ability to adapt.
Sir John Harvey-Jones' MANAGING TO SURVIVE: A GUIDE TO MANAGEMENT THROUGH THE 1990S (£15) is published by Heinemann this week .
Ian Norrie resumes his tour of bookshops in the regions of Britain, and finds Glasgow an industrial city beside the Clyde well endowed with multi-lane carriageways, flyovers and grimy churches, but also rich in art galleries, theatre, famous football teams — and bookshops.
Here the long established adjoin new arrivals
The Norrie guide to Glasgow
JOHN SMITHS HAS dominated the Glasgow bookselling scene for even longer than Thins has been preeminent in Edinburgh, but there are differences.
This has remained for five generations in the same family, and roughly speaking with headquarters on the same site, whereas Smith's ownership has passed through several families and occupied many addresses before settling in 1921 on 57–61 St Vincent Street.
In 1993, eight years short of its 250th anniversary, and still trading under its original name, it has fewer branches than Thins and a turnover probably around £13m (Thins is believed to be around £15m).
Where Thins has three Waterstones to compete with and, at university level, the old established Bauermeister, Smiths has two Waterstones and a Dillons, but virtually no competition on the campus of either Glasgow or Strathclyde.
When I first visited John Smiths in 1968, the council was only just embarking on its policy of making Glasgow a city dedicated to the motorway.
A huge area has since been cleared for the construction of flyovers, underpasses, multi-lane carriageways and slip roads, with forlorn office blocks and high rise flats standing around them, either waiting to be demolished or recently erected.
It is difficult to assess their status.
Mercifully there are regions, east and north of Central Station, relatively untouched.
Here are to be found squares and terraces as distinguished architecturally as in other British cities, and shopping streets which have been precincted and pedestrianised.
On or around them the chief bookshops are to be found.
Above bridge over the river Clyde
Departures, arrivals, survivors
Gone, since I last travelled to research Mumby's history, are John Wylie of Sauchiehall Street (where Ross Higgins, a great personal bookseller, presided), W & R Holmes' two branches and the Grant Educational Company.
Still with use, in addition to John Smiths, are Pickering & Inglis, William Porteous, branches of Menzies, and a number of specialist religious shops including an outpost of the Daughters of St Paul.
Newcomers are W H Smith (not even a distant cousin of John), Parks Business Bookshop and, of course, Dillons and Waterstones.
Glasgow, an industrial city beside the Clyde noted for shipbuilding, is larger than Edinburgh, and although it is not as beautiful as Scotland's capital, its university was founded more than 100 years earlier, its art galleries are even more distinguished, its theatrical tradition is stronger, its churches possibly grimier, and its football teams more famous.
Its bookshops are on a par, which means it is well catered for.
I'll start with one of the survivors, William Porteous of Royal Exchange Place off Buchanan Street.
Its modest signboard denotes maps and books, mostly maps in fact, and the stranger may well be surprised to find, within such small premises, detailed town plans of distant communities and regional maps of many parts of the USA.
Porteous has long had a high reputation for stocking maps and guides in depth, and its customers, to whom it also supplies daily newspapers, include large city companies whose executives travel regularly and widely.
W H Smith, a newcomer in the '80s, with no previous presence in Scotland, occupies an  acre or two of shop space in the pedestrianised part of Argyle Street where a gentleman with an electronic keyboard deafens passers by.
(All you can say about that is that it's a change from bagpipes.)
The book department, looked after by Mrs Lynn Bolland, is in a capacious basement where you are greeted by a sign above the Glasgow books and maps proclaiming, ‘YOU'D BE LOST WITHOUT SMITHS’.
The layout and shelf signing are more effective than at any WHS branch I have visited in England, and there was a thicker flow of customers than I encountered anywhere else in the city.
Opposite is an equally large Menzies, where the books, mostly paperbacks, are at the back of the ground floor, with a small children's section in a basement.
Handsome Dillons
For a brief while there was a smart L-shaped Hatchards in Gordon Street, but the Pentos presence is now marked by a handsome Dillons on three floors in the traffic ridden part of Argyle Street.
It opened only last year, so is still gleamingly new.
It has 10,000 sq ft for sales, and 32 staff, 24 of them full-time equivalents.
Very large window areas allow for broad sweeps of display which grab the eye from far away, as they do at Waterstones' even grander premises round the corner in Union Street.
It is probably patronising to say that in both cases the window dressing is up to Kensington standards, but it is.
At Dillons, assistant manager Graham Wilson told me with quiet confidence that ‘at customer service we are good’.
He thought it was easy for a newcomer to acquire school and institutional business because there was always someone on the lookout for improved service.
He felt sure Dillons would keep what it had acquired.
This is his particular speciality; when he was at the Oxford branch he was institutional sales manager.
Andrew Mitchell, in charge here, was on holiday, but I met another colleague, Fiona Sheppard, who looks after events.
All bookshops with an eye to their image have events nowadays, although the competition is tough going.
Last year Dillons got John Mortimer on a holiday weekend, which was not good timing, but it has since made a niche for itself with local books.
Some are published by Kenny McKenzie's Taranis, an imprint which does not yet seem to have hit the Spring and Autumn Books numbers of The Bookseller .
This store has ample provision for customer flow and is graced with wide, almost spiral, staircases which, at floor level, are faced by hotel-like reception desks.
It has style.
The newer of the Waterstones (7,700 sq ft, 24 full time, 17 full time equivalents) is a converted Sherratt & Hughes lying in the enclave of Princes Square — for which, says manager Robert Kinnear, the catchment area is the whole of central Scotland, plus Iceland and Norway.
The 60 shops, with a glass roof over the courtyard, have a marketing committee on which he sits.
The three levels are reached by stairs, escalators and lifts; Waterstones is on the top two, and it was here that Delia Smith addressed customers for 15 minutes, resulting in 300 sales for her recipe books.
Fitzroy MacLean also made a successful appearance.
‘You have to be careful, nowadays, whom   you get,’ warned Robert Kinnear, whose bookselling experience, at Grant Educational, must have been less worldly.
An attractive feature of his branch are the promotional banners waving in the air conditioned breeze.
Bigger brother Waterstones (although only marginally so — 8,400 sq ft, 25 full time, 16 full time equivalents) also opens on seven days a week, and occupies the ground floor and basement of one of Glasgow's most attractive buildings, so Venetian in character that it is known as the Ca' d'Oro.
Inside it is a purpose fitted Waterstones with a shallow gallery making contours on the ground floor.
This is foiled aesthetically by the enclosure of the wide, steep staircase to the basement which has a three sided screen demanded by the fire regulations.
And what fire officers require, fire officers get.
Customers might welcome escalators.
Tim Batten came here as manager in 1988 after five years in Waterstones, Old Brompton Road.
I asked him for an instance of the difference between bookselling in Knightsbridge, London, and Union Street, Glasgow.
‘Here they buy in ones and twos,’ he said.
‘There they bought in piles.’
He has had mass market signings with Fry and Pratchett, sells great qualities of Scottish books, and has mixed feelings about firm sale.
If there is a prototype Waterstone manager, he is it.
Mildly astonished at finding himself paid to perform in an Aladdin's cave of literature, he takes it in his stride.
Clockwise from top left Robert Clow and Willie Anderson of John Smiths; Robert Kinnear, manager of Waterstones, Princes Square; the exterior of William Porteous in Royal Exchange Street; Brownie Gray, manager of Parks; the interior of Waterstones in Union Street; and Dillons in Argyle Street
Smiths undiminished
A couple of blocks away is John Smiths, where I met my old friend Robert Clow, in company with his number two, Willie Anderson, current treasurer of the BA.
Robert, I recalled, had been displeased when, years ago, W H Smith, announced its intention of opening in Glasgow.
It was the eponymity which concerned him.
I asked how he viewed the invasion by other southern factions.
Only Hatchards had hurt, he said, because it was then owned by Collins, Glasgow's premier publisher, of whom his Smiths had always been a friendly, major customer.
Such relationships are now history, part of Murdoch's sunset boulevard.
Collins' identity is diminished; John Smiths' is not.
Smiths is still the largest if not the most imposing bookshop in Glasgow (16,000 sq ft, 40 full time plus Saturday).
Its double frontage is listed, and the mausoleum like doors in its midst, once providing access to the upper floors, are now permanently closed (must have been a visiting fireman).
The windows are richly dressed, though they do not lend themselves to the Kensington approach; as with Thins, the interior has been face-lifted and made warmly welcoming.
Being on six floors does not allow for sweeping vistas, but this is not a shop in which one can get lost any more.
The nooks and crannies have been eliminated, and that is no bad thing for policing the store.
There is a colour guide to Smiths (Willie Anderson's idea) which reminded me of the Louvre, although it is more simple, and there are lifts to all floors.
In the basement (paperback fiction and children's) an attractive device to light the books is provided by  thin columns with partly concealed strips that shine directly on them.
A pleasing touch in the interior are the old adverts — entirely irrelevant to books and publishing — displayed on small areas of wall space left fallow by book promoters.
Smiths does not open on Sundays, which is not a hangover from the days when the appropriately named John Knox was chairman, but because St Vincent Street is in the business quarter.
‘We like to think,’ says Robert, ‘that our customers are all out skiing, hill climbing, or reading the Sunday Whines.’
Robert, who succeeded Knox, is now chairman and managing director of a company whose senior employees form the majority of shareholders.
Up to the campus
When I visited Glasgow in the late '60s Robert Clow was manager of the University Shop in Gibson Street.
This moved, long since, up to the campus, where it now has premises on one side of the main gateway.
There is also a shop (3,500 sq ft) at the newer university (1964) of Strathclyde.
Here, as well as academic books, there is a science fiction section and Winnie-the-Pooh marginalia (address books and so on), thus lowering the intellectual temperature.
Christine Anderson is manageress.
Smiths has expanded outside Glasgow to the universities of St Andrews and Stirling, and to non-academic venues in Dundee and Paisley.
Within Glasgow there is a branch at Byres Road (3,500 sq ft on two floors, 8 full time), in a district downhill from the university which, says Robert Clow, ‘compares with Hampstead.’
More, I would say, with Golders Green, but the experienced rep for a large group refers to it enthusiastically and has high praise for manageress Alison Stroak.
‘It is catering for well-heeled youth,’ he maintains, ‘and is well run without too much interference.’
This branch of John Smiths augurs better for the company that the ill-fated Volumes, opened in Queen Street in the late '80s as a gesture against invasion by the groups.
An imaginatively designed store, it did not attract sufficient custom, so Smiths quickly cut its losses and closed it.
Meanwhile, on its very doorstep, at 83 St Vincent Street, a branch of Parks (or parks, as it regrettably insists on its letterheadings) had opened.
This small chain specialises in banking, business, accountancy and law.
The Glasgow shop (1,600 sq ft, 4 full time, 2 part time) is managed by Brownie Gray, who, my rep friend surmises, has picked up trade which formerly went to Holmes and Grants.
It may also have taken business away from John Smiths, because one enters its sales area straight off the street, whereas Smiths' comparable sections are well above pavement level.
If there is rivalry between the firms it is forgotten three times a year when Stuart Johnstone, of Smiths, organises a get together of Glasgow booksellers and reps.
Publishers often make their appointments to coincide with the parties.
With something like 50,000 square feet of bookselling space in the inner city, the retailers must be hoping that Glaswegians will  learn to buy in piles.
Ian Norrie's next stop: Southampton 
BOOK NEWS
James Clavell returns to the world of the shoguns in Gaijin, another massive (1,019 pages) contribution to his fictional portrait of Asia.
A one-time hater of the Japanese, the author of novels that have sold over 6 million copies tells The Bookseller how he came to want to promote understanding between east and west
Samurai saga
At the end of the Second World War, James Clavell says, he swore that he would put a brick through the window of the first Japanese Embassy to be opened in London.
Now he describes his novels as ‘a bridge between east and west’.
His latest,Gai-jin (£16.99), comes from Hodder on 6th May.
Clavell had been a prisoner of war of the Japanese in Changi camp, Singapore.
The Australian-born son of an English naval man and an Irish mother, he was serving in the Royal Artillery in Java when, in 1942, he was captured.
Fourteen out of 15 of his fellow prisoners died.
He bottled up what had happened at Changi.
Then, some 16 years later, he began talking about his experiences.
During a period of enforced absence, owing to a writer's strike, from his work in Hollywood, he was told by his wife April that he should write a book: ‘She slammed the door and said, ‘You can come out after you've written five pages.’’
The result was King Rat (1962).
How to start
‘I thought to myself, ‘How do you write a novel?’
And I remembered an early line from ‘Othello’ where Iago says something like, ‘I'll get that bloody Moor if it's the last thing I do in my life.’
I thought, ‘If that's good enough for Shakespeare, it's good enough for me’, and so King Rat starts, ‘I'm going to get that bloody bastard if it's the last thing I do in my life.’
‘And that sort of unlocked it.
I had had no  pretensions , ever, of being a novelist, and suddenly this thing started pouring out.
I thing I wrote the original 850-odd pages of King Rat in about six to eight weeks.
‘It wasn't a proper novel at that time.
Eventually I got myself an editor who explained to me how to write a book, more or less, and what purple prose was, and all of that.
‘Having written King Rat , I was cleansed.
All the frustration and anger that had been bottled up for 16 years were suddenly out.
I'm in balance if I remember Changi; because there I was as near death as I possible could be, and if I can relate to that, what else can anybody do to me?
I suppose I wrote King Rat to try to find out why I survived and 14 out of 15 others didn't make it.
Of course, there's no answer to that one.’
Nonetheless, perhaps one answer could be the drive and determination for which Clavell has been noted in his subsequent career.
On going to Hollywood, he became a writer because he wanted to produce, and a producer because he wanted to direct; he ended up as writer/producer/director on films including ‘To Sir with Love’ and ‘The Last Valley’.
He has said that he wrote his second novel to say, ‘Up you, Charlie!’ to those who had told him that getting out one book was easy.
He has confessed to going into book shops and placing his books in the windows.
He has said that when King Rat got to number four on the bestseller list, he reacted by exclaiming, ‘God dammit!
Why aren't I number one?’, adding, ‘If I'm in the game, I want to be the best.’
As executive producer of the mini-series version of Shogun , broadcast in the '70s, he ensured that each episode began and ended with a shot of the paperback edition on of the novel with his name in big letters.
He played a leading role in the $5m deal with Morrow that gave his novel Whirlwind a place in the Guinness Book of Records as the recipient of the highest ever advance for a single work of fiction.
Back to Japan
Whirlwind , though it continued the story of the Noble House company, was a departure for Clavell in being about modern politics in Iran.
Many of his millions of readers will welcome his return to a far eastern setting in Gat-jin .
The novel is set in Japan in 1862, when the Shogunate whose establishment was described in Shogun is under threat, and when the gai-jin (foreigners), led by the Nobel  House trading company, are manoeuvring to profit from the country.
Gai-jin is presented as the second volume in a four-part Japanese saga that began with Shogun ; it also refers to the worlds of Tai-pan , which was about the founding of Hong Kong, and of Noble House , which was set in Hong Kong in 1962.
Clavell says that King Rat had freed him to write about the Far East.
‘I like it there: I like the smells, and I like the food, and I like wandering about, and I like the people — even though in Japan I feel more like a foreigner than I do anywhere else in the world.
Gai-jin attitudes
‘The Japanese are very interested in what other people think about them.
The things they like about me are my gai-jin attitudes, and they laugh at a lot of my conclusions, I'm sure — not to my face, but among themselves.
At the same time, people who have levelled with me have said, ‘Hey, James, how did you know that?
Why don't you get on to the negotiating team at the trade talks?’
‘I'm trying to bridge east and west: to say, they look at something this way, and we look at something that way; and the way we look at it is not necessarily correct, and they way they look at it is not necessarily incorrect.
‘I'm a storyteller, and so I can show readers that people think in a certain way, and suggest to readers that under those circumstances they might thing in the same way.
My books are a very innocuous way of learning.
I'm not trying to be a teacher, but if people give me their time, they should be repaid.
I try to give value for money.’
Making husbands jealous — on CD
Bantam Press, celebrating the achievement by Jilly Cooper's The Man Who Made Husbands Jealous (£14.99) of a subscription of 70,000 copies, the company's highest ever for a hardback novel, is now looking forward to a further boost for the book when the CD and cassette single ‘Lysander's Theme’ is released on 10th May.
The single, inspired by the novel and sung by Junior and Ruby Turner, will get its first airplay on television on ‘Good Morning Anne and Nick’.
The CD or cassette may be ordered from the producer, Equity Records, on .
Sutton paperbacks
Alan Sutton launches a new paperback series, Illustrated History Paperbacks, in July.
Each reissued title is priced at £9.99, and contains over 50 black and while illustrations.
The first nine titles are The Wars of the Roses by J R Lander;The Battle of Barnet and Tewkesbury by P W Hammond;The Making of the Tudor Dynasty by Ralph Griffiths and R Thomas;The Battle of Bosworth by Michael Bennett;Margaret of York, Duchess of Burgundy by Christine Weightman;Lambert Simnel and the Battle of Stoke by Michael Bennett;The English Civil War by Maurice Ashley;The Battle of Naseby and the Fall of Charles I by Maurice Ashley; and Culloden and the ‘45 by Jeremy Black.
In brief Constable reckons it will have the first UK-published book on the Waco disaster.
Siege at Waco (July, £4.99) is written by Richard Valdemar, cult and ritual crimes specialist for the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, and Rob Eshman of the Los Angeles Times .
The AA expands its leisure publishing this month with its first ever guide to pubs,Britain's Best Pubs (£9.99) is sponsored by Appletise, and features over 1,000 pubs which the AA's researchers consider to be outstanding.
Commenting on the publishing by the organisation, which is committed to promoting the message that drivers should not drink, with a pub guide, marketing director Stephen Mesquita comments, ‘our association with Appletise reinforces the message that if you drive, don't drink — stick to soft drinks’.
At the International Association of Culinary Professionals' conference in the US,Henrietta Green was given a Julia Child Cookbook Award for A Glorious Harvest (Sedgwood Press).
The book is published in the UK as Henrietta Green's New Country Kitchen (Conran Octopus, £20).
A B Yehoshua has won the US National Jewish Book Award for Mr Mani (£15.99), published in the UK by Peter Halban.
Media
David Malouf Remembering Babylon (Chatto, 13th May, £14.99): interviews Sunday Telegraph (4th May),Observer (4th),Guardian (5th), Radio 4's Kaleidoscope (11th), BBC World Service's World of Books (13th),Scotsman (18th); events in London, Cambridge, Norwich, Edinburgh, Leeds, Manchester, Oxford, Birmingham, Hay-on-Wye.
Sara Schulman Empathy (Sheba, £6.99): interviews (from 28th Apr) Radio 4. s Woman's Hour, Radios Capital, GLR, Belfast,Tribune ,Pink Paper ,Forum ,Harpies & Quines ,Gay Scotland ,Outright ; events and signings in London, Glasgow, Birmingham, Nottingham, Belfast, Cork.
The Genetic Revolution Patrick Dixon (Kingsway, 7th May, £6.99): serialisation Mail on Sunday .
Riders ITV, 2nd and 3rd May: mini-series of Jilly Cooper's novel (Corgi, £5.99).
Robert Bramson Coping with Difficult Bosses (Nicholas Brealey, 20th May, £16.99/£7.99): serialisation Daily Mail ;Daily Express ,Times ,Observer ,She ,More!,
Girl About Town ,Office Secretary ,Best ,Bella ; recommendations on problem pages of Sun ,Mizz ,Chat ,Annabel ,Take a Break ; coverage in business press and syndicated feature in regional newspapers.
BOOK NEWS FIRST REPORT
Prequelling Hawthorne
Elsbeth Lindner, rebuilding Weidenfeld's fiction list, has bought a first novel set in Civil War England and Puritan America which she hesitates, she says, to bill as ‘a prequel to The Scarlet Letter ’ because it is ‘very much a novel in its own right’.
Written by Christopher Bigsby , broadcaster and Professor of American Studies at the University of East Anglia,Hester and its eponymous heroine nevertheless bear some relation to Nathaniel Hawthorne's novel.
Lindner bought UK and Commonwealth rights from Vivien Green at Richard Scott Simon, and publication will be next spring.
Jo Frank, editorial director of Simon & Schuster, has been busy.
She has recently done a six-figure deal with Carol Smith for world volume rights in three books by ‘bestselling novelist and TV personality’Denise Robertson , the first of which will be published in September 1994.
Also, on the basis of an outline and ‘three or four’ chapters of a first novel, she has done a five-figure deal for two books by Juliette Mead , a woman in her early 30s who works in the cit.
The first novel in the deal,The Headhunter , is, says Frank, ‘contemporary and commercial’.
HarperCollins was also interested, and the contest ‘went to marketing plans and all’; the agent was Jane Bradish-Ellames at Curtis Brown.
The book will be a Pocket original superlead in January 1995.
Another Pocket original superlead, out in March 1995, is a ‘breakthrough novel’ by Debbie Fowler , who has written three novels for Sphere and a romance for Century/Arrow, as well as a non-fiction account of her adoption of a Romanian orphan.
She has since also adopted a Bosnian child, and these experiences, and her work as a journalist in eastern Europe, inform her Straight on Till Morning .
The agent is Vivienne Schuster.
On top of these, Frank has bought The Social Survival Handbook for October 1993, by journalist Guy Browning , through Julian Alexander, and has done a further two-book deal (following the last three-book contract) for a ‘healthy six-figure sum’ with Lucinda Edmonds , author of Lovers and Players , through Arthur Goodhart.
Christopher Sinclair-Stevenson's first purchase for Reed outside his own imprint is an adventure novel by Lionel Davidson , along with Davidson's backlist including The Night of Wenceslas , published by Gollancz in the 1960s to prizes and acclaim, and The Rose of Tibet ,A Long Way to Shiloh ,The Chelsea Murders and others.
The new book,Kolymsky Heights , is says Sinclair-Stevenson, ‘a wonderful, classy novel set mainly in Russia post-Gorbachev — the best thing in this genre I've read for ages’.
It will be published by Heinemann, edited by Penny Hoare, and the backlist will appear in Mandarin.
Davidson's agent is Michael Shaw at Curtis Brown.
Also through Shaw, Sinclair-Stevenson has commissioned (and has world rights in) a biography of Freud by Paul Ferris , author of the recent Sex and the British from Michael Joseph; and through Maggie Noach (with world rights again) a biography of Tito by Richard West .
Rights in Sinclair-Stevenson's The Rise and Fall of the House of Windsor by A N Wilson have now been sold in the US, Germany, France and Holland.
Pavilion continues its relationship with its ‘star artist’, children's book illustrator Michael Foreman , following his ‘internationally acclaimed’War Boy .
He has been signed up for War Game , based on a story from the First World War, which will be published before the 80th anniversary of the outbreak of the conflict.
He is also writing and illustrating an adventure story based on the life of Marco Polo, and working with Michael Morpurgo on a retelling of the legends of King Arthur.
Jane Hissey ‘s Old Bear Stories, published by Random House Children's Books, have been adapted for television and will be screened across the ITV network in the autumn.
Video rights in the UK have been sold to Pickwick.
The animated, 13-part series will be narrated by Anton Rogers.
Random House will publish a range of Old Bear stationery in the summer, and is licensing a range of other products.
A ‘courtroom drama with a difference’ was bought pre-emptively last month by Headline's Susan Fletcher, just before she took a trip to New York.
Criminal Seduction by Darien North was sold through Abner Stein acting on behalf of Aaron Priest.
It will be published by Dutton/NAL in the US and by Headline later this year.
While she was in the States, Fletcher also picked up a copy of Bodies Electric by Colin Harrison , which Bloomsbury will publish here later this year.
She read it when her plane was grounded for four hours at JFK, as was inspired to pre-empt paperback rights.
‘Anything that was enjoyable under those circumstances had to be good,’ she says.
Nicolette Jones 
Glenfiddich offer
The Glenfiddich Awards are being promoted through bookshops this year with an offer to each purchaser of a winning title (Book News, 23rd April) of a free bottle of Glenfiddich malt whisky.
One author missed out of last week's round-up was Tom Jaine, editor of the Good Food Guide , who was named Restaurant Writer of the Year.
PAPERBACK PREVIEW
SARAH BROADHURST
Jewels, wicked pleasures and a porcupine, as well as Picador's finest and Black Swan's teasers.
Plus accounts from the battlegrounds of the Gulf and of Highbury stadium.
And August also sees the amalgamation of the Fontana and Grafton lists
August paperbacks
August is the launch month for HarperCollins paperbacks — or, to be more precise, August is the month when Fontana and Grafton cease to exist, amalgamating under the one imprint, which I shall refer to as HCP and in my mind will always call Collins.
The merger has been on the cards for some time and of course makes perfect sense.
In one stroke (which has taken about two years to organise) HarperCollins will substantially reduce overheads and become a major force in the mass market field.
Watch out, Transworld.
However, I do not expect the full effect to be felt until next year, when I am sure we can expect a megaseller each month.
Before I start, I would like to draw out two birthday titles, both paperback originals and both due for a lot of press coverage.
Picador 21st Book
This is very special: 21 Picador authors with original pieces, one for each year.
It starts with Oliver Sacks in 1972, the year his mother died and the year he wrote Awakenings , and closes with Tariq Ali writing about cricket in 1992.
In between is a truly outstanding list of contributors.
Phillip Evans (ed)
The Sunday Times Black Swan Literary Quiz Book
Divided into 80 different categories, with some 5,000 questions, a lovely title to celebrate Black Swan's birthday.
It comes ‘by public demand’, inspired by the hundreds of letters requesting more frequent quizzes.
But that remains an annual event, with the sixth one coming up this August bank holiday.
Top Sellers
Danielle Steel
Jewels (Corgi, £4.99, 12th)
Originally scheduled for May.
As in the past, it has the new hardback (Vanished ) promoted alongside it.
There is a competition in the Daily Express to win a diamond, all the expected p.o.s. and razzmatazz are there, but this year there is an added ingredient to well sales still further: a four-part, four-hour ITV mini-series in the autumn.
Penny Vincenzi
Wicked Pleasures (Orion, £5.99, 5th)
Wonderful stuff.
Three privileged siblings who discover they all have different fathers — and none is the man their mother is married to.
There is a choice of two covers, a white and a gold, to make the displays stand out.
Martin Cruz Smith
Red Square (HCP, £4.99, 2nd)
Post-Communist Russia with the Moscow Mafia and the black market prevalent and his past hero Renko starring again.
It leads the new Fontana/Grafton amalgamation.
Clive Barker
The Thief of Always (HCP, £4.99, 16th)
Beautiful cover, such an improvement over the cheapy hardback and more suitable for the ‘all ages’ market.
Erich Segal
Acts of Faith (Arrow, £4.99, 5th)
I don't expect it to match Love Story , but I think he still has a lot of mileage and is well worth supporting.
Ones to watch
Guy Bellamy
The Comedy Hotel (Penguin, £4.99, 26th)
A special favourite of mine.
He is such fun, the intelligent person's humorous read à la David Lodge (Penguin has used the same cover illustrator, Paul Cox).
This one concerns a group of ‘menopause men’ and features some delicious, disillusioned characters.
Penguin has produced a beer mat to help promote it.
Seth Margolis
The Other Mother (Headline, £5.99, 12th)
Headline's big hype of the year, a ‘tug of love’ story about an ex-drug addicted, illiterate black woman's fight to retrieve her son, adopted by a white family.
It is gutsy stuff, Headline is selling it hard and it is well worth supporting.
Margaret Mayhew
Bluebirds (Corgi original, £4.99, 12th)
Corgi's answer to All the Sweet Promises , a long, absorbing, atmospheric Second World War tale of four different girls meeting as the first of the WAAFS and contributing courageously to the fight.
The author is not new, but she hasn't written anything for 12 years.
It is a lovely book which, as an original deserves to do well (there is a simultaneous library edition); but the cover, although appropriate for the period, lacks some ‘pick me up’ ingredients.
Dave Cash
All Night Long (Mandarin original, £4.99, 2nd)
Moves from Signet for his second novel, which is still radio glitz.
I think he will succeed.
Mandarin has his next book and is determined to build him.
The publicity includes a CD of the same name featuring hits from the period covered (1965–67), the heyday of pirate radio.
The author is a DJ and will go on tour.
Lead sagas
Philippa Gregory
Her last with Penguin, as she has moved to HarperCollins, but the publicity is still tied in with her new hardback (Fallen Skies ).
This one has a Tudor setting, with the destruction of the monasteries and witchcraft as its backdrop.
She is a major author, straddling the intelligent and the escapist markets.
Nancy Livingstone
Two Sisters (Warner, £4.99, 12th)
Great new cover treatment for this family saga of struggling siblings in the aftermath of the First World War.
Her backlist is being reissued in the same style, which may help her jump a league.
She was shortlisted for the RNA award, which should have been her step up, but with no paperback until August there is little chance of any extra mileage.
Audrey Howard
All the Dear Faces (Coronet, £5.99, 19th)
Irish immigrants and English aristocracy intermingle in Edwardian Liverpool.
She is a past RNA winner.
Laura Gilmour Bennett
Distant Echoes (Signet, £4.99, 26th)
Another dual-period tale from the author of A Wheel of Stars , here mingling 13th century French history with a contemporary search novel.
Elizabeth Chadwick
The Leopard Unleashed (Signet, £4.99, 5th)
More 13th century history, here providing the backdrop for a gloriously romantic tale set in the marshes of Wales from the author who won the Betty Trask award with The Wild Hunt .
There is a new C format simultaneously,Children of Destiny (Michael Joseph, £8.99).
Roberta Latow
Her Hungry Heart (Headline, £5.99, 19th)
Sensual, sexy tale — a style for which she is becoming renowned.
Alexandra Connor
The Green Bay Tree (Mandarin original, £4.99, 31st)
Author of The Well of Dreams with a tale of a troubled marriage.
Thrillers and crime
Dale Brown
Night of the Hawk (HCP, £4.99, 31st)
The sequel to his first flying tale Flight of the Old Dog , taking the action into Soviet territory.
It is a bit high-tech for me, but his adventure sequences are good.
Ted Allbeury
Show Me a Hero (Coronet, £4.99, 5th)
Based on the true story of Stalin's most successful spy.
Good, old-fashioned espionage.
Bernard Cornwell
Scoundrel (Penguin, £4.99, 26th)
Arms dealing, terrorism and lots of excitement at sea.
Evelyn Anthony
The Doll's House (Corgi, £4.99, 12th)
Difficult one this.
It is most definitely a thriller, but with strong romantic undertones; I would like to recommend it to both sexes as a jolly exciting read.
She has moved from Arrow, and is just the sort of author who can benefit from a change of publisher, for she has been slipping a little recently.
This should pull her back up again.
Judith Kelman
The House on the Hill (Mandarin, £4.99, 16th)
Serial killer, child-in-peril stuff, and probably a woman's read.
There is a new hardback simultaneously (If I Should Die ).
Philip Kerr
A Philosophical Investigation (Arrow, £4.99, 5th)
Futuristic (early 21st century) serial killer chase tale with a joint promotion with a new hardback (Dead Meat ).
He is one of the new Best of Young British Writers, and Arrow is very keen.
Sue Grafton
I Is for Innocent (Pan, £4.99, 13th)
As she moves through the alphabet, so her sales get stronger.
J Is for Judgement comes in hardback at the same time.
Walter Mosley
A Red Death (Pan, £4.99, 27th)
An award-winning American to watch, and a favourite of Bill Clinton's.
He is coming over for a tour which culminates in the Edinburgh Festival, and he will be promoting both this and his third Easy Rawlins tale.
The White Butterfly (Serpent's Tail, £7.99)
John Francome
Rough Ride (Headline, £5.99, 5th)
His latest horse racing yarn, set in the world of point-to-pointing.
Fred Hiatt
The Secret Sun (Pocket, £4.99, 26th)
Début thriller from a Washington Post journalist about Japanese nuclear weapons threatening America.
Literary fiction
Julian Barnes
The Porcupine (Picador, £5.99, 13th)
His acclaimed examination of the aftermath of Communism.
He should probably be among the Top Sellers at the beginning of this article.
A History of the World in 10½ Chapters was number 36 in the Guardian top 100.
Paul Auster
Leviathan (Faber, £5.99, 16th)
And here is Barnes' American rival, the author of The New York Trilogy with an investigation into a tragic life.
Major sellers
Malcolm Bradbury
Doctor Criminale (Penguin, £5.99, 26th)
His first major novel since 1983, a quest which takes us through the heart of European thought in search of the elusive doctor.
Alina Reyes
Lucie's Long Voyage (Minerva, £4.99, 31st)
Although the poetic writing of this author is undoubtedly praiseworthy, I am sure it is the near pornographic content that actually makes her sell.
The Butcher , incidentally, is to be reissued as an A format simultaneously.
(£3.99).
Alasdair Gray
Poor Things (Penguin, £5.99, 5th)
A bizarre mix of literary tomfoolery and Victorian novel that won both the Whitbread novel of the year and the Guardian fiction prizes.
Terence Blacker
The Fame Hotel (Black Swan, £5.99, 12th)
I am a fan and will support him.
Multiply me several times and you have a good idea of the sort of coverage this author of PN 's Trivial Pursuits column and Harvey Porlock of the Sunday Times will get.
But he is writing too slowly
Fixx was some years ago and we want more of this contemporary satirical stuff.
This is a wicked of police corruption, media con tricks and celebrity scandals.
Lesley Glaister
Digging to Australia (Minerva, £5.99, 16th)
This is an author who is destined for great things.
Her first novel,Honour Thy Father , won the Somerset Maugham and Betty Trask awards.
This one concerns adolescent disillusionment, and comes at the same time as Limestone and Clay (Secker, £8.99, 31st).
Publishing her as a paperback original must be the best policy.
Michael Frayn
Now You Know (Penguin, £5.99, 26th)
A Landing on the Sun won the Sunday Express prize.
This is more of the same, a comic novel about the difficulties of being different.
Isabel Colegate
News from the City of the Sun (Penguin, £5.99, 16th)
The Shooting Party author with a novel about 40 years of change in a community.
Roger McGough
Defying Gravity (Penguin, £6.99, 5th)
His first major poetry collection since 1986; he will present it at the Edinburgh Festival.
Georgina Hammick (ed)
The Virago Book of Love and Loss (£6.99, 5th)
The hardback from Christmas 1992, a lovely collection from some of the foremost women writers of this century.
Further literary fiction
M John Harrison
The Course of the Heart (Flamingo, £5.99, 16th)
HarperCollins is giving him a big push, and is reissuing Climbers and The Ice Monkey at the same time as this haunting tale.
Kathy Lette
Girls' Night Out (Picador, £5.99, 13th)
Bloomsbury C  formatted this very successfully, but I am sure there is still lots of mileage for these sexy, outrageous tales.
Glyn Hughes
Roth (Sceptre, £5.99, 5th)
Values in art, the power of painting and love are explored through the hallucinating mind of a flamboyant artist.
Norman Rush
Mating (Vintage, £5.99, 19th)
A tale of two Americans on the loose in developing Africa, by the author of the short story collection Whites .
Geoff Nicholson
The Food Chain (Sceptre, £5.99, 5th)
American fast food family contrasting with a British gastronomic club in a strange black comedy, a genre for which he has a growing reputation.
Chris Wilson
Fou (Flamingo, £5.99, 26th)
A 97 year old woman looks back to pre-First World War Vienna and an extraordinary life, even if a fair amount of it is fabricated.
Clever, sexy satire.
Joe Simpson
The Water People (Abacus, £5.99, 26th)
Do you remember that wonderful climbing book from Pan,Touching the Void ?
Well, this is the author's first novel, which combines the adventure of mountaineering with the mystery of a spiritual odyssey.
‘Blue and Gold’ by Laura Knight, from the jacket of The Virago Book of Love and Loss 
Horror leads
Dean Koontz
The Funhouse (Headline, £5.99, 26th)
An Owen West title, so expect about two-thirds of the sales that he would get for a new one.
Headline is doing lots of advertising, which will link up to the new hardback in September and the next paperback in December — a Koontz autumn programme.
Shaun Hutson
Heathen (Warner, £4.99, 26th)
Strong female character in this one as he breaks further away from pure blood and guts.
John Saul
Darkness (Bantam, £4.99, 12th)
Much bigger in the States than over here.
Bantam moved him from a Christmas slot to this summer place last year in an attempt to increase his sales, but this summer the horror leads appear more plentiful, making it a tougher market.
Brian Lumley
Vampire World 2: The Last Aerie (Roc original (Penguin), £5.99, 26th)
Another staggering 784 pages of nerve-shattering horror from the author of the Necroscope series.
L Ron Hubbard
Fear (New Era, £4.99)
Author of the Mission Earth series has a go at horror and gets some incredible quotes from his American peers.
My horror reader wasn't greatly impressed.
Charles L Grant
Raven (N.F.L., £4.99, 5th)
No author's name on the front cover and you can't read the title, but the overall effect is great.
Shades of the brilliant Communion cover, which just had an alien face looking out at you; this one has an eyeless man.
Whitley Strieber
Unholy Fire (Warner, £4.99, 26th)
And here is the author of Communion , with a serial killer thriller set in ecclesiastical circles.
Fantasy and sf
Headed by a major lead
Julian May
Jack the Bodiless (Pan lead, £4.99, 13th)
The beginning of a new trilogy from the Saga of the Exiles author.
It has been a long time coming, and apparently impatient fans bombard the Pan press office weekly for information on its appearance.
Kim Stanley Robinson
Red Mars (HCP, £4.99, 31st)
HarperCollins is very keen, recognising the need to replace the old sf writers with a new generation, but my sf reader found it heavy going.
Ursula Le Guin
Always Coming Home (HCP, £5.99, 16th)
Story about the creation of a future culture that was first published in 1986; this is the first mass market edition.
The C format did very well.
C J Cherryh
The Goblin Mirror (Legend, £4.99, 19th)
A classic mix of myth, fairy tale and adventure, coming at the same time as Faery in Shadow (C format, £8.99) and being promoted with it.
Mike Jefferies
Hidden Echoes (HCP, £4.99, 31st)
The C format was last October.
Robert Asprin and Lynn Abbey 
Catwoman (Millennium (Orion), £4.99, 5th)
He is the natural author to take on the popular character to so successfully revived in ‘Batman 2’.
Nice one.
Connie Willis
Doomsday Book (NEL, £5.99, 5th)
Beautiful cover showing a window opening into the past for this time travel tale about an Oxford student stepping back into the Middle Ages to finish her thesis and ending up in the middle of the plague.
It was shortlisted for the Arthur C Clark award.
Support fiction
Starting with romance and historical, going on to glitz and crime.
Jeffrey Caine
It is unusual for me to start with a reissue, but I do think this is a clever bit of publishing.
First published in 1977 by W H Allen, it is said by HCP to be better than Lin Haire Sargeant's 1992 Heathcliff (they would).
I haven't read either, but I think it is smart of HarperCollins to cash in on the classic revival vogue.
‘A nice entertainment’ Jacket detail from The Sunday Times Black Swan Literary Quiz Book 
Michael Stewart
Belladonna (HCP, £4.99, 16th)
He has never really taken off, but keep with him, he has steady sales.
This one has a commercial storyline: it is a modern ghost story in which research into the 17th century affects the present.
It could be one of his best yet.
Alison McLeay
Sweet Exile (Pan, £4.99, 13th)
A charming cover, such an improvement on the terrible yellow of her first novel The Wayward Tide .
It should really help sell this strong historical romance set in America and Norfolk with a moving story of a young heroine and an older man.
Pan will advertise.
Rosalind Laker
The Venetian Mask (Corgi, £4.99, 12th)
Fine historical detail, here of 18th century Venice.
It is a shame she doesn't sell better.
Corgi is trying a new approach and has broken away from the single figure on the cover, giving this one an old master oil painting reproduction which makes it more sophisticated.
There is a new hardback simultaneously (The Sugar Pavilion ).
Alexandra Ripley
The Time Returns (Pan original, £4.99, 13th)
American southern belle writer (Scarlett and the Charleston lot) turns to Renaissance Florence.
It is an old one but a first UK publication.
Jonathan Grant
Storms at Sealandings (Arrow, £4.99, 5th)
Author (as Jonathan Gash) of the Lovejoy novels with the second in his historical East Anglian sagas, following Shores at Sealandings .
Molly Lefebure
Thunder in the Sky (HCP, £4.99, 31st)
The effect of the arrival of the US air force in East Anglia in 1943, especially on three girls.
Very much Elizabeth Elgin territory.
Emma Sinclair
The Seventh Wave (HCP, £4.99, 16th)
This one is pitched in Rosamund Pilcher territory, a many-layered family saga set in London, Kent and Germany during the Second World War.
Nicola Thorne
Silk (HCP, £4.99, 31st)
The best of the support glitz and a better seller than many of the above, it is a glamorous big business tale à la her last,Champagne Gold , only with the perfume industry as its backdrop.
Good one.
Gloria Nagy
Looking for Leo (Warner, £4.99, 12th)
More sex and sun from the A House on the Hamptons author as a group of ex-wives and lovers search the high spots of the world for their ex (Leo).
Ian Rankin
Strip Jack (Orion, £4.99, 5th)
An Inspector Rebus novel.
He has frequently been compared to Morse and Wexford for detailed atmosphere and strong characterisation.
Apparently a television series is in development; he is certainly worth watching.
Non-fiction
Biography
General Sir Peter de la Billière
Storm Command (HCP, £5.99 A, 31st)
This is obviously the major book here, but owing to its hardback success it may well be a little disappointing as a paperback.
Nick Hornby
Fever Pitch (Gollancz, £4.99 A, 26th)
Unbelievable amount of praise for this description of what it means to be a football fan.
It won the William Hill sports book of the year award, and 3,500 William Hill betting shops will be displaying a poster for the paperback.
Last week it was shortlisted for the NCR prize, the winner to be announced on 20th May.
David Icke
In the Light of Experience (Warner original, £5.99 A, 12th)
After the success of his two philosophical titles from Thorsons we have an autobiography which Warner seems to be playing quite softly, but which may well take off.
It is an original, and Warner is looking for a serialisation.
Sandra Bernhard
Confessions of a Pretty Lady (HCP original, £5.99 B, 16th)
A wonderful Madonna quote on the front (‘This book saved my life’), another UK tour and lots of press features expected.
I do not know the lady at all, but this is her autobiography and HarperCollins believes in her.
Jad Adams
Tony Benn (Pan, £7.99 B, 13th)
It was well received in hardback.
Walter Isaacson
Kissinger (Faber, £12.99 C, 16th)
Did well in hardcover.
Apparently it is fascinating: Faber's chairman Matthew Evans read all 894 pages in 24 hours!
Jean P Sasson
Princess (Bantam, £4.99 A, 12th)
First-hand account of life as a ‘sultana’(wife of a member of the Saudi royal family): a shocking story of oppression.
Michael Bentine
The Reluctant Jester (Corgi, £5.99 A, 12th)
Not another book on his beliefs in the paranormal, but his much-praised autobiography.
Jimmy Greaves and Norman Giller 
Don't Shoot the Manager (Boxtree, £9.99 C, 31st)
England's football managers, that is, all seven of them who have held the post since the war plus highlights of very England match since the war too.
Graham Lord
Just the One (Headline, £6.99 B, 19th)
‘The Wives and Times of Jeffrey Bernard’, the legendary Soho journalist and boozer celebrated in Keith Waterhouse's ‘Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell’, which goes on tour in the autumn.
Sir Billy Butlin
The Billy Butlin Story (Robson, £5.95, 26th)
The rags to riches tale of the holiday camp king.
He died in 1980, but his wife has completed the story and famous friends add their recollections.
Lou Eppolito and Bob Drury 
Mafia Cop (Pocket, £4.99 A, 26th)
The story of a mobster's son who became one of New York's most decorated cops, only to be betrayed.
Gay Talese
Unto the Sons (Arrow, £6.99 B, 5th)
Three-generation Italian immigrant tale.
Big in the States, but I don't expect it will be major over here.
Delayed from July.
Jacky Gunn and Jim Jenkins 
Queen: As it Began (Pan, £6.99 B, 27th)
This will be big.
It is the Sidgwick title, ‘written in cooperation with Queen’, that did so well in hardcover.
It heads up a pop promotion with a wonderful shout line: A-WOP-BOP-A-SIDGWICK-A-LOP-BAM-PAN!!
Victor Bockris
Keith Richards (Penguin, £6.99 B, 26th)
‘The full uncensored story of the Stones' most notorious desperado.’
Charles C Thompson II and James P Cole 
The Death of Elvis (Orion, £4.99, A 5th)
They don't stop, do they?
And the public still seem to buy them.
A quick mention of a television tie-in.
Deric Longden's story of his wife's ME and his wonderful portrait of his mother are to be televised as ‘Wide-eyed and Legless’ in a two and half hour film.
The tie-in books, which will get new covers, are of course Diana's Story (Corgi, £3.99) and Lost for Words .
General
Nancy Friday
Forbidden Flowers (Arrow original, £8.99 C, 5th)
Even more explicit than My Secret Garden , ‘women's sexual fantasies’, which I am sure appeal as titillation rather than education.
It was originally published in the US in 1975; I believe this is a UK original.
Jane Mills
Sexwords (Penguin original, £5.99 B, 5th)
Over 500 words and terms relating to sex analysed and explained.
Nice one.
John Parker
At the Heart of Darkness (Pan, £4.99 A, 13th)
Witchcraft, black magic and satanism today.
A frightening book.
John Canning 's
Great Unsolved Mysteries (Orion, £4.99 A, 5th)
A classic which Weidenfeld hardbacked and paperbacked.
Orion updated it in 1992, and this A format has been expanded again.
Christopher Andrew and Oleg Gordievsky 
Instructions from the Centre (Sceptre, £8.99 B, 5th)
‘Top secret files on KGB foreign operations 1975–1985.’
Extraordinary stuff.
Promotions
Weidenfeld launches a paperback list on 26th August.
The ‘Nicolson’ is being dropped, but other than that the books are very much the same as they always have been.
The big difference is that before they just slipped into a publication schedule, whereas now they are going to be ‘published’.
Twenty four will appear in 1993, followed by 20 titles a year from 1994 on.
The History of Civilization series is to be reprinted in its entirety, beginning with four in 1993.
A lot of the titles will be the long-established classics Weidenfeld has always had, but there are some new ones as well.
Arrow has a true crime promotion (5th August) featuring quite an extensive list and led by Joel Norris' The Killer Next Door (£4.99), a study of several serial killers.
Sarah Broadhurst 
CRITICS CROWNER
Jilly goes solo — super
So Jilly Cooper has joined the great, the good and the reviewable.
I am not sure, though, that for her latest caper,‘The Man Who Made Husbands Jealous (Bantam Press), she deserved the full, donnish, heavyweight treatment that she got from Valentine Cunningham in the Observer .
In particular, she could have done without the bad jokes.
Mr Cunningham began: ‘Jilly Cooper's latest chronicle of life in and about the chintzed-up Cotswolds village of Paradise, Rutshire (Pop: media yobs, polo-players, helicopter owners, a poofy vicar, a malapropic cleaning woman and the odd ennobled jam-maker) is pretty nasty and usually brutish.
It's also very long; a stretched-Aga saga.’
I bet it took him a week to think that one up.
In the final paragraph, it all became very heavy-handed: ‘Kept up, though, these jestings come to seem a forced grin on the altogether sorry face of dick-rattling Rutshire.
They quite fail to conceal the troubled human shallowness of all the raunch they profess so coolly and brightly to place and displace with a laugh.’
I hope that Mr Cunningham will go to his Senior Common Room to borrow a copy of the Mail on Sunday , where he is, in effect, told off by Maeve Binchy: ‘It's a story where almost all sex is joyful, a lot of it carefree, most of it responsible in that puppy-like Lysander [the main character]usually remembers his condom.
You can't take any of the people seriously, but Jilly never wanted you to.
It is a happy, happy feckless romp with many, many rolls in the hay, or whatever is most immediately available.
Her fans, who are legion, will love it.’
The, possibly, stodgy readers of the Sunday Telegraph may well have been surprised by Susannah Herbert's enthusiasm: ‘Jilly Cooper breaks all the rules of romantic fiction in The Man Who Made Husbands Jealous .
Kitty, her heroine, is dumpy, spotty, pallid and downtrodden.
Lysander, her hero, is a lovable thicko who isn't even terribly proficient in bed.
It really shouldn't work, but the wretched book is so irresistible that I devoured it in a day, fighting off friends and strangers who fell on it like vultures on a carcass the moment it was cast aside with a happy sigh.’
A bit of reviewer's hyperbole there, I should think.
Or has Mrs Cooper's prose style got to her?
Take three thrillers
Our Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, was given three thrillers to review by the Daily Telegraph : Geoffrey (not to be confused with Lord) Archer's Eagletrap (Century), Clive Egleton's Hostile Intent (Hodder) and J K Mayo's A Shred of Honour (Harvill).
It was Mr Hurd's first paragraph that drew me to the rest of the review.
If one had not been inclined to before, one had to go on reading after this: ‘Take three thrillers on a series of long-distance air journeys.
Read them when you need a break from your business papers.
Read them as you cope with the food and drink.
Read them at night when, despite yourself, you are held awake as your aircraft refuels in transit, by the grunting of trucks or the murmur of bureaucratic voices.
Then put the thrillers on one side, and after a week see what you can remember of any of them.
The test shows that the more preposterous the thriller the longer it sticks in the memory.’
Strong Meades
There was a surprisingly substantial critical reception for Jonathan Meades' first novel,Pompey (Cape)— substantial but mixed.
James Saynor, writing in the Observer , set the tone: ‘Jonathan Meades’ first novel is long and purple — a condition for which the author would have no difficulty finding a simile.
Meades is best known as a supercilious architecture and restaurant critic, and his prose is richer than foie gras with chocolate sauce.’
David Profumo (Daily Telegraph ) did not seem to take it very seriously: ‘Unless your literary menu is gamier than most, it is rare to come across a novel in which the author-narrator claims to have sodomised one of his own female characters.
But throughout his unrelenting, Rabelaisian first novel, Jonathan Meades is hard on his brainchildren, ludic with his fictional strategies, and generous with his lexiphanic complexities: wide-ranging, courting the surreal, and buoyed up with diabotic turpiloquence,Pompey reads like something by John Irving with Tourette's syndrome.
Do keep a dictionary handy.’
I am not going to make my usual complaint about words not in my dictionary, for this novel seems to demand ‘hard’ words.
Mr Profumo was in top gear for his final paragraphs: ‘With its mutilations, voyeurism, in-jokes, phantasmagoric idiolect and cruel humour, this is a harrowing and quite extraordinary book.
In a word — borrowed from a description of Hell by Theroux (Alexander, not Paul)— it is pornofornocacophagomaniacal.’
I tried that 26-letter word on my ‘spellchecker’: it paused for a moment, then put up its hands with ‘sorry, no suggestions’.
Mr Profumo continued: ‘It describes the squalid, the emunctory and the nosopoetic.
It is lurid, and ingenious and 100 pages too long, but so perverse that you could get to love it.
Appalling acts are recorded, and Pompey will not be every reader's cup of saliva.
Gross would be another epithet for it.
After reading this review, please wash your hands.
Thank you.’
Tom Shone, writing in the Sunday Times , was also struck far from dumb by Mr Meades' novel: ‘This novel bristles, like a Swiss army knife, with an array of pre-emptive critical barbs, with the result that there's no abuse you can hurl at it which it hasn't already hurled at itself.
The word ‘pyrotechnic’ recurs from page to page with studied insouciance, a covert challenge from Meades as he sits back paring his fingernails:tell me something I don't know already .’
The review continued: ‘The novel positively courts the charge of ‘too clever by half’ with a series of condescending footnotes to some of its more arcane vernacular; and it hugs failure to its chest in the form of Guy Vallender's motto: ‘Fireworks thrill because they disappoint.’
By this standard Meades ’ standard,Pompey is a work of some genius.
By any other it seems, well, pyrotechnic, condescending and too clever by half.’
Elizabeth Young (Independent on Sunday ) was rather kinder and, at the same time, less affected by the need to outwit the dictionary: ‘The novel has all the vigour and bravado of a fireworks display.
But after the vulgar beauty has faded, we face a grey ash of burn-out, a misanthropic dawn which prompts the old question: was it worth it after all?
Throughout this faecal gumbo [well, there we go again], there are flickers of pathos and mourning.
Without them, the book would be no more than a splenetic rant; with them come glimmers of compassion and even humanity to balance the pyrotechnics of loathing.
The English novel needs its senses to be violently deranged, and this piledriver of a book, cousin to Scarfe and Steadman, might just provide a kick-start.’
If it does, then I suppose I shall have to buy myself a larger dictionary.
Artless sincerity
We have become so used to spiteful obituaries that it was pleasant to find some kind thoughts about a dead writer.
They were contributed by Jessica Mann, writing in the Sunday Telegraph about Monica Dickens' One of the Family (Viking): ‘Monica Dickens had a knack of entering into the feelings of her characters and describing them with apparently artless sincerity, but she was never a cosy writer, being both too realistic and too experienced, having done time herself as a servant, factory girl and a Samaritan…
As she said…about her own great-grandfather — she was still writing ‘about ordinary people, and involved her readers in real life dramas that might have happened to them’.’
Quentin Oates 
BENT'S NOTES
More than enough to bitch about
It's odd that Sunday trading has not become an issue of even moderate heat in the book trade.
It certainly has in other retail sectors.
Retail Week the other day gave a flavour of the debate elsewhere when it published an editorial declaring that it was ‘Time for honesty on Sunday trading’.
‘There is nothing like the Sunday trading issue to bring out the worst in retailers,’ it said.
‘Taken at face value individual companies would have us believe that their particular stance has been determined by purely altruistic considerations, such as meeting customer demand, protecting staff or defending religious principles.
Now a group of major, highly competitive retailers seek to persuade the world in general that their opposition to Sunday trading stems from a desire to preserve the small shops sector.
‘What is absolutely clear one this verbiage has been cut away is that individual retailers’ stance on Sunday trading is, in the vast majority of cases, determined by a cold, calculating examination of the long term balance of financial advantage…
At the heart of the battle over Sunday trading is the simple straightforward issue of profit and loss.’
Well well, who would have guessed?
It's wonderful, isn't it, when trades have trade papers that can help them understand what is really going on in the world.
But seriously, why do you suppose there has been so little said about Sunday trading in the book trade? could it be because we have failed to make a ‘cold, calculating examination of the long term balance of financial advantage’?
Or is it because we already have quite enough issues to squabble over?
Alan Giles, the new supremo at Waterstones, was unable to spend very long at the drink spotty that followed the Publishers Association's a.g.m. last Thursday — he was rushing off to meet his wife to celebrate their wedding anniversary.
He'd arranged to meet her at in the West End, he told me, but had been at a loss for a suitable landmark as a meeting place.
They finally settled on Dillons in Trafalgar Square…
To Lichfield for the 17th Literary Dinner, hosted at the spectacular and refurbished Guild Hall by booksellers Ralph James and Cliff Redshaw.
The burghers of Lichfield are a cultured and discerning lot, and were clearly charmed by guest speakers Joanna Trollope and Mark Wallington, who could hardly have come from more different writing genres.
Joanna Trollope, who also writes romantic period sagas under the name Caroline Harvey, talked of the research involved in the ‘thoroughly despised genre’ of historical fiction — Mandalay, the Khyber Pass, South Africa and the battlefield of the Boer War — compared to that involved in contemporary fiction — a stint behind the tills at Sainsburys for ‘The Rector's Wife’.
Travel writer Mark Wallington had stories to tell of his south London-born dog Boogie, ‘a cross between a whippet and a Morris 1000’, star of Five Hundred Mile Walkies , and how at a promising sounding signing session at Harrods, John Julius Norwich and Jilly Cooper were led into the Books Department while he and Boogie were ushered into the Pet Department.
Boogie has now, alas, passed on, but ‘he died a very rich dog’.
Close your eyes and imagine yourself in a bookshop.
What is the pervading odour?
The SUNDAY TIMES reports a new marketing wheeze which is being tested across Britain: ‘secret trials of ‘designer smells’ are going on in more than 100 stores, including petrol stations and a chain of clothes shops — and, yes, bookshops.
The aromas include coconut oil (exotic holidays) in travel agents, cut-grass (summer) in fruit and vegetable shops, and leather (quality) in car showrooms.
Nothing about what conjures up the distinctive perfume of a bookshop, however.
Perhaps this could be tackled by section: garlic for Cookery, cordite for Thrillers, baby lotion for Children's, Musk Rose for Romance.
I'd certainly like to know which bookshops the trials are being held in.
Well, well, our transatlantic cousins seem to be slipping: the usual way is for the UK to follow American fashion, but not so in all matters in bookselling it would appear.
According to last week's fascinating piece in the Organ by Publishers Weekly 's bookselling boffin John Mutter, the newly emerging ‘chain superstores’ in the US are taking the market by storm, with ‘15,000 to 30,000 sq ft of selling space and stock between 75,000 and 125,000 titles’.
No wonder they were anxious about the ‘British threat’ posed when it was first rumoured that Waterstones and/or Dillons might head across the water.
These two chains have been opening stores of that size and with that stock range for nigh on 10 years on this side of the pond.
A memo from Clive Ryder Runton, to the staff of Random House
RE: USE AND ABUSE OF LIFTS
It has become apparent that the lifts in this building have been increasingly subject to abuse.
You may not be aware that excessive usage of the lifts does in fact cost the company a great deal of money, and in line with our cost-cutting efforts in other areas I have drawn up the following guidelines, which must be strictly adhered to from now on.
1.
Lifts are not to be used by single passengers.
Our lifts are overworked, and as well as being very mindful of the cost I am anxious to rectify this situation in order to keep the lifts free for more needy passengers, such as the postroom boys with trolleys, etc.
In consequence we must insist that staff moving about the building on their own should not use the lifts.
If there is an overriding reason why you should use a lift then please try to ensure that you go on longer journeys rather than shorter ones, i.e. say three floors or more.
It is imperative that you do not travel on your own, so if you need to use a lift and you find yourself alone, please hold the doors open until someone else comes along so that you can share the facility.
2.
Members of the staff use the lifts for four journeys per day.
With the exception of the postroom boys, for obvious reasons, it has been decided to rectify use of the lifts to only four journeys per person per day.
Members of staff will be issued with a ‘lift card’ which will clock up the number of times staff use the lift.
If you use your card for more than four journeys an alarm will sound and you will not be able to use the lift.
I have given instructions to Brian Lewis that if members of staff are found trying to abuse this facility he should switch off the lift system entirety.
In exceptional circumstances there may be a good reason why you should use the lift more than your allotted four times; such as functions, visits by VIPs, etc.
In this case you should apply to Christine no fewer than three days in advance, and she may reset your card if she feels that this action is justified.
May I be allowed to stress that in overall terms the quality of the lifts and the level of service is exceptional.
I have spent a good deal of time trying to improve cost-efficiency without detracting too greatly from the service you enjoy, and I trust this is an acceptable compromise.
The memo was dated 1st April.
Horace Bent 