

NEWS RELEASE
Embargoed for release: 0800 hours, 4 February 1993
LASMO RAISES £126.5 MILLION FROM NORTH SEA DISPOSALS
LASMO announces that it has raised £126.5 million in two separate transactions through the disposal of interests in a number of North Sea blocks.
In the first transaction, LASMO has agreed to sell assets for £105.8 million to Deminex UK (see Notes to Editors — 2).
These assets comprise interests in a total of 17 North Sea blocks which form a balanced package of forthcoming production, near-term developments and exploration acreage.
LASMO has sold its entire interest in 14 blocks, and part interests in three further blocks in which it will retain operatorship.
The Deminex package includes LASMO's interests in the Bruce, Keith and M fields together with a 25 per cent interest in block 16/12a containing the ‘Tree’ fields.
In total, the package contains some 36 million barrels of oil equivalent which were booked by LASMO as commercial reserves together with various oil and gas discoveries currently under delineation.
In the second transaction, LASMO has sold its interests in the producing Balmoral and Maureen fields to Pentex Oil Limited for a total of US$30 million (£20.7 million
$1.45/£1).
The combined sales will result in a significant contribution to earnings and the proceeds will be used to repay debt thereby reducing gearing by approximately 14 per cent.
The transactions are subject to the approval of the Department of Trade and Industry and pre-emptive rights of certain partners.
Commenting on the transactions, Joe Darby, LASMO's Chief Executive, said today: ‘These disposals are part of our continuing strategy to reduce debt and gearing and to divest ourselves of peripheral assets when attractive prices can be obtained.
Despite difficult market conditions we have been able to dispose of assets at varying stages of development at prices which compare favourably with those achieved for recent industry sales.
We are encouraged by our progress and shareholders can expect to see this process continue.’
(ends)
For further information, please contact 
Notes to editors attached 
NOTES TO EDITORS
1/
A full list of the assets acquired by Deminex is as follows:
*LASMO will retain a 33.85 per cent interest in block 16/12a and a 50 per cent interest in blocks 14/29b, and is the operator for all these blocks.
2/
The consideration of £105.8 million for the Deminex transaction will be received in two halves.
£52.9 million will be paid in cash upon completion and the balance will be paid in the form of a loan note redeemable on 1st January 1994, the maturity value of which will be £52.9 million.
3/
A full list of the assets acquired by Pentex is as follows:
4/
These transactions bring the amount raised to date from the 1992/93 asset management programme of £1,005 million, of which £363 million represents the disposal proceeds from peripheral upstream interests.
5/
The UKCS asset rationalisation programme has realised the following benefits since 1 January 1992:
Number of blocks with a working interest of 10 per cent or less reduced by 42 per cent.
Number of blocks with a LASMO interest reduced from 166 to 125.2
£215 million realised through net disposals of assets containing 65 million barrels of oil equivalent commercial reserves booked by LASMO (implied realisation £3.31/boe)
A substantial reduction in estimated future capital expenditure.
NEWS RELEASE
Immediate: Monday, 19 April 1993
FOR RELEASE IN UK ONLY
LASMO's 1992 Annual Report and proposals to create 10 million Cumulative Dollar Preference Shares
LASMO's 1992 Annual Report and Accounts was today posted to shareholders.
In his first annual review as Chief Executive of LASMO, the international oil and gas exploration and production company, Mr Joe Darby describes his immediate objective as being ‘to build a business which is profitable even at low oil prices and which will show a rate of growth commensurate with the forecast rise in our production and cash flow’.
The measures he has adopted to achieve this objective include:
focussing on areas where LASMO has knowledge, experience and, as a result, competitive advantage;
building on LASMO's strengths by investment in opportunities which best use the Group's skills and expertise, and which are commensurate with management and financial capabilities;
selling non-core and peripheral assets when attractive prices can be realised;
redirecting overseas exploration efforts into offshore areas where finding and development costs are lower than equivalent offshore environments;
concentrating on areas where significant exploration potential has been identified and, where appropriate, reducing exploration exposure by farming out;
reducing overheads and production costs; and
maintaining efficient and cost effective access to capital markets.
LASMO Annual Report/2
A circular to shareholders was also posted with LASMO's Report and Accounts containing proposals to be put to meetings of the Ordinary and Preference Shareholders on 25th May 1993 for the creation of 10 million cumulative dollar preference shares of US$25 each (Dollar Preference Shares) in the Company.
The creation of a class of Dollar Preference Shares would give the Company the power, not available to it a present, to raise preference share capital in the United States.
The power would only be exercised if market conditions were favourable.
It is intended that the proceeds of any such issue would be used primarily to refinance existing debt.
The Dollar Preference Shares will, as regards income and capital, rank pari passu with the existing 9⅝ per cent Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares.
An issue of Dollar Preference Shares would have the following advantages for LASMO:
the proceeds from an issue would increase shareholders ‘funds and the Group's capital base;
the Dollar Preference Shareholders will have no further rights to participate in the Group's profits beyond preference share dividend payments;
the fact that the Dollar Preference Shares will be denominated in dollars will form part of the hedge against the Group's dollar asset base; and
flexibility will be retained in that the Dollar Preference Shares will be redeemable only at the Company's option, subject to the terms of issue.
Enquiries:
NEWS RELEASE
Immediate: Tuesday, 20 April 1993
FOR RELEASE IN THE UK
New York Stock Exchange Listing, proposed issue of US Cumulative Dollar Preference Shares and US$250 million of US dollar Yankee Bonds
LASMO announces that yesterday it filed documentation relating to the proposed listing of its Ordinary Shares on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) with the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington, together with documentation relating to the proposed issuance of up to US$150 million cumulative dollar preference shares and up to US$250 million long-term fixed rate debt securities (Yankee bonds).
The listing of the Company's Ordinary Shares, which will trade in the form of American Depositary Shares on the NYSE, will support LASMO's growing US shareholding base currently estimated at 13 per cent.
The proposed preference share and debt offerings are expected to form part of the Group's financing strategy and enable the Group to access long-term US dollar fixed rate finance at attractive rates.
The proceeds of the two offerings will be used primarily to re-finance existing shorter term US dollar debt.
The issuance of the cumulative dollar preference shares is conditional upon the approval of LASMO's Shareholders and Preference Shareholders, which will be sought at a meeting to be held on 25th May 1993 and subject to favourable market conditions.
Enquiries:
NEWS RELEASE
For immediate release: 10 June 1993
LASMO issues US$250 million perpetual preference shares
LASMO plc today announced that it has issued US$250 million of perpetual cumulative dollar preference shares in the US public market, with a gross dividend of 10 per cent.
The issue comprises 10 million shares with a nominal value of US$25 per share and is callable at LASMO's option after five years.
Proceeds from the issue, which is expected to close on the 16th June 1993, will be used to refinance existing bank debt.
The issue will be treated as equity in LASMO's balance sheet for the purpose of computing balance sheet gearing which will therefore reduce significantly.
Also, when proceeds are applied to retire existing debt, LASMO's average life of debt will increase.
The US perpetual preferred offering follows the successful launch by LASMO on 28th May of the US$350 million yankee bonds.
These financings, which have raised aggregate gross proceeds of US$600 million, will substantially refinance LASMO's bank debt arranged at the time of the Ultramar acquisition, and strengthen the balance sheet.
Enquiries:
NEWS RELEASE
For immediate release: 2 June 1993
NEW ARTS CHARITY INITIATIVE WILL SUPPORT TALENTED MUSIC STUDENTS
A new arts charity initiative, which will provide encouragement and financial support to talented mature music students, is preparing to hold its first event in Scotland this summer.
Nominations for the LASMO Staffa Music Award were invited from the United Kingdom's top music colleges and five finalists have already been selected to perform at a competition and festival of music.
The competition will take place on the 22nd June at Haddo House Hall, near Aberdeen, and cash prizes will be offered to all finalists.
The initiative was inspired by the UK oil and gas exploration and production company LASMO to coincide with the completion of its first offshore oil development in the North Sea, called Staffa.
The LASMO Arts Trust has specific responsibility for arranging the festival and providing financial support to all finalists.
The Trust, worth £50,000 over five years, is chaired by Lady Aberdeen and administered by the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland.
This year's finalists, chosen by the Trustees, will be performing a wide variety of modern and classical music for piano, cello, trumpet, percussion and voice.
Individual performances will be assessed by a distinguished adjudication panel: Lady Barbirolli, the renowned oboist and widow of the famous conductor; Emanuel Hurwitz, professor of violin and soloist of international acclaim; and Hugh MacDonald, Head of Music, BBC Scotland.
A first prize of £3,000 and a specially commissioned piece of Scottish crystal engraved with the opening bars of Fingal's Cave will be awarded to the winner.
Other prizes will be awarded as follows: 2nd prize — £1,500; 3rd prize — £1,000; the two remaining finalists will receive £500 each.
Arts Trust/2
Lady Aberdeen, Chair of the Trust, said: ‘The students were selected on the personal recommendations of their college tutors for their high standard of performances and for their stated desires for a successful career on international concert platforms.
The calibre and standard of applications has been extremely high, in fact many students are already successful musicians in their own right, and I feel certain we can be assured of an exciting competition on the 22nd June.’
LASMO is grateful for the support of Lady Aberdeen and for the use of Haddo House Hall, a National Trust for Scotland property, as a venue for the festival.
In addition it wishes to thank all the other Trustees: Richard Baker, OBE; W Grant Cochrane; Dr Philip Ledger, CBE; Robert Tear, CBE, and the Trust's administrators, the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland.
A list of finalists, biographies and a programme for the evening is attached.
Enquiries:
Notes to editors
1/
A press/photo call will be held at Haddo House Hall, near Aberdeen during the afternoon of the 21st June.
There will be an opportunity to attend rehearsals, interview finalists and take photographs.
Please indicate if you wish to be present.
2/
The festival and competition will begin 6.55 pm, Tuesday 22nd June.
Adjudication and winners announced at 9.25pm.
Complimentary tickets available on application.
FINALISTS
Serge Podobedov — Piano
Born 1972, Moscow.
Attended the Central School of Music of the Moscow Conservatory, gave his first recital at 16.
Moved to the Royal College of Music, London in 1990 and won first prize at the Edward Boyle Piano Competition in December of that year.
He was invited by Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother to give a recital for the Royal Family at Windsor Castle.
Performed at the First International Piano Festival in Oviedo, Spain in January 1992.
Miriam Kirby — Cell
Born 1971, British/Dutch.
Currently, in the first year of an Advanced Solo Studies Course at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama.
Been a member of the National Youth Orchestra of Great  Britain , the European Community Youth Orchestra and played as an ‘extra’ with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra in the UK, Germany and Spain.
Has a number of awards and achievements and in February this year was chosen as one of five students to represent the Guildhall School at an international chamber music festival at the Paris Conservatoire.
Gareth Small — Trumpet
Born 1970, Swansea.
Postgraduate at the Royal Academy of Music since 1989.
Performed with a number of orchestras including the London Sinfonietta, BBC Welsh Symphony Orchestra, Halle Orchestra and the London Philharmonic Orchestra.
In 1992, was awarded the Mark Jones Memorial Scholarship to assist with postgraduate studies and in the same year, was invited by conductor Elgar Howarth, to be soloist in the Trumpet Concerto by Michael Blake Watkins with the National Youth Orchestra of Wales.
Ruari Donaldson — Percussion
Born 1972, Glasgow.
Graduate of the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama.
Performed with the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra, Scottish Chamber Orchestra and Scottish Opera.
A member of the National Youth Orchestra of Scotland (NYOS) for five years.
Won the NYOS Best Audition Prize and the Shell/LSO Best Semifinalist Prize.
Plans to continue music studies at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama next year.
Jane Irwin — Mezzo-Soprano
Born 1968, Lancashire.
In third year of a postgraduate extension course at the Royal Northern College of Music (RNCM).
Graduated from Lancaster University with a BMus Hons degree in 1990.
Recorded operatic arias for Granada Television.
Since joining the RNCM appeared regularly at St David's Hall, Cardiff and Manchester Free Trade Hall.
In 1991, won the Decca Kathleen Ferrier Prize and more recently, won the John Ireland Prize and the Frederic Cox Award for Singing.
She has a Peter Moores Foundation Scholarship to further her studies at RNCM.
NEWS RELEASE
For immediate release: 5 April 1993
LASMO awards Markham satellite contract
LASMO, on behalf of the Markham field participants, has today awarded a contract for the Markham field satellite platform to Trafalgar House Engineering Contractors.
The contract is for the engineering, procurement, construction and offshore installation, hook-up and commissioning of the satellite platform.
Project duration is 16 months and completion is due at the beginning of August 1994.
The platform will be ‘not normally manned’ and located in UK block 49/5a, in 31 metres of water.
The jacket will weight around 820 tonnes and the topsides will have an operating weight of approximately 1,200 tonnes.
For more information, please contact:
Notes to editors:
1/
LASMO has recently announced its intention to commence discussions on the sale of its interest in the Markham field.
It is hoped to complete the sale by the end of this year.
2/
Markham is the first offshore development lying across the UK/Netherlands median line.
It came on stream in November 1992.
3/
Current working interests in the Markham field are: