

LASMO is a substantial international oil and gas exploration and production company.
The Company's objectives are to: Manage effectively its existing reserves portfolio; find and develop efficiently additional reserves which offer significant potential to add value for shareholders; build a business which is profitable even at low oil prices; and provide a strong financial base to support its operations.
LASMO is committed to the welfare of its employees, the protection of the environment in which it operates and to making an active contribution to the local communities where the Group's operations are located.
1992 was a year in which the deepening recession in most of the world's leading economies led to a fall in demand for oil.
As a consequence, the dollar price of oil has remained weak and profitability has been adversely affected.
Although this has been offset in sterling terms by the devaluation of sterling against the dollar, this is less significant to LASMO than to some other companies, given that a high proportion of its costs are denominated in dollars.
Against this background we successfully integrated Ultramar's upstream assets and undertook a rationalisation and disposal programme of those assets which did not fit the long-term strategy of the Company.
Results
Notwithstanding a substantial improvement in profit after tax from upstream activities to £41 million [1991 £17 million], reflecting improved operating profits following the Ultramar acquisition, the Group recorded a disappointingly large loss for the year of £385 million, after incurring exceptional charges of £426 million.
This compares with a loss for 1991 of £4 million, stated in accordance with the new accounting standard FRS 3.
Full details of the exceptional charges are set out in the Financial Review on page 11.
The Ultramar acquisition, a stronger US dollar and a period of heavy development expenditure, led to our gearing increasing substantially.
Our disposal programme, which has raised approximately £1 billion to date, together with reductions in capital and operating expenditure, has gone some way to improving gearing and strengthening our balance sheet.
We shall continue to reduce gearing in 1993.
Dividend
In considering the level of the dividend, the Board has taken into account the current results of the Company and its significant future capital investment programme.
In the light of the above factors and on the assumption that there is unlikely to be any real increase in the dollar price of oil in the medium term, the Board does not believe it to be financially prudent to maintain the 1992 dividend at the same level as that paid in respect of 1991.
Accordingly, the Board recommends a final dividend payment of 1.0p per ordinary share making a total payment for the year of 3.3p per share.
This is a level which the directors believe is sustainable and which will allow room for growth in the future as the underlying profitability of the Group recovers.
Corporate Governance
I am pleased to say that LASMO is already in compliance with a majority of the items covered by the code recommended by the Cadbury Committee established by the Financial Reporting Council, the London Stock Exchange and the accountancy profession to review the financial aspects of corporate governance.
Our independent non-executive directors have a particularly valuable role especially in relation to audit and remuneration matters.
Directorate and staff
In January 1993, Chris Greentree, Chief Executive for more than ten years, left to pursue other interests.
During that time, the Company has grown substantially under his leadership and we pay tribute to his achievements.
We welcome Joe Darby, previously Group Chief Operating Officer, as the new Chief Executive.
He joined LASMO in 1989 following the acquisition of Thomson North Sea where he was Chairman and Chief Executive Officer and was appointed a director of LASMO in January 1990.
He has been succeeded as Chief Operating Officer by John Hogan, previously Managing Director of LASMO North Sea PLC, who has also joined the Board.
Sir David Nicholson retires from the Board this year and we thank him for his contribution to the Group over the past nine years.
The past year has certainly tested the skills of our hardworking staff.
1993 will be no less demanding and I know we can count on their continuing professional dedication.
I extend to them our grateful thanks.
The future
Our goal is to generate growing shareholder value by prudent investment, tight control of costs and streamlined management of our business.
Joe Darby explains the strategy for achieving this in his Chief Executive's review.
LASMO has significant strengths in terms of assets, rising cash flow, product-mix, geographical distribution and exploration opportunities.
I believe that the Company can face with confidence the challenges that lie ahead.
I look forward to meeting shareholders at the Annual General Meeting on 25 May.
Rees Chairman .
Chief Executive's review
We have built a quality asset and production base which is internationally diversified.
Our international spread of assets is a strength which differentiates LASMO from many of its competitors.
Our overriding priority is to provide our shareholders with a satisfactory financial return on their investment.
Size and growth, in terms of reserves and production, are secondary to value and profitability.
Whenever there are senior management changes in an organisation, changes in direction, emphasis and style follow almost inevitably.
My appointment as Chief Executive of LASMO will be no exception and you should expect to see changes in our objectives, strategy and the way we manage our business.
Our overriding priority is to provide our shareholders with a satisfactory financial return on their investment.
I shall ensure that size and growth, in terms of reserves and production, are secondary to value and profitability.
We are committed to improving profitability and increasing asset value from a sound financial base.
Our strategy is to strengthen the balance sheet through asset sales and the efficient use of global capital markets, and to improve the fundamentals of our business by finding oil and gas reserves at lower cost and developing those reserves more profitably.
We are committed to prudent exploration and will direct efforts to ventures which offer significant potential.
We will increase emphasis on cost consciousness throughout the Group and continue to reduce overheads throughout 1993.
Asset base
Over the past few years we have created a substantial oil and gas exploration and production company through a combination of exploration, development and acquisition.
We have built a quality asset and production base which is internationally diversified and provides established production, new development opportunities and an attractive acreage portfolio to support our ongoing exploration programme.
However, certain investments have been made based upon past oil price and development cost forecasts that today seem optimistic.
As a result, I believe it is appropriate to write down the value of our assets by a substantial amount.
Disappointing though this is, it is an appropriate recognition of current values.
International diversification
We believe it is important for LASMO to be active internationally.
This has been underlined by recent proposed UK Budget changes which have abolished tax reliefs for UK exploration and development.
Under changing fiscal regimes there are clear advantages in holding a diverse international portfolio which offers alternative investment opportunities to maximise value for the Company.
Our international spread of assets is a strength which differentiates LASMO from many of its competitors.
Our business is concentrated in two main producing regions, the UK and Indonesia, where we continue to focus a significant amount of our activity.
The Group has a reserve base in excess of one billion barrels of oil equivalent, principally in these two areas.
In the UK, we have a balanced mix of oil and natural gas production and gas field development.
In Indonesia, we have a significant position in the fast growing Pacific Rim LNG business, supplying energy to Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
Natural gas, which is an ecologically acceptable hydrocarbon fuel, now represents more than half of our reserve base.
Outside these two regions LASMO is concentrating its efforts on proven hydrocarbon bearing areas that are relatively under-explored but have the potential for further discoveries which are significant to the Group at minimum exploration risk.
This strategy has delivered encouraging results in Colombia, Pakistan and Algeria.
We recognise that to add value through successful exploration over a sustained period will require a continuing supply of quality new venture opportunities.
We have therefore established new venture teams to review the hydrocarbon provinces in the world which offer opportunities that fit our strategic needs.
Operational highlights
Our operating activities during 1992 have achieved a number of successes.
Group production reached a new peak, encouraging oil and gas discoveries were made, new fields were brought on stream and material progress was made in development activities which will add further to production in the short and medium term.
Our working interest production rose from 85,000 boepd to 184,000 boepd, chiefly as a result of the additional production from the Ultramar acquisition.
It is forecast to rise further during 1993 as a result of new fields coming on stream, principally the Piper and Saltire fields in the UK North Sea.
These should more than compensate for the natural decline in other more mature fields.
Gross exploration and appraisal expenditure in 1992 was £141 million, a considerable reduction from the £200 million spent by LASMO and Ultramar collectively in 1991.
We replaced our production of 67 mmboe at a gross cost equivalent to £2.04 per barrel.
Booked reserves for new discoveries amounted to 47 mmboe, and there was an additional net 22 mmboe upward adjustment in commercial reserves of existing fields.
The decrease in overall reserves to 1,028 mmboe was a direct result of LASMO's disposal programme.
Strategy
The low oil prices experienced over the past two years have reduced the profitability of our industry.
In this environment, which is likely to continue for the foreseeable future, our objective is to build a business which is profitable even at low oil prices and which will show a rate of growth commensurate with the forecast rise in our production and cash flow.
The measures we have adopted to achieve this objective include:
focussing on areas where we have knowledge, experience, and, as a result, competitive advantage;
building on our strengths by investment in opportunities which best use our skills and expertise, and which are commensurate with our management and financial capabilities;
selling non-core and peripheral assets  when attractive prices can be realised;
redirecting our overseas exploration efforts into onshore areas where finding and development costs are lower than equivalent offshore environments;
concentrating on areas where significant exploration potential has been identified and, where appropriate, reducing exploration exposure by farming out;
reducing overheads and production costs; and
maintaining efficient and cost effective access to capital markets.
Asset management
The challenge of our asset management programme is to strengthen the balance sheet whilst maintaining a rising production and cash flow profile, and improving profitability.
We fulfilled our commitment to shareholders to divest Ultramar's downstream business by creating a new company, Ultramar Corporation, which was sold through a flotation on the New York Stock Exchange in July 1992, realising net proceeds of over $1 billion.
In our upstream business, a strategic decision was taken to withdraw from onshore exploration and production operations in North America.
In a series of transactions in 1992, we sold substantially all our US and Canadian onshore interests, receiving some $250 million, and a further Can$88 million is expected at the end of 1993 for the remainder of our shareholding in ELAN Energy Inc. [formerly LASMO Canada inc].
In the UK we have disposed of a number of non-strategic assets for a total of £208 million, which will be received in 1993, while in February this year we also disposed of our remaining businesses in Australia and withdrew from that country.
In total, disposals achieved to date have amounted to nearly £1 billion, reducing debt significantly.
Shareholders can expect to see the disposal programme continue during 1993.
In March 1993 we announced our intention to offer for sale our interests in the Markham field, and adjacent uncontracted discoveries, proceeds from which will improve our financial position in 1993.
Exploration and development expenditure
Consistent with our view of forecast oil prices, we expect to reduce our exploration expenditure to around £90 million in 1993 and we will benefit from third party expenditures on properties which LASMO has farmed out to major oil companies in Colombia, Pakistan and Yemen.
In total, we plan to drill 41 exploration and appraisal wells, compared with 75 wells in 1992.
Given the high quality of prospects which will be drilled and our substantial working interest in those prospects, we are optimistic of achieving our objective of reducing finding costs and increasing value through exploration.
Development expenditure on new oil and gas fields reached a peak in 1992 of £385 million [including capitalised interest of £58 million].
For 1993 we expect development expenditure to be approximately £150 million less and within this budget we are planning to devote significant funds to our UK offshore projects in Morecambe Bay.
Development of these new fields should follow shortly, now that Government consent for the construction of the gas fired electricity generating plant at Connah's Quay in North Wales has been granted.
Capital markets
I am pleased to report that the US credit rating agencies have recently re-confirmed the Investment Grade rating of our public debt issues.
It is important to us to maintain and seek to improve those ratings to enable us to minimise the cost of our borrowings.
Over the past year we have seen a significant change in the Company's shareholder base with approximately 13 per cent of our shares now held by US investors.
We are applying to list LASMO's shares on the New York Stock Exchange in American Depositary Receipt [ADR]form, to facilitate dealing by US shareholders and to enable LASMO to access more readily a variety of capital market opportunities available to US listed companies.
Outlook
It will inevitably take some time before the full benefits of our strategy are realised and, whilst we expect our production and cash flow to remain strong and rise over the next few years, profitability in the short term is likely to remain depressed, even with contributions from disposals.
However, as I have said previously, we now have a quality portfolio of international assets on which we can build in the future.
We have clearly defined our investment priorities and established the right strategy to meet the challenges which face us, to exploit LASMO's business strengths and to achieve our objectives.
We have made significant progress in our asset rationalisation programme and as a result are strengthening the balance sheet and creating capacity to invest in a very exciting range of exploration and development opportunities which will add materially to cashflow and improve profitability.
We are vigorously addressing the level of our overheads.
LASMO has the strength and the determination to take advantage of good opportunities in the future, for the benefit of all its shareholders.
Joe Darby Chief Executive .
1992 was a challenging year, characterised by a major integration and rationalisation programme, heavy capital expenditure commitments and consider5able fluctuations in both currency and interest rates.
Increased production, cash flow and operating profits have resulted in higher profits before exceptional items in 1992.
These exceptional items reflect charges arising from the Ultramar downstream disposals and re-evaluation of assets and reserves.
Balance sheet gearing is now being steadily reduced as a result of the disposal programme.
Financial review
Changes in accounting disclosure
The introduction by the Accounting Standards Board [ASB]of Financial Reporting Standards No. 1 [FRS 1]and No. 3 [FRS 3]has resulted in some major changes to the way in which cash flow and performance are reported.
We have decided to adopt FRS 3 earlier than required by the ASB to ensure that the Company is in line with latest UK accounting practice.
As a result, LASMO's accounts for 1992 contain some significant changes in disclosure and the restatement of reported figures for 1991 and earlier years.
The impact of FRS 1 and FRS 3 is explained in more detail in this financial review.
1992 results
Under FRS 3, the profit and loss account is radically altered, with exceptional items shown separately.
LASMO's profit after tax ‘before exceptional items’ for 1992 of £41 million compares with a profit for 1991 of £17 million on a restated basis.
After exceptional items the loss for the year totalled £385 million [1991 £4 million].
Upstream oil and gas profits continued to be under pressure from low oil prices.
In dollar terms 1992 oil prices were slightly weaker at $19.27 per barrel [1991 $19.58].
Despite the stronger US dollar in the latter part of 1992, the average sterling price of oil realised for the year at £10.95 per barrel [1991 £11.00]was also marginally lower.
However, gas now constitutes almost half of LASMO's sales, and the price for oil and gas combined averaged £10.63 per barrel of oil equivalent.
Increased production and a higher operating profit are reflected in improved profits before exceptional items after tax.
Net cash inflow from operations after tax and dividends was £225 million, a substantial increase from the 1991 figure of £169 million, which did not include a contribution from Ultramar.
Provisions have been made against oil and gas assets in 1992, to reflect lower oil price expectations and a more conservative estimate of oil and gas reserved in certain fields.
Changes introduced in the UK Budget in March 1993 have also been reflected in the release of certain tax provision.
A major feature of FRS 3 is that it defines ‘extraordinary items’ much more strictly than before and such items have become virtually non-existent.
The provision in respect of the write down of oil and gas assets [£232 million], the net releases of tax provisions [£78 million]and the loss on sale of Ultramar's downstream business [£302 million]partly offset by profits on other disposals [£30 million, net of tax]have been treated as exceptional items.
Profits on disposals, which were previously treated as ‘extraordinary items’ in our 1991 accounts, have also been included as exceptional items in the restated 1991 profit before tax.
Cash flow
The Group's rising production profile has increased 1992 net cash flow to £225 million [1991 £169 million]as reported under FRS 1, and detailed in the cash flow statement on page 35.
Under FRS 1, the old ‘funds flow’ concept is replaced by a ‘cash flow’statement.
Although underlying cash flow is unchanged, the new presentation under FRS 1 contains  some radical changes in the way cash flow is reported, which the following reconciliation indicates.
As can be seen from the cash flow statement, ‘cash flow from operations after tax’ is now struck after deducting dividends and capitalised interest, and after excluding Petroleum Revenue Tax [PRT]recoveries on development expenditures.
PRT relief [£43 million]on Piper redevelopment expenditure has therefore been excluded from cash flow and is now included as a reduction in capital expenditure.
Capital expenditure
Capital expenditure in 1992 [on an accruals basis]comprised exploration expenditure of £141 million, and development expenditure of £385 million [including capitalised interest of £58 million].
Exploration expenditure at £141 million was considerably lower in 1992 than the combined spend for LASMO and Ultramar in 1991 of £200 million; further significant reductions in exploration expenditure are forecast for 1993.
Development expenditure in 1992 was the highest in LASMO's history, with Piper, Saltire, Caister and Markham in the North Sea and Cohasset/Panuke offshore Nova Scotia being the main fields under development.
Certain UK fields, which are scheduled to commence production during 1993, are expected to be completed at considerably higher costs than originally forecast; in particular, the Piper field has more than doubled its originally projected cost.
As well as resulting in higher unit depletion costs, interest charges will cease to be capitalised when production from these fields begins, with a consequent adverse effect on Group profitability.
In 1993 the level of development expenditure is forecast to fall significantly by approximately £150 million.
Funding
LASMO's heavy development programme resulted in a continued upward pressure on Group indebtedness and balance sheet gearing during 1992.
This pressure was exacerbated by lower than expected proceeds from the disposal of Ultramar's downstream businesses, the settlement at $180 million of Ultramar's substantial US tax liability and provisions against oil and gas assets, net of UK Budget tax changes.
In addition, the impact upon debt of the strengthening US dollar during 1992 from $1.87/£1 to $1.51/£1 added some 18 per cent to gearing.
Consequently, at the end of 1992, the Group's net debt of £1,146 million [including preference shares]represented approximately 111 per cent of shareholders' funds, after having received £732 million proceeds from the sale of assets.
However, as further proceeds are received from disposals already agreed, the high level of indebtedness will reduce.
Taking into account post year end disposal proceeds [and profits]already announced, LASMO's level of gearing at 31 December 1992 on a pro-forma basis would have been 88 per cent.
LASMO has recently had its public debt ratings by Moody's and Standard & poors re-affirmed at Baa-1 and A-respectively.
The Group's current average life of gross debt is some 5.5 years.
One of the continuing financial objectives is to lengthen this average life of debt through selective refinancing.
Consistent with that objective, LASMO issued £100 million 9 ½%; Notes Due 1999 in December 1992.
LASMO does not have any unduly restrictive financial covenants governing any of its borrowing agreements.
Currency management
Although LASMO has a sterling balance sheet, most of its business is conducted in US dollars.
At 31 December 1992, 52 per cent of the Group's gross borrowings were denominated in US dollars and 6 per cent in Canadian dollars, thereby providing a partial hedge against balance sheet translation exposure of non-sterling assets.
An analysis of Group borrowings by currency is shown on page 48.
Although a strengthening of the US dollar/£ exchange rate has an immediate upward impact upon gearing, a stronger US dollar produces increased sterling revenues and improved interest cover and earnings despite the increase, in sterling terms, of US dollar costs.
High levels of debt increase the importance of interest rate management.
LASMO has a mix of fixed and floating rate debt which is designed to balance the advantages of currently very low floating US dollar and sterling rates with the need to access sources of long-term finance at fixed rates.
Michael Pavia Finance Director .
OUR BUSINESS WORLD
UK
1
LASMO is one of the leading North Sea oil producers, with interests in 15 fields in production, 4 fields under development and 13 fields which are being appraised.
1
INDONESIA Through its interest in the Sanga Sanga PSC., LASMO has a major position in the growing Pacific rim LNG market.
INTERNATIONAL
1
LASMO has been successful in acquiring a highly sought after block offshore Vietnam.
2
Development of the Kadanwari field in Pakistan is underway following successful gas price negotiations.
3
The Tempa Rossa oil discovery in Italy has been successfully appraised and tested.
4
In Libya, a major seismic programme is near completion.
5
A LASMO-operated group has been awarded a highly prospective block in Yemen, adjacent to major discoveries.
6
An encouraging oil discovery was made in Algeria.
7
Offshore Nova Scotia, production commenced from Canada's first offshore oil field, operated by LASMO.
8
A series of exploration successes has made LASMO a significant operator in Colombia.
UK
The consolidation of Ultramar's assets into our North Sea Business has established LASMO as one of the leading UK oil and gas companies.
The Group's interests in the UK account for approximately one half of its reserves.
The successful programme of asset sales and swaps in 1992 and 1993 has further focused our business, and we will continue our efforts to add value from the considerable investments made in the North Sea.
Following a large expenditure programme in 1991 and 1992 the Staffa and Markham fields were brought on stream in 1992 and four further new fields will commence production in 1993.
Future capital expenditure will therefore reduce substantially from peak 1992 levels and revenues from new production will increase considerably over the next few years.
We view the changes to the Petroleum Revenue Tax [PRT]regime announced in the UK Budget in March 1993 with mixed sentiment.
The lower tax rates on fields liable for PRT are welcome and will increase the Company's discretionary cash flow as well as providing incentives to invest in mature fields to increase future recoverable reserves and profitability.
However, the elimination of tax relief for exploration and appraisal expenditure has significantly increased the cost of exploration and as a result, LASMO will be reconsidering its investment priorities in the UK.
Piper/Claymore area
Net reserves in this area account for 27 per cent of LASMO's reported commercial UK reserves.
A considerable investment has been made in the redevelopment of the Piper field, which achieved first oil in February 1993, having been delayed by construction schedule slippages and bad weather at the end of 1992.
New production from the adjacent Saltire field and smaller Chanter field is expected later in 1993.
Plateau production from Piper and Saltire is expected to reach 83,000 boepd and 57,000 boepd respectively.
LASMO has a 20 per cent interest in both fields.
To the east of the Piper and Claymore fields, successful appraisal drilling was undertaken on block 15/24b [LASMO 40 per cent) and this oil discovery has now been named MacCulloch.
The company acquired an interest in block 15/19, immediately to the north of MacCulloch, through an acreage swap in 1992 and plans to drill additional exploration prospects that have been identified in this area.
Southern Gas Basin
LASMO holds extensive interests in the northern part of the Southern Gas Basin centred around the Caister-Murdoch system.
17 per cent of LASMO's net commercial UK reserves are situated in the Southern Gas Basin.
Annex B approval was received in April 1992 for the development of the Caister gas field [LASMO 21 per cent]which is expected to commence production before the end of 1993.
LASMO has acquired a considerable acreage position in this area through licence awards in the 11th and 12th licencing rounds and, in 1992, added to its position by acquiring an interest in a significant gas discovery in block 44/21a [LASMO 44.5 per cent]through an acreage swap.
An active drilling programme is planned in this area in order to maximise the use of the Caister facilities.
To the east, the Markham field, operated by LASMO, came on stream during 1992.
The field straddles the UK/Netherlands median line and is the first UK field to export gas to  mainland Europe.
Production commenced in November at a rate which quickly reached 130mmcfd.
LASMO has a 33.83 per cent working interest.
Irish Sea
LASMO's 30 per cent interest in its fields in the Irish Sea represents a significant source of future cash flow and earnings potential for the Group commencing in the mid-1990's.
Development studies were advanced during 1992 on the Hamilton, Hamilton North and Douglas fields.
Planning consent for the onshore facilities at the Point of Ayr in North Wales, that will be required to support the development, has been received recently, and in March 1993, the Government granted approval for the construction of a power station at Connah's Quay, North Wales that will use gas from the Hamilton and Hamilton North fields for electricity generation.
It is hoped that a decision to develop these fields will be taken in 1993.
LASMO participated in two new discoveries in the Irish Sea during the year, confirming the Company's assessment of the considerable potential of this area.
The first well drilled in block 110/15 [LASMO 30 per cent]discovered oil and gas which was tested at rates of 1,370 bopd and 78 mmcfd.
This discovery has been named the Lennox field and development options are already under consideration.
Later in the year, LASMO participated in a separate discovery of gas in block 113/29 [LASMO 40 per cent]to the north of the Lennox field.
Exploration drilling will continue in this highly promising area.
The Irish Sea contains 20 per cent of LASMO's net commercial reserves in the UK.
Exploration and appraisal
LASMO participated in 38 exploration and appraisal wells during the year.
A number of successes were achieved from this programme.
In addition to exploration success recorded in the Irish Sea, in the Southern North Sea LASMO made a gas discovery in its first well on operated block 44/16 [LASMO 40 per cent]which tested gas at rates of over 30 mmcfd.
The company also participated in a new gas discovery adjacent to the Caister field and this new discovery, named the Hunter field, will be tied-in to the Caister production facilities.
Appraisal drilling was successfully undertaken on the MacCulloch field and three wells in operated block 16/12a progressed the appraisal of the South Birch and Pine fields.
Drilling activity will be reduced in 1993 in line with the Group's intention to reduce expenditure.
A number of attractive prospects that have been identified will be given priority for early drilling.
Production and development
Production in 1992 averaged 51,000 boepd.
Whilst this is an increase over the 1991 level of 41,000 boepd, it is lower than originally anticipated due to the delay in the commencement of production from Piper and lower production from Ninian as a result of the deferral of well workovers from 1992 to 1993.
Production levels will increase substantially during 1993, even after the asset sales agreed to date, following the commencement of production from the Piper, Saltire and Chanter fields, and from the Caister field before the year end.
Capital expenditure on the development of new fields reached over £200 million in 1992.
Expenditures will reduce sharply during 1993 as several developments are completed and as obligations are reduced as a result of asset sales.
Cash flow from operations will increase as production from these new fields is brought on stream.
Studies continued on the Andrew and Birch fields during 1992 and development decisions should be taken by the end of 1993.
The development of the Columba field has been deferred given the marginal economics of the project under low oil prices, but will be reassessed in the light of the PRT changes announced in March 1993.
Asset management
Following the integration of Ultramar's North Sea assets into its portfolio, LASMO embarked upon a major programme of rationalisation.
This activity was a feature of 1992 and will continue into 1993.
The aim of the disposal programme has been to streamline LASMO's business, strengthen its presence in core areas and improve performance, whilst raising cash and curtailing expenditure in order to reduce debt and gearing.
The transactions completed to date have gone a considerable way towards achieving these objectives.
In total £212 million is to be raised from disposals agreed in 1992 and early 1993.
Cash proceeds from the majority of these transactions will be received in 1993.
The transactions include the sale of a package of assets to Deminex UK for £106 million, the sale of LASMO's interests in T-block to Murphy Oil for $100 million, in the Balmoral and Maureen fields to Pentex UK for $30 million and in blocks 29/2a and 22/27a to enterprise Oil for £15.2 million.
In addition, LASMO withdrew from UK onshore activity through the sale of its entire onshore portfolio to Pentex UK.
The Company also completed a large swap of offshore acreage with BP, which strengthened LASMO's position in the areas of the Piper, Caister and Markham fields in return for assigning to BP interests in the Pierce and Medan discoveries.
These transactions have reduced the number of blocks held by the Group in the UK from 166 to 122, whilst increasing the average working interest in the acreage retained from 26 per cent to 29 per cent.
Indonesia
Indonesia is a core area contributing significantly to both production and cash flow and accounting for approximately 46 per cent of the Group's reserves.
It offers considerable future potential for the discovery of large oil and gas reserves.
The majority of LASMO's Indonesian production is from Sanga Sanga and this PSC is the single largest contributor to Group reserves and production.
Production in 1992 averaged 107,000 boepd, making LASMO one of the largest oil and gas producers in the country.
The major source of production is from Sanga Sanga and this PSC, which is operated by LASMO's VICO affiliate, is the single largest contributor to Group reserves and production.
gas produced from Sanga Sanga is converted into LNG and sold to Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
The Company also holds interests in three operated PSCs [Malacca Strait, Cumi Cumi and Runtu], and two other non-operated PSCs [Kakap and Madura].
Together, the six PSCs comprise a varied and wide ranging portfolio of established production, new discoveries and large tracts of attractive exploration acreage.
Sanga Sanga
The Sanga Sanga PSC [LASMO 37.81 per cent]contains six producing fields.
Gas from the Sanga Sanga fields flow to the Bontang LNG plant in East Kalimantan which has a total daily throughput of approximately 2.0bcf.
Five processing trains were operational during 1992 and produced a total of 210 cargoes of LNG during the year, each cargo holding LNG equivalent to 2.7 bcf of gas.
Construction of a sixth train, due to be completed in 1993, will make Bontang the largest operating LNG facility in the world.
A significant upward revision to Sanga Sanga reserves was reported by independent engineering consultants DeGolyer and MacNaughton, resulting in an increase in net reserves to LASMO of 64 mmboe.
In 1992 a successful appraisal of the Lampake gas discovery was drilled in Sanga Sanga and a block-wide seismic programme was commenced as part of a comprehensive evaluation of the further potential of this prolific area.
Immediately adjacent to Sanga Sanga, LASMO is the operator of the large and relatively unexplored Runtu PSC with a 65.63 per cent interest.
A major seismic programme was undertaken during 1992 and this work will continue through 1993.
The market in the Pacific Basin is expected to continue its rapid growth and the  challenge for LASMO is to find additional reserves of gas to supply this growing demand.
With the Company's experience in Sanga Sanga coupled with the longer term exploration potential of the adjacent Runtu PSC, LASMO is well positioned to contribute significantly to meeting the increasing demand.
Exploration and appraisal
Major seismic programmes are underway in East Kalimantan in the Sanga Sanga and Runtu PSC's.
LASMO plans its first exploration drilling in Runtu in 1994.
In Kakap, following successful appraisal of the KRA discovery, a 3D seismic programme has been completed too assist in planning for development of the KRA and KG fields and to define further exploration opportunities in this new play.
To the south of Kakap, a well was drilled in the Cumi cumi PSC [LASMO 100 per cent]in the first contract year.
the well was dry but provided valuable information pointing to further exploration prospects in several areas which may be tested by 1993 drilling.
The Kakap KRA field and Conoco's Belida field lie immediately to the north and south of Cumi Cumi respectively, reinforcing the potential of the block.
Recent exploration in the Malacca Strait has concentrated on the deep gas potential.
One well tested oil and gas but the results were disappointing.
The exploration potential of the PSC is now considered to be fully tested and reduced drilling activity is planned for the future.
Indonesia offers considerable future potential for the discovery of large oil and gas reserves and, through new venture studies, we are continuing actively to review the area and identify plays that might provide material opportunities for the Group.
Production and development
Average working interest production for 1992 increased to 107,000 boepd [1991 25,000 boepd], reflecting the impact of the acquisition of Ultramar's interests in Indonesia.
Production from the Sanga Sanga PSC dominated these figures, contributing 91,000 boepd.
The Malacca Strait fields [LASMO 23.41 per cent]are in the mature stages of production.
A significant cost cutting programme was introduced which, combined with improved production resulting from a successful infill drilling and well recompletion programme, has helped alleviate the production decline and extend the economic life of the PSC.
Production decline has been slowed in Kakap [LASMO 18.75 per cent]as a result of a gas re-injection programme in the KF field and an infill drilling programme has recently been completed in the KH field.
At year end, development plans for two new fields, KG and KRA, were at the preliminary engineering stage, with production projected for early 1995.
Commerciality has been granted by Pertamina for a gas development in the Madura PSC [LASMO 12.58 per cent].
Projected start-up is in 1997 and it is anticipated that the gas will be used for local power generation.
Asset management
In 1992, LASMO embarked upon an asset management programme.
Interests in the South East Sumatra PSC and the Fifi Zaitun contract areas were sold, raising some US$19.5 million, and the Lahat and Tangerang contract areas were relinquished.
International
LASMO believes that it is important to maintain a strong international portfolio of exploration opportunities.
The company intends to maintain a balance between its existing assets in established and mature areas, with the exposure to significant new reserves in proven under-explored oil and gas provinces.
Outside the North Sea and Indonesia, the Company's activities are focussed on ventures that offer potential for discoveries that will have a material impact on the Group's reserves.
As a result, 1993 and 1994 should be important years for LASMO as exploration drilling proceeds in Algeria, Libya, Yemen and Vietnam, each of which is considered to offer significant potential.
Our producing operations were enhanced in 1992 with first production from the Panuke field, offshore Nova Scotia, Canada and substantial progress has been made towards development of the Kadanwari gas field in Pakistan with gas sales contracts signed in February 1993.
In other areas, such as Colombia and Italy, our exploration efforts will continue with a view to maximising value from our existing portfolio by building on success and exploiting our technical expertise.
As part of the rationalisation programme, and following LASMO's stated intention to withdraw from countries that were considered unlikely to contribute significantly to the Group, the Company has sold its onshore businesses in the US and Canada and its remaining interests in Australia.
Proceeds of some US$177 million, Can $83 million and A$10 million respectively were raised from these disposals.
Colombia
In Colombia, first oil production from the Santiago field [LASMO 50 per cent]was achieved in 1986.
With several satellite fields now tied-in, production from the Santiago complex has reached 9,800 boepd.
Exploration drilling in 1992 resulted in a string of successes which will lead to significant production increases in the next few years.
In mid 1992, LASMO discovered gas in the Guepaje-1 well [LASMO 100 per cent]located in the Lower Magdalena Valley.
The well was brought on stream within six months of discovery, in December 1992, and gas from the well is being sold to Ecopetrol for use in electricity generation.
Two further wells will be drilled in 1993 to increase production from this field.
Further success was achieved in 1992 in the Espinal block in the Upper Magdalena Valley where the Purificacion oil discovery was successfully appraised.
Commerciality has since been granted, with production expected to commence in 1993.
In addition, a new oil discovery was made in the  Venganza prospect, to the east of Purificacion.
Further appraisal drilling on this discovery, and exploration drilling on similar prospects, is planned in the block during 1993.
Early in 1993 BP, under a farmout agreement, commenced drilling an exploration well on LASMO's Upia A block to test a possible southerly continuation of the Cusiana field.
Canada
First production from the Panuke field [LASMO 50 per cent]offshore Nova Scotia, Canada, began in June.
After the Cohasset field is brought on stream in 1993, production from the combined development is expected to reach a peak rate of 40,000 bopd gross.
Gabon
Production from the Obando fields in Gabon [LASMO 50 per cent]surpassed 8,000 bopd net to LASMO during 1992, the highest level achieved since they came on stream in 1986.
Pakistan
In Pakistan, agreement has been reached on the sales and pricing for Kadanwari gas and development in proceeding with first production scheduled for 1995.
This marks a significant step in oil import replacement for Pakistan and the new policy of pricing gas at parity with oil provides an incentive for further exploration by the petroleum industry.
Italy
Important steps have been made towards the confirmation of commerciality of the Tempa Rossa oil field in southern Italy.
A long term test of the Tempa Rossa 2 well has been successfully completed and good production rates were achieved from a sidetrack to the original discovery well.
A third appraisal of this potentially significant heavy oil field will be drilled in 1993.
Exploration
In 1992, LASMO, as operator, was awarded an attractive new exploration block in the Con Son Basin, offshore Vietnam [LASMO 50 per cent].
This concession, which is due north of the giant Dai Hung oil field, is located in the centre of one of the few remaining prospective and as yet relatively unexplored basins in South East Asia.
An initial seismic survey will be completed in 1993 with exploration drilling scheduled to begin early in 1994.
Early in 1993, LASMO announced its first discovery in Algeria, in the productive Ghadames Basin.
In 1992, considerable exploration activity was focussed in both the Ghadames and Illizi Basins, where there have been a series of exciting new oil discoveries in blocks adjacent to our acreage.
The well, EMK-1 [LASMO 25 per cent], tested oil and gas from two zones at combined rates up to 3,729 bopd plus 17.3 mmcfd.
The commercial significance of this discovery is under review and a number of similar prospects in the area are being evaluated.
In Yemen, seismic activity has commenced in our Hood block which lies in the same province as the oil fields recently discovered in the adjacent Masila area.
Although seismic acquisition is at an early stage a number of attractive leads have already been recognised and these leads will be matured and tested during 1993.
In Libya, our most prospective acreage lies within the remote Murzuk Basin.
Here the seismic acquisition continued throughout much of 1992.
The initial results are promising and will be tested during 1993.
Production
Production from LASMO's international activities outside Indonesia averaged 26,000 boepd.
This will decrease in 1993, despite production increases in Colombia, as a result of a number of disposals made during the year.
OUR PEOPLE HEALTH, SAFETY AND THE ENVIRONMENT THE COMMUNITY
Our people
LASMO currently employs some 1,500 people worldwide.
Of this total, 26 per cent are in the UK, 49 per cent in Indonesia and 25 per cent in other countries.
The continuing success of LASMO's business depends upon the quality, commitment and performance of its employees at all levels, and upon their contributions being properly recognised.
This means giving constant and close attention to personnel policies, in particular those which cover recruitment, employment, training, motivation and communications.
LASMO offers equal employment opportunities without discrimination on grounds of ethnic or racial origin, nationality, disability, sex or marital status.
The Company recognises the importance of internal communication and consultation.
The operating divisions have responsibility for keeping their employees fully informed about the state of the business and matters of importance or interest are featured in LASMO's in-house magazine.
LASMO requires the highest standards of integrity from its employees and adherence to a published Code of Business Ethics is a condition of employment for all staff.
Health, safety and the environment
LASMO operates its businesses to comply fully with both its own strict health, safety and environmental [HSE]criteria and the HSE requirements pertaining to each of the countries in which it operates.
LASMO has an HSE policy fully endorsed by the Board, which is implemented through a management system.
This ensures amongst other things that
i
HSE leadership is clearly placed on line management;
ii
appropriate safety and environmental analyses are carried out at defined stages of exploration, development and production;
iii
leadership is provided to all our contractors to assist them in meeting the Group's standards;
iv
wastes are minimised, treated and controlled; and
v
sites are cleared and restored after all seismic, drilling, or production activity.
Worldwide evaluation and monitoring of HSE standards for the Group is the responsibility of the Company's central risk management function, which ensures that regular audits are undertaken and submits any key issues arising to a Committee of the Board.
Detailed regulations are in place which are designed to ensure that all employees give the highest priority to the health and safety of themselves, and those around them.
The community
It is LASMO's continued objective to be a ‘good corporate citizen’ in the many communities around the world in which it operates.
It encourages its employees to do the same on an individual basis.
For example, in Indonesia LASMO is sponsoring a land rehabilitation scheme involving a number of villages; in Colombia, LASMO is actively involved in the construction of schools and providing financial assistance for the supply of educational material and scholarships and has begun work on a Small Business Development programme to generate economic activity and assist local communities to become increasingly self sufficient; and in Scotland a LASMO Arts Trust has been set up to provide cash awards for promising musical students.
In 1992, as in previous years, a wide range of charities in the UK received support and employees participate in the Give As You Earn Scheme, which enables monthly tax free donations to be made to registered charities.
FACTS AND FIGURES: OIL AND GAS RESERVES
The reserve changes during the year include the results of our ongoing asset management programme.
Overall we have sold 106 mmboe during 1992.
The Group has added a total of 69 mmboe as a result of our ongoing exploration appraisal and development activities.
In addition to the above commercial reserve, LASMO is participating in the appraisal of a number of discoveries which are potentially commercial and have a most likely reserves estimate of 240 mmboe net to LASMO [1991 178 mmboe].
In Indonesia, Gabon and Syria LASMO has no ownership interest in oil and gas reserves, but rather has the right to receive production and/or revenues from the sale of oil, condensate, gas, liquefied natural gas and petroleum gas in accordance with PSCs and other agreements.
The reserves remaining net to LASMO have been presented on two bases, on the relevant working interest and also on a net entitlement basis which takes into account projections of government share of production calculated in accordance with certain price and expenditure assumptions.
LASMO's production, shown on page 22, has similarly been presented on both the working interest and entitlement basis.
Reserves and production figures quoted in this annual report are on a working interest basis unless otherwise stated.
The glossary of terms on the inside back cover provides definitions of reserves categories.
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS
The directors submit their report and the accounts for the year ended 31 December 1992.
Activities
The Group is engaged in the exploration for and production of oil and gas.
Results
The Group's results are set out on page 32.
After dividends of £31 million [1991 61 million], £416 million was withdrawn from reserves [1991 £65 million].
During 1992, £400 million was transferred from merger reserve to profit and loss account in the Company, following the write down of its investment in Ultramar by £412 million.
Dividends on ordinary shares
The directors recommended the payment of a final dividend on 7 June 1993 to ordinary shareholders on the register on 29 April 1993 of 1.0 pence per share.
This, together with the interim dividend of 2.3 pence per share paid on 5 October 1992, would make a total for the year of 3.3 pence per share [1991 8.5 pence].
The ordinary shares become ex-dividend on 19 April 1993.
Under Article 134 of the Articles of Association of the Company, the directors may, if authorised by an ordinary resolution of the Company, offer holders of ordinary shares the right to elect to receive ordinary shares credited as fully paid instead of cash in respect of any dividend specified by the ordinary resolution [‘scrip alternative’].
Any authority so granted would expire at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting next following the date of the meeting at which the ordinary resolution was passed.
Your directors propose to seek authority to exercise the power conferred upon them by Article 134 in respect of any dividend on the ordinary shares relating to the financial year of the Company ending on 31 December 1993.
The authority will expire at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held in 1994.
It is your directors' present intention to seek renewal of the authority at that time and annually thereafter.
A scrip alternative, if offered to ordinary shareholders, will enable them to increase their shareholdings in the Company without incurring dealing costs and, to the extent that ordinary shareholders elect to take new ordinary shares instead of cash, there will be enhanced cash flow and increased liquidity to the Company.
Group development
A review of the Group's activities during the year, its position at 31 December 1992 and its future development is included in the Chairman's statement, the Chief Executive's review and the review of operations.
Fixed assets
Significant changes in fixed assets are set out on pages 43 and 45.
Share capital
Details of the share capital of the Company and options over ordinary shares of the Company granted under various employee share option schemes are set out on page 50.
The directors are presently authorised to allot shares up to a maximum nominal amount of £114,668,095 and to allot equity securities for cash in connection with a rights issue and up to an aggregate nominal amount of £9,350,000, without applying statutory pre-emption rights.
Both these authorities expire on the date of the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Item 8 on the agenda of the Annual General Meeting is an ordinary resolution to give the Board authority to allot relevant securities up to a maximum nominal amount of £114,533,413, which is the amount of the unissued share capital of the Company, including £40 million nominal of authorised but unissued cumulative redeemable preference shares, such authority to expire fifteen months from the date of the passing of the resolution or on the date of the Annual General Meeting in 1994, if earlier.
Item 9 on the agenda of the Annual General Meeting is a special resolution renewing the Board's authority to allot equity securities for cash in connection with a rights issue and up to an aggregate nominal value of £9,350,000, such authority to expire fifteen months from the date of the passing of the resolution or on the date of the Annual General Meeting in 1994, if earlier.
This represents less than 5 per cent of the issued ordinary share capital as at 24 March 1993 and is in line with guidelines issued by the Investment Protection Committees of the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of Pension Funds.
Additionally, these guidelines require that in any rolling three year period the Company should not use more than 7.5 per cent of its issued ordinary share capital by way of non-pre-emptive issues for cash.
Your directors would consult the appropriate investor protection bodies before making any cash issue in excess of the guidelines.
Directors
The present directors and their biographies are set out on pages 4 and 5.
All held office throughout 1992 with the exception of Mr J A Hogan, who was appointed to the Board after the year end.
Mr. W W C Greentree resigned as Chief Executive and as a director on 28 January 1993 and Mr. J. Darby, formerly Chief Operating Officer, was appointed Chief Executive on the same date.
On 23 February 1993, Mr. J. A. Hogan was appointed a director of the Company having previously been appointed Chief Operating Officer.
Mr. Hogan retires from the Board at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting in accordance with the Articles of Association and, being eligible, offers himself for reappointment.
Mr. Hogan has a service contract with the Company with an unexpired period of three years.
In accordance with the Articles of association, Mr. J. Cordingley and Mr. W. G. Cochrane retire by rotation at the Annual General Meeting and, being eligible, offer themselves for reappointment.
Mr. Cordingley has a service contract with the Company with an unexpired period of two years.
Mr. Cochrane does not have a service contract with the Company.
Sir David Nicholson has attained the age of 70 and will retire from the Board at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting.
Directors' interests in and options over securities of the Company are set out on page 54.
During the year, the Company maintained liability insurance for its directors and officers.
Major shareholders
As at 24 March 1993, the Company had received notifications from the following institutions of interests equal to or in excess of three per cent of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company held for themselves and/or their clients:
Charitable and political contributions
Charitable donations made during the year amounted to £154,700 [1991 £104,900].
A donation of £20,000 was made to the Conservative Party in 1992 [1991 £15,000].
Business and employment practices
The Company has defined and published policies on personnel management, health and safety, and environmental conservation.
Adherence to a Code of Business Ethics is a condition of employment for all employees.
LASMO does not discriminate in recruitment selection, career development or training, in relation to race, religion, ethnic origin, sex or disability.
Employee involvement
The Company operates Inland Revenue approved equity participation plans for UK based employees.
Copies of the annual report, interim report and news releases are available to employees.
Other matters of importance of interest are featured in LASMO's in-house magazine.
United Kingdom Pension Plan
Events during last year have focused considerable attention on the security of assets and benefits under company pension schemes in the United Kingdom.
The trustees of the LASMO Pension Plan operate independently from the Company.
The trustees have delegated the investment and safe custody of the Plan's assets to independent investment managers and custodians and are satisfied with the security of assets and the controls in place.
The Trust deed precludes the trustees from investing any part of the trust assets in securities of the Company or in lending to or guaranteeing any loans made to the Company.
Status
The Company is not a close company as defined by the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988.
Auditors
Ernst & Young have expressed their willingness to continue in office as auditors and resolutions proposing their reappointment, and authorising the directors to fix their remuneration, will be submitted at the Annual General Meeting.
By order of the Board JAT Wedgwood Secretary London 24 March 1993.
DIRECTORS' RESPONSIBILITIES for the accounts
The directors are required by law to prepare accounts which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group as at the end of its financial year, and of the profit or loss for the financial year.
The directors are also required to maintain adequate accounting records.
Suitable accounting policies, consistently applied and supported by reasonable and prudent judgements and estimates, have been used in the preparation of the accounts.
Applicable accounting standards have been followed.
The directors are also responsible to the Company for taking reasonable steps to safeguard its assets and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
REPORT OF THE AUDITORS to the members of LASMO plc
We have audited the accounts on pages 29 to 53 in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the Group at 31 December 1992 and of the loss and cash flows of the Group for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985.
Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants Registered Auditor London 24 March 1993.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of preparation
Principal accounting policies are set out below.
These policies are consistent with those adopted in previous years.
The accounts have been prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with applicable accounting standards as defined by the Companies Act 1985.
Basis of consolidation
The consolidated accounts include the accounts of the Company and all its subsidiary undertakings for the year ended 31 December 1992.
All these undertakings are companies, and hereafter are identified as such, except for a 50 per cent interest in a general partnership [Unimar Company]which is consolidated on a proportionate basis.
The Group conducts substantially all of its oil and gas exploration and development activity through unincorporated joint ventures.
The share of these joint ventures' results and net assets attributable to LASMO are fully reflected in the Group consolidated accounts.
Subsidiaries acquired or sold during the year are included from the effective date of acquisition or to the effective date of disposal.
LASMO's offer to acquire the ordinary share capital of Ultramar PLC became unconditional in all respects on 20 December 1991.
The acquisition was treated, for accounting purposes, as being effective on 31 December 1991.
As was announced at the time of the offer, LASMO had no intention of extending its activities beyond oil and gas exploration and production.
All the assets and operations acquired which do not fall within this business segment are treated as ‘business held for resale’ in the accounts.
The subsidiaries which held and operated the refining and marketing operations which were sold on 6 July 1992 were not consolidated and certain borrowings, attributable to these businesses, were also separated and included within businesses held for resale at the end of 1991.
Ultramar's oil and gas exploration and production assets were integrated with LASMO's existing operations from the beginning of 1992.
It is therefore not practical to determine their 1992 financial results.
The Group's share of results of associated undertakings [hereafter called associated companies]is included in respect of companies in which the Group owns at least 20 per cent of the equity and over which it exerts significant influence.
Such investments are stated at cost together with the Group's share of post acquisition undistributed reserves less amounts written off.
Goodwill
Goodwill, which comprises the amount by which the cost of acquiring shares in subsidiaries exceeds the fair value of net assets acquired, is written off to reserves in the year of acquisition.
Turnover
Turnover comprises amounts receivable for invoiced sales, exclusive of value added taxation and similar levies.
The Group's entitlement to turnover proceeds from Indonesian LNG sales is included in turnover after adjustment to add back the Group's share of transportation and liquefaction costs and debt service which is deducted on an incurred basis on loans raised by the owner to finance the construction and expansion costs of the Bontang LNG plant which is operated on a break even basis.
Cost of sales is also adjusted to reflect these deductions, except that only equal annual charges for debt service are deducted so as to spread the financing costs over the remaining lives of the respective sales contracts rather than the uneven repayment schedules established for the loans.
The resultant deferred debt service charges are included in debtors.
Petroleum Revenue Tax [PRT]
PRT is treated as a production cost and has been charged or credited before arriving at operating profit.
Provision is made for current PRT on revenue from petroleum sales less all allowable deductions for the period.
Deferred taxation
Deferred taxation is provided in respect of liabilities relating to timing differences between profits as computed for taxation purposes and profits as stated in the accounts, except to the extent that the liability is not expected to crystallise in the foreseeable future.
The provision arises principally from the different accounting and tax treatments for amortising field assets.
Foreign currencies
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at exchange rates ruling at the date of each transaction.
Assets and liabilities of overseas subsidiary and associated companies and of UK companies with non sterling functional currencies are translated into sterling at rates current at the balance sheet date.
Trading results and cash flows of overseas subsidiary companies are translated into sterling at average rates.
Unrealised gains or losses on revaluation of net assets of overseas subsidiary and associated companies and on revaluation of Group borrowings arranged to finance or hedge those net assets are taken directly to reserves.
All other gains and losses on translation are dealt with in the profit and loss account.
Pension costs
The Group operates a number of pension schemes worldwide, the principal schemes being those in the United Kingdom, which are of the defined benefits type.
Contributions to the schemes are charged to the profit and loss account so as to spread the cost of pensions over the employees' working lives within the Group.
The regular cost is attributed to individual years using the attained age or projected unit method.
Variations in pension cost, which are identified as a result of actuarial valuations, are amortised over the average expected remaining working lives of employees.
Differences between amounts funded and the amounts charged to the profit and loss account are treated as either provisions or prepayments in the balance sheet.
Fixed assets
Exploration and appraisal expenditure
Exploration expenditure comprises all costs, including premium payments, associated with the acquisition of new acreage, the drilling of exploratory wells and other costs incurred in evaluating the commercial viability of geological entities.
Appraisal expenditure comprises costs incurred in the survey, exploration and appraisal of licence areas not yet under development or in production.
Exploration and appraisal expenditures are defined as intangible fixed assets until a decision is reached concerning commercial viability of the fields to which they relate.
Expenditure is then either written off or transferred to tangible fixed assets.
General seismic and other expenditures not connected with a specific exploration licence are written off to the profit and loss account immediately.
Development expenditure
Development expenditure comprises all costs including financing costs, exploration and appraisal expenditures incurred in bringing a field to commercial production and is defined as tangible assets.
No depletion is charged in respect of development expenditure.
Once a field achieves commercial production, development expenditures are transferred to production assets.
Production assets
Expenditure on production assets represents the Group's share of total expenditure on the exploration, appraisal and development of oil and gas fields which are currently in commercial production.
This expenditure includes costs of capital assets, financing costs and general technical and supervisory services plus, for depletion calculation purposes only, any anticipated further development expenditures and is stated at cost.
Production assets are depleted by field on a unit of production method, in the proportion of actual production for the year to the total estimated remaining commercial reserves of the field on an entitlement basis.
The remaining commercial reserves figure is that estimated at the end of the year plus the production during the year.
Impairment of value
Each year management compares the net book amounts carried in respect of each field with the estimated net realisable amount of proven and probable reserves within each field.
Any permanent impairment of tangible assets identified is written off.
Fixed assets continued 
Oil and gas reserves
Proven and probable reserves are estimated quantities of commercially producible hydrocarbons which existing geological, geophysical and engineering data show to be recoverable in future years from known reservoirs.
Other tangible assets
Office equipment and vehicles are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation, which is provided so as to write-off those assets over their estimated useful lives, ranging from four to 15 years.
Abandonment provisions
Provision is made for the cost of abandonment of Group-owned assets, calculated using the unit of production method based on proven and probable reserves on an entitlement basis.
Such provision represents the Group's share of the estimated liability for costs which may be incurred in removing production platforms and facilities at the end of the producing life of each field.
Effect of changes in estimates
The effect of revisions of previous estimates of proven and probable oil and gas reserves and of costs is taken up prospectively in unit of production calculations.
Stocks
Stocks are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Investments
Investments included in current assets are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Comparative figures
Prior year comparative figures have been restated to conform to the current year's presentation where appropriate.
NOTES OF THE ACCOUNTS
1 Segment information
For the purpose of the Companies Act 1985, the operations of the Group constitute one class of business, the exploration for and production of hydrocarbon liquids and gas.
Accordingly the loss on disposal of the refining and marketing businesses acquired in 1991 is shown separately.
The two major operations of the Group are situated in the UK and Indonesia.
All other operations are shown under International, previously analysed separately as Asia Pacific/Western and Europe, Africa, Middle East [EAME].
The exploration and production operations in the USA, which were sold during 1992, made contributions to Group turnover of £35 million [1991 £18 million]and operating profit of £8 million [1991 £1 million].
The loss on sale was £22 million, which had been provided for in 1991.
This disposal is not considered material to qualify as a discontinued operation in accordance with FRS 3.
In the UK region, turnover sourced in the UK was £216 million [1991 £177 million]with the balance of £2 million [1991 £nil]sourced in the Netherlands.
Operating profit generated in the Netherlands was not material [1991 £nil].
Turnover by destination is not materially different from that reported above, except for turnover sourced in Indonesia which includes £233 million in respect of LNG sales to other Far East countries [1991 £nil].
3 Exceptional items
In order to show more clearly the significant impact of exceptional items on the results for the year, these items have been presented in a separate column on the face of the profit and loss accounts.
The provision of £232 million reflects lower oil price expectations and a more conservative assessment of reserves in certain fields.
Included in this amount if £45 million for the UKCS oil and gas assets on which the impact of the March 1993 Budget has still to be fully determined.
The direct tax effects of Budget changes have primarily resulted in the release of deferred PRT provisions totalling £108 million, offset by a provision for deferred corporation tax of £30 million [see note 8], a net tax release of £78 million.
a
At 1 January 1992 the Group held 33.32 per cent of the common shares of ELAN Energy Inc.
[ELAN][formerly LASMO Canada Inc.], together with all of the non-voting shares, giving a total beneficial interest of 57.08 per cent.
During 1992 half of the Group's interest in ELAN was sold and purchase warrants, which expire on 15 December 1993, were issued in respect of its remaining holding.
b
Includes disposal of Ultramar Oil and Gas Limited [UOGL]for £44 million, sold at carrying value.
The contribution to 1992 Group results by UOGL was not material.
Exceptional items continued 
iii Loss on disposal of businesses held for resale
The net assets attributable to the refining, marketing, shipping and other non exploration and production operations of Ultramar, which were acquired in December 1991, do not form part of the Group's continuing business and are included in the balance sheet as businesses held for resale.
The disposal of Ultramar's refining and marketing businesses was completed during 1992 for US$125 million.
Additional expenditure on these businesses to the date of their disposal were not reflected in the Group profit and loss account, but were applied to reduce the carrying value.
A loss of £280 million, plus a holding charge of £22 million to produce an aggregate loss of £302 million, has been recognised in respect of these disposals.
Net assets with a carrying value of £53 million at 31 December 1992 remain for disposal.
At 31 December 1992 the total number of employees was 1,565 [1991 1,893].
The year end 1991 figures exclude 3,734 employees directly employed by overseas businesses held for resale which were sold during 1992.
Information to calculate the average for this category during 1992 is not available.
a.
Interest payable in 1992 and 1991 in respect of bank loans and overdrafts relates to amounts which are wholly repayable within five years, with the exception of £29 million [1991 £14 million]which relates to borrowings of £303 million at 31 December 1992 [1991 £137 million]repayable after five years.
b.
Oil Production Stock [OPS]payments comprise the amounts payable to holders of OPS units.
These payments are calculated on 8.75 per cent of the sales value of production from 8.62608 per cent of the Ninian field [50 per cent of the Group's interest in the field]after deducting Government royalties and operating costs incurred in extracting the oil and conveying and treating it at Sullom Voe.
OPS holders are not entitled under the Trust Deed to receive payment on the production arising from the acquisition in 1988 of an additional interest in the Ninian field.
OPS payments are made half-yearly on 31 October and 30 April, based upon production during the six months ending 30 June and 31 December respectively.
c.
Borrowings include £98 million [1991 £70 million]which is the subject of interest swap agreements under which counterparties have undertaken to pay amounts at fixed rates of interest in consideration for amounts payable by the Group at variable rates of interest.
a.
The reduction in value of the investment in Ultramar resulted from a £302 million impairment following the loss on disposal of businesses held for resale and the realisation of a £110 million dividend declared out of pre-acquisition revenue reserves.
Associated companies
On the basis of ELAN's accounting policies, the Group's share of its profits before tax for 1992 was £3 million [1991 £1 million]and the Group's share of its net assets at 31 December 1992 amounted to £26 million [1991 £37 million].
The Group also holds an interest in an associate, Methodplan Limited, a finance and investment Company.
Methodplan's principal asset is a holding of 19,148,502 LASMO plc shares, obtained in exchange for Ultramar PLC shares following LASMO's acquisition of Ultramar.
On the basis of Group accounting policies, the Group's share of Methodplan's loss was £7 million [1991 £10 million treated as part of the cost of the Ultramar acquisition].
The Group's share of net assets at 31 December 1992 amounted to £30 million [1991 £32 million].
The Group's share of accumulated losses of associated companies at 31 December 1992 is £20 million [1991 £22 million].
15 Investments: other listed securities
Other listed securities include AUK Limited Guaranteed Unsecured Floating Rate Notes 2003 [‘the AUK Notes’]which are guaranteed by Societé Nationale Elf Acquitaine and are listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange.
They are included in the Balance Sheet at their cost and market value of £368 million [1991 £368 million]and in the opinion of the directors their realisable value is not less than this amount.
It is the Company's intention to continue to regard the AUK Notes as part of its working capital; they are pledged as collateral for Group borrowings.
The remaining securities with a value of £3 million [1991 £nil]are listed in the US.
a
Bank loans due wholly or partly after five years attract interest at rates between 7 per cent and 11 ¼ per cent.
The average rate for the year was 10 per cent.
b
At the same time as the issue of the US$125 million 10 per cent 1994 Notes, 125,000 warrants were issued, being sold separately from the Notes.
Each warrant entitled the holder to subscribe to 9 ½ per cent 1996 Bonds of US$1,000 principal each, at any time on or before 12 July 1992 at par plus any accrued interest.
All warrants were exercised by the due date.
c
The Sw.Fr 150 million 1996 Notes outstanding at the end of 1991 have been swapped into £58 million at an interest rate of 6.85 per cent.
d
The £100 million 9 ½ per cent 1999 Notes were issued on 16 December 1992 for net proceeds of £99.4 million, to refinance existing debt and for general corporate purposes.
e
The Exchangeable Debentures were issued by Ultramar in April 1991.
The Company offered Debenture holders the choice of exchanging into LASMO shares, or the ability to redeem the Debentures for cash at par plus interest, during 1992.
All Debentures were redeemed.
f
The 2005 Bonds are convertible into ordinary shares of the Company at a price of 564p per ordinary share on or before 27 September 2005 subject to adjustment in certain circumstances.
g
Payment of principal and interest on the Stock are guaranteed by LASMO Securities Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and the guarantee is secured by a charge over £187 million of the AUK Notes held by LASMO Securities Limited.
h
Oil Production Stock [OPS]
NOTES OF THE ACCOUNTS CONTINUED
17 Creditors; amounts falling due after more than one year continued 
Oil Production Stock [OPS]continued 
The OPS is repayable at par on the earliest of:
the date when the total quantity of petroleum won and saved from the original 8.62608 per cent interest in the Ninian field attributable to the Group reaches 120 million barrels; or
the termination of production from the field; or
31 December 2010.
At 31 December 1992 cumulative production from the Ninian field attributable to the interest of the Group on which OPS payments have become due amounted to 84,453,60 barrels [1991 82,347,875 barrels].
i Deferred income
Interest is receivable on PRT refunds which have arisen from the carryback of excess current UK North Sea expenditures against prior year PRT payments.
To the extent that such interest relates to PRT receipts, which totalled £31 million [1991 £25 million]arising in respect of the Piper field redevelopment, it has been deferred pending release as income as Piper production is received.
Also included in deferred income is £14 million which relates to a pre-payment received under a contract for sale of gas.
The income will be released to profits as deliveries are made.
The Company has issued guarantees or indemnities including those for loans and obligations of various subsidiary companies amounting to £860 million [1991 £472 million].
The Company is empowered under its articles of Association to borrow up to twice the aggregate amount of the share capital and reserves of the Company and its subsidiaries as indicated by the latest audited accounts, subject to certain adjustments.
LASMO gives negative pledge and net worth covenants where considered appropriate.
19 Provision for liabilities and charges
The provision for abandonment represents the accumulated amount of the Group's share of abandonment cost of £58 million [1991 £45 million]for all North Sea fields in which the Group has an interest and which are currently in production, £1 million [1991 £nil]for similar costs in Nova Scotia, and £nil [1991 £1 million]in Australia.
the total estimated liability for the Group's share of abandonment costs is currently forecast at £159 million [1991 £127 million].
At 31 December 1991 the US federal tax authorities had proposed adjustments relating to the assessment of certain profits earned during 1979 to 1983 by Ultramar Group companies operating outside the US and other matters which would result in taxes of approximately US$190 million plus interest.
The claim in relation to 1979/1980 which made up approximately $125 million of the principal; was settled in full during 1992 by the payment of US$49 million plus US$131 million interest giving a total sum of US$180 million [£102 million].
Management considers that adequate provision has been made for any liability which may arise in respect of the years 1981 to 1983.
Deferred taxation is not provided in respect of liabilities which might arise on the distribution of profits of overseas subsidiary companies, due to the availability of foreign tax credits.
The Group has no present intention to dispose of the AUK Notes and therefore no tax provision has been made for the potential liability to corporation tax.
NOTES OF THE ACCOUNTS CONTINUED
ii Share Options
At 31 December 1992 there were outstanding options under various employee share option schemes, exercisable during the years 1993 to 2002, to acquire 9,668,454 ordinary shares of the company at prices ranging from £0.74 to £4.75 per share.
The Company has other stock option plans in which former employees of the Ultramar Group participate.
The outstanding options, exercisable during the years 1993 to 2001, to acquire 6,658,422 shares were at prices ranging from £1.93 to £2.92 per share.
Unless previously exercised, approximately 4,900,000 shares of these options will expire by 5 July 1993.
The Company also has a stock appreciation rights [SAR]plan under which SAR's have been granted to US residents who previously held options under the Ultramar stock option plans.
On valid exercise of a SAR, LASMO pays to the option holder the difference between the calculated exercise price of equivalent LASMO shares in the SAR and the market value of LASMO shares on the date of exercise, either in cash or LASMO shares.
Unless previously exercised, the majority of the SAR's will expire by 5 July 1993.
The company has not presented its own profit and loss account as permitted by section 230 of the Companies Act 1985.
The loss dealt with in the accounts of the Company was £399 million [1991 profit £55 million].
Movements on the Company's share premium account are as those set out on page 33.
22 Pension costs
The LASMO Group operates a number of pension schemes.
The principal schemes, which are in the United Kingdom and described below, are funded and are of the defined benefits type covering approximately 440 employees [1991 520].
The assets of these schemes are held in trusts or separately administered funds.
All defined benefit schemes are subject to regular valuations by professionally qualified actuaries.
Details of the latest valuations are as follows:
The surplus shown by the valuation in Scheme 1 will be used to reduce Company contributions during the twelve months to 31 March 1994.
Scheme 2 is a closed scheme, with sufficient assets to meet its liabilities.
The pension cost assessed on the basis of actuarial advice and charged in the accounts relating only to Scheme 1 was £4 million [1991 £2 million].
Costs in the accounts relating to Scheme 2 were not material.
NOTICE OF MEETING
Notice is hereby given that the twenty-second Annual General Meeting of LASMO plc will be held at Cinema 1, Barbican Centre, Silk Street, London EC2Y 8DS, on Tuesday 25 May 1993 at 11.30 am for the following purposes:
Ordinary business
1
To receive the directors' report and accounts for the year ended 31 December 1992.
2
To declare a final dividend of 1.0p per ordinary share.
3
To reappoint Mr J A Hogan a director
4
To reappoint Mr J Cordingley a director.
5
To reappoint Mr W G Cochrane a director.
6
To reappoint Ernst & Young auditors of the Company to hold office until the conclusion of the next general meeting of the Company before which accounts are laid.
7
To authorise the directors to fix the remuneration of the auditors.
Special business
To consider and, if thought fit, pass the following resolutions, of which resolutions 8 and 10 will be proposed as ordinary resolutions, and resolution 9 as a special resolution:
8
That the directors of the Company be generally and unconditionally authorised in accordance with section 80 of the Companies Act 1985 to exercise all powers of the Company to allot relevant securities, as defined in that section up to a maximum nominal amount of £114,533,413 provided that this authority shall expire fifteen months from the date of this resolution, or, if earlier, at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting of the Company in 1994, save that the Company may before such date make an offer or agreement which would or might require relevant securities to be allotted after such date and the directors may allot relevant securities in pursuance of any such offer or agreement as if the authority conferred hereby had not expired.
9
That the directors be empowered pursuant to section 95 of the Companies Act 1985 to allot equity securities [within the meaning of section 94[2] of the Act]for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 8 as if section 89[1] of the said Act did not apply to any such allotment, provided that the power hereby conferred shall be limited:
a
to the allotment of equity securities in connection with a rights issue in favour of shareholders where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interests of all shareholders are proportionate [as nearly as may be]to their holdings of such shares subject to such exclusions or other arrangements as the directors may consider necessary or expedient to deal with fractional entitlements, statutory restrictions or legal or practical problems under or resulting from the application of the laws of any territory or the requirements of any recognised regulatory body or stock exchange in any territory; and
b
to the allotment [otherwise than pursuant to sub-paragraph [a]above]of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of £9,350,000;
and shall expire fifteen months from the date of this resolution or, if earlier, at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting of the Company in 1994, save that the Company may before such date make an offer or agreement which would or might require securities to be allotted after such date and the directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of such offer or agreement as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.
10
That the Board be authorised to exercise the power contained in Article 134 of the Articles of Association so that, to the extent and manner determined by the Board, the holders of ordinary shares in the capital of the Company be permitted to elect to receive ordinary shares, credited as fully paid, instead of cash in respect of all or part of any interim or the final dividend relating to the year ending on 31 December 1993, such authority to expire at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held in 1994.
By order of the Board JAT Wedgwood Secretary 19 April 1993 100 Liverpool Street London EC2M 2BB