

To Sally
with best wishes and lots of love for your birthday from Auntie Anne
This present is tintinnabulant, so if you experience a ringing in your ears, don't blame your ears.
Visiting Sid, and then maybe Mary
Edinburgh
1/5/93
Dear Jean
I've been meaning for many weeks now to pass on  's French address, which filtered through to us in January — but of course you may already have had it from  or heard from Janet yourself.
It's:, which seems on the brief side, but is apparently adequate.
I hope Bill's genealogical researches are progressing — I didn't manage to ask him yesterday at Catherine's leaving party.
All the best,
Anne S
1/5/93
Dear Antonia
Happy May Day, and I'm so sorry about the muddle with the draft I've enquired at the head office of the Bank of Scotland, where I got it made out, and they seemed to think your Brno bank was being a bit dim, or perhaps even obstructionist, in telling you they couldn't deal with it and that you'd have to go to Prague to get it cashed.
So they gave me minute instructions (enclosed, along with the much-travelled draft, in the foreign-desk-clerk's handwriting) about what you should say to them if you can be persuaded to try them again.
If you can't, but wouldn't mind keeping the draft till you're in Prague (it's good for six months), it may be less of a hassle cashing it there, especially as the bank in Brno may charge you something for the transaction.
The thing is that I couldn't cancel the draft — it cost £6.50 to get it, and would have cost another £12.00 to get it annulled.
So, if you receive the also-enclosed £30 in Bank-of-England notes safely, perhaps you could share the draft money with Robert when you see him in Prague.
Thanks so much for sending on the extra questionnaire; it was such a conscientiously answered one, too.
I really had the most constructive feedback from the questionnaires returned by you and Robert.
The ones returned from Singapore were the most perfunctorily answered (and most reactionary in tone).
Looking forward to seeing you in July.
Lots of love from
Godmother Anne
To David
with all good wishes for your birthday.
I thought you ought to learn to juggle with these to amuse Michael.
Unfortunately they didn't throw in an instruction manual, but maybe you know how already.
To David and Barbi
with all good wishes and lots of love for your silver wedding
from Anne and Hamish, John and Robert
25/4/93
Dear Edmund
Many apologies for taking so long to write.
Thanks so very much for getting me Bloomfield's annotated NT, vol I. I'm delighted to have it, and have just been spending some time revisiting a few cruces to see what explanations are offered.
When Richard handed it to me I was so surprised I forgot to enquire whether or not il s'agit d'un cadeau, but if not, I must settle up with you when next you're here.
I do hope you're flourishing, and look forward to meeting you over lunch or a drink sometime.
With all good wishes
25/4/93
Dear 
Very many thanks for the complimentary ticket for Little Sister, usable for either 8 or 9 May.
I should like to attend on 9 May, and look forward to the evening's entertainment very much.
I enclose a donation for The Council for Music in Hospitals.
With good wishes 
20/4/93
Dear Jillie
Hope these will come in useful; I got 2 of as many as I could, so you could have one for handling and one for display — or for pinning up to show both sides.
There's a map in the first opening of the Spanish Welcome/Bienvenido booklet (couldn't get a Scots one).
The Information Centre thought the locusts had been.
Love
Alan — Do hope Sid is feeling better.
Please could you give her the enclosed PC from me when you visit her?
My family, who were threatening to visit us en masse the first weekend of May, can't come after all (plans fell through), so won't need B & B. But they might some day.
Blair Atholl
9/4/93
Dear Sid
I do hope you're feeling better, and that they're sorting out the right combination of drugs this time.
What a nuisance for you, having to go back into hospital.
Blair Atholl has ghastly weather today, but yesterday was very glorious, and John and I climbed some mountains behind Drumochter, and fortunately didn't need the services mentioned on the front, though our map fell into a river and needed to be rescued.
We've just been ironing it, sellotaping it and refolding it.
Lots of love
19/4/93
Dear Robert
Hope this arrives in time for your birthday.
I'll put some money into your account — sorry it's such a boring present.
Thanks again for your very great help over the questionnaires.
Yesterday John and I climbed the horseshoe of Munros behind the Boar and the Sow, but fortunately didn't need the services of the overleaf-mentioned people.
Lots of love, M, D, J.
Medau — summer classes 
7.15 in St Andrew's Hall as usual 
15/4/93
Dear Perilla
Very many thanks indeed for the copy of Edward Barnsley .
I'm most delighted to have it, having been brought up in a house in the Isle of Man that was very much a product of the earlier stage of the Arts and Crafts Movement (it was designed by  and built in 1893).
This seems a splendid book — excellent text, and as usual faultless on the production side.
The photos are extraordinarily clear, too.
I see that Photina is well-established with you now.
We investigated it for one of our earlier dictionaries as it seemed quite economical on space.
Production's usual attitude is ‘any typeface you like, as long as it's Times'.
It was good to see Ewen and the boys, if briefly, the other day, all looking healthy and brown after the Cyprus trip.
Our spare room (with the toys in) was unfortunately impenetrably filled with sitting-room furniture (the sitting-room is awaiting redecoration), but the boys managed to entertain themselves in the empty sitting-room instead.
I mentioned to Ewen that I still had some (I told him 10, but it appears to be only 8) copies left of GGE , and yesterday I approached Bargain Books on Princes Street, where I see they're selling it for £6, in the hope that I might add my copies to their stock and get a cheque for you.
They have me the number of  of Lomond Books to ring, when he returns from holiday.
But what do you think?
Seeing it features in your catalogue, would you prefer me to send the copies back to you?
Dictionaries go on just as usual— at present EFL ones — in the making of which I gather Orlando's best friend's father is also engaged.
Thanks again for Edward Barnsley, and all the best for the one that's causing the present overload of work.
love
To Margaret and Peter with love and congratulations on Georgina's birth from Hamish and Anne.
Hope Finlay likes her too.
To Fiona and Steven with love and congratulations on the birth of Alexander from Hamish and Anne.
13/4/93
Dear Antonia
Very many thanks indeed for all the trouble you took in seeing to the distribution, filling-in, and return of the questionnaires.
I was delighted to get the seven that came back with Charley, and look forward to the couple from Nigel.
Yes, the answers and comments of the students and your fellow-teachers will certainly be valuable to the project — they were helpful, interesting, and in quite a few cases enlightening in bringing up incidental considerations I hadn't previously given enough thought to.
Thanks very much for filling in a questionnaire yourself so fully, and for your points about possible dangers here and there.
I haven't actually seen Charley since his return, as he called on Hamish while I was at work, but at lunchtime today I conveyed your presents for Christopher and Lydie to Jenners Rose Street restaurant and placed them in Inga's hands (a handy reminder to me of their birthdays, too).
She is busy with the lead-up to Hansel and Gretel , and sent me away with a variety of posters and handouts.
Looking forward to seeing you in the summer, and thanks again so much to you and the other participants for your help.
Meanwhile, good luck with the work.
Love
13/4/93
Dear Robert
A very quick note to thank you very much indeed for all the trouble you took in seeing to the distribution, filling-in and return of the questionnaires.
I was really pleased to get so much in the way of useful comment and feedback — a lot of it bringing up incidental considerations that we clearly haven't yet given enough thought to.
Please thank Renata very much too for doing one; her point about the reference count being on the small side for usefulness even to the general learner is a crucial one; likewise yours about the belt-and-braces reassuringness of the transitive/intransitive label.
And there were a lot of other helpful points.
Please thank the participants when you see them again.
Hope to get something to you for your birthday, but don't despair if it doesn't come on the day.
Happy Birthday, though, in the meantime.
I might be asking your permission to use your letters (all anonymised) in Chambers's collection of unpublished material (private correspondence, etc) for the British National Corpus of the English language.
I'll be in touch again about that.
Lots of love
10/4/93
Dear Margaret,
may already have spoken to you about her and my plan to have a training/recreation weekend in St Andrews (Saturday) and Edinburgh (Friday evening and Sunday) in the autumn, 19–21 November,
We would very much like to have you to teach us (but would of course welcome any trainer that you'd propose in your place if you're already busy that weekend).
The classes on Saturday would probably be the open ones, and the Edinburgh sessions the training ones).
The St Andrews town hall is already booked, because it was in such demand and this particular weekend was the only one when it was available.
I've a worrying feeling that the Medau Annual Reunion may clash — I do hope it doesn't.
Is your hip completely better now?
And how are your family?
I often think of your grandchildren and hope they are flourishing.
Looking forward to hearing from you.
All the best, and love from
Anne
Dear Karin
If the May issue of Medau News is still short of regional news, perhaps a couple of items from Edinburgh will come in useful.
(1)
(Medau Soc member) and I each swam 100 lengths non-stop as ‘the Medau Duo’ in the British National Swimathon (in aid of NSPCC, Red Cross, Spastics, and Sports Council Promoting Sport for People with Disabilities) and raised £100 each in sponsorship money.
(2)
In addition to my regular Medau classes, I continue to teach occasional apparatus sessions to Keep Fit groups in Edinburgh and Glasgow.
With all good wishes for your editorship
10/4/93
Dear Nan
Many thanks for your letters and the very generous cheque.
I'm glad that people enjoyed the class on 11 March.
Yes, I'd love to come again — the class members are very enjoyable to teach, being so quick and responsive.
Your two suggested dates for apparatus sessions — 7 October 1993 and 13 January 1994 — are fine as far as I know.
I look forward to seeing you all again.
With all good wishes,
28/2/93 
Dear Antonia
Sorry I've taken so long to get a letter written to you.
I telephoned your Ma yesterday, to hear that things were a bit depressing at the school and in the country generally.
Have you plans for after June, yet?
Robert said he'd been to see you in Brno recently; hope it was a good weekend.
This weekend he seems to be in Bratislava — that is if we understood the five (at least) different voices that answered the telephone at the number we have for him.
Maybe you have a note of his latest address and telephone number?
Is he still with Renata's mother?
The tights I send via Inga at Christmas were probably too small.
I got myself a larger size and even they seemed to be pretty neat.
So, very sorry if that was the case.
Your Dad said he was coming over to visit you too, and wanted to see something of Prague.
I gave him Robert's (old, unfortunately), address; I don't know if contact has been made, or if Charley has got somewhere to stay.
The chief purpose of this letter is actually to ask you a favour.
Under Chambers's auspices I've prepared a questionnaire on (intermediate) learners' dictionaries, along with a piece of sample text and a batch of parallel extracts from four other publishers' dictionaries of about the same level, and I'd be ever so grateful if I could send you about 10 of these sets to distribute amongst fellow teachers and some of the students, as you think fit; and of course I'd be pleased if you'd answer one yourself.
They won't take more than an hour to fill in, and might be quite fun to to.
I suppose this is more of a forewarning than a request for permission, as I was going to send them this week anyway.
I do hope this will be OK.
I'll work out some way of sending you the money for the return postage.
I'm sending Robert 10 questionnaires as well.
I think the response from Czech learners and their teachers should be useful.
I do hope you're OK in health and that it's not intolerably cold in Brno.
Here it's been trying to snow all day.
Your grandparents seem to be fairly cheerful — Ken was on the phone last night, about some editing procedures connected with a project he's recently undertaken.
I'll be in contact again very soon; meanwhile, lots of love from
Godmother Anne
28/2/93
Dear Robert
This is to tell you that I hope to send you about 10 questionnaires on ELT dictionaries (intermediate rather than advanced) this week, for you and whoever else (teachers or students — mixture if possible) might be willing to fill them in.
I'm sending some to Antonia as well.
I'd be very happy if Renata felt like answering one too.
I tried phoning you this lunchtime to ask about the above proposal, but I don't even know if I had the right number, though I got through to it twice; about five different people spoke to me uncomprehendingly, and eventually a man came to the phone and said ‘Bratislava’; I didn't know whether that meant I'd got a Bratislava number, or that you'd gone to Bratislava.
So I gave up.
Anyway, I hope you're still at the same address, and that someone may let us know where you are if you're not.
How about the permissions for doing the translation work?
And are you still going on teaching?
Maybe we'll see you in the summer, but, sadly enough, the firm cancelled the trip to Moscow that Elaine and I were going to take in June, to deliver papers on ELT dictionaries.
I'd hoped to come on to Prague after that.
Did you ever write to John and Agnes?
I did ring Agnes away back in January and thanked her for having you; I was ringing her partly to tell her that, strangely, one of her Hungarian friends from Southampton (called ) is now the computer expert at Chambers, whose services I've been using recently to accomplish the final formatting of my questionnaire and piece of sample text.
John is apparently ‘not seeing Hazers’ any more.
He seems to be not too much upset.
I feel sad, though.
He's doing quite a few weekends on duty, to earn a bit of money.
Next Saturday my Medau friend Camilla and I are each going to swim 100 lengths non-stop (as the ‘Medau Duo’) in the national charity swimming marathon (as you might guess, it's called a ‘swimathon’), so have been collecting sponsors, which is rather more arduous than doing the actual swimming.
If I don't manage to contact you in the next few days, I'll still send these questionnaires in the hope of a splendidly useful response.
I remembered to re-xerox the pencil pictures I did of you and John in 1975, so I enclose them.
The ones I sent previously must still be chez .
lots of love
Mummy
10/4/93
Dear 
MEDAU: ST ANDREW'S HALL
Many thanks for your letter of 17 March.
We are wondering if we could use the hall on the evenings of 26 April, 10 May, and 24 May?
That will be the end of the 1992–93 session, and if possible we'd like to start again in the autumn on (probably) 27 September, continuing till 29 November.
Could I provisionally book the hall for the full day (10.00am–4.00pm) on Sunday 21 November?
You said that it might be possible to get it for £50.
I'd be so grateful if that were still an acceptable fee.
I'll let you know definitely as soon as possible about whether to confirm the booking.
With all good wishes for your help,
10/4/93
Dear Ann
Many thanks for your letter of 20 March.
I'm glad the class was all right on 11 March and especially pleased that things are better for you and Bob; also that there was such good news of your daughter.
I had 2 letters (one about taking some more apparatus sessions) and a cheque from Nan, so must get a reply off to her.
I'll keep you posted about the autumn training — provisionally planned for 20–21 November.
It could be quite a marathon: Saturday in St Andrews (Town Hall) and Sunday in Edinburgh (St Andrew's Hall, just to be confusing).
Transport and beds still to be thought of.
It'll be good fun, though.
Lots of love, and keep well too,
Anne
10/4/93
Dear Rita
Hamish unearthed an undeveloped film the other day, which included photos of Malta taken in 1989.
We thought you'd like this one, taken in Sliema, beside a pub, if I remember rightly.
Looking forward to seeing you this coming weekend,
Love to you both,
Anne
10/4/93
Dear Organizers
Many thanks for your letter of 5 April acknowledging my cheque for £100 for the charities for the benefit of which the Swimathon was run.
I'd hate you to think it was all a ‘donation' from me, and so I enclose my sponsorship form (which I didn't realise I should have posted with the cheque) to show that I had a lot of generous sponsors.
I look forward to receiving the stopwatch.
My swimming partner and I greatly enjoyed taking part in the event.
With best wishes
8/5/93
Dear 
I should like to take part in the epic-reading planned for 26 May if you have some passages available.
Yours
8/5/93
Dear Anita
It was good to get your PC from Öland.
I remember the name Hulterstad rather better than the place.
Apologies for not having been in touch for so long.
I realised from your earlier letter that you might not in fact have yourself read the DNB article on , so I enclose a xerox.
He seems to have been more substantially into astronomy than the evidence had suggested, doesn't he?
But for all that he plays no part in the ancestry of my colleague , on whose behalf I was alerted at the mention of his name.
The tape you sent us has given us a lot of nostalgic pleasure.
Our friend  from Göteborg was much intrigued at the circumstances that brought Hamish and you together in Skye, and commented ‘and a house at Segerstad too — well, well’.
I do hope you and Per and the girls are well, and that work is going satisfactorily for the two of you and studies likewise for them.
The sun-and-moon chart hangs on the kitchen cupboard, where we can consult it.
With very best wishes
Anne
8/5/93
Dear Erik
I expect Hamish will be writing again pretty soon again too, but here I am sitting at the computer anyway, putting off writing a series of begging letters to friends and connections in various educational and other institutions and organizations asking them to submit to Chambers Harrap (as we now are) all partable-with unpublished bumf (memos, minutes, notices, reports, etc, etc) to swell the ‘ephemera’(new stretched meaning) content of the British National Corpus of English.
Which is a long and irrelevant preamble to saying it's an obvious priority, and more congenial, to write to you and acknowledge with warm thanks and much acclamation the copy of Litterära Strövtåg i London , which arrived yesterday and is already much browsed-through.
Splendid pictures, too (Hamish was especially impressed by Verschuier's (-ers's?)
Great Fire).
You must be very pleased with its production and appearance.
It was good to get your last letter with news of all the family.
Here (and in Prague) everything is much as no doubt Hamish represented it when he last wrote.
He may have told you we've now handed over the Nissan Sunny to John and replaced it with a new bright-red Micra (the one with the cuddly toy-car image).
A Chambers colleague remarked on seeing it that it must be like driving around in a Smartie.
So it is, a bit.
Mum continues to be fairly contented in her residential home.
Hamish and I are going over to the Island to see her next weekend.
Lots of love to Birgitta and yourself, and to the boys when you see them, and again thanks for the book,
Anne
20 April 1993  Dear 
Re Private car policy no .
Further to our telephone conversation last week, I am writing to inform you of the changes of circumstances concerning the above policy, which I had completely forgotten to do, and for which I apologize.
The named driver, has now left the UK.
Since she had not been a UK resident for longer than 3 yrs, you had kindly found a policy which charged ‘only' £14 extra.
Perhaps, now, the renewal premium will be less than the £323.00 quoted in your letter?
Please also delete  from my ‘named drivers’, as she has her own car now; I would be grateful if you could replace her with my mother, whose details I believe you hold from previous policies.
If you find a suitable policy that does not specify that all the named drivers should be female, please contact me as I would like to add on , a 26–year old man (with no convictions etc).
However, I know this is unlikely as all-female policies tend to be cheaper.
Sorry for any inconvenience.
Please telephone me if any of this is unclear; my work no. is .
I will be in the office tomorrow (Wednesday 21st) but then not until Monday 26th April.
Yours sincerely
19 April 93  
Dear Amanda
Thank you so very much for a lovely evening on Friday, it really was delightful.
I was deeply impressed at your delicious meal, for I know that it takes a lot of thought and time to put something together so excellently (at least, I know about the thought + time!).
It was nice to meet your properly and get to know the others a bit better.
Some people one never sees outside church-y dos!
Thank you again for inviting me — sorry we had to leave early-ish — we left at 8am on Saturday (yawn!)
Love.
Melanie
26 April '93
Dear Heather,
Thank you so much for all your hard work on my curtains — I am delighted with them.
Enclosed is a cheque for £84–00, as arranged,
I trust you have all had a lovely time on holiday.
I have been in touch with Jeanette; she has found herself a job and seems to be settling down, while hoping for a visit from a certain young man!
very best wishes,
Melanie
19 April '93
Dear Sara,
I'm sorry it's taken me so long to write to you.
Thank you very much indeed for the smelly duck — or should I say scented, it is such a nice smell!— and for the pretty scarf which, you may be surprised to hear, Mark admired when I was wearing it the other day though he hadn't realized it was new and from you!
But you really ‘shouldn't have’— I know you have so many other things on your mind that I would hate to think I was adding to them.
They are lovely presents though, and I am very grateful.
I seem plagued by convoluted sentences today — sorry!
It was lovely to see you again over Easter; I hope in retrospect, that it was a worthwhile trip.
Though they say ‘a change is as good as a rest’ I do agree with you that one needs both in order to end up feeling refreshed.
Thank you for your letter also; I was so terribly sorry to hear about Marbles' demise — such a characterful friend — and I felt for you so much.
I do hope that the proverbial ‘silver lining’ becomes more apparent for you now; surely it's about time.
I am so glad that you came north over Easter, and I hope it won't be too long before we can get to know each other a little better.
Much love,
Melanie
19th April 1993
Dear Susannah,
It was about three months ago that my aunt,, gave me your address.
I can't believe how long it's taken me to get in touch with you.
Anyway, I just thought I'd write to suggest that we meet up at some point; I do enjoy trying to get to know some of my cousins, especially when they're not hundreds of miles away.
I do hope you don't think this is  presumptuous , and I expect you are very busy generally, but perhaps you and your husband would like to come here for supper one evening, or we could go out somewhere, or if it's easier, I could drop in to you one evening for a short time for a chat.
We may have met a long time ago at Rotherfield when I was on a weekend outing from school, but I wouldn't expect you to remember — it was at least 10 years ago and I can't imagine I was a memorable schoolgirl!
I am going to be away Thurs–Sun this week (Roland, my brother, is getting married and I'm to be bridesmaid) but perhaps you wouldn't mind giving me a ring sometime?
My number is at the top of the page, and my work number is .
I am a reference editor at Chambers Harrap (the publishers).
Hope to see you soon,
Yours sincerely,
Melanie
19/4/93
Dearest Jeanette,
I'm afraid my intentions don't always match my actions, but I assure you I do think of you far, far more than I put pen to paper!
Various things enclosed; a not very good pic of my lovely curtains; some photos taken in Hyde Park, London which aren't much good either, so feel free to cut them up or chuck them!
Laura Ashley send you various brochures and things like that, eg invitation to 40th anniversary tea etc — I would really rather they didn't.
Perhaps you could write to arrange for your name and account to be cancelled, and £10 to be returned to your somehow?
I opened the ‘Laura Ashley by Post’ catalogue (couldn't resist it!)— would you like me to send it on?
(It is quite heavy!).
Why do they send you things and not me anyway?
Perhaps I haven't used my a/c card enough.
Things have been stressfully buoyant at Chambers recently — one weekend I worked 13 hours on British Biographies — not my ‘style’ at all.
Anyway, there's a bit of a lull at the moment before I start helping out with the encyclopedic dictionary.
I had hoped to be the editor of a book all on my own at last, but this project is important and so urgent that have been drafted on to help.
Mum, Dad, Roland and Heather all came to stay over the Easter weekend which was really good fun.
Mum had done lots of cooking beforehand so we weren't tied to the kitchen and could spend time doing other things and just sitting around chatting.
The weeding is this Saturday — April 24th.
I did want to lose weight so much for it, but have had very little success so will have to get used to the idea of being the back-end-of-a-bus in comparison to Heather.
She will look stunning — I'll send you photos when I can.
Her dress is princess-line and Edwardian looking in style, and she's wearing the most gorgeous hat too.
Mark & I are driving south on Thursday, and as today's an Edinburgh holiday, it will mean a 2–day working week for one!
We're hoping to say with  on Thursday night, and then Friday & Saturday I will be at Hanbury Manor (what a hardship!), sharing with Heather the first night and Auntie the second.
I have the plumber in at this very moment re-sealing the bath.
I was fed up with the yucky mouldy silicone round the edge and reckoned a proper job should be done on it.
The trouble is, I've been longing to go to the loo for the past hour, and I don't know how long he's going to be!
How's life with you?
I was glad to get your last letter, which sounded so much more cheerful and relaxed than the first.
Any more luck with jobs?
I do hope something comes along soon.
And thank you so much for the beautiful card, the towel and bookmarks.
You have a real talent for giving excellent and thoughtful presents; I was thrilled, thank you.
I was very spoilt on my birthday.
Mark gave me one of Sophie's doorstops — a sleeping fox, and we went down to visit a friend in the Borders with Ethel for support.
When the family arrived for Easter, Mum gave me a  Portmeirion tea set which I love, and Dad had found two dining chairs in an antique shop in Castle Douglas.
The seat covers go very well with the other colours in this room, and the width of the chairs is exactly right to be able to use one at my desk.
Roland gave me a new tennis racquet (which I know he couldn't afford because Moonstone is ‘on the brink’) which is a great improvement on my last one, and an encouragement to get out on court.
Thoroughly spoilt I was!
Weather is not tennis weather, though, cold and damp.
In five weeks only we'll be on our ‘summer’ holiday at Dornie — there will be trouble if it hasn't cheered up by then.
The birch tree outside is only just beginning to look green, but at least it is, I suppose.
We were in Yorkshire this weekend, visiting .
It was excellent fun and a really good chance to catch up with friends I hadn't seen since graduation.
We went to the Bedale Point-to-point in the afternoon, and a ball in the evening.
The evening was really good, but Mark and I rather missed reeling — no comparison to not-very-good disco.
A friend of Rosemary's has been teaching us a few basic ballroom dances — the deal is that we both go to his aerobics classes!
Hope you're well + happy,
Love Melanie
19 April 93
My dearest Grandmum
It's already a fortnight since my birthday — life seems to get ‘hecticker’ and ‘hecticker’.
Thank you very much indeed for your card and the £25, with which I have decided to buy some pinking shears, to encourage me to do some dressmaking now that summer is (supposedly) not far away.
I've no idea how much they cost, but whatever's left over will go towards the kitchen scissors — rather mundane I know but one of those things that's not exactly necessary but once you've got it you can't do without!
Today is an Edinburgh holiday and so I have a day off — a good opportunity to catch up with various things, and the plumber is arriving shortly to re-seal my bath.
I did it myself a while ago but the silicone has gone rather mouldy and I thought he would make a better job!
The windows have been cleaned for the first time in a year, and what with my contact lenses (which I've had since Christmas), the view is much improved.
Jeanette's friend eventually produced the curtains for the sitting room, and I am very pleased with them (sorry if I've already told you that — it's exciting to me anyway!).
Sadly funds are lacking to do very much else at the moment.
I do hope you'll come and see me again in Edinburgh.
I may even have redecorated the sitting room by then!
Mark and I went down to Yorkshire on Saturday morning to stay with an old University friend of mine and to go to the Bedale Point-to-Point with a group of people.
Luckily it didn't rain, though we did get a bit cold, and it was a fun day.
In the evening we all got dressed up to go to a ball nearby, and over dinner I had a good chance to catch up with some friends I hadn't seen for years, and meet various husbands too!
I've lost count of the number of weddings happening this year — hence the need to do some dressmaking.
I can't always wear the same outfit!
I am so pleased with the Elna; I began making my bedroom curtains some time ago, but had to steel myself and put them away, as the ‘British Biographies’ book was exerting great pressure to keep to its schedule and I had to work on it in much of my spare time.
Maybe I'll get them out this afternoon.
My next project at work is to help out with a huge encyclopedic dictionary project which has to be completed by next January.
My boss, Min, and I, and one other editor, will take on the ‘people’ at the dictionary and write or condense tiny biographies of them, as well as short descriptions of ‘institutions’, which includes buildings, works of art, monuments, battles etc.
I hope the work will be interesting, I was a bit disappointed not to have the chance to tackle my own book as the main editor at last but of course one doesn't want to rock the boat too much — there are too many people who'd happily fill my shoes.
Easter was a really full time.
I was so glad that the ‘family’ came to stay with me for a change.
I'd hoped it would be a good break for Roland and Heather, and I think it was, but I haven't heard their retrospective verdict yet.
Both were under a lot of stress I think — both with the build-up to the wedding and with the uncertainty of Moonstone's future.
If the company ‘goes under’, I fear R will regard the years he has spent on it as wasted , it seems to be a feature of modern society that we tend to judge who we are and what we've achieved, even what success is , by our work above everything else.
Undoubtedly work is necessary and important but surely not to be used as a yardstick for everything…
Mum had been so kind and prepared lots of meals for us all so there wasn't much in the kitchen to be done at the time.
I was very grateful, the previous week hadn't allowed me any time to shop, let alone cook?
Ethel's Wood, about an hour's drive away.
We had tea there and admired 100s of beautiful primroses, and hid little eggs for Roger Simpson's (the rector) children who were to arrive later on.
Pippa and , and Mark and his mother Sarah came to support, and we all had a good party.
On the Saturday Mum grabbed the opportunity to head for the shops, while the rest of us had an interesting time choosing a tennis racquet for Roland to give to me for my birthday — a generous present and already in use.
It was good to spend a few days all together, we visited Falkland Place on Saturday pm, and it was fun to go to St Paul's and St George's to worship on Easter day.
Heather even said it was the most interesting service she'd been too, and I think Mum and Dad lapped up the excitement and atmosphere of celebration in the packed church — a far cry from Dalseattie!
I seem to have been blathering on and on.
Time to go!
I do hope your plans to move are developing smoothly and that you're feeling happy at the whole prospect.
It's certainly exciting for us to think that you will soon be with us more permanently.
What a shame you won't see R + H's marriage (wedding, I mean!) but no doubt we'll fill you in on all the details.
Mark and I are driving south this Thursday — only a 2–day working week for me (whee!).
It will be nice to spend some time with him too — often the week goes by and we hardly have a chance to talk.
Lots and lots of love
Melanie
Dear Jean
I've just found a note to myself saying that you'd like a Harrap's French-English Tin Tin au Pays des Mots — written at Christmas.
I'm so sorry!
I'll get it organized on Monday.
Do hope term has gone quite well and that you're not too tired.
I'll be writing soon to you to beg your help (not too demanding) in a large language-collecting project — consists of sending us any typewritten ‘bumf’ etc. from the school that you'd be happy to let us have.
Don't react yet.
Saw Mum at the w/e — OK in health, but all too easily confused, and constantly obsessed about particular issues — keys, etc.
See you soon?
Love, Anne
I called in on Ruth at lunchtime today and found her sitting up in her wheelchair looking out at the garden and seeming much better and as bright as usual — a nice nurse in attendance.
I'm sure she still likes hearing from everyone, even if telephone conversations are ‘a bit unsatisfactory’.
So I'd say it was pretty good news.
Love, Anne
25/3/93
Judith
Thought you'd like to see the enclosed snippets.
1.
What excellent company you keep in recommending Chambers — not all of them are quite politically correct but I've been after the broadest sweep possible.
2.
My first published letter — in edited and inedited forms.
I think it's a bit of an art — trying to get something that's concise enough to be published whilst covering all the points you want to raise — especially in reply to twits like .
Still, I'll work on it.
3.
I assume you wrote this for the New Staffroom, though you aren't credited.
They aren't very good editors either — probably teachers!
I think our headie would disagree with you on testing — she feels we all abandoned it when the going got tough.
Mind you our school tested anyway so she's a fine one to talk!
I noted your name on Radio 4 this morning & quote in the Scotsman re school trips/accident.
No-one has reported your anarchic views on school boards re: hand grenades get through!
See you
Linda
3/93
Ruth
Thought you ought to see my first published letter — in its edited & unedited versions.
Have pencilled in the 7th shall we go for LeSapt again?
Hopefully if the doctor prescribes me more antibiotics tomorrow then I'll have finished them by then — if not we'll have to rearrange things.
I don't think I could take another night without alcohol!
Look forward to seeing you then
Love
Linda
3/93
Anne
Following our conversation, I thought the enclosed clips may be of interest.
The  article appeared last year in the Times Ed and basically explains why there is no mass boycott this year.
She argues that the nature of the Tests is now so different that we cannot object on the same grounds as each objection has been met.
Basically Tests are to be done as worksheets in the classroom just as any other worksheet and would be done, to see if a child has understood the work taught.
This is probably as far as the government are going to go in changing the Tests and is probably the best compromise we can expect to get.
The other article herewith was in the Times Ed last week and suggests that the Govt. will start to get heavy over the Tests if people  don't comply, and especially so if they are antagonistic.
Certainly if they are so far changed as Gillespie suggests, I don't have a problem with it.
We therefore have a bit of a dilemma.
As you thought, Mrs. Jack has not been able to state openly that a parent can withdraw a child if they so wish as it would be seen, like Tayside, to undermine ‘the consensual approach’.
As a Board though there is nothing to stop us stating the option in our Newsletter, but I think we have to be very careful of the tone and wording that we use.
We must simply be seen to be stating a right and not advising or recommending anything.
I think also that we should make clear that the nature of the Tests this year is understood to be less threatening etc. etc.
I have checked that it still remains a right and that it is OK to withdraw.
(In fact 4 requests have been received so far).
If I manage to work out anything this lunchtime, I'll enclose it herewith — in the meantime this is all I've done for the Newsletter so far.
It'll get better I hope.
Give me a ring at work if you like ()
Speak to you soon.
Linda
4/93
Arrangements on National Testing
As you will know, the original proposals for National Testing of P4 and P7 pupils have been changed somewhat since last year.
Pupils will now be tested when they are deemed to have moved from one stage to another and the teacher will be free to determine when this is the case.
There will not therefore be testing on specific days, or just for P4 and P7 groups, but Testing can apply to any class at any time.
It is understood that the Tests can be done as worksheets by a group whilst the teacher is working with other children in the class.
There is no requirement that the teacher devotes her attention solely to the group being tested.
Schools in Lothian have been asked to commence Testing in the summer term but only have to test one group in each class in either Language  or Mathematics, if that class has a group which is deemed to be moving from one stage to the next.
Corstorphine has chosen to test in Mathematics only.
Your child may or may not be tested depending on whether he or she is part of a group progressing from one stage to another.
The situation then is quite different from last year when many parents boycotted the Tests.
Whilst no such boycott is due to happen this year, Testing is not compulsory and parents would still be able to withdraw their children if they so wished.
Alan
Here's the celibacy piece.
Hope it's OK.
R
Juice
Jam
Honey
 Marmalade 
Tinned Fruit
Tip Top
Carnation M
Crisps
Butcher Meat
Toilet Rolls
Jiff
Squeezy
Soap
Dish Cloths
Scouring Pads
Eggs
Butter Beans
Lentils
Split Peas
Rice
Tinned Ham
Sauce
Salt
Pepper
Sugar
Icing Sugar
Caster Sugar
 Sultanas 
Currants
Porridge
 Cereal 
Vegetables:
Leeks
Sprouts
Cabbage
Carrots
Onions
Tomatoes
Lettuce
Apples
Oranges
Beans
Corn (tin)
Tea
Coffee
Butter
Margarine
Flora
Cheese
Cream
 Yoghurt 
Milk
Bacon
Pkt Ham
Pie
Biscuits
Snowballs
Bread
Cakes/Pancakes
Frozen food:
Peas
Mixed Veg
Fritters
Ice Cream
 Strudel etc