

Enjoy a Mediterranean-style diet, with lots of olive oil, salads, pasta, grains and fresh bread and you could be helping to reduce your risk of cancer and heart disease.
That's the latest, very positive message from the World Health Organisation (see p.80) and a deliciously painless way to ensure a healthy diet.
It certainly makes a change from all the ‘what-not-to-eat’ diet advice that we are usually given.
Many of us are already cutting down on red meat, partly for health reasons but also because of, as Audrey Eyton explains (see p.56), the growing awareness that animals being farmed intensively are neither happy nor tasty.
As we discover the horrors of factory farming, there is a swing to traditional rearing which I feel really does produce better tasting meat that is worth paying extra.
More and more teenagers are becoming vegetarian for those reasons.
If you are having difficulty cooking for everyone in the family, try Roseyne Masselin's recipes (see p.70); they are also Mediterranean in style and perfect for today's lifestyle.
Someone who cares passionately for the quality of his ingredients is top chef Raymond Blanc.
He grows much of his own fruit, vegetables and herbs for his restaurant.
Deputy editor Janette Marshall went to interview him recently (see p.36) and found herself a late arrival at his impromptu wedding breakfast.
We thank Raymond and his bride Koti for not cancelling us at the last minute, and allowing BBC Good Food to share in their excitement.
PS.
For back issues, call (0424) 851896.
NEWS
What's cooking
The very latest products on the market, plus news, views and hints
BANGERS NOT TRASH
Remember what a real sausage tastes like?
Ronald Nicosia makes Continental-style sausages (like the Tex-Mex chilli variety here) for Bangers Galore.
Packed with meat (92% min), they are gutsy and flavourful and can be bought at a few outlets in London and Oxfordshire, or direct (no mail order) from Bangers Galore,
HIT THE DEX
A comprehensive 48-page index to BBC Good Food is now available, covering November 1989 to December 1990 inclusive.
Price £1.95, or £1.50 to magazine subscribers.
Send a cheque or PO (payable to Redwood Publishing Ltd) to:BBC Good Food Index,
EASTER LOLLIPOP
Celebrate Easter with chocolate rabbit lollipops from Thorntons, 30p; in other animals shapes too.
The hollow milk chocolate rabbit, below, with white tail, whiskers and eyes, is also from Thorntons; comes in various sizes from 99p-£4.25.
FREE FOR ALL
To enter for any of our free offers, either send postcards with offer details to BBC Good Food ,.
Or ring the numbers linked to the offers: calls prefixed 0839/6 cost 33p/per minute cheap rate, 44p/per minute other times.
Winners will be chosen at random by the end of April.
State if you do not want to receive other material linked to the offer.
ON WITH THE SHOW
Don't forget to visit the first ever BBC Good Food Show, being held alongside the Ideal Home Exhibit at Earls Court, London, on March 21–24.
There will be live demonstrations including a number using British meat at the BBC Good Food Theatre at 3.30pm, Thursday to Saturday, and noon on Sunday, led by different top chefs each day.
Tickets: £2.50 per show from the BBC Good Food stand.
A copy of this magazine could get you free goodies from exhibitors, so bring it along.
LIGHT BULB
Garlic freaks, feel free to indulge your passion!
A Japanese researcher has managed to create a fresh mild garlic that doesn't give you garlic breath.
Get Dr Sakai bulbs at delis or by mail order from:
CALIFORNIA DREAMING
New World wines are winning more and more fans as each year passes.
If you are partial to Californian wine, you could be in luck.
We are giving away 100 half-bottles each of 1985 Rutherford Cabernet Sauvignon and 1988 Dry Sauvignon Blanc, both produced by the highly regarded Beaulieu Vineyard of Napa Valley, California.
The Cabernet Sauvignon has a distinctly blackcurranty flavour and is velvety smooth, while the Sauvignon Blanc is light, dry and refreshing.
To stake your claim to a sip from the Sunshine State, send your details on a postcard to BBC Good Food /Beaulieu Wine Offer (address above) or call by the end of April on (0839) 168103.
NAUGHTY BUT ICE
Undergo the ultimate ice-cream experience with fresh cream ice-cream cakes from Häagen-Daz.
Raspberry Ripple Cake combines vanilla ice-cream, raspberry sorbet, bitter chocolate and fresh raspberries.
It's not cheap at £28, but it's big and all ingredients are natural.
Six varieties, £23-£30, from Häagen- Daz shops.
NOILLY PRAT, NO WORRIES
Noilly Prat, the classic French vermouth, is a delicious aperitif and is also great with fish and shellfish.
It makes a useful addition to cooking too, lending its herby delicacy to dishes as varied as Stilton soup and Hazelnut and orange gâteau.
We have 500 Noilly Prat Creative Entertaining recipe leaflets to give away; write now to BBC Good Food /Noilly Prat Recipes (address on opposite page) or call (0839) 168106.
PUFF FOR PASTRY
Saxby's fresh ready-to-use pastry makes a cook's life a little easier.
We have 1,000 vouchers for a free 500g/1¼lb pack of Saxby's puff or shortcrust pastry and a recipe leaflet.
The voucher can be used at Tesco, Safeway, Waitrose and branches of Sainsbury's.
Write to BBC Good Food /Saxby Pastry Offer (address on p.8) or call (0839) 168105.
MAKE A PARIS CATCH
The Fauchon Food Halls in Paris are the epitome of luxury.
Selfridges now offers the unusual jams, preserves, spices, sauces and other delicacies that have made Fauchon's name.
Among these are a wonderful selection of teas, including blackberry, bitter orange and mango in 25g tins at £1.45, and herbs such as shallot flakes, harissa powder (very hot peppers) and mustard seed, all £1.50.
Available mail order from London Selfridges Food Hall by calling 071–629 1234.
Please note that the prices mentioned here do not include postage and handling.
INCREDIBLY WELL BREAD
Once found in the heart of Soho, Italian breads are now on sale in many supermarkets.
They are usually made with unbleached wheatflour and extra virgin olive oil, and as a result they have a lovely texture and fresh taste.
Above, left to right: Sainsbury's Pane di Olive, studded with whole olives, 92p; Marks & Spencer's fresh moist Ciabatta, 89p (ready to bake, 95p), also available at Waitrose (62p, fruited, 89p); Marks & Spencer's Ciabatta rolls, 52p for six (ready to bake, 95p); Sainsbury's Pane Cioccolato, a chocolate flavoured while bread, 98p; Waitrose La Fornaia Pugliese, a round loaf with a firm texture, 56p.
From selected branches.
GET THE TUBE
The Cadbury's Mini Eggs Tube, 99p, is packed to brimming with speckled eggs in different colours.
Great for treasure hunts and decorating cakes.
ON THE MILKY WAY
Can you tell the difference between long-life skimmed and semi-skimmed milk and their pasteurised equivalents?
And which tastes best?
In a recent tasting, long-life was voted the clear winner, suggesting that is moving beyond its traditional ‘stand by’ position and is on its way to becoming a product that will be chosen for everyday use.
SWEET TALKING
It's all sweetness and light here at BBC Good Food .
We are offering 200 free copies of Sweet Thoughts , by Rosamond Richardson (Martin Books, £9.95), a super selection of delicious dessert recipes using Canderel, a low-calorie sweetener made with Nutrasweet.
Write to BBC Good Food /Canderel Offer (Address on p.8) or call (0839) 168104.
BREATH OF FRESH AIR
The first-ever world symposium on bad breath is to be held this April in Mexico.
Halitosis is estimated to afflict 80 per cent of the world's adult population, and has been cited as a contributory factor in divorce and social isolation.
Dr Rosenberg, head of the Laboratory of Oral Microbiology in Tel Aviv, believes he is now close to finding a cure for this problem.
His ‘halimeter’, which measures bad breath, will be unveiled at the Mexico conference.
Manufacturers of mouth washes and breath fresheners must be holding their breath for the results!
CAKES BY MAIL
Meg Rivers Cakes delivers traditional seed, fruit and Simnel cakes (and more) to your door.
The Festival Cake below costs £18 (incl. p&p) and is packed with sun-dried fruits, cherries, pecan and brazil nuts.
Order by March 22.
GLASS WITH CLASS
Frigoverre glass containers from Spong Housewares come in all shapes and sizes, from £1.75-£5.70.
The have airtight lids, store food in the fridge or freezer, and are microwave safe.
We are giving away 60 sets of one round (15cm/6in) and one rectangular container (13×10cm/5×4in), plus a square jug (1.2 litres/2½ pints).
Write to BBC Good Food /Frigoverre Containers (address on p.8) or call (0839) 168102.
WE'VE GOT IT TAPED
BBC Good Food is available on tape from Talking Newspapers For The Blind,.
This marvellous service provides more than 100 newspapers and magazines on tape, covering every kind of interest.
The annual subscription fee is £8.
CALL CHRISTINE…
…on our new BBC Good Food weekly recipe service.
Christine France will tell you how to cook a different seasonal dish based on the freshest produce available.
Call her on (0836) 40 60 80 — 33p/per minute cheap rate, 44p/per minute at other times.
HOLD THE MAYO!
At last— takeaway sandwiches with flavour that packs a punch!
Marks & Spencer's American-style sandwich range includes Pastrami on Rye with a dynamic edge of American mustard and crunchy dill pickle, or Ham, Cheese, Pepper and Salami with roquette lettuce and vinaigrette dressing on rye.
The fillings are as generous as their Stateside forebears and the rye bread has a nice, chewy texture.
Prices start from £1.29-£1.69.
NORTH NOSH
Hooray for Home Cooking is a cookery show focussing on the specialities of the north-west of England, and takes place on April 6 & 7 at Preston Guild Hall, Lancs.
Ruth Mott, Valentina Harris and Roselyne Masselin will be there, and Derek Cooper will be reporting for BBC Radio 4's The Food Programme .
Contact  
CHOCS AWAY
Bettys By Post delivers super hand-made Belgian chocolate to your door.
Bettys Broody Hen, below, sits on a nest of solid milk chocolate eggs and costs £9.75 (plus p&p).
HOME AND DRY
The ISC Electric Home Food Dehydrator, above, will dry a huge variety of produce, from fruit and vegetables to meat, fish, herbs and spices, at a running cost of just 1.2p per hour.
Dehydration is a brilliant way of preserving food and is particularly useful for foods that don't freeze well, such as tomatoes and strawberries.
ISC is offering a special price to BBC Good Food readers of £99 (inc. delivery); usual price is £150.
Fill in the coupon, right, and send to  or call .
THE RIGHT STUFF
We got it wrong — the International Food and Drink Exhibition at London's Earl's Court in April is only open to the trade and not the public as stated in our Jamaica competition (February issue).
If you want more information about Jamaican food and drink, please send an sae to: Jamaican Food and Drink,.
We apologise for any trouble caused.
Fast Family Fillers
ONE for the POT
Save on energy — and on washing up — with Eve Bletcher's meals that you can cook in just one pot
Chunky fish and pasta soup
Serves 4
4 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, coarsely chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
1 leek, sliced
400g/14oz can chopped tomatoes
100g/4oz penne or rigatoni pasta
150ml/¼ pint dry white wine
1kg/2lb mixed fish, such as cod, hake, eel or halibut, cut into
bite-sized pieces
100g/4oz mussels in their shells
1 green pepper, diced
seasoning
1
Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based pan, then fry the onion and garlic until softened, but not browned.
2
Add the leek, tomatoes and seasoning and simmer for 5 minutes.
Add the pasta, wine, 300ml/½ pint of water and the eel (if using).
Bring to the boil, reduce the heat and simmer for 10 minutes.
3
Add the remaining chunks of fish and cook for 5 minutes.
Scrub the mussels well, remove the hairy ‘beards’ and discard any that remain open.
Add the mussels to the soup and cook for a further 3 minutes.
4
Stir in the green pepper and heat gently.
Serve the soup hot with lots of crusty bread.
Spring chicken
Chop large vegetables if you can't find any tiny spring ones
50g/2 oz butter
1 large onion, sliced
1 garlic clove, crushed
4 chicken joints, halved
2 celery sticks, sliced
225g/8oz baby carrots
225g/8oz baby turnips
450g/1lb new potatoes
400g/14oz can chopped tomatoes
300ml/½ pint chicken stock
2 tbsp tomato purée
100g/4oz French beans
seasoning
4 tbsp chopped fresh parsley, to garnish
1
Melt the butter in a large casserole and fry the onion and garlic for 5 minutes.
Add the chicken and brown on all sides.
2
Add the vegetables (except the beans), stock, tomato purée and seasoning.
Cover and simmer for 40 minutes.
3
Stir in the beans and cook for 10 minutes more.
Garnish with the parsley and serve.
Beef in beer with herb dumplings
2 tbsp olive oil
25g/1oz butter
1kg/2 lb stewing steak, cut into large chunks
2 onions, sliced
25g/1oz plain flour
600ml/1 pint bear or Guinness
350g/12oz button mushrooms
seasoning
2 tbsp; chopped fresh thyme, parsley and oregano to garnish
FOR THE DUMPLINGS
100g/4oz plain flour
½ tsp baking powder
50g/2oz shredded suet
2 tbsp each chopped fresh thyme, parsley and oregano
seasoning
1
Heat the oil and butter in a large, heavy-based pan.
Add the meat and brown on all sides.
2
Add the onions and fry until soft.
Stir in the flour and cook for 1–2 minutes, then add the beer and seasoning.
Stir well, cover and simmer for 1½ hours.
3
For the dumpling, sift the flour, baking powder and seasoning into a bowl.
Stir in the suet, herbs and enough cold water to make a soft dough.
Shape into walnut size balls.
4
Add the mushrooms to the stew, drop in the dumplings and cook until they have risen to the surface and look fluffy.
Sprinkle with chopped herbs and serve at once.
Vegetable and lentil curry
175g/6oz split red lentils
4 tbsp olive oil
2 onions, sliced
2 tsp ground coriander
2 tsp ground turmeric
1 tsp Madras curry paste
2.5cm/1in piece fresh root ginger, finely chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
225g/8oz tomatoes, peeled, seeded and diced
4 carrots, cut into chunks
750ml/1¼ pints vegetable stock
1 tbsp tomato purée
1 small cauliflower, broken into florets
350g/12oz courgettes, sliced
150g/5oz natural yogurt
2 tbsp fresh roughly chopped coriander
seasoning
50g/2oz blanched almonds, toasted, to garnish
1
Soak the lentils in cold water for 30 minutes, then drain.
Heat the oil in a large, heavy-based casserole, add the onions and fry until soft.
Add the spices, curry paste, ginger and garlic and cook, stirring for 2 minutes.
2
Add the tomatoes, carrots and drained lentils and fry for 3–4 minutes.
Add stock, tomato purée and seasoning.
Cover and simmer for 15 minutes.
3
Add the cauliflower and courgettes and cook for a further 5 minutes.
4
Stir in the yogurt and chopped coriander, heat it through without boiling.
Sprinkle with the almonds.
The Chunky fish and pasta soup will be demonstrated on the British Gas stand in the mail hall at the Daily Mail Ideal Home Exhibition from March 14 — April 7.
Cook's Helpline
If you have a culinary query or a tip to share with other readers, Linda Fraser and Janette Marshall want to hear from you.
Culture query
Could you please tell me exactly what smetana is and how do you use it in cooking?
Smetana, like yogurt, is a fermented milk product, but it has a thicker texture and does not separate as much as natural set yogurt.
It is also cultivated by a different type of bacteria to that used as yogurt.
There are two types of smetana — ordinary and creamed — the latter has a slightly higher butterfat content and there are 132 calories per 100g/4oz compared with 120 calories for the ordinary version.
Use smetana exactly as you would use yogurt.
Hard times
Help!
I am having trouble with my fruit cakes!
By the time the inside is done, the outside is overcooked, hard and crisp.
Also, after just one day they turn quite dry and seem almost too stale to eat.
Dry, crisp cakes are often the result of an oven temperature that is too hot.
It particularly happens in convection or fan ovens that circulate dry, hot air around the food in order to cook it faster.
We suggest that you check your oven temperature with a thermometer or set it 10° lower — make sure you check the manufacturer's instructions first as some are already adjusted.
But do allow the cake to cool completely in the tin, covered with a tea towel to keep it moist, then wrap it in foil and keep it tightly wrapped once cut.
Cutting edge
Although my fruit cakes are nice and moist, they crumble easily and are difficult to cut.
What can I do?
Everyone likes a moist cake, but yes, they are difficult to cut.
It is always a good idea to keep cakes for at least a day before cutting them to allow the contents to settle.
Cut cakes with a very sharp, unserrated knife.
Oriental orders
Where can readers like myself who live in remote parts of the country obtain mail order supplies of authentic Chinese ingredients?
Ken Lo's Kitchen stocks a range of canned and dried goods and spices, as well as some equipment, which can be bought by mail order.
Write to: 14 Eccleston Street, London SW1 0NZ; tel: 071–730 7734.
Low fat low-down
My husband has been told that he has high cholesterol.
But I have found the choice of low fat spreads confusing — some are made with added butter, others with vegetable oil.
Which is better?
We are currently trying out four different types.
As your husband has probably been told, he needs to cut down on fat, and on saturated fat in particular, to lower cholesterol levels.
The best types of margarine or low fat spreads are those that are labelled ‘high in polyunsaturates’ and you should use vegetable oil or olive oil in cooking.
There is a wide range available in supermarkets.
Your husband could also try eating bread the continental way — without any spread.
See our Health Matters feature on page 80 for more information.
Fatal fruit?
My mum has a passion fruit plant and it has grown for the first time.
But someone told me that it is not the same as the passion fruit on sale at the shops and that the fruits are poisonous.
If they are edible, how can we use them?
Our sister publication BBC Gardeners' World tells us that you can eat the fruit from your passion flower, but it will be rather seedy and not particularly palatable.
This is because it is from the ornamental plant passiflora caerulea .
To grow a passion flower for edible fruits, you must sow the seed from a shop-brought passion fruit, but it will need the warmth of a greenhouse or conservatory and plenty of space.
The fruits available in shops are the passiflora edulis and passiflora quadrangularis .
If you have a bumper crop, you can make ice-creams and sorbets, or use them in sauces and fruit salads, soufflés and mousses or as toppings for cheesecakes.
Cheesed off
I want to use fromage frais and cottage cheese, but I am allergic to cow's milk.
Are there any made from goat's or sheep's milk?
Yes, there are quite a few.
The Cheesemaker's Association stocks a directory,The On-Farm Cheesemakers of England , which costs £7.50 including p&p; available from .
Or call  to find a local stockist.
Tomato teaser
What are sun-dried tomatoes?
I've tried numerous shops, but no-one has heard of them.
As the name suggests, the tomatoes are dried in the sun to make them dehydrated like a  dried fruit.
They are sold in packets or dressed in oil in jars, and are available from delicatessens and health food shops.
Some supermarkets sell them and you may find them in food halls.
Cold war
I wonder how many readers realise that new regulations from the Department of Health might make certain foods less available.
I refuse to sell refrigerated Brie, so when the regulations come into force that state food has to be refrigerated from manufacture to sale, it will disappear from my shop.
The insistence on refrigeration is a ludicrous over-reaction to food scares, and it will inevitably mean the closure of small businesses concerned with bringing good natural food to the consumer.
Chaumes is a pale, succulent cheese made in the Dordogne, an area of France famed for its excellent food and wine.
It has a rich nutty flavour and a full bodied bouquet.
We have a portion to give away for each reader's letter we print.
Write to: We welcome all your letters but are unable to reply to readers individually.
Books
Food for thought
You've got £30 to spend and 2½ hours cooking time: how do you make a three course meal for four within these constraints?
MasterChef 1990 (BBC Books, £7.99) contains all the recipes produced by contestants in the last MasterChef television series to fit that very bill.
And inspiring reading they make, too.
Alsace is one of France's best-kept secrets (as Jill Goolden reveals in her wine feature on page 76).
Like the dialect and culture of the region, the food is an intriguing combination of German and French, very well reflected in Sue Style's recipe choice in her book A Taste of Alsace (Pavilion Books, £15.99).
And to help you, if you are inspired to visit the area, the book features a number of Alsace's best charcutieres, cheese-makers, bakers, restaurants and sommeliers.
If you enjoy a whodunnit, you'll lap up Janet Laurence's Hotel Morgue (Macmillan, £12.99).
Her murder-solving cook Darina Lisle discovers more intrigue when she takes a job at a dying country house hotel that turns out to be a hotbed of sex and mystery.
But the venture threatens her romance with Detective sergeant William Pigram.
Any lack of elegance in the prose is made up with the gripping action.
Italians are renowned for their love of family gatherings and good home-cooked food.
In Valentina's Italian Family Feast (Conran Octopus, £15.99), TV favourite Valentina Harris takes us on a tour of Italy and introduces us to the food served by her family at parties and other celebrations.
Includes mouthwatering pictures of the finished food and snaps of behind-the-scenes preparation.
A new slant on ever-popular Italian food can be found in Sicilian Food by Mary Taylor Simeti (Jill Norman, £16.99).
It traces the ingredients that have gone into the melting pot to become Sicilian cuisine, right back to the ancient Greeks, Arabs and Normans.
Recipes are peppered throughout this fascinating historical survey, but while many of the dishes are delicious, Simeti (an American married to a Sicilian) admits that some are of more historical than culinary interest.
Anyone considering switching to a vegan diet (which eschews all animal produce) would do well to read Vegan Nutrition by Gill Langley for The Vegan Society (£6.20 incl p&p from the society at St Leonards on Sea, East Sussex TN37 7AA).
The book covers all the elementary rules (especially important for infants and young children) that should be followed to remain healthy on a vegan diet.
Sainsbury's cookbooks are generally renowned for being good value for money and The Cooking of Russia by Karen Craig and Seva Novgorodsev (£1.25) is no exception.
The book gives a basic introduction to Russia's best-known dishes, with recipes gathered from family and friends across the whole country and all illustrated in full colour.
Recipes include pirogi and koulebiaca (pies and pastries),blinis (pancakes), plus soups, meat, fish, vegetable dishes, desserts and special Easter bakes.
Running a restaurant is a dream for many people.
To make sure it doesn't turn into a nightmare, Leith's Guide to Setting up and Running a Restaurant (Merehurst, £12.95) is essential reading.
Author Martin Wood covers all aspects of the business, from planning, design, staff, marketing and finance to the correct way to grip utensils for spoon and fork service.
He is well qualified for the task, as he lectures on the subject at Leith's School of Food and Wine in London and has practical experience as managers of restaurants in Britain, the Caribbean and America.
Integrating flowers, fruit and vegetables in an attractive way sounds impossible, but Geoff Hamilton shows how it can be done in The Ornamental Kitchen Garden (BBC Books, £15.95).
‘All this, with the bonus of an organic approach, makes it one of the most original books on gardening that I've seen in a long time,’ says our kitchen garden correspondent, Adam Pasco.
Would-be cooks note that The 1991 Guide to Cooking Schools (Shaw, £5.95 incl. p+p) details more than 300 cookery schools in 21 countries, and is available from Books for Cooks; tel: 071–221 1992.
SEASONAL EATING
renaissance lamb
Spring into action with tasty and tender lamb.
Linda Fraser looks at some older traditions and newer trends in rearing and preparing this popular meat.
Lamb has always been associated with springtime — it features in the Jewish Passover and Christian, Greek and Russian Easter festivals.
The tastiest lamb comes from animals that have been grazing, but are not yet fully grown — about 10 months old.
However, much younger and very tender spring lamb traditionally comes into the shops for the Easter weekend.
This sweet-tasting, open-textured meat with its fine, white fat needs to be hung for only a couple of days, so it remains quite pink.
Ieuan Edwards of the High Street, Conwy, Gwent, one of the Q Guild of Butchers — a group of independent butchers with their own quality standards — is enthusiastic about his local Welsh spring lamb.
He sells lean, versatile cuts that are ready to cook, easy to carve and with little wastage.
New cuts
Boning large joints means some fat can be removed and the meat rolled into neat shapes, and these are often sold ready stuffed and may be sliced into cutlets.
Smaller boneless lamb cuts include best end neck fillets and steaks from the leg or loin.
Cubed boneless lamb is perfect for kebabs and casseroles, and lamb mince can be used for burgers, Shepherd's pie and Moussaka.
On the mutton
Until quite recently, meat from lambs under two years old was considered pale and tasteless so mutton (a darker meat) was preferred, even though it required slower cooking.
Nowadays, however, it is almost impossible to get hold of it.
Birth control
Reared outside and fed on good pasture, lamb has a fine, fragrant flavour.
In recent years, however, there has been a move towards more intensive farming: altering the lambing season so they are born at different times of the year; bringing lambs indoors and using special feed to make them grow bigger.
Good tradition
Traditionally reared animals grow more slowly than those reared under intensive farming conditions — they are therefore more mature and are hung for two or three weeks to bring out the flavour.
A few farmers have adhered to or returned to more traditional methods of farming.
Anne Petch, who runs Heal Farm in Devon, began producing and selling ‘naturally reared’ meat in 1979 to meet growing demand for hormone-free produce.
Along with conventional breeds of lamb, she also rears primitive breeds of that have a stronger flavour.
Last autumn, for the first time, she had mutton from two-year-old sheep.
Heal Farm delivers all types of meat and meat products — from lamb burgers to ready-marinated chunks for casseroles.
For more information, call (07695) 2077/4341.
Real thing
Another company that uses traditional farming methods is The Real Meat Company which has shops in Bath, and Chelsea and St John's Wood, London, as well as a national home delivery service.
For further information, call (0895) 40436/40060.
Mint is a traditional addition to Easter Sunday lunch.
Avoid vinegary mint sauce and serve a home-made sauce instead.
Cook a few tart apples along with a sprig or two of mint and strain through a fine sieve.
Fresh mint is also good finely chopped and sprinkled over buttery new potatoes or peas.
Add mint leaves to stuffing for shoulder of lamb or mix with other chopped herbs and breadcrumbs to make a crunchy crust on the roast (see the recipe for Herby roast lamb on the next page).
There are more than 600 varieties of mint which interbreed so readily that it can be hard to tell them apart.
A few varieties of mint taste of other things — there's lemon mint with smooth, pale green leaves, and apple mint with bright green, slightly hairy leaves.
Both varieties make lovely tea — just infuse a handful of leaves in boiling water.
Only organic
Traditionally reared organic lamb, farmed on land entirely free from artificial chemicals, is harder to find.
However, you can get organic lamb, along with a huge range of other organic produce, from Ian Miller's farm shop on Jamesfield Farm, Newburgh, Fife, which provides  a full, nationwide delivery service.
Call (0738) 85498.
New world lamb
Lamb from New Zealand is usually sold frozen, and is cut while still frozen into cubes, chops and cutlets.
However, Marks & Spencer imports fresh New Zealand lamb during the winter months to fill the gap in the British lamb season.
Off the shelf
Many supermarkets now sell naturally produced lamb.
Sainsbury's Tenderlean Lamb is labelled ‘naturally produced’ and it comes from selected farms.
Safeway was the first big store to sell organically farmed meat, and in June last year it introduced lamb to the range.
Supplies are still limited, despite the growing demand, and it is only available from selected stores.
Herby roast lamb
2kg/4lb leg of lamb
2 garlic cloves, in slivers
50g/2oz butter, softened
100g/4oz fresh breadcrumbs
4 tbsp chopped fresh herbs
1 tbsp plain flour
450 ml/¾ pint lamb stock
seasoning
1
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas.
Make small slits all over the lamb and insert the garlic, then rub the lamb with the butter.
2
Mix breadcrumbs and herbs and press onto the lamb.
Place on a rack in a roasting tin and cook for 2 — 2½ hours.
3
Lift out and keep warm.
Skim the fat from the juices, stir in flour and cook for 1 minute.
4
Gradually stir in the stock and cook until thickened.
Season to taste, strain into a sauce boat and serve.
Vegetables
Avocados: peel and half, cover with a tomato sauce and bake at 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 15 minutes.
Carrots: sweet baby carrots should be in the shops now.
Scrub and steam until tender.
Toss with butter and mint.
Jerusalem artichokes: choose the least knobbly ones, peel and parboil, then slice and fry in groundnut oil with crushed cardamom seeds until golden.
New potatoes: Jersey Royals are in the shops now.
Peppers: home-grown supplies appear in the shops this month.
For a salad, grill whole peppers until the skins turn black, then pop them (still hot) into a polythene bag, tie tightly and leave for 5 minutes.
Scrape off the skin, rinse under running water and slice.
Marinate in a light French dressing for 1 hour.
Watercress: make use of homegrown crops with a free recipe booklet.
Send an A5 sae to:My Watercress Book , The Watercress Association, Agriculture Hse, London SW1 7NJ.
Fruit
Grapes: seedless varieties, such as Thompson and Glame are ideal with cheese.
Mangoes: choose unwrinkled fruit with ‘gives’ slightly when squeezed gently.
Cube for fruit salad with other exotic fruit.
Passion fruit: eat pulp straight from the fruit or drizzle over ice-cream or sorbets.
Rhubarb: outdoor stalks are in now — great for jam.
Meat
Turkey livers: for pâté, fry livers in butter with chopped onion, garlic and thyme.
Season and add 2 tbsp each of sherry and cream; process smooth, then chill.
Fish
Conger eel: buy cutlets.
Fry in olive oil with lots of garlic and parsley until just cooked.
Cooper's Column
If we weren't so enamoured with fresh food images, we might get better quality, argues Derek Cooper
Last Christmas, Mr Green of Ickenham was given a hamper containing a sultana cake that was made, according to the wrapper, by the Yorkshire Farm Bakery.
His wife Betty wasn't taken by the cake at all; she wrote and told me that she didn't find the flavour to her taste.
She checked the ingredients.
‘There were some items I certainly wouldn't put in my sultana cake.
The last two E numbers were too much and the rest of the cake went into the bin.’
Mrs Green also sent me the cardboard box in which the gift had come and, curious to find out more about the cake's origins, I rang the Yorkshire Farm Bakery.
It turned out that it wasn't sited in farming country but in Main Street, Hull.
‘How can you have a ‘farm’ bakery in the centre of huge town?’
I asked Charles Arnett, one of the two brothers who run the company.
‘When we started in 1983, the image of the old farmer's wife at the stove was what we had in mind,’ Charles explained.
His family, he told me, had been in the bakery business for nearly 50 years since his grandmother started selling cakes from her front room.
‘Baking as it used to be’ the cake's cardboard wrapper proudly claimed, but the ingredients seemed more in tune with modern technology than the farmhouse kitchen.
A book of traditional recipes compiled by the Yorkshire Federation of Women's Institutes in 1927 reveals that sultana cakes in those days called for butter, flour, eggs, sultanas and sugar with a dash of baking soda.
But the list of ingredients in the cake given to the Greens was far more complex.
What were they all doing there, I wondered?
Charles' brother, John Arnett, pointed out that the main ingredients — wheatflour, sugar, sultanas and whole egg — couldn't have been more traditional.
But good old butter was replaced by what the label described as ‘vegetable and animal fat’.
‘Why?’
I asked.
‘In our top range of bakery products,’ said John, ‘we don't use animal fat because the manufacturers can't guarantee that doesn't include fish oil.’
Butter also presented problems far too complicated for mass production.
Then came glucose syrup and soya flour.
‘That's a very nutritious, natural ingredient, what we call an enriching agent.’
Then came rice flour.
What was that for?
‘It makes the cake less liable to crumble.’
There was glycerine as well as the whey powder and starch which all added their individual contribution to the success and shelf-life of the cake.
And then we came to the flavourings.
‘These are all perfectly natural,’ said John, ‘what we call nature-identical.
We use vanilla, almond and butter flavours.’
At the end of the list of ingredients came the contentious E numbers which had annoyed Mrs Green.
E104 is quinoline yellow, which is synthetic coal tar dye, and is banned in Norway, the United States, Australia and Japan, but perfectly legal here.
It's an additive that the Hyperactive Children's Support Group recommends eliminating from the diet of susceptible children.
Another ingredient was E110, an azo dye known as sunset yellow, which is now banned in both Norway and Finland.
John Arnett has some good news about these controversial dyes.
‘We're in the process of replacing them with beta-carotene and the packaging will be changed to indicate that.’
When tartrazine was receiving a bad press a few years ago, the Arnett brothers decided to stop using artificial colours altogether, but the outcome was far from positive.
‘When we produced cakes which weren't coloured yellow, our sales dropped by half.
We put back the colours and the sales went up again.’
The food industry knows from long experience that shoppers don't act rationally.
As long as people want to buy cakes which suggest that an old lady wearing a mob-cap is baking them in a Victorian farmhouse, the food firms will continue with dotty deceptions which add nothing to the nutritional value of our food.
If we'll only buy highly coloured food, we make it difficult for the industry to eliminate the additives which provide them.
It's a two way contract; if we don't play our part responsibly, it is virtually impossible for firms to produce the good honest food we say we want.
Derek Cooper, writer and broadcaster, has conducted a 10- year campaign for good food (and supplied information on less desirable ingredients and practices) on Radio 4's The Food Programme
Competition
THE PERFECT CHOCOLATE CHOICE
Cadbury's chocolate is a taste of sheer luxury.
So chocs away to win a set of classic china, glass and cutlery, a chocolate goodies selection and a book of dreamy recipes
Whether you're entertaining the family, arranging a special celebration, or planning a candlelit dinner for two, here's the perfect opportunity to win a table setting to enhance the most sumptuous spread.
Dinner parties will never be the same again.
The lucky first prize winner will receive a classic Crown Derby Cloisonne design eight-piece dinner service, with soup bowls, serving dishes and a coffee service, a smart 84-piece canteen of Viners silver plated cutlery, plus 16 wine glasses, eight tumblers and a water jug from Royal Doulton crystal.
Eight second prize winners will receive a Minton fine china tea service (pictured opposite, below left).
All prize winners will receive a copy of the new Cadbury cookery book The Taste of Chocolate and super selection of Cadbury confectionery.
150 runners up will receive a copy of The Taste of Chocolate , a super selection of Cadbury confectionery and Cadbury's Milk Tray chocolates.
Scrumptious slice
375g/13oz puff pastry
225g/8oz marzipan
75g/3oz glacé cherries
75g/3oz desiccated coconut
2 egg whites, lightly beaten
8 Cadbury's Flake from the family size box
caster sugar
1
Preheat the oven to 230C/450F/Gas 8.
Roll pastry out to a 25×30cm/10×12in rectangle.
Roll out the marzipan to a slightly smaller rectangle and lay it on top of pastry.
2
Chop the cherries, mix with the coconut and enough egg white to bind.
Spread over the marzipan and lay the Flake in pairs down the centre.
3
Dampen the pastry edges, seal together lengthwise and then seal both ends.
Lift on to a greased baking sheet, join side down, brush with egg white and sprinkle with sugar.
4
Mark diagonal lines on top.
Bake for about 15 minutes until golden brown.
Moonlight magic
FOR THE BASE
100g/4oz bar Cadbury's Bournville chocolate
75g/3oz butter
1 tsp dry instant coffee
1 tsp Cadbury's Bournville cocoa, sifted
1–2 tbsp Marsala or sherry
3 eggs, separated
75g/3oz ground almonds
75g/3oz caster sugar
FOR THE SYRUP
1 tbsp caster sugar
2 tbsp Marsala or sherry
FOR THE TOPPING
4 egg yolks
4 tbsp Marsala or sherry
300ml/ ½ pint whipping cream
2 tbsp icing sugar, sifted
2 tbsp Cadbury's Bournville cocoa, sifted
1
Preheat the oven to 170C/325F/Gas 3.
Melt chocolate with butter, coffee, cocoa and wine.
Beat in yolks and almonds.
Whisk egg whites stiffly and fold in the chocolate mixture and sugar.
2
Spoon into a lightly greased 20cm/8in round, loose-based cake tin.
Bake for about 50 minutes.
Cool for about 10 minutes before removing from tin.
Clean tin and put back base.
3
Bring the syrup ingredients to the boil with one tablespoon of water.
Pour evenly over base.
4
Whisk yolks, wine, cream and sugar until very thick.
Pour over base and freeze overnight.
5
Release dessert from the tin, sprinkle with cocoa and draw lines with a skewer.
Mocha chocolate mousse
50g/2oz Cadbury's Bournville chocolate, grated
2 tsp dry instant coffee
2 egg whites
50g/2oz caster sugar
1
Reserve some chocolate for decoration.
Melt remainder with the coffee and one tablespoon of water in a bowl over hot water.
2
Whisk the egg whites stiffly, add half the sugar and whisk until stiff again; fold in the remaining sugar, then the chocolate mixture.
Divide into two glasses, sprinkle with chocolate and chill well.
How to enter
All you have to do is decide which of the puddings on these pages from Cadbury's The Taste of Chocolate would be the perfect ending to each of the following menus.
1.
A romantic meal for two.
2.
A celebration dinner party.
3.
An Easter Sunday lunch.
Then use the coupon on the right to write your answers and personal details.
Or you can enter by calling (0839) 168 108.
The competition closing date is April 30, 1991.
A taste of Cyprus
Gilli Davies invites you to sample the splendour and simplicity of authentic Cypriot cooking
Cookery writer and teacher Gilli Davies has appeared regularly on both television and radio.
Her first book Lamb, Leeks and Laverbread explored the delights of Welsh food, and it had just been published when her husband, a British army officer, was offered a two-year posting in Cyprus.
Gilli went with him, and during their stay on the island she developed a close relationship with its easy-going inhabitants.
This provided her with the ideal opportunity to research and write a book about the local food, which resulted in the publication of The Taste of Cyprus (Interworld Publications, £5.95), an enjoyable look at seasonal Cypriot cooking.
While researching the island's past, Gilli discovered culinary traditions which date back to the Ancient Greeks.
Other races as varied as the Persians, Egyptians, Venetians and even the Crusaders brought their influences to Cypriot food when their armies invaded the tiny island.
Intrigued by the Cypriots' intense pride in their local cuisine, Gilli encountered great enthusiasm for food wherever she went.
Everyone, from stall holders to waiters, was eager to provide recipes and tips.
And they all insisted that their recipe was the definitive version.
On what is this pride and enthusiasm based?
Cypriot food is, above all, fresh.
Very little produce is imported, and with the restrictions imposed by a hot climate, meals are based on indigenous ingredients.
Grapes, almonds, olives, citrus fruit and pulses feature in local recipes.
Fish is very popular and it is still preserved and smoked by traditional methods.
Cypriots also have countless ways of preparing the wealth of fresh vegetables, salad stuffs and herbs which are freely available.
In order to prepare Cypriot food in this country, you will find many ingredients are already in common use.
For more specialised ingredients, such as pickled vine leaves or halloumi cheese, try Cypriot or Greek delicatessens and greengrocers.
Pourgouri pilafi (Cracked wheat pilaf)
The Arabs call it burghul; to a Cypriot it is pourgouri, and to us — cracked wheat or bulghar.
The grain from hulled wheat is steamed until partly cooked, then it is dried before being ground.
Pourgouri is available in fine and coarse grades.
Since the Turks ruled the eastern Mediterranean during the days of the Ottoman Empire, pourgouri has been a vital part of the Levantine diet.
It is far more popular than rice or pasta, and is an ingredient which is an essential item in every Cypriot store cupboard.
This may not appear to be a splendid dish, but its star-rating qualities are in its simplicity.
Always serve Pourgouri pilafi with lemon wedges and lots of thick natural yogurt.
2 tbsp olive oil
1 medium onion, finely sliced
2 medium tomatoes, peeled and sliced
25g/1oz vermicelli
225g/8oz pourgouri or bulghar (cracked wheat)
300ml/ ½ pint chicken stock
seasoning
1
Heat the oil in a heavy-based casserole and sauté the onion and tomatoes until the onion softens, but doesn't brown.
2
Stir in the vermicelli, breaking it up with your hands.
Continue to fry with the onion for a couple of minutes until it begins to absorb the oil.
3
Rinse the pourgouri or bulghar under the sold tap, then add to the casserole.
4
Add chicken stock and seasoning.
Cover and simmer gently for 8–10 minutes or until all of the stock is absorbed.
5
Leave the pilafi to stand for 5 minutes before serving.
Fork through at the last minute.
Souvla (Barbecued lamb)
The high days and holidays in Cyprus are celebrated whenever possible with a colourful barbecue.
Souvla will be the order of the day — large chunks of lamb, marinated and seasoned with herbs, wine, oil and salt, are threaded onto the spit and cooked until very tender.
1.5kg/3lb lamb, cut into chunks, each on the bone
200ml/7fl oz dry red or white wine
3 tbsp sunflower oil or olive oil
4 bay leaves
1 large onion, finely chopped
1 tbsp chopped fresh rigani,(oregano), thyme and rosemary or basil
2 tsp salt
freshly ground black pepper
1
Put the chunks of lamb into a large bowl and add all the remaining ingredients.
Mix well and leave it to marinate for at least 2 hours.
2
Thread the meat onto large skewers and grill over a gentle heat for about an hour, turning every 10 minutes, basting with the marinade at the same time.
Avgolemono (Egg and lemon soup)
This delicious Greek soup is popular all over the eastern Mediterranean.
In Cyprus, it is served on Easter morning to break the long Lent fast.
With its clever combination of egg and lemon, it has a pleasant, but slightly tart flavour.
1.2 litres/2 pints well flavoured chicken stock
50g/2oz rice
2 eggs
juice of 1–2 lemons
seasoning
2 tbsp chopped fresh parsley or chives, to garnish
1
In a large pan bring the chicken stock to the boil.
Add the rice and simmer until the rice is cooked.
Remove from the heat and allow the soup to cool down a .
2
Beat the eggs and lemon juice together in a bowl.
Add a spoonful of the warm soup and stir well.
Blend the egg and lemon mixture into the soup, stirring constantly.
Reheat very carefully, taking care not to let the soup boil or it will curdle.
3
Adjust seasoning.
The addition of salt will improve the lemon flavour.
Serve the soup immediately, garnished with chopped parsley or chives.
Spanakopitta (Spinach in filo pastry)
Fyllo in Greek means ‘leaf’ which is why it gives its name to the wafer-thin filo pastry that is used in the preparation of Middle Eastern pastries.
Filo pastry is available in Greek food shops and large supermarkets.
Once the packet is opened, keep the pastry leaves covered with a damp tea towel to prevent them from drying out.
3–4 tbsp olive oil
1 bunch spring onions, finely chopped
1kg/2lb fresh spinach, washed and chopped
2 tbsp chopped fresh parsley
½ tsp grated nutmeg
100g/4oz feta cheese (or cheddar), crumbled
2–3 eggs, lightly beaten
100g/4oz butter
8–10 sheets filo pastry
seasoning
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Heat the oil and gently fry the spring onions without browning for a few minutes.
Add the drained spinach and toss until it begins to wilt.
Cover and cook gently for 5 minutes.
2
Allow the spinach to cool a little, then add the parsley, nutmeg, cheese, eggs and seasoning to taste.
3
Melt the butter and brush some over the base of a large, deep square or round baking tin or oven dish.
4
Place four or five sheets of filo pastry in the bottom, brushing between each layer with melted butter.
5
Spoon the spinach filling onto the filo sheets and cover with the remaining filo sheets, brushing between layers with melted butter as above.
6
Tuck in the sides neatly and brush some butter over the top of the pie.
7
Bake spanakopitta for about 40 minutes, then increase the heat for another 5 minutes to crisp the top.
Serve hot, warm or cold.
Louvia me lahana (Black-eyed beans with greens)
This is a typical Cypriot dish that is served in the spring.
After the winter rains, the leafy green vegetables, such as chard, are at their best and produce a crunchy texture.
Black-eyed beans are called louvi mavromati in Cyprus.
They have a pleasant, slightly sweet flavour and cook more quickly than other dried beans.
A tablespoon of lemon juice added to the cooking liquid stops the beans discolouring, but I find this sometimes makes them tough and I prefer to add lemon juice at the end with the oil.
In this dish, the beans don't need to be soaked.
225g/8oz black-eyed beans, picked clean and washed thoroughly
450g/1-lb chard leaves (or fresh spinach, shredded seasoning
olive oil and lemon juice, to serve with the beans
1
In a medium pan, cover the beans with water and bring to the boil.
Drain and throw away the water.
2
Cover with fresh water and simmer for about 25 minutes, or until almost tender, adding more water if necessary to keep the beans completely covered.
3
Toss the chard into the beans.
Cook for 5 minutes.
4
Season with salt and pepper.
Serve hot, warm or cold with a spoonful of olive oil and fresh lemon juice.
Natural yogurt also goes well with it.
Elioti (Cypriot olive bread)
A traditional loaf baked during Lent when Cypriots adhere to a fast.
It is full of flavour and moist due to the oil and olives.
Makes a 1kg/2lb loaf
450g/1lb strong white plain flour
225g/8oz stoneground wholemeal flour
1 sachet easy-blend yeast
2 tsp salt
2 tbsp olive oil
450ml/ ¾ pint warm water
1 medium onion, chopped and lightly fried in olive oil
1 tbsp olive oil
200g/7oz stoned black olives, chopped
1
Tip both of the flours into a large bowl and stir in the easy-blend yeast and salt.
2
Pour in the oil and enough water to make a soft but not sticky dough.
Add a little more water or flour if required to achieve the correct consistency.
3
Knead the dough until it becomes smooth and elastic.
Turn it into an oiled bowl, cover with a polythene bag and leave in a warm place for about an hour or until the dough has doubled in size.
4
Turn the dough onto a floured surface and knead for a minute before adding the cooked onion, extra oil and chopped olives.
5
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Shape the dough into a round loaf, place it on an oiled baking sheet and cover again with a large polythene bag.
Leave the dough in a warm place to rise for 30 minutes.
6
Bake the elioti for about 45 minutes or until the base sounds hollow when tapped.
For a shiny finish, lightly brush the top with oil and return to the oven for a minute.
FOR THE FILLING
Taramasalata (Smoked cod's roe pâté)
The sharp, salty or insipid taste of shop-bought taramasalata is not a patch on the real thing.
Tarama is the dried, salt-pressed and lightly smoked roe of the grey mullet and it is stocked in delicatessens, good fishmongers and most large supermarkets.
You may be lucky to find vivid orange smoked mullet roe — if not, use smoked cod's roe, which is a deep reddish-pink and less expensive.
4 slices day-old bread, crusts removed
100g/4oz tarama
1 garlic clove, crushed with a pinch of salt
juice of 1 lemon
6–8 tbsp olive oil
pinch of paprika, for colour (if required)
1
Soak the bread in cold water for 5 minutes; squeeze dry.
2
Skin the roe, if necessary.
Using a food processor or a whisk, combine the roe, bread, garlic and lemon juice.
3
Add the olive oil and four tablespoons of cold water in alternate spoonfuls until the mixture is thick and creamy.
Add the paprika.
Serve with slivers of warm pitta bread.
Flaounes (Easter cheese cakes)
Flaounes are made by every Cypriot family to celebrate Easter Sunday.
They are to me, the best example of Cypriot cooking.
These cheese buns have a rich filling and a crisp crust, which are just right with a cup of coffee at breakfast or a glass of wine later in the day.
750g/1½ lb strong plain flour
1 sachet easy-blend yeast
1 tsp salt
2 tsp sugar
2 tbsp olive or vegetable oil
350gr/12oz flaouna cheese (or 225g/8oz Cheddar)
100g/4oz halloumi cheese (or mozzarella)
1 tbsp plain flour
1 tsp baking powder
1 tbsp crushed dried mint
4 eggs, lightly beaten
1 egg, beaten
sesame seeds
1
First make the dough.
Sift the flour into a large bowl, stir in the yeast, salt and sugar.
Add the oil and enough water to make a firm dough.
Knead for at least 5 minutes until smooth and elastic.
Put the dough into a polythene bag and leave to rise in a warm place for an hour.
2
For the filling, coarsely grate the cheeses, add the flour and baking powder, then gradually stir in the mint and beaten eggs until you have a stiffish paste (keep back some of the beaten egg if the mixture becomes too runny).
3
Preheat the oven to 230C/450F/Gas 8.
Divide the dough into egg-sized pieces and roll them into 10cm/4in discs.
Now place a generous tablespoon of filling in the centre of each pastry disc and spread slightly.
Pull the dough up at three points to make a triangle, or four points to make a square.
You should be able to see the filling in the middle.
Press the corners together to seal and leave to rise.
4
Just before baking, brush with beaten egg and sprinkle some sesame seeds over the finished flaounes.
Bake for 12–15 minutes until the cheese filling is puffed up and the pastry has turned golden.
Serve warm or cold.
FOR THE DOUGH
FOR THE CHEESE FILLING
TO FINISH
Evie's Easter biscuits
During Easter week, every household in Cyprus will be preparing biscuits for the Easter feast.
This recipe was given to my Evie who cut my hair in Episkopi.
As the recipe makes a great many biscuits, you may prefer to halve the quantities, though you can store them in an airtight container.
Makes 2–3 dozen
200ml/7fl oz vegetable or sunflower oil
100g/4oz caster sugar
100g/4oz whole almonds, finely chopped
50g/2oz currants (optional)
2 eggs
2 tsp baking powder
½ tsp vanilla essence
350–450g/12oz–16oz plain flour
icing sugar, to decorate
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Mix all the ingredients together to form a firm paste.
2
Roll the mixture into small balls about the size of walnuts and place them on two large baking sheets.
3
Flatten slightly with your hand.
Bake the biscuits for about 10 minutes.
4
Dust the biscuits with icing sugar as they cool, and store in a cool, dry place.
Kafés (Cypriot coffee)
Wherever you go in Cyprus, it is almost impossible to visit the shops or market without being told: ‘Relax, what's the hurry anyway, surely you have time for a coffee!’
Cypriot coffee is made individually in small, long-handled pots which are wide at the base and tapered at the top.
These are called imbrikia and come in various sizes.
Fresh coffee beans, usually Brazilian, are finely ground or powdered daily and one heaped teaspoon is added to each demitasse of cold water.
Sugar goes in too at this stage before the coffee is heated up.
You also need to know whether to order glykos (sweet),metrios (medium sweet) or sketos (unsweetened).
The imbrikia are heated on the stove, and when the sugar has dissolved the coffee is allowed to come to the boil, forming a creamy froth on top called kaimak .
As the froth turns in from the sides and the coffee begins to rise in the pot, it is removed from the heat and a little is poured into each cup to distribute the froth.
Cypriot coffee is strong and should always be served with a glass of cold water.
It contains no spices; but sip with care, for at the bottom of every cup lurks more than a little sediment.
in love with food
Raymond Blanc has an appetite for life, as Janette Marshall found when they talked about food, home and marriage
As he opened the door to his thatched cottage, Raymond Blanc's famous boyish smile flickered.
‘You're 10 minutes early, but come in — my son can look after you.’
Following Ollie (more formally, Olivier Blanc, 16) into the brand new kitchen of the 16th-century cottage, Raymond's fleeting concern about my early arrival became very clear.
Dining chairs surrounded the breakfast bar table which was covered with the debris of a champagne breakfast.
So — is Roederer champagne and a full English breakfast the way Raymond Blanc, arguably Britain's best chef, starts his day?
Not at all.
Before me were the remains of an impromptu wedding breakfast.
Blanc had just got married.
‘I woke up and heard a lot of laughter,’ said Ollie.
‘I didn't know what was going on.
I went downstairs and they told me they had just got married.
Dad did say yesterday he had a surprise, but I didn't know it was going to be this — it's great.’
As we loaded the dishwasher and admired Blanc's new Miele kitchen, Raymond re-entered — beaming — to confirm the secret wedding in the village of Wheatley, just a few miles from his world-famous restaurant and hotel, Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons, Great Milton, Oxford.
Meanwhile Koti, his bride of two hours, a psychotherapist, had slipped out to see some patients.
‘We wanted a quiet wedding and decided today was as good as any.’
There wasn't a photographer at the register office, but Blanc produced a snapshot of himself and Koti, a vivacious Hungarian-born blonde, both laughing and obviously potty about each other.
‘She's fun,’ he said, simply.
Raymond and Koti met seven years ago when she went to Le Manoir.
‘It sounds corny, but as soon as I saw her I knew she was the one,’ said Blanc, whose first marriage broke up during the difficult years when he was struggling to build up his reputation.
He has a second son, Sebastian, nine, who telephoned during the day to be told his father and Koti's surprise good news.
‘I left school at 19, and at 21 worked in a restaurant as a waiter because I was ‘too old’ to train as a chef.
I resigned myself to becoming a brilliant restaurant manager because I thought I had missed my chance of becoming a chef.
‘Then I came to England.
I became head chef in a kitchen with two cordon bleu chefs at The Rose Revived in Oxford.
It was a joke — I had to cook for 70 people and there were 12 rooms and a pub as well that could seat 100–200 in summer.
I had to learn fast.
I had nobody to take my hand and lead me through the obstacles.
I had to find my own way.’
This big break came when Blanc was 27.
He later opened his own small restaurant, Les Quat' Saisons,(also in Oxford), which received its second Michelin star in 1982.
He followed this with a traditional French bakery in Oxford while he set about converting a 15th century Cotswold manor house into Le Manoir, which opened in 1984 and has since become one of Britain's most exclusive restaurants.
Now, at 41, he still insists, ‘In a way I am an amateur — I never cooked under a chef.’
Because of this, Blanc expresses a real empathy with the average cook at home.
‘I do understand that reading a recipe might make you panic.
Often recipes are only a succession of technical operations and no explanations as to why, or how, or why not.’
That is why he is now writing a book for the ‘home cook’.
It follows the tremendous success of his first book Recipes from Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons (Macdonald Orbis, £17.50), which has topped the best sellers' list with more than 65,000 sales.
‘Nobody could believe we sold that many because, in a way, it is an elitist book.
You might think many people buy it as a coffee table book, but they don't.
They use the recipes a lot, judging from the feedback I get.’
Feeling that his first book was directed towards chefs and more experienced cooks, he is hoping to put the balance right.
His new book, as yet untitled, but probably to be called something like Raymond Blanc — Cooking at Home , is going to be full of explanations.
It will say, ‘Be careful; if you do this, that will happen.
There will be lots of guidance and an emphasis on demystification.’
Blanc is no stranger to home cooking.
‘When I cook at home I cook quite simply.
Koti works at night as well, and so we both get home late — but we always have a natter before going to bed, no matter how late.
I make a quick soup or take ham from the fridge and we have a simple munch.’
Blanc is also planning a few special dinner parties to celebrate his wedding.
‘I have some of my most relaxing, richest moments entertaining at home.
We love matching people from different backgrounds who don't know each other.
There is a particular pleasure when new people meet.’
Dinner parties chez Blanc do not feature the elaborate dishes and menus of Le Manoir.
‘To me, a dining room table is not just about stuffing oneself.
It has very little — nothing — to do with that.
Of course the food should be lovely and delicious, but it doesn't need to be complicated.
You can enjoy yourself with beautiful smoked salmon and olives or soup, followed by roast lamb and a few spuds from the garden, French beans, or whatever.
Then cheese and chocolate mousse or crème caramel and a couple of bottles of good wine.’
When he cooks at home on a daily basis, his new kitchen has another purpose too.
‘It is also my little laboratory where I can experiment with new dishes and new ideas.
At Le Manoir there is always too much going on and I can't concentrate — I am constantly being interrupted.’
Far from looking like a sterile laboratory, the new kitchen is attractive, light and pleasant.
The Blancs, who have lived in the cottage seven years, spent a long time looking at many ranges before deciding on the white Miele kitchen with its terracotta trim.
‘There is only one window in the kitchen and it was previously furnished in oak which made it very dark.
Our new kitchen is not ultra-modern because I wanted it to have an  old look and homely feel.
‘The kitchen has to be in sympathy with the house you live in.
It should be a place where you want to sit down to eat and where you can be comfortable for most of the day.
It has to be warm and friendly and, especially for the busy cook, it must be well designed.
The kitchen is very important to me, especially after what has happened today.’
What you put in your kitchen is as important to Blanc as its design.
‘Equipment is important.
If you try to whisk something with a hard metal balloon whisk it is hopeless; you want to use something supple.
I like Le Creuset bakeware — I like the feel and functionality.
They are very good for homes.
You can imagine mother putting the big casserole on the table and saying, ‘Go on and enjoy yourselves.’
I use Sabatier knives at home, but I don't buy stainless steel, I only use steel carbon which will be a friend for life.
I think you must buy quality.
I know it's tempting when see something at £5 instead of £10, but in six months time it's useless — that's why it's cheap.’
Blanc's new book also has lots of little asides about the importance of home and family.
It's a celebration of life.
Some recipes are for dinner parties, others for day-to-day.
All are being tested by eight other people to check both the quality and possible difficulty in obtaining ingredients as well as the actual cooking.
‘I had to coax two into it because they are not very experienced cook, but I chose them for that very reason,’ he says.
Despite the pace of modern life, Blanc hopes people will start cooking more often for themselves — with the help of his book.
‘Instead of grabbing a tin of soup the book will say, ‘Pick up a few carrots, a leek, chop them up and throw them in water, add a dash of cream, a few leaves of chervil, and you have something homely and delicious that you have made.’
He continues, ‘Instead of reaching for the brown sauce, my book suggests deglazing the meat juice with water to rediscover the taste of real food; the same goes for the taste of real vanilla rather than vanilla flavouring; and the taste and simplicity of pan-fried fish with a dash of lime juice.’
Blanc admits this requires effort and that people may not be able to cook every day, but he says, ‘Instead of buying ‘orrible chocolate mousses full of preservatives, colouring and all sorts of stabilisers and sugar, make your own which takes no more than 10 minutes.
And you can rediscover the joy of giving kids something home-made.’
It is the joy of making and giving that has fired Blanc on his way to the top.
‘I wouldn't be a cook if it wasn't for that.
Of course I enjoy making and presenting food and working with the noblest of ingredients.
But the act of giving, when that food becomes a catalyst, is a lovely moment.
The dining table is one of the last remaining places for family communication in this day and age.’
It was around the family table that Blanc learned to respect food.
‘My father was an atheist, yet he used to mark a cross on the top of bread before cutting it.
I asked him why, and he said he couldn't find any other way to show respect for that commodity.
‘Very early on we were told you didn't mess around with food — even if it was crumbs, my mother would do something with them.
We grew up eating everything — if we said ‘Ugh, what's that green thing?’, we were told, ‘You eat it, it's good for you.’
That means I've learned to enjoy everything.’
With such obvious delight in food, it's hard to see how Blanc remains so slim.
‘It shocks a lot of people, they don't believe that I eat so much.
I remember my doctor coming in my kitchen some time ago (he's a good friend and a gastronome and he wanted to learn).
He took lots of notes and after three days he said, ‘Raymond, I want to give you a check.
You cannot possibly eat as much as you do and remain so slim.’
‘He showed me a list of what had eaten and it was quite extraordinary.
When I cook, I eat all the time.
I don't just taste, I take a piece of food or a large spoonful of something.’
The good news is Blanc's medical found nothing untoward — and it revealed very little fat.
With such a fast metabolism and the high level of energy behind everything he says and does, I had to ask, is he a workaholic?
‘I would like to think I am a very passionate person, but I have to admit there is a degree of workaholism, which I hope I will be able to temper.
Now I am trying to achieve a much better parity between my private and public life.
‘It takes a lot out of you to do anything well and it very often involves working long hours, but I would hate to believe I am a total workaholic.
I have studied myself and I know what drives me.
At one stage, yes — it was approval, it was ambition, it was all sorts of things, but I was still aware of them.
Now I know that creating wonderful, fantastic food is quite simply the most exhilarating experience.
‘I'm not cynical.
I really love what I do and every day is different.
More than ever, now I'm with Koti, I want to share.
I feel very happy and passionate about what I'm doing.
If one day there is no light in my eyes, I will stop.
I would sell Le Manoir.
It just wouldn't be worth it — it would choke.’
Then he adds hastily, ‘This is not likely to happen, though.’
Quick, clever kebabs
Can you take a grilling?
Kebabs make simple, succulent supper dishes that the whole family will love, says Sara Lewis
Vegetarian seekh kebabs
1 small onion, finely chopped
50g/2oz blanched almonds, chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
4 tbsp sunflower oil
¼ tsp chilli powder
¼ tsp ground cinnamon
¼ tsp grated nutmeg
400g/14oz can red kidney beans, drained
50g/2oz fresh breadcrumbs
2 tbsp fresh coriander leaves
1 egg yolk
1 tbsp sesame seeds, to garnish
FOR THE TOMATO RELISH
350g/12oz tomatoes, skinned, seeded and chopped
½ small onion
2 tbsp fresh coriander leaves
1 tsp tomato purée
½ tsp sugar
seasoning
1
Fry the onion, almonds and garlic in 1 tablespoon of oil in a frying pan until softened.
Add spices and cook for 1 minute.
2
Put onion mixture and remaining ingredients into a processor and whizz together.
Divide into eight portions and shape each one around one end of skewer to form a thick cigar shape.
3
To make the relish, put all the ingredients into a processor or liquidiser and blend until smooth.
Pour into a serving dish.
4
Brush kebabs with a little of the remaining oil and cook under a hot grill for 4 minutes.
Turn, brush with oil sprinkle with sesame seeds and cook for 4 minutes more until browned.
Serve with the relish.
Salmon and cod brochettes
350g/12oz salmon fillets
350g/12oz cod fillets
4 tbsp virgin olive oil
coarsely grated rind and juice of 1 lemon
seasoning
FOR THE WATERCRESS SAUCE
150g/5oz strained Greek yogurt with cream
grated rind of ½ lemon
3 tbsp chopped watercress
1
Cut the skin away from the fish, then cut the fillets into even-sized chunks.
2
Mix the oil, lemon rind and juice and seasoning in a bowl.
Add the fish and toss gently in the oil mixture until coated.
Cover and chill for at least 2 hours, stirring once or twice.
3
Mix the watercress sauce ingredients together; chill until required.
4
Drain fish, reserving the marinade; thread salmon and cod pieces alternately onto eight skewers
5
Cook brochettes under a hot grill for 5 minutes, turning once and brushing with marinade, until the fish flakes when pressed with a knife.
Serve hot with the watercress sauce and a good selection of steamed spring vegetables.
Mixed grill kebabs
6 rashers streaky bacon, rinded
12 stoned prunes
4 lamb's kidneys
100g/4oz cap mushrooms, halved
1 small onion, cut into eight wedges
225g/8oz mini herby cocktail sausages
2 tbsp oil
2 tsp Worcestershire sauce
2 tsp tomato purée
1
Stretch rashers with the back of a knife until almost half  as long again, then halve crossways and wrap each half around a prune.
2
Halve kidneys crossways and snip away white core.
Cut each one into half again.
Thread the prunes, kidneys, mushrooms, onion and sausages onto eight skewers.
3
Mix oil, Worcestershire sauce and tomato purée and brush over kebabs.
Grill for 10 minutes, turning once and brushing with oil mixture until well browned.
Vegetarian brochettes
1 medium aubergine
100g/4oz baby corn cobs
5 tbsp virgin olive oil
grated rind and juice of ½ lemon
3 tbsp chopped fresh basil
2 garlic cloves, crushed
100g/4oz shallots, peeled
3 courgettes
1 red and 1 yellow pepper
seasoning
1
Cut aubergine into thick slices, then cut into quarters.
Put on a plate and sprinkle with salt.
Leave to stand for 30 minutes to 1 hour.
2
Blanch corn boiling water for 1 minute.
Drain
3
Mix together oil, lemon rind and juice, basil, garlic and seasoning in a bowl.
4
Cut any large shallots in half down through the root.
Cut courgettes into 1cm-½in thick diagonal slices.
Halve peppers, discard seeds and core and cut into 2.5cm/1in squares.
5
Rinse aubergine and dry with kitchen paper.
Add vegetables to oil mixture, toss together and leave to stand for 15 minutes.
6
Drain vegetables, reserving marinade and thread them alternately onto eight skewers.
7
Cook for 10 minutes, turning twice until evenly browned.
Serve hot with grilled chops or steamed fish.
Other vegetables would be equally good — use blanched florets of broccoli or cauliflower, small, whole mushrooms or cherry tomatoes.
Gingered steak ribbons
500g/1¼lb thick-cut rump or sirloin steak
4 tbsp sunflower oil
3 tbsp soy sauce
2.5cm/1in piece fresh root ginger, grated
¼ tsp five spice powder
175g/6oz can red pimientos, drained
FOR THE DIPPING SAUCE
1 tbsp soy sauce
1 tbsp sesame oil
1 tbsp sherry vanilla
1cm/ ½in piece fresh root ginger, grated 1 spring onion, thinly sliced, to garnish
1
Trim fat from steak, then go along its length, holding the knife at a slight angle to cut long, thin ribbons.
2
Mix the oil, soy sauce, ginger and five spice powder in a shallow dish.
Add the steak, press into oil mixture, then turn over.
Cover and chill for at least 2 hours, turning the steak once or twice.
3
Mix together the ingredients for the dipping sauce and put into four bowls.
Garnish with spring onion.
4
Cut the  pimientos into strips, about the width of the steak ribbons.
5
Drain the steak, reserving the marinade and thread a skewer through one strip of steak at 2.5cm/1in intervals, pushing the strip together so it forms concertina-like folds.
Repeat process with the  pimientos .
Continue until steak and  pimientos are evenly divided among eight skewers.
6
Cook under a hot grill for 7 minutes, turning once and brushing with marinade until browned.
Serve with boiled rice and bowls of the dipping sauce.
Peppered lamb kebabs
750g/1½lb lamb fillet or leg steaks, cubed
1 small green pepper, in chunks
½ small red pepper, in chunks
2 small onions, quartered
2 courgettes, in chunks
8 ready-to-eat dried apricots
few fresh rosemary sprigs
FOR THE MARINADE
1 tsp coarsely crushed black peppercorns
3 tbsp clear honey
3 tbsp red wine vinegar
3 tbsp olive oil
1
mix the marinade ingredients.
Add the lamb and vegetables, toss to coat.
Cover and chill for at least 2 hours, stirring once or twice.
2
Drain the lamb and vegetables, reserving the marinade.
Thread alternately onto eight skewers with the dried apricots.
3
Cook under a hot grill for 5 minutes, tuck in rosemary and baste with the marinade.
Cook for 4–5 minutes until browned.
Bamboo skewers are ideal for all sorts of kebabs, but soak them first in warm water.
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
FAMILY feasting
Lurpak, the cream of Danish butters, brings a taste of Europe to your table
Danish dairies have been shipping butter to Britain for over 100 years.
MD Foods of Denmark is the fourth largest dairy business in the world, bringing us Lurpak butter and cheeses, including the ever popular Danish blue.
Lurpak is made from cream which is ripened for 24 hours before it is churned, a process which imparts its distinctive flavour, and it is subject to rigorous independent testing at every stage of production.
Only then is it awarded the ‘Lur’ mark which is given to the highest quality Danish products.
Introduced in 1904, this mark denotes purity and quality, which is why it later became part of Lurpak's name.
Lurpak is perfect to use in everything; from sandwiches to jacket potatoes and all kinds of cooking.
Choose from slightly salted or unsalted.
Danish Blue cheese, with its distinctively sharp taste, is another versatile product from MD Foods.
It is now available in resealable table pack, which also keeps it fresh in the fridge.
We've used both Danish Blue and Lurpak in our recipes to show you a few ways of bringing a flavour of the Continent to your cooking.
Danish open sandwiches
Use a firm bread, such as rye or pumpernickel, for these open sandwiches.
Put them together at the last possible moment and cover with a damp tea towel until you serve them.
Spread the bread with Lurpak slightly salted butter and top with one of the following:
Prawn and lemon
Mix ½ teaspoon of grated lemon rind with one tablespoon of mayonnaise; stir in 50g/2oz peeled prawns.
Spoon onto buttered rye bread.
Garnish with cayenne pepper, slices of lemon and dill.
Blue cheese and grape
Slice 50g/2oz Danish Blue cheese into thin triangles.
Halve and seen three black grapes.
Arrange on buttered pumpernickel.
Garnish with watercress and walnut pieces.
Roast beef
Fry 25g/1oz sliced onion in oil until crispy.
Drain and crumble.
Roll 50g/2oz thinly sliced rare beef or pastrami into cones and place on the bread in a fan shape.
Mix one tablespoon of mayonnaise with ¼ teaspoon of creamed horseradish.
Spoon onto bread at base of meat.
Add onion.
Garnish with gherkins and cherry tomatoes.
Oven-baked sesame chicken
50g/2oz fresh breadcrumbs
25g/1oz sesame seeds
25g/1oz blanched almonds, finely chopped
8 chicken thigh joints, skinned
2 tbsp flour
1 large egg, beaten
1 tsp vegetable oil
40g/1½oz Lurpak unsalted butter
seasoning
FOR THE SAUCE
15g/½oz Lurpak unsalted butter
1 small onion, sliced
50g/2oz carrots, cut into matchsticks
1.5cm/½in piece fresh root ginger, chopped
6 tbsp demerara sugar
6 tbsp white wine vinegar
1 tsp cornflour
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Mix breadcrumbs, sesame seeds and almonds.
Season.
Coat chicken in flour, then in egg and finally in  the breadcrumb mixture.
2
Place the oil and Lurpak in a roasting tin and melt in the oven.
Place chicken in the hot fat and baste thoroughly.
Return to the oven for 40 minutes, basting occasionally.
Turn the chicken halfway through cooking.
3
While the chicken is cooking, fry the onion, carrot and ginger in Lurpak until softened.
Stir in the sugar, vinegar and six tablespoons of water and simmer for 2 minutes.
Mix the cornflour with one tablespoon of water.
Add to sauce.
Stir until thickened.
4
Drain chicken and serve with sauce and boiled rice.
Danish Blue cheese and walnut salad
100g/4oz Danish Blue cheese
1 medium carrot
450g/1lb red cabbage
4 spring onions
25g/1oz walnut pieces
FOR THE DRESSING
3 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp red wine vinegar
1 tbsp sesame seeds
seasoning
1
Cut the cheese into 1cm/½in cubes.
Cut the carrot into matchsticks.
Shred cabbage.
Slice the spring onions diagonally.
Place in a salad bowl with the walnut pieces.
2
Whisk together dressing ingredients.
Pour over salad and toss.
Chill for up to an hour.
Danish apple cake
750g/1½ lb cooking apples, cored and sliced
75g/3oz Lurpak unsalted butter
75g/3oz granulated sugar
100g/4oz fresh breadcrumbs
150ml/¼ pint whipping cream
2 tbsp redcurrant jelly
1
Put apples in a pan with three tablespoons of water, cover and cook gently until soft.
Mash to a purée.
Stir in 25g/1oz Lurpak and 50g/2oz sugar.
Cool.
2
Mix remaining sugar with the breadcrumbs.
Melt the remaining Lurpak in a frying pan.
Add the breadcrumb mixture and fry until golden.
Cool.
3
Just before serving, lightly whip cream.
Alternate layers of apple and crumbs in a glass bowl.
Top with the cream.
Melt the jelly, leave to cool and drizzle over the cream.
Butter biscuits
100g/4oz self-raising flour
75g/3oz Lurpak slightly salted butter
50g/2oz caster sugar
1–2 almond essence
egg white and granulated sugar, to finish
1
Stir the flour.
Dice the butter and rub into the flour until it resembles fine breadcrumbs.
Stir in the sugar and almond essence, then knead the mixture until smooth.
Wrap and chill in the fridge for at least 1 hour.
2
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Lightly flour a work surface.
Roll out the dough to about 5mm/ ¼in thickness.
Brush with lightly beaten egg white and dust with sugar.
3
Cut dough into fingers about 7.5 × 2.5cm/3 × 1in.
Transfer to buttered baking sheets.
Chill in the fridge for 15 minutes.
4
Bake for 12–15 minutes until barely golden.
Leave on baking sheets for a few minutes, then transfer biscuits to wire racks until completely cool.
SECRETS OF Success
PART 13 CHOCOLATE
Cooking with chocolate can be as rewarding as eating it.
Linda Fraser and Sarah Barrass show you some fabulous recipes that will delight anyone with a taste for chocolate, be it milk, plain or white.
PUDDINGS
Chocolate bavarois
2 eggs, separated
50g/2oz caster sugar
175ml/6fl oz milk
25g/1oz milk chocolate
200g/7oz plain chocolate
2 tsp gelatine
90ml/3fl oz double cream, whipped
150ml/ ¼pint double cream
1 tbsp apricot jam, sieved
1 tbsp raspberry jam, sieved
1
mix the egg yolks with 25g/1oz of the caster sugar in a large mixing bowl.
Put the milk in a small pan and bring slowly to the boil, then pour over the egg mixture, stirring thoroughly with a wooden spoon.
2
Return the mixture to the pan and stir over a gentle heat until the custard thickens.
Add one third to the milk chocolate and the rest to 50g/2 oz of the plain chocolate.
Stir until the chocolate has melted.
3
Add the gelatine to two table spoons of water and leave to swell.
Stir one third into the hot milk chocolate custard and the rest into the plain.
Whisk the egg whites until stiff and whisk in remaining sugar.
4
Fold one third of the egg whites and one third of the cream into the milk chocolate and fold the rest into the plain.
Divide the milk chocolate mixture among four moulds and chill for 10 minutes.
5
Add plain chocolate mixture to moulds and chill to set.
Melt the remaining plain chocolate in a pan with the cream.
Spoon the sauce onto serving plates, drizzle with the jams and turn out set moulds on top.
Chocolate apricot tart
175g/6oz plain flour, sifted
2 tbsp cocoa, sifted
2 tbsp caster sugar plus 50g/2oz caster sugar
100g/4oz unsalted butter
2 eggs
150ml/¼ pint milk
150ml/¼ pint single cream
100g/4 oz plain chocolate
425g/15oz can apricot halves, drained
150g/5oz canned apricot pie filling
1
Mix together the flour, cocoa and two tablespoons of sugar, then rub in the butter until mixture resembles breadcrumbs.
Stir in enough cold water to form a firm dough.
Wrap and chill for 30 minutes.
2
Mix the eggs and remaining sugar.
Heat the milk, cream and chocolate until melted then bring to the boil.
Pour onto the egg mixture, stirring all the time.
Return to the pan and heat gently, stirring constantly until the custard coats the back of the spoon.
Cool.
3
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Roll out the pastry and line a greased 20cm/8in loose-bottomed flan tin.
Spoon in the custard and top with apricot halves and pie filling.
4
Roll out pastry trimmings, then cut into 12 × 1cm/½in strips with a pastry wheel and form a lattice across the flan.
5
Bake for 50–60 minutes until pastry is crisp.
Cover with paper if over-browning.
Chocolate ice-cream
Makes about 1 litre/1¾ pints
2 eggs
2 egg yolks
75g/3oz caster sugar
300ml/ ½ pint single cream
225g/8oz plain chocolate
300ml/ ½ pint double cream, whipped
1
Whisk together the eggs, egg yolks and sugar in a large bowl.
Heat the single cream and chocolate in a small pan until melted and then bring tot he boil.
Pour onto the egg mixture and stir well.
2
Return to the pan and heat gently, stirring all the time until the custard coats the back of the spoon.
Strain into a bowl, cover the surface of the custard with damp greaseproof paper.
Cool.
3
Fold the whipped cream into the custard and pour into a rigid polythene container.
Seal and freeze for 2 hours.
Remove from the freezer, whisk well until completely smooth again and then return to the freezer until the ice-cream is firm.
Try white chocolate instead of plain, and serve the ice with chocolate-dipped strawberries.
Dip them diagonally in melted white chocolate, leave to dry, then dip the other way in plain.
Chocolate palmiers
Makes 24 
200g/7oz packet puff pastry
75g/3oz caster sugar
25g/1oz plain chocolate, grated
150ml/ ¼ pint double cream, whipped
1
Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Roll out the puff pastry to a rectangle 30×25cm/12×10in, sprinkling with the sugar as you go.
Sprinkle with chocolate and roll up from one of the longest sides to the centre.
Roll up other side to meet it and then moisten both rolls with water where they meet and press them firmly together.
2
Cut the roll into 48×5mm/ ¼in slices.
Place well apart on baking sheets and flatten slightly.
Bake for 10 minutes until golden.
Cool on a wire rack.
3
Sandwich pairs of biscuits together with the cream and serve at once.
The palmier biscuits can be made up to two weeks in advance of the filling them with the whipped cream, as long as they are stored in an airtight tin.
Mini chocolate éclairs
50g/2oz butter
65g/2½oz plain flour, sifted
2 eggs, beaten
150ml/¼ pint double cream, whipped
100g/4oz plain chocolate
1
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6 and moisten two baking sheets with a little cold water.
2
Melt the butter with 150ml/¼ pint of water in a small pan.
Bring to the boil.
Add the flour and beat until the mixture forms a ball.
Cool slightly, then beat in the eggs a little at a time.
3
Spoon the mixture into a piping bag fitted with a plain 5mm/¼in nozzle.
Pipe 50×2.5cm/1in éclairs onto baking sheets and bake for 15–20 minutes until they are golden and crisp.
4
Make a slit in the side of each éclair and leave to cool on a wire rack.
Using a palette knife, carefully fill each little éclair with the whipped double cream.
5
Melt the plain chocolate in a bowl over hot water and did the top of each éclair in chocolate.
Leave them to set in the fridge until ready for serving.
Praline chocolates
300g/11oz plain chocolate
50g/2oz caster sugar
40g/1½oz whole almonds
4tbsp single cream
50g/2oz butter
2 egg yolks
25 whole almonds, to decorate
1
Melt 150g/5oz of the chocolate in a bowl over hot water.
Brush the inside of 25 foil sweet cases with chocolate and turn upside-down on a tray lined with non-stick baking paper.
Leave to set in the fridge.
2
Put the sugar and two tablespoons of water in a small pan and heat gently until dissolved.
Add 40g/1½oz of the almonds and boil rapidly until the syrup is golden brown.
Pour onto a greased baking sheet and leave to set.
When cool, crush and divide among the sweet cases.
3
Melt the remaining chocolate with the cream.
Cool slightly, then beat in the butter gradually.
Beat in the yolks and cool until firm.
Beat thoroughly when cold.
Pipe swirls into the chocolate cases and top with a whole almond; chill until required.
Truffles
Makes 30
225g/8oz plain chocolate
250g/9oz white chocolate
120ml/4fl oz double cream
30ml/1fl oz orange liqueur
1
Place the plain chocolate and 225g/8oz of the white chocolate in separate bowls and stir them over hot water until melted.
Stir half of the cream and orange liqueur into each bowl and chill until almost set.
2
Roll the stiffened truffle mixture into small balls the size of walnuts, leaving them a little rough and craggy.
Grate the remaining white chocolate and roll the white truffles in it.
Place in the fridge to set.
If you don't want alcohol in your truffles, you can replace the liqueur with the same amount of strong coffee.
Florentines
75g/3oz butter
75g/3oz golden syrup
25g/1oz plain flour
50g/2oz flaked almonds, chopped
50g/2oz chopped mixed peel
50g/2oz glacé cherries, chopped
25g/1oz angelica, chopped
50g/2oz white chocolate
50g/2oz plain chocolate
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4 and line two baking sheets with non-stick baking paper.
2
Gently melt the butter and syrup in a small pan.
Stir in the flour, almonds, mixed peel, cherries and angelica.
3
Place teaspoonfuls of mixture well apart on the baking sheets and flatten to 4cm/1½in rounds.
Bake for 10 minutes until golden.
Cool for 1 minute, then trim using a plain pastry cutter which is slightly larger than the biscuits.
Cool.
4
Melt the white and plain chocolate in separate bowls over hot water.
Spread the chocolate over the back of the biscuits and use a fork to make a pattern of wavy lines.
Leave the florentines on a wire rack to set.
Chocolate meringues
1 egg white
50g/2oz caster sugar
1tbsp cocoa, sifted
100g/4oz plain chocolate
150ml/¼ pint double cream, whipped
1
Preheat the oven to 120C/250F/Gas ½ and line two medium-sized baking sheets with non-stick baking paper.
2
Whisk the egg white until stiff, then whisk in half of the sugar.
Carefully fold in the remaining sugar and cocoa.
Spoon into a piping bag fitted with a 5mm/ ¼in plain nozzle.
Pipe 50×2.5cm/1in long spirals well apart on the baking sheets.
Bake for 1 hour until crisp and dry.
Cool on a wire rack.
3
Melt the chocolate in a bowl over hot water and dip the meringues diagonally into the chocolate.
Leave to set on a wire rack.
Sandwich the meringues together with cream and serve at once.
CHOCOLATE CAKES
Chocolate whisked sponge
4 eggs
175g/6oz caster sugar
75g/3oz plain flour, sifted
25g/1oz cocoa, sifted
75g/3oz white chocolate
75g/3oz plain chocolate
600ml/1 pint double cream, whipped
200g/7oz plain chocolate-flavoured cake covering
icing sugar, to decorate
1
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Grease and line a 20cm/8in round cake tin.
In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs and 100g/4oz of the sugar until it is thick and holds a trail from the beaters.
2
Fold in the flour and cocoa.
Tip the mixture into the prepared tin and bake for 30 minutes or until the sponge is springy to the touch.
Turn onto a wire rack.
Leave on the lining paper while it cools.
3
To make a ganache , melt the white and plain chocolate separately over hot water, adding 25g/1oz of the sugar and three tablespoons of water to each bowl.
Fold each mixture into halved amounts of cream.
4
Cut the sponge horizontally into three and sandwich with the white chocolate ganache .
Cover the sides and top of cake with the plain chocolate ganache , starting with a thin coat to seal in any crumbs.
5
Melt the cake covering and spread thinly over a cold surface.
When firm but not set, scrape off thin strips with a wallpaper scraper.
Place ruffled strips on top of cake.
Dust with cocoa and icing sugar.
Chocolate chocolate cheesecake
1 2-egg whisked sponge, baked for 15–20 minutes in a 20cm/8in square cake tin (see above)
225g/8oz plain chocolate
100g/4oz white chocolate
6 tsp gelatine
750g/1½ lb skimmed milk soft cheese
300ml/½ pint single cream
100g/4oz caster sugar
150ml/¼ pint double cream, whipped
1
Line the sides of an 18cm/7in square, loose- bottomed cake tin with slightly crumpled foil.
Trim the sponge so that it fits snugly into the base.
2
Melt 100g/4oz of the plain chocolate in a bowl over hot water and brush evenly over the foil lining.
Chill until set.
3
Melt the remaining plain chocolate and the white chocolate in separate bowls over hot water.
Sprinkle the gelatine over four tablespoons of water and leave to swell for 5 minutes.
Melt the gelatine over hot water until dissolved and clear.
4
Beat together the cheese, single cream and sugar.
Fold in the double cream and dissolved gelatine.
Divide the mixture between two bowls and stir one type of chocolate into each.
Spoon the chocolate mixtures alternately into the tin, then swirl together with a skewer.
Chill for 2 hours until set.
5
Ease the cheesecake out of the tin and carefully peel off the foil to serve it.
Chocolate roulade
150g/5oz plain chocolate
4 eggs, separated
150g/5oz caster sugar
300ml/½ pint double cream, whipped
icing sugar, to decorate
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Grease and line a 20×30cm/8×12in swiss roll tin with greaseproof paper.
2
Melt the plain chocolate with three tablespoons of water over a pan of hot water.
Whisk egg yolks with half of the sugar until thick and creamy, then whisk in the warm chocolate until completely blended.
3
Whisk the egg whites with the remaining sugar until stiff, then fold into the chocolate mixture and tip into the prepared tin.
Bake for 30–35 minutes until firm.
Cool for 5 minutes then cover with a damp tea towel.
Leave in the fridge overnight.
4
Carefully remove the tea towel and turn out roulade onto a sheet of greaseproof paper sprinkled thickly with icing sugar.
Peel off the lining paper, spread with the whipped cream and roll up from one short side.
Sprinkle with extra icing sugar and serve.
SHAPING UP FOR EASTER
Chocolate novelties take centre stage at this time of year, so save yourself some money and have a go at making your own Easter eggs and bunnies.
Chocolate moulds
Makes 1 large rabbit
225g/8oz plain chocolate, broken into pieces
1
Melt the chocolate over a pan of hot water until it is shiny and smooth and reaches a temperature of 38–43C/100–110F.
This is the ideal melting temperature for chocolate; if the chocolate is too cool, the set moulds will develop a white sugar bloom; if it is too hot, a fat bloom may form.
2
Spoon chocolate into two clean, dry moulds and tip each mould from side to side to form an even coating.
Use a brush to push chocolate into the creases of the moulds for an absolutely even finish.
Turn the moulds upside-down onto a sheet of non-stick baking paper and leave in a cool, dry place until completely set.
3
When the chocolate has set, trim any excess chocolate from the outer edge of the moulds using a knife.
Then run the point of a thin knife around the edge of the moulds to loosen the cases and enable you to carefully turn out the chocolate shapes onto a cool, clean surface.
4
Paint the edge of just one half of the shape with a little melted chocolate and bring the two halves together.
Press together gently but firmly to join them.
Leave the rabbit to set for a few moments.
5
When set paint the necessary features — eyes, whiskers and nose — on the rabbit's face, using melted white chocolate.
The amount of chocolate needed depends on the size of the moulds you use, and larger moulds need thicker chocolate cases.
Smaller eggs are best made from solid chocolate.
Try mixing two types of chocolate to give a marbled effect before pouring into the moulds.
Slick shapes together with melted chocolate and decorate joins with piped chocolate.
You can pipe patterns on eggs with coloured chocolate which is made by mixing a few drops of your choice of food colouring into melted white chocolate.
A pair of good cotton gloves make working with chocolate that much easier as they increase the length of time that you can handle the chocolate before it melts.
Chocolate moulds can be bought by mail order from:
COMING NEXT MONTH: WEDDINGS
CAUSE FOR CONCERN
The kindest cut
Factory farming will become a thing of the past if we put our money where our mouths are and support ‘kinder’ food with our purses, argues Audrey Eyton
There's definitely something in the air.
Marks & Spencer, having liberated breeding pigs from hard concrete cells to the great outdoors, tells fondly of the technologist who snuggled up in a sow's couchette to comfort test the temperature of her new straw-bedded housing.
Tesco chose ‘kindness to poultry’ as the message for its costly television commercials starring consumer-friendly Dudley Moore.
Safeway and ASDA are introducing free-range products to their shelves as quickly as they can.
And, behind the scenes in some superstores, plans are being hatched to ban battery eggs.
Tide turning
So, what has prompted this sudden outbreak of kindness in one of the toughest, least sentimental sectors of British business?
Though not without animal-loving executives among their ranks, the big stores are, or course, responding to consumer demand.
They were quick to spot the first ripples of concern which have surged into a tide over the past year.
And the signs are that, after 40 years, the tide has turned against Britain's factory farmers.
Vegetarians unite
Vegetarianism has stepped out of its sandals and into the smartest restaurants.
Its supporters now include such eminently acceptable figures as Jonathan Dimbleby, Joanna Lumley, Paul and Linda McCartney, crime novelist Ruth Rendell, president of the Royal Institute of British Architects, Max Hutchinson, even ‘Mr Speaker’ Weatherill of the House of Commons.
The movement has even reached the last bastion of the British banger, pub grub.
Few White Harts and Wild Boars now fail to offer a vegetarian alternative.
And, for every fully-fledged veggie, there are 100 fish-eating demi-vegetarians and many thousands — more than 40 per cent of the adult population at the last count — claiming to eat less meat.
Horror stories
The causes of such a major change in attitude are many and varied.
Health hazard headlines about salmonella, listeria and BSE have undoubtedly played a part.
New nutritional guidelines are being widely promoted.
And there is a growing sense of horror at the treatment to which farm animals have been subjected in ‘animal-loving’ Britain since the Second World War.
Times change
In the 1950s, when factory farming was created, the primary motive was to make cheap meat, eggs and poultry available to the malnourished poor.
Nutritionists believed (mistakenly, they now admit) that human health was suffering from a lack of animal protein.
Today, the principal concern of mainstream nutritionists is excess animal food in our diet.
Experts, including Sir Richard Doll and Professor Philip James, of the NACNE report committee which changed our eating habits, suspect that our present diet (too high in animal foods, too low in cereals, fruit and vegetables) is the main cause of coronaries and cancers which have replaced the now conquered infectious diseases as major killers.
This switch in the attitudes of the medical establishment has removed the last justification (if there ever was one) for cruel factory farming practices.
The factory farm doors are now being flung open and the terrible truth behind them is driving shoppers away from chops and steaks and poultry of unknown origin and sending them flocking in search of free-range eggs and chickens.
Money talks
The output of no fewer than 30 government ‘think tanks’ was devoted to the cost-cutting  priorities of animal rearing in post-war years.
Labour costs were slashed by packing as many as 100,000 chickens into one shed, where they could be ‘looked after’ by just one or two workers.
More meat or eggs for less feed was the other primary aim.
Crowded together with no room to move (the proverbial ‘five laying hens’ in today's battery cage do not even have the space to stand up together — one or more must crouch), animals no longer wasted calories in non profit-making exercise.
Packed so closely together, they kept each other warm, thus saving those calories that were burned up maintaining body temperature.
Facts flouted
What was completely left out of these cost-saving equations was any consideration of animals' behavioural needs.
Science simply ignored the fact that livestock are creatures with a capacity to suffer.
At the time, after years of wartime austerity, consumers were so relieved to sink their teeth into a nice slice of meat that they seemed content to remain in ignorance about its origins.
And it was easy to be reassured by pastoral images on the packaging and in the advertising that nothing much had changed ‘down on the farm’.
Now a new breed of scientists is changing all that.
Pigs in the middle
‘Existing scientific knowledge is unclear on the extent to which pigs need space, or whether close confinement causes any distress,’ says the National Farmers Union press office.
‘Successful pig production is never achieved a the expense of animal welfare.’
This is hardly the conclusion to be drawn from reading the research of such scientists as Professor Donald Broom of Cambridge University, who has studied sows kept in confined conditions.
The prolonged bouts of repetitive behaviour and deep apathy to stimulation revealed by such studies has led to the conclusion that pigs react to these systems in a manner closely resembling the development of human psychiatric disorders.
Horse sense?
The public, however, has yet to completely abandon its belief that farm animals are somehow different to those we call pets and regard as friends and family.
The prospect of exporting live horses for meat still causes a greater outcry than the continued export of half a million live British sheep each year.
Yet scientific tests show that sheep, along with pigs, cattle and goats are actually more intelligent than horses.
Experts believe they suffer just as much on harrowing journeys, although nature has invested these animals with the capacity (once valuable for protection from predators) for not revealing pain or fear.
Wild at heart
Another much-fostered fallacy is that farm animals are now quite different from their wild and free ancestors.
Accustomed to crouching in cages or concrete cells, knowing no different, modern farm animals are happy with their lot.
Or so producers would have us believe.
But when Edinburgh University's Professor David Wood-Gush and colleagues released factory-raised pigs into a semi-wild environment on the Pentland Hills, the animals lost no time in gathering twigs, grass  and branches to build communal nests in which to sleep.
They quickly learned how to use their snouts to lever edible roots from the ground, overturn grass tussocks for worms and locate resin (pigs have a sweet tooth).
On hot days they wallowed in bogs or streams; at noon they took siestas ; they began to groom each other and established communal loos, well away from their sleeping quarters.
Professor Wood-Gush concluded that, within six months, the pigs' behaviour was just that of their primitive ancestor, the wild boar.
Call of nature
Similar experiments with factory farmed chickens and ducks reveal the same swift reversion to nature.
Centuries of domestication have failed to eradicate their behavioural instincts.
Many studies now confirm that farm animals, in fact, differ very little to wild animals.
Any changes in the behaviour of domesticated animals have been minor, such as becoming less alarmed by the proximity of Man and being prepared to breed in captivity.
Primal fears
With our new awareness of animal needs, the more forward looking factory farmers are now seeking ways of offering farm animals a better life.
The Irish company, Moy Park, has switched much of its poultry production to free-range, and is now busy planting bushes in its fields.
Despite its long history of domestication, a chicken's greatest fear — and what tends to keep it indoors — is still the threat of overhead attack from its primitive predator, the hawk.
Purse power
Most farm animals, however, still endure conditions devised in days when they were merely thought of as meat machines.
The present imponderable is just how far this move to ‘kinder’ food will go.
Will 20, 50 per cent or even the majority of shoppers be prepared to pay a little extra for more humanely produced foodstuffs in the caring '90s?
As such foods become more widely available, the onus is on us to put our money where our mouths are.
Cost-cutters who won't pay out the extra for ‘traditional’, ‘free-range’, ‘conservation grade’ or ‘organic’can no longer put the blame for cruelty to animals on the factory farmers.
By their actions, it is they who will be keeping hens in cages and pigs in chains.
The Kind Food Guide by Audrey Eyton (Penguin, £3.99) is a complete guide to the more humanely produced foods on sale in supermarkets and reveals whose to choose in poultry, meat and dairy products — even the ‘kindest’ sausages, bacon, pies and quiches.
The book also looks at ‘The Most Healthy Diet Known to Science’, based on new nutritional guidelines.
The author's royalties will all go to charities working to improve the welfare of farm animals.
TV Cooks
EASTER teatime
There's more to Easter than eggs and chocolate.
Daytime UK's Anne Stirk goes around the world in search of cakes to bring a festive touch to your teatime table
With the emphasis firmly on bunnies and bonnets, eggs and entertaining, Easter Sunday itself is a ‘moveable’ feast.
It can fall on any Sunday between March 22 and April 22, and is celebrated across the world with traditional dishes and customs.
Easter food has a lightness and freshness after the richness of Christmas; and of course it wouldn't be Easter without eggs.
Eggs are an international symbol of Easter, the sign of rebirth and new life.
In France and Russia, beautifully painted and decorated eggs are offered as gifts.
In Germany, you can eat Ostertorte, a mocha-filled sponge piled with miniature eggs.
The traditional Russian Easter cake Kulitsch is even eaten with hard-boiled eggs after being blessed by a priest.
In Britain, we have egg rolling competitions and Hot cross bun ceremonies.
Hot cross buns are very much a part of the British Easter tradition.
They used to be made in the shape of Christ's tombstone, and years ago, all bread baked on Good Friday was marked with a cross as a symbol of good luck.
Happy Easter feasting!
Simnel cake
A luscious festive cake, spicy and buttery-rich with marzipan, it originated as a speciality for Mother's Day.
225g/8oz plain flour
1 tsp baking powder
1 tsp mixed spice
175g/6oz butter
175g/6oz soft light brown sugar
3 eggs
450g/1lb mixed dried fruit
50g/2oz glacé cherries, quartered
50gr/2oz candied peel
finely grated rind of 1 orange
finely grated rind of 1 lemon
2 tbsp milk
450g/1lb pack of white marzipan
2 tbsp apricot jam, strained
FOR THE DECORATION
crystallised flowers, small marzipan balls, yellow or gold ribbon
1
Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/Gas 3.
Grease and line a deep 20cm/8in round cake tin.
2
Sift together the flour, baking powder and mixed spice.
Cream the butter and sugar until light and fluffy, then beat in eggs, a little at a time.
3
Fold in the flour mixture.
Combine the dried fruits and mix with the grated orange and lemon rind.
Stir them into the creamed mixture with the milk.
Spread half of the mixture in the base of the prepared tin.
4
Roll out about one third of the marzipan and trim to fit the cake tin.
Place marzipan circle on cake mixture and cover with the rest of the mixture.
5
Bake for 2–2 ½ hours, or until a skewer inserted into the cake comes out cleanly.
Cover cake with foil if the tip seems to be overbrowning.
Once cooked leave to cool in the tin.
6
Roll just over half of the remaining marzipan to fit the top of the cake.
Brush cake with strained apricot jam and place marzipan on top.
Crimp the edges and score the top.
7
Roll remaining marzipan into 11 even-sized balls.
Arrange these around the edge of the  cake, sticking them down with dots of jam.
Place cake under a hot grill until the marzipan begins to turn brown.
Hot cross buns
For a healthier bun, try using wholemeal flour
450g/1lb strong plain flour
75g/3oz butter
1 sachet easy-blend yeast
1 tsp salt
1 tsp ground cinnamon
1 tsp mixed spice
½ tsp grated nutmeg
50g/2oz caster sugar
75g/3oz currants
25g/1oz mixed peel
1 egg, beaten
300ml/ ½ pint warm milk
50g/2oz plain flour
FOR THE GLAZE
4 tbsp milk and water, mixed
3 tbsp caster sugar
1
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Sift the strong plain flour into a warm mixing bowl.
Rub in the butter, then stir in the yeast, salt, spices, sugar and fruit, mixing well.
2
Gradually add the egg and enough milk to mix to a smooth dough.
Turn onto a floured surface and knead for 5 minutes until smooth.
If mixture becomes sticky, add a little extra flour
3
Divide into 12 equal pieces, smoothing into rounds and place on a lightly oiled baking sheet.
Cover with a tea towel and leave in a warm place until double in size, about 1 hour.
4
Make a dough with the plain flour and a little water, roll out thinly and cut into strips to make crosses.
Fix the crosses to the risen buns with a little water.
5
Bake for 15–20 minutes until golden brown.
Transfer to a wire rack before glazing.
6
Heat together milk and water and caster sugar.
Brush warm buns twice with glaze.
Serve warm or toasted and spread with butter.
Kulitsch
A delicious Russian Easter loaf baked in a tall mould — so why not use a clay flowerpot?
175g/6oz butter, softened
100g/4oz caster sugar
few drops vanilla essence
½ tsp salt
pinch of ground saffron (optional)
6 egg yolks
1 sachet easy-blend yeast
450g/1lb strong plain flour
175ml/6fl oz warm milk
75g/3oz almonds, chopped
75g/3oz sultanas
50g/2oz mixed peel, finely chopped
1 tbsp rum
glacé fruits and 4 tbsp glacé icing, to decorate
1
Cream the butter and sugar until pale and light.
Add vanilla essence, salt and saffron (if using).
Gradually beat in yolks.
2
Mix yeast with flour and add to mixture.
Stir in enough milk to give a soft, smooth dough.
3
Cover the bowl with a tea towel and leave until the mixture is double in size, about 1½ hours.
Meanwhile, marinate the almonds, sultanas and peel in the rum for 30 minutes.
Then preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
4
Knead the soaked fruit into the dough.
Divide the mixture between two well buttered and base-lined 600ml/1 pint clay flowerpots.
Cover and leave to prove for 30 minutes to 1 hour, or until double in size.
5
Bake for 15 minutes, then reduce heat to 180C/350F/Gas 4 for a further 25–30 minutes.
6
Test with a skewer, which should come out clean.
Turn out and discard lining paper.
The bread should sound hollow when tapped.
Leave to cool on a wire rack.
7
Decorate with glacé fruits and drizzle with glacé icing.
Gâteau de Pacques
5 eggs, separated
150g/5oz caster sugar
100g/4oz fine semolina
50g/2oz ground almonds
pinch of salt
1 tsp grated orange rind
1tbsp orange juice
1tbsp rum
FOR THE FILLING
1 orange
100g/4oz full fat soft cheese
50g/2oz caster sugar
150ml/ ¼ pint whipping cream, whipped
icing sugar and crystallised spring flowers, to decorate
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Whisk yolks and sugar until mixture is thick and pale and holds a trail.
2
Fold in semolina, almonds, salt, orange rind and juice, and rum.
Whisk whites in a clean bowl until stiff, then fold into mixture with a metal spoon.
3
Pour mixture into a greased and floured 20cm/8in round spring-form tin.
Bake for about 40–45 minutes until golden brown and springy to touch.
Cool on a wire rack, then cut in two horizontally.
4
To make filling, finely grate orange.
Peel the orange and cut into segments.
Mix the soft cheese with the sugar, fold in the orange rind.
5
Fold cream into mixture.
Spread over lower half of the cake, then arrange orange segments on top of filling.
6
Place top layer of cake on filling, dredge with icing sugar and decorate with crystallised spring flowers.
12 REDS from AROUND THE WORLD
Judy Goolden sees red with this selection.
Jill Goolden is the drinks expert who sniffs out winners on BBC2's Food and Drink
AUSTRALIA
Hill-Smith Cabernet Sauvignon Malbec '88
Malbec, one of the lesser-known claret grapes, responds well to Australia's sunshine.
It goes well with Cabernet, offsetting that grape's fruitiness with its plummy taste.
BULGARIA
Oriachovitza Cabernet Sauvignon Reserve '84
Starts with a whiff of charcoal and a hint of fire-lighter, then it develops into rich fruit tinged with cedar and mint.
Good, mature Cabernet.
CALIFORNIA
Wente Cabernet Sauvignon '85
A direct, brash, up-front fruitiness wins friends for this wine, which is a copy-book New World Cabernet Sauvignon.
Instantly recognisable by its overt blackcurranty flavour, but there's noticeable tannin to firm it up and give it some structure.
CHILE
Nogales Cabernet Sauvignon '88
The nose is more subtle than some Cabernets, but search and you'll find currants and an edge of tar.
Zingy berry taste with an unusual cutting edge.
Good body and price; an excellent partner for rich food.
FRANCE
Château de Gourgazaud Minervois '87
Honest to goodness southern French plonk in which traditional grape varieties conspire to bring together pepper and spice and rich, smelly cheese with a raspberry and currant flavour.
A real treat.
GERMANY
Rheinpfalz Dornfelder
Alcohol-soaked cherries sum up the bouquet of this unusual Dornfelder.
Sharp, direct fruit, like biting into a tart-skinned damson, gives it a fresh edge.
But be prepared for a slight jab of bitterness as you get to the end.
HUNGARY
Merlot
Young, bouncy, straightforward, the unmistakeable Merlot plumminess provides fruit with an almost tangible liveliness to it.
Velvety textured and mouth-filling, this wine delivers good grape character at a reasonable price.
NEW ZEALAND
Montana Marlborough Cabernet Sauvignon '88
Intense hedgerow scents on the bouquet lure you to the gorgeously fruity taste redolent of cassis, but with a slightly grassy note.
Delicate, direct and quite delicious.
ITALY
Rosso Conero '89
This velvety, rich, typically Italian wine is made from the Montepulciano grape and tastes both fruity and meaty, like lamb with redcurrant jelly.
Distinguished wine and distinguished presentation at a good price.
PORTUGAL
Borba '89
New entry to the British market from the Alentejo region near Lisbon.
Broad, robust and almost cheesy bouquet, but with bags of fruit to follow, giving it the sort of richness that goes well with casseroles and games meats.
THE LEBANON
Château Musar '82
Modelled on claret and made from Cabernet Sauvignon with Syrah and Cinsault thrown in, there's a ripe fruitiness to this well-balanced wine, pepped up by a shake of spice.
Great with red meat, offal, and, surprisingly enough, turkey.
SPAIN
Don Hugo
Looking a shade light, but well made in the traditional Rioja style with buttery oak leading the scent and flavour medley.
The ripe, grapy fruit with a slightly sweet, nutty edge, calls to mind roasted chestnuts.
GOOD FOOD PROMOTION
Spice it up
Savour three new spices with tasty flavour arrangements by Schwartz
Schwartz is proud to announce the launch of three new additions to its range of herbs and spices.
Piri-Piri Seasoning, Thai 7 Spice Seasoning and Cajun Seasoning have all been created to add even more taste and flavour to your everyday cooking.
Piri-Piri Seasoning is a Portuguese-style blend of crushed chillies and aromatic herbs.
It adds a characteristic flavour to a range of savoury dishes, from pizza to pork chops.
Mixed with lemon juice and oil, it makes an ideal marinade for chicken and fish.
Thai cooking provides the inspiration for Thai 7 Spice Seasoning.
Cloves, harvested from the flower buds of the clove tree are an essential flavouring along with cinnamon, star anise and ginger; dried chillies add a peppery touch.
Use in oriental-style dishes and sprinkle it over meat before grilling it or use to liven up leftover boiled rice.
Schwartz has turned to the American Deep South for its third new seasoning.
Introduced to Louisiana by immigrants, Cajun cooking has its roots in southern France and is currently enjoying a revival.
Cajun Seasoning blends several traditional spices with pimientos, garlic and thyme to impart a New Orleans- style flavour and an attractive barbecued appearance to pan-fried meat and fish.
Add to tomato juice for a piquant alternative to Worcestershire sauce or sprinkle it on corn on the cob before baking or barbecuing.
All three flavourings have been produced to ensure they meet the standards for which Schwartz is famous.
As the brand leader for herbs and spices in the UK, Schwartz maintains its standards with rigorous quality screening at every stage of production, from detailed checking of crops and supplies to packaging in resealable jars.
Schwartz also has over 300 merchandisers to ensure that all of its stores are kept well-stocked.
Cajun crusted pork
Serve with roast sweet potatoes, guavas and peaches.
50g/2oz spring onions, chopped
1 tbsp soft brown sugar
1 tbsp Schwartz Cajun Seasoning
1 tbsp vegetable oil
1.5kg/3½lb loin of pork, skinned
25g/1oz fresh white breadcrumbs
1
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5 Place the spring onions, sugar, Cajun Seasoning and one teaspoon of oil in a processor and blend to a smooth paste.
2
Spread the paste over the pork.
Cover and leave in a cool place for up to 24 hours.
3
Place the pork in a roasting tin, add 150ml/ ¼ pint water and cover with foil.
Roast for 1 hour.
4
Remove the pork from the tin, stir the breadcrumbs and remaining oil into the pan juices.
Score the fat on the loin and cover with the breadcrumb and oil mixture.
5
Return the pork to oven with 150ml/ ¼ pint water to roast for 1 hour until cooked.
TIPS
Sprinkle Cajun Seasoning on fish, chops or chicken breasts to give them zing.
Add to stews or mix with mince for spicy burgers.
Thai chicken and peanut curry.
If you can't find coconut milk, soak the grated flesh of a coconut in 400ml/14fl oz boiling water, then drain and use the milky liquid.
12 tbsp vegetable oil
12 boneless and skinless chicken thighs
4 tsp Schwartz Thai 7 Spice Seasoning
400ml/14 fl oz can coconut milk
75g/3oz salted peanuts
150ml/¼ pint pineapple juice
juice of ½ lime
FOR THE GARNISH
1 tbsp vegetable oil
1 red chilli, sliced
50g/2oz salted peanuts
Schwartz Coriander Leaf or fresh coriander leaves
1
Heat the oil in a large frying pan.
Dip the chicken in the Thai 7 Spice Seasoning and fry until golden on all sides.
2
Purée the coconut milk and peanuts in a blender, then add to the chicken together with the pineapple and lime juices.
Bring to the boil, reduce heat, cover and simmer for 30–40 minutes until the chicken is tender.
Season with salt.
3
For the garnish, heat the oil and quickly sauté the chilli and peanuts.
Drain and sprinkle them over the chicken with the coriander leaves.
Serve hot with basmati rice.
TIPS
Add Thai 7 Spice Seasoning to stir fries.
Sprinkle over raw shellfish.
Add to omelettes with spring onions and fresh coriander, and also cooked noodles and fried rice.
Sprinkle over whole chicken or fish before cooking or add to minced pork to make meatballs.
Lamb Piri-Piri
4 leg of lamb steaks
4 tsp Schwartz Piri-Piri Seasoning
salt
2 tbsp vegetable oil
4 onions quartered
300ml/ ½ pint lamb stock
1 tbsp cornflour
1 tbsp tomato purée
2 large oranges
oregano sprigs, to garnish
1
Preheat the oven to 190C/375G/Gas 5.
Sprinkle the lamb with the Piri-Piri Seasoning and salt and set aside.
2
Heat the oil in a large, non-stick frying pan and brown the onion, remove from the pan.
3
Using the same pan, brown the lamb steaks on both sides, adding a little extra oil if it is necessary.
Place in a large, ovenproof dish and arrange the onion on top.
4
Mix a little of the stock with the cornflour to make a paste, then add remaining stock and tomato purée.
Add to the pan juices and bring to the boil.
Pour over the lamb and bake for 45 minutes.
5
Meanwhile, using a sharp knife, peel both oranges, remove the white pith and cut into quarters.
Place the orange quarters on top of the lamb and return to the oven for 15 minutes.
Serve garnished with oregano.
TIPS
Add Piri-Piri Seasoning to chicken casseroles.
Flavour seafood rice with a generous sprinkling.
Spice up tomato or cream sauces for fish and chicken.
Add it to omelettes or mix with mayonnaise to serve with prawns.
Visit the Schwartz stand at the BBC Good Food Show and you could win an attractive Schwartz wooden spice rack (spices not included).
Schwartz is giving away spice racks to the first 1,000 BBC Good Food readers who can correctly answer our questions below.
Simply write the appropriate answers in the boxes on the corner of the page — all necessary information appears in this feature.
For your chance to win, take the ‘corner’ to the Schwartz stand, where you'll be able to taste and buy the Schwartz Seasonings featured in our recipes as well as other new ranges and Authentic Mix Cook-in sauces.
1.
Which part of the tree do cloves come from?
2
.
Where does Piri-Piri Seasoning originate?
3
.
Which US state is the home of Cajun cooking?
EQUIPMENT
Shape a cake
Mary Lambert chooses tins for all occasions — from bells and bears to brioches and birthday cakes
Aluminium tiffin tins make anything from wedding bells to space-ships, from   Tel: for mail order details.
Prices start at £3.50.
Festive novelty steel moulds, like the teddy below, are made by Pinto, for Kitchenware Merchants Ltd.
Helpline (0800) 373792 (10am–4pm).
From £4.30; also available in department stores and kitchen shops.
Spell it out with an alphabetically-adaptable A-Z non-stick ‘Educated Cake pan’, about £22.95; from   .
Add £1.94 p&p for mail order items up to £30.
Over £30 p&p is free.
Hire (or buy) a horseshoe, teddy frame, or any type of shape from    Hire costs are £3 for three days.
Make a brioche in this Silicone non-stick Master Baker from Prestige, price £4.69.
From department stores and kitchen shops.
Almost any aluminium shape from a Michelangelo or Raphael (far right, opposite page) to Garfield (right), about £9.99 each from Wilton's.
Tel: for stockists details.
Plastic clown (above) and other microwave moulds, about £3.49; also available from department stores and kitchen shops.
Six of the best pumpkin faces, aluminium tin (right) from Wilton's; about £7.99 from department stores and kitchen shops.
Microwave star mould (right of headline) also from Wilton's; about £3.49; available from department stores and kitchen shops.
Progress Healthier Lifestyle heart Silverstone tin from George Wilkinson Ltd; The non-stick finish needs no greasing and is endorsed by Weightwatcher's recipes.
About £4.45; also available from department stores and kitchen shops.
Teenage Mutant Hero Turtle aluminium tin from Wilton's; £9.99 from department stores and kitchen shops.
Rabbit tin for Kitchenware Merchants Ltd by Pinto; from department stores and kitchen shops, about £4.30.
Birthdays, children's parties, weddings, Hallowe'en and Valentine's Day are just some events that could see you searching for an unusual tin in which to bake a cake that will leave your guests or children marvelling at your skills.
‘Wacky’ cake tins are produced in an incredible variety of shapes and sizes, including cartoon and character moulds.
There are also adjustable tins which enlarge or reduce in size or, as in the case of a numerals tin, can be altered by moving around squares to create different numbers.
Remember that baking shapes need to be placed on a greaseproof-lined baking sheet before filling.
Many specialist tins are made from tin plate or aluminium.
Tin plate is cheaper and quite durable, but keeping tin rust-free does pose problems.
Always grease and dust with flour before use.
After cooking, wash in warm, soapy water; soak in suds for longer periods to remove dried food particles.
Wipe dry and place in a warm oven for a few minutes to remove any remaining moisture.
Finally, coat with a fine film of cooking oil before storing for long periods.
Aluminium is more expensive and hard-wearing.
Once again, it should be greased and dusted before use.
Anodised aluminium (see label) should be washed in soapy water, then dried.
The more stubborn food particles can be removed by gentle scrubbing with wire wool.
Polished aluminium tins should be cleaned gently to prevent scratching.
Only a few of the more unusual tins have a non-stick surface.
The quality and thickness of the surfaces vary from Silicone and PTFE to Teflon and top-quality Silverstone.
Before using a non-stick tin it should be washed, rinsed and dried, then lightly coated with cooking oil or fat to condition the surface.
Some are dishwasher-proof (see label); if not, wash in warm, soapy water.
Microwave bakeware is normally made of durable plastic and needs no greasing before use.
Either wash in soapy detergent or place in the dishwasher in the normal way.
SPECIAL
Having young vegetarians in the family doesn't mean that their nutritional needs will be lacking, says Roselyne Masselin
GREEN teen CUISINE
The number of vegetarians in Britain is increasing.
The 1990 Realeat survey reports that 24 million people (40 per cent of the population) are cutting back on their meat intake.
Vegetarians who exclude fish and poultry as well as red meat, now make up 3.7 per cent of the population — an increase of 23 per cent since 1988 and 76 per cent since 1984.
Realeat founder Greg Sams predicts that within 20 years half of us will have a vegetable-based diet, and the greatest swing has been seen among the young.
Juliet Gellatley, head of Youth Education at the Vegetarian Society, hears from hundreds of parents of vegetarians and would-be vegetarian youngsters (some as young as five) wanting advice on nutrition.
It is said that in the under 16 age group one in six no longer eats meat.
Changing to a vegetarian diet is a big step as the body needs to adjust to different foods and sources of protein and you need to cope with new methods of cooking and shopping.
So, how do you make this change and ensure a balanced diet?
The best way is to start with a few vegetarian meals a week and gradually increase the number.
Remember not to rely too heavily on dairy products as they contain highly saturated fats which could be bad for health if consumed in large quantities.
Vary your diet with nuts, seeds, pulses, grains and soya-based products, such as TVP and tofu.
One thing that worries parents about their children becoming vegetarian is that they might lack protein.
To ensure that they get the right amount, vegetarians mix proteins from a variety of sources.
Mixed protein dishes include cheese sandwiches, beans on toast and porridge that is made with milk.
Another common fear is that vegetarians may be lacking in iron or vitamin B12.
All green, leafy vegetables, pulses, grains, dried fruits, nuts and seeds contain iron.
Vitamin C aids iron absorption and is found in most fresh fruit and vegetables.
Vitamin B12 is found in dairy products, and a number of cereals and yeast extracts, such as Marmite.
There are plentiful amounts of B vitamins in pulses, grains, nuts, seeds and fruits.
A vegetarian meal contains plenty of carbohydrates; pasta, beans, peas, lentils, couscous, rice, bread and potatoes are all good sources.
Fats of vegetable origin, mainly polyunsaturated, are often used in the cooking process.
Both carbohydrates and fats provide plentiful sources of energy.
It is worth remembering that only the format of the evening meal will change dramatically.
Lunch can be a sandwich filled with vegetarian cheese or a ready-made spread from a health food shop.
Leftover savouries, such as nut roast, make good sandwich fillings.
Most families are not against having vegetarian dishes several times a week; indeed pizza, pasta and vegetable burgers have become widely acceptable alternatives.
For those meals when family members insist on eating meat, keep a stock of vegetable pies and bakes in the freezer.
For Sunday lunch, a nut roast is perfect; cook a large quantity, freeze in thick slices and serve with the usual side vegetables.
Encourage older children to read about vegetarian nutrition and cooking; they may enjoy getting involved in the planning of their own menus.
Roselyne Masselin runs a vegetarian cookery school in central London — La Cuisine Imaginaire.
The school offers a variety of day courses including: meals in a moment, vegetarian dinner parties and healthy family meals.
Roselyne also offers vegetarian catering — call .
The following recipes should be very useful and for more nutritional advice, call The Vegetarian Society on .
Couscous and ratatouille bake
FOR THE BASE
400G/14oz can ready-made ratatouille
2 tbsp tomato purée
FOR THE MIDDLE LAYER
225g/8oz couscous
good pinch of salt
1 vegetable stock cube
FOR THE TOPPING
425G/15oz natural yogurt
1 egg, beaten
100g/4oz vegetarian Cheddar, grated
½ tsp ground cumin
1
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Place the ready-made ratatouille in a deep 1.75litre/3 pint ovenproof dish, add five tablespoons of water and the tomato purée and mix well.
2
Place the couscous and salt in a medium-sized glass bowl.
Dissolve the stock cube in 450ml/ ¾ pint boiling water and pour over the couscous.
Cover and leave for 10–12 minutes, until the liquid is absorbed.
3
.
Mix together the yogurt, egg, cheese and cumin.
Spoon the couscous over the ratatouille and level the top.
Pour over the yogurt mixture and bake for 35–40 minutes until the topping has set.
Leave to stand for 5 minutes before serving.
Crêpes à l'orange
A delicious dessert — even better with a little orange liqueur, such as Cointreau or Drambuie added to the filling.
FOR THE BATTER
300ml/ ½ pint milk
1 egg
1 tsp oil
100g/4oz wholemeal flour (or 100g/4oz unbleached white flour and tbsp
wheatgerm)
FOR THE FILLING
2 tsp arrowroot
150ml ¼ pint orange juice
4 oranges, segmented
honey, to taste
grated orange rind
225g/8oz Greek strained yogurt
1–2 tbsp poppy seeds
1
Place all of the batter ingredients in a blender or food processor and blend together until smooth.
Leave the batter mixture to stand for about 20–30 minutes.
2
For the filling, place the arrowroot in a small pan and gradually add the orange juice and any juice resulting from the segmenting of the oranges; mix well.
Bring to the boil and simmer for 2 minutes until clear.
Add the orange segments and bring the sauce to the boil.
Remove the pan from the heat and add the honey.
3
Stir the batter, then make at least eight pancakes in a small, non-stick frying pan, cooking each side in a small amount of oil or fat until golden.
Keep them warm as you make them.
4
Place some filling in each pancake and fold in half, then in half again.
Decorate with grated orange rind and serve warm with yogurt sprinkled with a few poppy seeds.
TO SERVE
Creamy sesame and vegetable cobbler
The pastry topping for this dish is similar to a scone mixture and provides a nice contrast to  the base.
The vegetables can be varied according to the season; try it with sweetcorn, green beans and flageolet beans for a change.
225g/8oz carrots, diced
350g/12oz broccoli florets
1 red pepper, diced
1 small leek, finely sliced
40g/1½oz vegetable margarine or butter
25g/1oz wholemeal flour
450ml/ ¾ pint milk
2 tsp creamed horseradish
400g/14oz can butter beans, drained and rinsed
seasoning
FOR THE TOPPING
1 quantity scone mix (see Pizza-style pie, p. 74)
50–75g/2–3oz vegetarian Cheddar, grated
15g/ ½oz sesame seeds
1
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Steam the carrots and broccoli for 8 minutes.
Add the red pepper and leek and steam for a further 5 minutes.
2
Meanwhile, make a white sauce.
Melt the margarine or butter in a small pan, add the flour and cook over a low heat for 1–2 minutes.
Remove from the heat and gradually add the milk, stirring all the time.
3
Bring to the boil and simmer, covered, for 2–3 minutes.
Remove the pan from the heat and then add the creamed horseradish, stirring well.
4
Place all the cooked vegetables in mixing bowl, add the sauce, butter beans and seasoning, and mix well.
Pour into a 1.75–2 litre/ 3/3½ pint ovenproof dish.
5
Roll out the scone dough to a 1cm/ ½in thickness.
Cut out rounds with a 6cm/ 2½in pastry cutter and overlap the rounds over the vegetable mixture leaving a gap in the centre.
6
Sprinkle the grated cheese and sesame seeds over the top and bake for 30–35 minutes until crisp and golden on top.
Take out of the oven and serve at once with a crunchy fresh salad.
Smoked tofu pâté
This creamy pâté makes a nice alternative to the usual cheese and egg sandwich fillings.
It can also be used to fill small tomatoes as a tasty starter.
50g/2oz walnuts
1 pkt smoked tofu
25g/1oz wholemeal breadcrumbs
few drops Tabasco sauce
25g/1oz margarine or butter
2 tsp naturally fermented soy sauce
freshly ground black pepper
1
Place the walnuts in a food processor and grind until fine.
Add the tofu, breadcrumbs, Tabasco, margarine, soy sauce and pepper and blend until the ingredients come together as a smooth ball.
2
Taste the pâté and adjust the seasoning, if necessary.
3
Place the pâté in the fridge and use it within 2–3 days.
Creamed cannellini, basil and tomato soup
This nutritious and hearty soup with a delicious Italian flavour is suitable for a light lunch, or as a starter for an evening meal.
If you cannot get hold of ripe red tomatoes, add one tablespoon of tomato purée to the soup to improve its colour.
400g/14oz can cannellini beans, drained and rinsed
350g/12oz ripe tomatoes, seeded and roughly chopped
1 vegetable stock cube
1 bouquet garni(fresh or sachet)
1 tsp dried basil
seasoning
chopped fresh basil or parsley, to garnish
1
Place the beans, tomatoes, 600ml/1 pint water, stock cube, bouquet garni and basil in a medium-sized pan.
Cover, bring to the boil, reduce the heat and simmer for 30 minutes.
2
Leave the soup to cool, then remove the bouquet garni.
Blend the soup until smooth in a blender or food processor.
If the soup is too thick, add a little water to thin it down.
3
Reheat the soup, season to taste and simmer for 2 minutes.
Garnish with fresh parsley or basil and serve hot with fresh wholemeal bread.
Courgette and hazelnut burgers
These crunchy burgers are delicious served with boiled or mashed potatoes, a tomato sauce or tomato ketchup, and seasonal vegetables or salad.
Makes 8–10 burgers (depending on size)
3 tbsp sunflower oil
1 small onion, finely chopped
100g/4oz mushrooms, very finely chopped
1 small courgette, finely diced
100g/4oz chopped mixed nuts
50g/2oz chopped toasted hazelnuts
100g/4oz wholemeal breadcrumbs
1 rounded tsp Marmite mixed with 2 tbsp boiling water
1 egg, beaten
seasoning
1
Heat one tablespoon of oil in a pan and fry the onion until soft but not brown.
Add the mushrooms and courgette and fry over a medium heat for 8 minutes or until the vegetables are soft.
2
Meanwhile, mix the nuts and breadcrumbs in a mixing bowl.
When the vegetables are soft, add the Marmite mixture to the pan and remove from the heat.
3
Pour the vegetables into the breadcrumb mixture, add the beaten egg and mix thoroughly.
4
Add the seasoning (and extra boiling water, if necessary) and form the mixture into a stiff, manageable dough.
5
Leave it to stand for 10 minutes and then shape into 8 or 10 burgers.
6
Heat two tablespoons of oil in a frying pan; fry four or five burgers at a time and cook for 2–3 minutes on each side until well done.
Serve hot.
Pizza-style pie
FOR THE TOPPING
2 tbsp olive oil
1 onion, finely chopped
2 large garlic cloves, crushed
1 tsp mixed herbs
350g/12oz courgettes, thinly sliced
350g/12oz tomatoes, thinly sliced
175g/6oz vegetarian Cheddar, grated
2 tsp chopped fresh thyme
FOR THE SCONE BASE
250g/9oz unbleached plain white flour
1 tbsp wheatgerm
pinch of salt
75g/3oz vegetable margarine or butter
200ml/7fl oz milk
1
Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Heat the oil and gently fry the onion, garlic, mixed herbs and courgettes for 5–10 minutes until soft.
2
Meanwhile, put the flour, wheatgerm and salt in a mixing bowl or a food processor.
Add the margarine or butter and rub in with your hands or blend for a few seconds.
Add the milk to form a smooth dough.
3
Roll out the pizza dough on a well floured surface to fit a 33×23cm/13×9in swiss roll tin.
Spread the courgette mixture on top, cover with tomatoes and cheese, and sprinkle over the chopped thyme.
4
Bake for 10 minutes, then reduce the heat to 200C/400F/Gas 6 and bake for 10 minutes.
READER OFFER
OUT TO lunch WITH GOOD FOOD
Join us for another fabulous Perrier lunch in the heart of England
Six readers will have the opportunity to meet the BBC Good Food team at the second BBC Good Food readers' lunch, to be hosted by Perrier at an award-winning Les Routiers restaurant in Yorkshire.
The first lunch which was held at Greig's restaurant, London SW13 (tel;) was a great success, so do come along and join the next one.
Three of our lunch invitations have been inserted into three copies of this month's BBC Good Food , so check your copy carefully.
But if you don't find an invitation, send your name, address and daytime telephone number on a postcard to:, and the first three names drawn from the hat will be invited to join us.
In France and Britain, travelling gourmets know that roadside restaurants, hotels and pubs recommended by Les Routiers provide good quality food, a warm welcome and excellent value.
Many of these eating places offer their customers Perrier, which is recognised across the world as the perfect partner for food.
Perrier's source of Vergeze in southern France is said to have been discovered by Hannibal in the year 218BC.
This month's lunch takes place on Monday April 8 at Ayton Hall, Great Ayton, in breathtakingly beautiful Yorkshire.
Set in six acres of parkland, Ayton Hall is an elegant 19th-century house with foundations dating back to 1281.
The menu at Ayton Hall is based on fresh local produce and there is a comprehensive wine list.
The restaurant has been awarded the Les Routiers ‘Casserole’ of excellence for the past four years.
Some of chef/owner Melvin Rhodes' recipes are included in the Les Routiers Cook Book and he will be cooking at least one of these for the lunch.
The Les Routiers Cook Book has recipes from British restaurants chosen by Raymond Blanc.
Les Routiers are offering it to BBC Good Food readers at a special price of £6.99 (including p&p).
Send your name, address and a cheque/PO for £6.99 to:BBC Good Food Offer /Les Routiers, 354 Fulham Road, London SW10 9UH.
creative CAKEWARE
If there's a birthday or any celebration on the horizon, why not bake a special, unusual shaped cake?
There are plenty of cake tins in this month's equipment feature on page 68 to inspire creative cake baking.
But you don't have to seek out specialist shops to buy them.
Our aluminium selection is mainly suitable for sponge cakes.
The animal/people cake pans take about 350g/12oz of sponge mixture.
The Clown and Doll cake pans come with two icing bags and nozzles.
Tiffin tins are ideal for fruit cakes and can be used as a base for people/animal shapes or bells.
They make 1.25kg/2½lb (small), 1.75kg/3½lb (medium) and 2.25kg/5lb (large) cakes.
FREE we are giving away a set of nine chocolate moulds with every order.
Aristocratic ALSACE
Jill Goolden looks at the Gallic and Germanic influences on Alsace wines
A modern map of north-eastern France shows the Alsace region sandwiched between the Vosges mountains and the River Rhine, representing the border with Germany.
The region was established in Roman times, and produces a number of wines that are highly prized by the French.
Over the centuries the border has moved more than a little— for instance in 1917, Alsace was part of Germany and during the last war it was again occupied by the Germans.
But today it is entirely French and justifiably proud of its thoroughly French style of wines.
However, there is much about Alsace that appears to be Germanic, including the outward appearance of the wines which suggests a German influence.
The slim, green, fluted bottles are reminiscent of those from neighbouring Moselle in Germany — though slightly taller — and the wine firms have a distinctly Germanic ring with names such as Trimbach, Gisselbrecht and Hugel.
The wine villages of Alsace also sound decidedly Germanic with names such as Marlenheim, Turckheim, Riquewihr and Ammerschwihr and here a curious German dialect is often spoken.
Perhaps unsure of exactly what to expect from Alsace wines, it seems British wine drinkers have tended to give the whole lot a miss.
And what treats they have passed up!
About 20 per cent of all quality French wines (that is, wines with an appellation ) come from Alsace, but outside France their biggest fans remain within the wine trade itself.
Alsace is known as the wine merchant's wine.
Long before California and Australia elected to name their wines after the grape variety or varieties from which they were produced, Alsace was already doing just that.
And, instead of a sea of individual appellations , Alsace has only AC Alsace ; and AC Alsace Grand Cru for wines produced from both the best grapes and the best sites.
Of the wines produced in Alsace, 95 per cent are white and dry with a smattering of rosés, a few (delicious) reds, a handful of sweet whites (identified on the label as being vendange tardive or late picked) and a little sparkling, known as Cremant d'Alsace ).
Apart from a few blends, generally called either Vin d'Alsace on the label, or Edelzwicker , wines are produced from individual grape varieties.
Edelzwicker indicates that the wine is a blend of two or more varieties.
The permitted whites are Riesling; the aristocrat of all Gewürztraminer; Tokay d'Alsace (also known as Pinot Gris); Muscat; Pinot Blanc and Sylvaner.
The only red grape grown is Pinot Noir, which is responsible for all reds and rosés.
To choose a single word to summarise Alsace wines, I would go for ‘purist’.
The scents and flavours are both direct and uncluttered and, quite extraordinary for such a northerly location, the region is virtually the driest in France.
The Vosges mountains take most of the rain before it can reach the protected valleys, and dry, sunny days last long into the autumn.
So the wines pack in a fair punch of alcohol before all the grape sugar is used up during fermentation, which adds body and substance.
Riesling Alsace is the only region in France where Germany's noblest grape is allowed to be grown.
No farther into France than 30 miles from the German border is the directive and, luckily for us, this law permits the Riesling to flourish in Alsace.
Generally produced bone dry, Alsace Riesling positively glows with delicate floweriness.
On the taste, the haunting, flowery aroma persists, coated in an apparent oiliness.
Young Alsace Riesling can be somewhat rapier-like in its directness, but as it matures it becomes more honeyed, better rounded and altogether fuller in flavour.
Gewürztraminer, despite its Germanic name (gewürz means spicy in German), is a highly pungent grape whose origins lie in northern Italy, according to Jancis Robinson in her book Vines, Grapes and Wines .
However, nowhere in the world (and Gewürztraminer is widely grown) does it reach such dizzy heights as in Alsace, where it is generally vinified dry, the rosy-skinned grape producing dark- hued white wines packed with alcohol.
Redolent of exotic fruit and scented soap, it is almost sweet-and-sour in character — seemingly sweet at the rich bouquet stage, but satisfyingly dry — almost sour — as you come through the pungent taste.
So this makes a terrific partner for Chinese food.
Tokay d'Alsace, or Pinot Gris, is aptly named gris as the skin colour of this grape does fall somewhere between black and white.
Although it can be youthful, slim and slight, Alsace versions of the grape tend to produce a soft and spicy effect.
And there is a coddling quality, a smooth butteriness that conjures up visions of shortbread biscuits sprinkled with ground cinnamon.
In the fruit line, you can expect small helpings of peaches and pears.
Muscat, the first recorded grape variety in Alsace, appears to have no family links with the aromatic Gewürztraminer, although there are certainly taste associations.
Light, fresh and zesty, Alsace Muscat conjures up all the lush grapiness of those giant, dried grapes, Muscatel raisins, but with a clean freshness because they are dry.
There can be a hint of spice, too, just to confuse you.
Pinot Blanc is one of the less complicated Alsace grapes, producing good, refreshing wines.
In contrast to most Alsace types, there is seldom much of a bouquet from Pinot Blanc wines.
These wines are lovely, clean and fresh.
Well chilled, they make refreshing aperitifs, or good accompaniments to fish and white meats.
Sylvaner is almost at the bottom of the quality scale (below Sylvaner is Chasselas, used only in blends).
Alsace is the only stronghold for the grape outside its native Germany, but its fashionable blandness is causing it to give way to Pinot Blanc.
Hay is the most obvious taste association, striking you first on the bouquet, where it mingles with the scent of crumbled biscuits, and when it comes to flavour, it is met by a faint dusting of icing sugar.
Pinot Noir red Alsace wines are unusual, to say the least, but if you get a chance to taste one, take it!
The are produced from Burgundy's top grape, making them light and vibrant wines.
Cherries and strawberries are scents that you'll find on the bouquet and in the taste.
Chill if you wish.
By the way, if you are stuck for choice on a wine list in a restaurant, turn immediately to the Alsace section.
The name seems to carry its own guarantee of quality and prices are generally fair, so you can't go wrong.
BREAD winners
Wholemeal bread has finally shed its health food image and become one of the most popular sources of fibre.
Kitty Butterwick clears away all the crumbs to find loaves which truly earn their crust.
TRIED AND TASTED
Wholemeal bread is no longer the preserve of traditional bakers, health food shops and fibre freaks.
It is now mass-produced and freshly baked in supermarkets' own in-store bakeries all over the country.
But have modern baking methods affected the traditional wholemeal loaf, and what do fans of the old school think of the new sliced and unsliced loaves that are being produced by large plant bakeries?
New bread-baking technology means that the slow process of traditional fermentation is very much a thing of the past.
The Chorleywood Bread Process, introduced in 1961, replaces a long ‘proving’ with a few minutes of intense mechanical mixing.
Yet many bakers say that if the yeast is not left to develop, the resulting bread has a lot less flavour and structure.
The use of the Chorleywood Bread Process and flour improvers, such as vitamin C, means that wholemeal bread is no longer solid and heavy and is more like white bread in texture.
Wholemeal bread contains more nutrients than white bread and three times as much fibre, but this doesn't mean white bread is bad for you; it contains valuable protein, carbohydrate, calcium, iron and B vitamins, and some fibre.
But as some of the vitamins and minerals are lost during milling, they have to be supplemented later.
In our tasting, we were especially disappointed with the sliced wholemeal breads, which had a generally poor, spongy texture.
They also appeared to smell and taste ‘damp’, probably due to baking technology which allows far more water to be added than in the traditional method in order to produce artificial volume and a longer shelf life.
Three of the sliced loaves stood out among the rest, which were thin-looking with a raw dough taste and vinegary or salty aromas.
See panels below for the verdicts.
The unsliced fresh wholemeal bread performed much better.
Joined by John Thorneycroft of Hibberds Bakery and Sylvia MacDonald of British Baker magazine, the BBC Good Food panel compared wholemeal, unwrapped breads supplied by medium to large regional independents and in-store supermarket bakeries.
Despite the variety of sources, the differences were not very marked — the top five were remarkably close in quality.
As with the sliced bread, we were looking for a good, brown appearance, a firm crust, a distinctive aroma and taste with some nuttiness and a firm but springy texture.
In eighth place, the panel selected a loaf from Sainsbury's in-store bakery, which is made by the Chorleywood Bread Process and is 69p for 800g.
This month's tasting panel also sampled unsliced loaves from M. Firkin (Birmingham), The Co-op, Ferrari's (Wales) and Crawfords (Scotland) as well as sliced loaves from Warburtons, Waitrose, Fine Lady, Tesco, Sainsbury's Roberts and Hovis.
1st UNSLICED Safeway
Safeway (in-store bakery) using the Chorleywood Bread Process.
Attractive, with an uneven, home-made appearance, a shiny, golden colour and a crisp crust.
The bread has a good, appetising, nutty aroma and taste and a pleasantly firm texture to it.
1st UNSLICED Watson's
Watson's of Halifax has 30 shops in Yorkshire area.
Baked using the Chorleywood Bread Process.
Home-made appearance with a very dark crust.
Attractively burnt, nice nutty aroma and taste.
Very flavoursome; springy, soft texture.
2nd UNSLICED Baker's Oven
Baker's Oven (Allied Bakeries retail division).
Usually made on the premises.
Uses traditional and modern processes.
An enjoyable if rather insubstantial loaf.
Has a fresh, nutty taste.
Well-baked with a sweet aroma and a dryish, somewhat crumbly texture.
3rd UNSLICED Newstead
Newstead has 16 shops in Ipswich area.
Bread made by traditional bulk fermentation.
75p for 800g.
Home-made look with a mild but attractive sour dough aroma and good nuttiness.
Close-textured, savoury flavour and good substance.
4th UNSLICED Birds Ltd
Birds Ltd has 39 shops in Derby and Nottingham.
Uses a ‘sponge and dough’ process; part of the dough is left for 24 hours and then added to new dough.
A fairly attractive loaf; has a good, nutty, cooked aroma and slightly salty taste.
Soft, spongy texture.
Not very interesting.
5th UNSLICED Mountstevens
Mountstevens has 67 shops in Avon, Gloucestershire, Wiltshire and Somerset.
Uses a traditional sponge and dough process.
This bread has a rather uneven patchy appearance and a slightly damp, malty aroma.
Fairly sweet, bran-like, mild taste, and a rather soft, moist texture.
6th UNSLICED Greggs
Greggs, based in Newcastle, has seven plants and 450 shops around the country.
Fairly traditional baking method used.
Attractive, golden brown coloured loaf with a fairly nutty but uncooked dough aroma.
the good, chewy texture is a plus, but on the whole rather bland.
7th UNSLICED ASDA
ASDA (in-store bakery).
Made and baked entirely on the premises using fairly traditional baking methods.
Loaf has a good golden colour but lack a firm crust.
Cooked aroma with a slightly salty taste.
The texture of it is light but too soft.
An acceptable loaf.
1st SLICED Safeway
Safeway (in-store bakery), Sliced Wholemeal.
Appetising colour and nice thick crust.
Well cooked, slightly salty aroma and taste.
The texture is firm yet light.
Has a ‘real’ bread feel.
2nd SLICED St Michael
High Fibre Sliced Wholemeal with added bran, from Marks & Spencer.
Good slice thickness and a dark crust.
Vinegary, sweet aroma and taste; good texture.
3rd SLICED Allinson
Medium Sliced Wholemeal, from Allied Bakeries.
Rather pale, with fair slice thickness and attractive crust.
Reasonable texture and bland, if slightly uncooked, taste.
Wholemeal flour contains wholewheat grain with nothing taken out.
Traditionally, grain was ground slowly between huge stones.
Nowadays, the practice is to pass it through rollers without the outer bran layer, which is then added to the flour at a later stage.
HEALTH MATTERS
Janette Marshall discovers that you can forget the meat — but not the two veg
healthiest diet in the world
Eating your greens may not make your hair curl, but knowing what might happen to you if you don't eat enough cabbage and other vegetables and fruit might make your hair stand on end.
While we are now well aware that too much fat, especially in saturated forms, increases the risk of heart disease and certain cancers, the latest from the World Health Organisation (WHO)—Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases — says we run further risks if we do not eat enough fruit and vegetables.
The report recommends that up to 70 per cent of our diet should now consist of fruit, vegetables and complex carbohydrates such as pasta, potatoes, bread and other wholegrain foods.
It almost relegates meat, cheese and fish to the position of being mere garnishes on the plate.
By putting an emphasis on these complex carbohydrates, there is less room for the fatty and sugary foods which can lead to weight problems, and which push valuable nutrient-rich foods out of the diet.
Some way to go
It's true we have made changes to our diet since the National Advisory Committee on Nutritional Information (NACNE) report in 1983 which blew the whistle on the state of the British diet.
But according to several experts, we have not gone far enough.
Professor Philip James was chairman of the NACNE report and he also chaired the WHO report.
‘The British diet has started to change, but a far greater rate of progress can be achieved if we now shift to a positive message about what to eat, rather than going down the old road of saying don't eat certain foods.
‘In the past we have taken too miserable a view of food, now we must say there is a glorious array of foreign cuisines which are associated with amazingly low risks to health.
The message is — enjoy these foods.’
The types of foreign cuisine celebrated by Professor James are those in the tradition of the southern Mediterranean.
Here the food is rich in olive oil and garlic, fruit and vegetables, pasta and pulses, grains and salads.
Green, leafy vegetables and yellow and orange fruits are of especial nutritional value to good health.
The balanced diet
In addition to the new findings on fruit and vegetables, the WHO report has fine-tuned the NACNE advice on eating a healthy, balanced diet.
We should now eat far more carbohydrates and even less fatty food.
The new advice shapes up as follows: 70 per cent of our total calorie intake should be complex carbohydrates which include fruit and vegetables, pulses and grains; 10–15 per cent as protein — not necessarily meat; 15–30 per cent as fat, with a maximum of 10 per cent as saturated (animal) fat (saturated fat can be cut out altogether if desired); and 10 per cent maximum as added sugar, although this is not essential for healthy eating.
In contrast to the reactions from doctors and nutritionists on the publication of previous healthy eating reports, this time the plan is to be more positive towards it.
It's your life
‘It's time to let everybody else get involved,’ says Professor James.
‘After all, it's your life!
So this time we want to involve the public.’
A joint campaign to get the updated healthy eating message across to the general public is being planned by the Consumer's Association, National Federation of Women's Institutes, Coronary Prevention Group, Guild of Food Writers and others.
‘Previous reports on diet and health have told us we need to eat fruit and vegetables only to provide roughage,’ says Professor James.
‘But while fibre is important, it's not the whole story.
One should think of fruit and vegetables in three main categories in terms of their potential health benefits.’
There's more to fruit than fibre
Firstly, fruit, vegetables and complex carbohydrates (pasta, bread and other wholegrain foods, for example) can be used to solve the problems of how to reduce fat in the diet.
Studies show that this is the area of the diet that most people find the most difficult to change.
‘When they go onto these so-called new diets, people tend to lose weight because they automatically restrict themselves without realising they ought to be eating more bread, cereals, fruit and vegetables.
These foods will make up the calories they are losing when cutting down on their saturated fat intake.
Fruit is a good replacement for fatty snacks such as biscuits and crisps,’ says Professor James.
‘The fact that you remove saturated fat from your diet is profoundly important,’ says Professor James, ‘and you get an additional 10 per cent fall in cholesterol levels if you happen to eat more fruit and vegetables as a way of removing saturated fat from the diet.
It is the soluble fibre in oats and beans that is particularly good at lowering cholesterol levels.’
Colour chart
The second point to be taken into consideration is a quite surprisingly coherent and consistent story that links an intake of mostly green and yellow vegetables with a much lower risk of several forms of cancer.
In particular, breast cancer, large bowel cancer and lung cancer — the most common cancers in the Western world.
We don't know what it is in the vegetables and fruit that is so beneficial,’ explains Professor James, ‘but there are several theories.
One is that the beta carotene present in green and yellow fruits and vegetables is converted into vitamin A in the body, giving protection against disease.
However, there are other compounds that might also be helping with it.
‘For all we know, if the plant breeders start producing lots of new varieties, they might select out the protective ingredients.
I don't want to start any scare stories, but it just illustrates our ignorance.
We only have  theories as to what might really be involved.
‘The third point is the amazing story about heart disease.
We know that about 50–60 per cent of the cause of heart disease relates to smoking, high blood pressure, high cholesterol and saturated fat.
But we have always been looking for the cause of the extra 40 per cent.
‘We also know genetics affect whether one person has a heart attack on a rotten diet while another gets away with it.’
E is the key
Professor James and his colleagues are learning about the mechanisms that underlie heart disease.
One of these involves damage from free radicals that circulate in the blood.
‘This oxidative damage is, to a certain extent, prevented by the intake of the so-called protective factors which include vitamins E and C, and these are found in fruit and vegetables.’
One interesting study from Edinburgh University, published in The Lancet , found that men with angina had lower levels of vitamins A, C and E in their blood compared with a similar group who did not suffer from heart disease.
The scientists concluded that vitamin E was the key factor, so they advise people to eat more fruit and vegetables, cereals and vitamin E-rich vegetable oils.
The lack of vitamins in the British and Scottish diets, in particular, may explain why the incidence of heart disease is higher here than in the Mediterranean areas where blood cholesterol levels may be as high, but there is much less heart disease.
‘I don't really think we can necessarily say that it must be vitamin E that is a protective factor, but what we can now say is that fruit and vegetables seem to protect against heart disease,’ says Professor James.
Raw health
With these concepts in mind, Professor James' WHO group came to the view that we ought to be concentrating on the positive aspects of the benefits of fruit and vegetables.
Whether or not the British Government translates WHO advice into health education, changes its policy of subsidising foods high in saturated fat, such as meat and dairy produce, or finds funds to promote fruit and vegetables, remains to be seen.
Meanwhile, the Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Information Bureau has launched a Raw Health campaign based on its commissioned report The Antioxidant Benefits of Fruit and Vegetables .
The report explains how the antioxidant vitamins A, C and E are able to neutralise potentially carcinogenic and atherosclerotic free radicals which are produced naturally in the body, but which need to be effectively ‘mopped up’ by antioxidant vitamins.
‘Raw health is not about eating raw food.
The name is designed to emphasise the vital energy that comes from fresh  fruit and vegetables.’
says Hilary Richards of the Bureau.
Raw produce retains the vitamins and minerals destroyed by cooking and food processing.
‘But we haven't a clue about what causes antioxidant differences between raw and cooked food,’ adds Professor James.
‘The whole chemistry of food changes when it's cooked, yet we know so little.
Consider this: only five per cent of the Rowett Research Institute (of which Professor James is a director) total activity is in the study of human nutrition, and we are the largest nutritional science institute in the world.’
Sugar, not so sweet
While encouraging us to eat more complex carbohydrate foods, the WHO report is quite clear in recommending that we limit our intake of added sugar.
This doesn't include the sugars that occur naturally in complex carbohydrate foods such as fruit and vegetables, and starchy foods such as bread, pasta, vegetables, grains and pulses.
These foods are valuable because they contain different types of fibre, vitamins and minerals essential for health.
The WHO report says we don't need sugar and sets an upper limit of 10 per cent of total calorie intake from added sugar.
As Professor James explains, ‘By issuing these separate recommendations for complex carbohydrates and free sugars, the intention of the report is to stress the many specific advantages of a high intake of complex carbohydrates.
the report also looks at the health risks linked to eating excess sugar, notably sucrose and sugar-based sweeteners.’
Lean with greens
Sugar and fat are also frowned on in the report because they can more easily lead to obesity than some other foods.
‘We are slowly realising that fat is a very effective means of making you put on weight.
There seems to be a metabolic susceptibility to becoming fat on a high fat diet.
But there is no such susceptibility on a high fruit and vegetable diet,’ says Professor James.
‘Therefore if you switch to a diet high in fruit, vegetables and cereals, it will bring your weight down without the agony of constantly checking and restricting yourself.
‘In order to slim, people have to change their lifestyle permanently.
If you reduce your weight you change the amount of energy you need.
So, if I lose a stone, I need to eat 200–300 fewer calories a day for the rest of my life, just to keep at the same weight.
A high fruit and vegetable diet really does help you maintain the same weight without feeling hungry.’
But how do our actual eating patterns measure up to the ideal?
Not very well, according to recent research.
The level of cabbage and Brussels sprouts consumption has decreased since 1982 from 3.81oz per week per person to 3.05 for cabbage, and from 1.54oz to 1.02oz for Brussels sprouts.
But intake of other green vegetables has increased from 0.19oz to 0.50oz per week.
Salad consumption has gone up from 1.44oz to 1.89oz per week.
The total amount of vegetables we each eat per year since 1982 has gone from 221lb to 204lb.
Citrus fruit consumption has gone up from 2.70oz per person per week in 1982 for oranges to 2.99oz, and for other citrus fruits from 1.72oz to 2.19oz.
In total our fruit consumption has risen from 61lb to 69lb per person.
The healthiest diet in the world is low in total fat, low in saturated fat, high in plant foods — green and yellow vegetables and citrus fruit — and low in alcohol and salt-pickled, smoked and salt-preserved foods.
Which all in all adds up to a Mediterranean type of diet — with porridge!
VITAMIN A SOURCES
Apricots
Broccoli
Carrots
Endive (raw)
Kale
Leaf lettuce
Liver*
Mangoes
Melons
Pumpkin
Squash
Spinach
Sweet potatoes
Watercress
Water-melon.
VITAMIN C SOURCES
Blackcurrants
Broccoli
Brussels sprouts
Cabbage and other cruciferous vegetables
Citrus fruits
Green peppers
Kale
Kiwi fruit
Mangoes
Potatoes
Rose-hips
Spinach
Strawberries
Tomatoes
Watercress.
VITAMIN E SOURCES
Almonds
Apricot oil
Corn oil
Hazelnuts
Margarine
Peanut oil
Sunflower seeds
Vegetable oils
Walnuts
Wheatgerm
Wholemeal bread
Wholewheat flour.
*Pregnant women are warned about eating liver as animal feeds that are fortified with liver have caused unnaturally high levels of Vitamin A which is stored in the body's fat and can prove to be toxic in overdose.
FOOD FILE
GRAINS of paradise
Sweet spices are a must when preparing food for feasts and festivals, especially at Easter.
Janette Marshall investigates the story behind spice
Many of the flavours we associate with Easter are from spices.
Hot cross buns, Simnel cake and Easter biscuits (see recipes on page 60) contain currants and mixed spices that have been eaten at Lent since Elizabethan times, although their use goes back to the Middle Ages when only the rich could afford spice.
Spice and fruit breads, similar to hot cross buns, were typical Elizabethan Lenten fare.
Cakes and ale were a common combination; sweet spice buns were eaten with cheese, which was often melted in ale or wine.
During the fasting days, especially on Friday when no meat was eaten, a posset often replaced a meal.
Posset was heated milk enriched with eggs, sherry or wine, sugar and nutmeg, and it was sometimes accompanied by hot, buttered sweet buns.
Elinor Fettiplace's recipe book of 1604 contains another Lenten delicacy — almond cakes which were sweetened with aniseed.
Bread sauce, the British accompaniment to turkey, originated from the Elizabethan who flavoured it with nutmeg and cloves.
Clever cooks in large houses where eggs were strictly forbidden during Lent, ‘blew’ eggs and filled them with a mixture of thick, white almond milk, sugar, ginger and cinnamon.
They even coloured some of the mixture with saffron to make a ‘yolk’, then they carefully filled the shells before baking them in the ashes of the cooking fire.
PAGAN ORIGINS
The origin of hot cross buns dates back further than the Elizabethans.
It was the Anglo-Saxons who adapted the pagan marking of bread with a cross (which at the time represented the four seasons) into the Christian symbol for the crucifix.
Originally, the cross celebrated the vernal equinox and the rites of spring associated with the goddess Eostre, from whose name it is said the Venerable Bede derived the name for Easter.
Later, loaves were marked with a cross to ward off evil spirits that might prevent the bread from rising.
This was abandoned as papist in the 1600s, says food historian, Ann Wilson, but was retained on Good Friday when the cross was at its greatest significance.
It was not until the Reformation in 1660 that the spiced loaves were replaced by hot cross buns.
These were baked on Good Friday and eaten hot for breakfast.
In European countries, the equivalent buns are not eaten until Easter Sunday when they mark the resurrection and the end of Lent.
GINGER GROUP
Hot cross buns and Easter biscuits are studded with dried fruit and contain mixed spice, usually a blend ground cinnamon, cloves, mace, nutmeg, coriander and allspice berries.
Earlier blends of spice used in medieval and Elizabethan cooking were dominated by the flavour of ginger.
In Ben Jonson's famous comedy Bartholomew Fair , Trash the gingerbread seller plies her trade loudly and her name reflects the widespread adulteration of food.
Cinnamon and cloves were mixed with ginger to flavour meat, biscuits, cakes, puddings, pickles and drinks such as wine.
Today we still enjoy mulled wine in which water is mixed with red wine and spices (cinnamon, ginger, cloves and orange zest) and then sweetened with sugar.
FAR FLUNG FLAVOURS
Zeodary is an aromatic spice, related to turmeric and is native to India and Indonesia.
Also from Indonesia comes galangal, an underground stem that is very close related to root ginger.
The so-called grains of paradise are related to cardamom but have a hotter taste.
They used to replace pepper when its price was high, and were called Guinea pepper because they are from West Africa.
Cassia, or Chinese cinnamon, is another spice which was used in the past, and is interchangeable with cinnamon in recipes.
In America, cassia is often sold as cinnamon to which it is related.
Both are dried, or ground, from the bark of laurel trees.
Although we now refer to token payments as ‘peppercorn’ rents, at one time the ordinary people (and later the traders) had to pay levies or taxes on pepper.
The Pepperers was one of the oldest guilds in London with records dating back to 1180.
In the 1300s it was renamed the Guild of Grocers, Pepperers and Apothecaries.
DO THE CONTINENTAL
Other European countries share the tradition of sweet spiced breads at Easter.
In Spain, breads flavoured with cinnamon and dried fruit are baked at Easter, and some contain hard-boiled eggs, according to Elizabeth Luard's European Festival Food .
The same tradition exists in Greece where the sweet breads are flavoured with caraway and have dyed red hard-boiled eggs embedded in them.
Italy also has many spiced sweet breads, including Colomba pasquale (Easter dove), a light sweet bread dotted with almonds and sprinkled with sugar, found in pastry shops at Easter.
Another speciality is Naples Easter cake, a shortcrust pastry case filled with ricotta cheese, candied fruit and spices.
Panforte, the traditional fruit cake of Sienna, is neither a conventional cake nor a bread but pressed dried fruits with cinnamon, coriander, cloves, nutmeg and white pepper.
It originated when these rare spices were first brought to Italy from the East in medieval times.
MIXED BLESSINGS
In Russia, Poland and other east European countries, women still bake spice cakes and take then to church for blessing at Easter.
A typical Russian bread is Kulitsch which is spiced with cinnamon, cardamom, saffron and nutmeg.
In some countries, the breads are shaped as crowns.
More familiar in this country is Simnel cake, originally given as a gift on Mothering Sunday, nut now associated with Easter.
Until the 1930s, it was common to have a fig pie or pudding on Palm Sunday, based on stewed, dried figs thickened with cornflour and flavoured with mixed spice.
It has been suggested that this arose from the withering of the barren fig tree which features in the Gospel's account of Christ's entry into Jerusalem.
Regional spiced Easter specialities are also recorded by Jane Pettigrew in The Festive Table , where she catalogues saffron cakes and buns made in Devon and eaten, not surprisingly, with clotted cream.
Spiced currant dumplings cooked with boiled beef were also eaten at Easter in the Cambridge area.
Spices certainly have come a long way since their early days, when they were a rare commodity and it was considered an honour to receive them as a gift.
And they even became one of the few luxuries allowed to monks.
At his death, the Venerable Bede gave his spices to fellow priests.
Now that they are more freely available, spices are a part of everyday cooking.
Once the most traditional of ingredients, spices are now at the forefront of 20th-century technology.
They are one of the first candidates for food irradiation, which will replace the chemicals that are used to protect them from pests during storage.
Sticky fingers
Coloured eggs date back to the fourth century when it was forbidden to eat eggs during Lent (the days leading up to Easter).
Eggs laid by hens during Lent were hard-boiled and given to children to play with.
Many happy hours were spent colouring the eggs and inventing games to test the strength of the shells.
Eggsciting colours
Remember when colouring eggs that egg shells are porous so only use edible or non-toxic paints and colourings if you want to eat the egg after it's decorated.
The colouring could pass through the shell into the egg, especially if the shell were to break during cooking.
For a quick funny face in your egg cup on Easter morning, use non-toxic felt tip pens — taking care not to burn your fingers when you handle the egg.
If you want cold hard-boiled eggs for eating or playing with, use either natural dyes or edible food colourings.
Natural dyes
Spinach (for green), beetroot (for red) or onion skins (for brown).
Simmer the vegetables in separate covered pans with 300ml/ ½ pint water for 20 minutes until the water is dark.
Strain off the liquid and use instead of water to boil the eggs for 10 minutes.
Strong tea can be used in the same way for a lovely brown colour.
Combine food colourings with a tablespoon of vinegar in the cooking water.
You can also buy special packs of edible egg colourings from some supermarkets and craft shops.
Full instructions are given on the packet.
EGGSPRESSIVE PATTERNS
Batik — before cooking the egg in the coloured water, use masking tape to create a pattern over the shell.
After dyeing, wait until the egg dries and carefully remove the tape.
Etching — dip a cocktail stick in lemon juice or vinegar and scratch away the colour when the dyed egg is cold.
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
Humpty Dumpty had a great fall,
All the King's horses and all the King's men
Said, ‘Not scrambled egg for breakfast again!’
Eggstra fun
When you've coloured your eggs, try some special games played throughout history:
Egg and spoon race — place your egg in a dessertspoon and see how far you can run without dropping the egg.
Egg rolling — see whose egg goes fastest or furthest down a smooth slope.
Egg tapping — hold eggs in clenched hands with the round ends just showing.
Take turns in hitting each other 's rounded end with the pointed end of your own egg.
The least damaged shell wins.
GOOD COOK OF THE MONTH
This month's recipe reporter is Andrew Birch, 9, from Nottingham.
His recipe is very easy and tastes great with bacon and eggs or dunked in yogurt.
Potato pancakes
Serves 2
1 large potato
1 egg
50g/2oz margarine or butter
seasoning
1
Peel the potato and grate on a coarse grater (take care not to grate your fingers).
2
Beat the egg and add to the potato.
Add salt and pepper.
3
Melt the fat in a frying pan and drop in dollops of mixture, about a tablespoon for each.
4
Fry until golden brown on both sides, turning once.
Eggsperts required
Eggbert is the lion whose mark is stamped on British egg boxes to show they are of high quality.
He wants new eggsperts, aged between seven and 11, to join his club, and he's giving free membership to 250 lucky children who call (0839) 168107 by April 10, 1991.
Members receive dozens of eggsciting goodies, including regular issues of Eggbert's Eggspress , a full colour comic, a special egg cookery booklet, the code to help you ‘crack’ Eggbert's messages, and the chance to build up a collection of enamel badges.
You can also join the club by sending four lion marks to: The British Egg Information Service, 126–128 Cromwell Road, London SW7 4ET with your details.
Send your recipes to: Sticky Fingers,BBC Good Food , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
Kitchen Garden
tumbling TOMATOES
Adam Pasco makes gardening easy with bags of advice on growing vegetables, and fruitful ideas for hanging baskets.
If those expensive cherry tomatoes are your idea of heaven, why not grow your own at a fraction of the price?
Aptly named Tumbler is an ideal tomato for a large basket or even a patio tub or window box.
The colourful, cherry-type fruits have an excellent sweet taste, and yields of 4kg/9lbs of fruit per plant are possible.
As this is a compact bush tomato there is no need to pinch out the side-shoots as you would on standard tomato varieties.
Tumbler is exclusive to Suttons Seeds and should be sown and grown in the same way as other bush tomatoes.
For perfect fruit, see our guide for tomato growing below.
Growing guide
Sow seed from mid-March to mid-April in pots or trays.
Stand the pots in water until the top of the compost is moist.
Then place the pots in a heated propagator, set at 18C/65F, or in a plastic bag in a warm place.
Remove the pots as soon as the seedlings have germinated but keep them in a warm, light position.
When the seedlings are large enough to handle, prick them out singly into 7.5cm/3in pots.
Check daily to ensure that the compost is kept just moist.
Plant out when the seedlings are 20–25cm/8–10in tall.
Be sure that any frost is over.
If you are growing tomatoes in hanging baskets, allow one plant per 35.5cm/14in basket.
For an attractive, decorative effect, plant the basket sides with pretty trailing lobelia.
Feed weekly, beginning after the first flowers have set fruit.
Jobs for the April kitchen garden
Onion sets can be planted now — leave about 15cm/6in between each onion in the row.
Sow sweetcorn in pots indoors from now until May, for planting out in early June.
Cover strawberries with cloches to encourage early flowering and fruiting.
Parsnips should be sown now.
Sow seed in groups, 15cm/6in apart in rows.
Early carrots can be sown under cloches and frames.
Crops to sow now in a heated greenhouse: cucumbers, aubergines, celeriac, celery, marrows, courgettes, melons, tomatoes, and sweetcorn.
Crops to sow now under cloches: beetroot, early carrots, kohlrabi and sweetcorn in warm regions.
Crops to sow now outside: broad beans, beetroot, maincrop carrots, lettuce, parsnips, peas, leaf beet, spinach, radish, cabbage, winter cauliflower, broccoli and leeks.
The secret's in the bag for successful growing
Whether you have a tiny balcony, a greenhouse without soil borders or a patio, a growing bag which combines soil and compost is a very convenient way to grow all kinds of vegetables.
Plant up the bag with young vegetables and water it well.
Make several small slits about 2.5cm/1in up from the base to allow excess water to drain away.
Taller growing tomatoes, sweet peppers or cucumbers will need to be supported with growing bag support frames.
Many vegetables can be grown to maturity in a growing bag, including aubergines, marrows, radish, kohlrabi and dwarf French beans.
Choose a site in full sun, and water well during warm weather.
Regular feeding is essential once crops are established.
If you share gardeners' environmental concerns about using peat, Godwins organic growing bag is available from garden centres, and a coconut fibre compost bag by Growbox is available through East Anglian Organic Products, Green House, Timworth Green, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk.
The Super Groframe wheeled growing bag support frame is available from Sim & Coventry Ltd, Sabre House, Saltney, Chester CH4 8SN.
NEXT month! in BBC GOOD FOOD 
Keith Floyd tells us all about his travels to Australia and he gives readers an exclusive taste of the recipes he collected while he was there.
We also take a peek at Keith in the kitchen of his Devon pub.
PLUS
The second series of MasterChef is about to begin.
Lloyd Grossman shares the fun he's had in making the series and lets us in on some behind-the-scenes secrets.
We take a visit to Japan and discover that raw fish is only a tiny part of the Japanese diet.
Read about the amazing wealth of ingredients used in the Land of the Rising Sun and try some of our tasty, easy to follow recipes at home.
For those with less time to shop or cook, Lesley Waters of BBC1's Bazaar creates some really useful 15 minute feast.
Health Matters next month suggests that we should be more concerned with hygiene and the prevention of food poisoning than the risks of ill health from pesticides.
And on our equipment pages, we look at how water filters work.
June brides will have to start planning for the big event about now, so in Secrets of Success we show you how to cook the perfect wedding buffet, with salmon and salads, and, of course, a three tier wedding cake that will make 'em gasp.
BBC COOK'S DIRECTORY VOL 17
Including recipes from your favourite BBC cookery programmes
EGGS 'N' BAKER
Cheryl Baker's fun recipes are easy to make — and even easier to eat
Eggs 'n' Baker can be seen on BBC1 every Saturday at 8.00 am
Pashka
50g/2oz dried apricots, chopped
4 dried figs, chopped
25gr/1oz dates, chopped
25g/1oz dried banana chips, chopped
50g/2oz raisins
300ml/½ pint fresh orange juice
grated rind of 2 small oranges
350g/12oz cream cheese
2 tbsp natural yogurt
100g/4oz ground almonds
whole almonds and angelica, to decorate
2 small oranges, sliced, to decorate
1
Mix together the chopped apricots, figs, dates, banana chips and raisins in a bowl.
Add the orange juice and leave the mixture to soak overnight.
2
Place the grated orange rind, cheese and yogurt in a bowl and beat together.
Add the ground almonds and soaked fruits and mix well.
3
Spoon the mixture into a buttered 600ml/1 pint pudding basin and chill for at least 2 hours, or until set completely.
4
Turn out the pudding onto a plate and decorate with the whole almonds, angelica and orange slices.
Chicken with forty cloves of garlic
Forty is not a magic number — it can be 30, 50 or even 100.
1.5kg/3–3½lb chicken breast pieces
6 tbsp olive oil
sprigs of fresh thyme, rosemary, sage and parsley
1 bay leaf
1 celery stick, chopped
40 garlic cloves
1 tbsp flour
seasoning
1
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Sprinkle the chicken pieces with seasoning and thyme.
2
Pour the oil into an ovenproof baking dish and add the thyme, rosemary, sage, parsley, bay leaf, celery and unpeeled garlic cloves.
Lay each piece of chicken in the dish, turning it over until both sides are coated with the herbs and oil.
3
Mix the flour with enough water to form a thick paste.
Dip your fingers into the paste and run it around the rim of the dish and put on the lid.
(The paste acts as a seal, so no steam can escape during cooking and the chicken cooks in its own juices).
Bake for 1½ hours.
4
.
Take the dish to the table so the smell of garlic and herbs is released as you unseal the lid.
On your plate, squash each clove with your fork and scrape out flesh and eat it.
Fruit kebabs
Makes 16
32 seedless grapes
8 apricots, halved and stoned
1 mango, peeled
1 small pineapple, peeled
FOR THE DIP
150ml/¼ pint soured cream
150ml/¼ pint Greek yogurt
2 tbsp clear honey
2 tbsp chopped fresh mint
1
Cut the grapes, apricots, mango and pineapple into bite-sized pieces and thread the fruit onto short bamboo skewers or cocktail sticks.
2
Mix together the soured cream, yogurt, honey and mint.
Serve the sauce as a dip to complement the fruit kebabs.
If you would prefer a less tangy-flavoured dipping sauce to serve with the Fruit kebabs, don't despair.
Instead of the soured cream, you could always try using some fresh extra thick cream or double cream.
Rumbledethumps
From Scottish Cookery , by Catherine Brown
50g/2oz butter
1 medium onion, finely chopped
500g/1¼ lb potatoes, cooked
500g/1¼ lb cabbage, cooked
2 tbsp snipped chives
50g/2oz Scottish Cheddar, grated
seasoning
1
Melt the butter in a large pan.
Add the onion and cook gently for 5 minutes, with browning it.
2
Add the potatoes, cabbage and chives and mix together, heating gently.
Season well and put into a pie dish.
3
Sprinkle with cheese and brown under a hot grill.
Easter time
Two tempting treats from Anne Stirk to complete your tea table this Easter
Easter biscuits
These fruity, spicy biscuits are yummy.
Double the recipe, as they'll soon disappear.
Makes 28
100g/4oz butter
75g/3oz caster sugar
1 egg, separated
200g/7oz plain flour
pinch of salt
½ tsp mixed spice
½ tsp ground cinnamon
50g/2oz currants
1 tbsp chopped mixed peel
1–2 tbsp milk
extra caster sugar, to sprinkle
1
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Cream the butter and sugar until pale and fluffy, then beat in the egg yolk.
2
Sift together the flour, salt and spices and mix well.
Stir in currants and mixed peel.
3
Add enough milk to make a soft, smooth dough.
Turn into a lightly floured board and knead gently for a few minutes.
4
Roll out thinly to 5mm/¼in thickness.
Cut out biscuits with a 5cm/2½in fluted cutter, and use up all the biscuit mixture by re-rolling as necessary.
5
Arrange on a baking sheet and bake for 10 minutes.
Lightly beat the egg white and brush over biscuit tops.
Sprinkle with caster sugar and return to the oven for about 5 minutes for a crunchy, sweet finish.
Luscious lemony roulade
Serves 6–8
3 eggs, separated
100g/4oz caster sugar
grated rind and juice of 1 lemon
65g/2½ oz ground almonds
15g/ ½oz fine semolina (or use extra almonds)
FOR THE FILLING
300ml/ ½ pint whipping cream
2 tbsp lemon curd
lemon rind, to decorate
1
Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/Gas 3.
Grease and line a 25 × 38cm/10 × 15in swiss roll tin with non-stick baking paper.
2
Whisk egg yolks and sugar together until thick enough to leave a trail.
Stir in lemon rind and juice, then fold in almonds and semolina.
3
Whisk egg whites in a clean bowl until stiff enough to stand in peaks.
Fold into mixture with a metal spoon, then pour mixture into prepared tin and smooth the surface evenly.
4
Bake for 15–20 minutes until golden and springy to touch.
5
Leave to cool, covered with a sheet of non-stick baking paper and a damp tea towel to keep it moist.
6
Sprinkle a sheet of non-stick baking paper with caster sugar.
Uncover the roulade and tip onto sugared paper.
Then carefully peel away the lining paper from the bottom of the roulade.
Set away.
7
Lightly whip the cream, divide in half and fold lemon curd onto one half.
Spread the filling over the cake and roll up from one short side, using the paper to help you.
Decorate the top with the remaining whipped cream and lemon rind.
For best results, use electric whisk for whisking the eggs and sugar for the sponge.
If whisking by hand, place bowl over a pan of hot water.
Remove once mixture is thick; whisk until the bowl has cooled.
Daytime UK
Don't pass over Judy Spier's special recipes for the Jewish Pesach 
There is a cookery demonstration daily on Daytime UK, BBC1, at 9.25am
Plava (Russian for whisked sponge)
In Jewish kitchens all over the world, women will be holding their breath in fear — the Plava is in the oven.
Will it rise?
Will it be moist?
Will there be enough?
Will it be as good as last year's?
No other recipe causes so much grief, with the possible exception of chicken soup — but that's another saga!
Women drop in unexpectedly to see how your Plava compares with theirs — it has to be good, your reputation rests on the Pesach (Passover) Plava.
Serves 8–10
8 eggs, separated
375g/13oz caster sugar
grated rind of 1 lemon
175g/6oz fine matzo meal
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350C/Gas 4.
Beat the egg yolks and sugar in a large bowl until it's very pale and thick enough to leave a definite trail.
2
Stir in the lemon rind and matzo meal.
In a separate bowl whisk the egg whites until they hold soft peaks and then fold in the egg yolk mixture.
3
Turn into a greased and lined roasting tin and bake for about 50 minutes until light and springy to the touch.
4
Leave to cool for a few minutes, then turn out onto a wire rack to cool.
Matzo brie
Finding a hot and filling breakfast that's acceptable during the eight days of the Passover isn't easy.
Leavened bread and cereal are both forbidden, so this recipe is a delicious, comforting alternative — much too good and fattening to eat all year round, though!
Serves 1
2 large matzos
a little tomor (kosher vegetable fat)
2–3 eggs, beaten
sugar, to taste
1
Soak the matzos in hot water, then squeeze out.
2
Heat the tomor in a frying pan, add the matzos, then pour the eggs over the top.
3
Heat gently, stirring all the time, until the brie is lightly cooked.
Add sugar and serve.
Matzos are large, very thin, unleavened Jewish biscuits.
They can be crushed to make matzo meal, although this can be bought ready-made in supermarkets or good delicatessens.
Cinnamon balls
As a child I made these, covering the kitchen in ingredients and allowing balls of mixture to roll all over the place, only to be found six months later behind the toaster.
Makes 15
2 egg whites
225g/8oz ground almonds
225g/8oz caster sugar
1 tsp ground cinnamon
25g/1oz icing sugar
1
Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/Gas 3.
Beat the egg whites in a large bowl until they hold stiff peaks.
2
Stir in the ground almonds, caster sugar and cinnamon, divide the mixture and rill into 15 small balls.
3
Arrange the balls on a greased baking sheet and bake for 25–30 minutes until they are firm to the touch.
4
Transfer the cinnamon balls to a wire rack and leave to cool, then roll in icing sugar.
Coconut pyramids
Makes 10
225g/8oz desiccated coconut
150g/5oz caster sugar
2 eggs
1
Preheat the oven to 150C/300F/Gas 2.
Put the coconut, sugar and eggs into a bowl and mix together thoroughly.
2
Divide into 10 pieces and shape into rough pyramids.
3
Arrange the pyramids on a greased baking sheet and bake for 30–35 minutes until set and golden brown on top.
4
Allow to cool on the sheet for 5 minutes, then transfer to a wire rack and leave until they are completely cool.
Almond macaroons
Makes about 30
225g/8oz ground almonds
225g/8oz caster sugar
3 egg whites
blanched almonds, to decorate
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Mix together the ground almonds, caster sugar and egg whites until well blended then, using wet hands, shape the mixture into balls.
2
Place the balls, well-spaced apart, on greased baking sheets and flatten each one into a plump round.
3 Press a blanched almond into the centre of each round and bake for about 20 minutes until pale golden and set.
4
Leave to cool on the baking sheets for a few minutes, then transfer to a wire rack to cool.
Almond biscuits will be moister if you grind nuts freshly — grate blanched almonds in a cylindrical-shaped grater.
Rev Roger Cressey creates tasty dishes that summon up the spirit and traditions of the Easter festival.
St Peter's pie
Fish is one of the traditional foods of Lent, most often eaten on Good Friday.
The haddock is said to bear the fingerprint of St Peter — two dark smudges behind the gills — as he took the fish from the water.
Potatoes were planted on Good Friday as it was believed that this was one day on which the Devil had no power to poison and ruin the soil.
450g/1lb fresh haddock fillets
225g/8oz Finnan haddock fillets
225g/8oz leeks, sliced
600ml/1 pint milk
1 bay leaf
90g/3½oz butter
50g/2oz plain flour
100g/4oz Cheddar, grated
2 hard-boiled eggs, shelled and roughly chopped
750g/1½lb potatoes, boiled and mashed
freshly ground black pepper
seasoning
1
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Arrange the fish in an ovenproof dish, add the leeks and pour over 300ml/½ pint of the milk.
Add the bay leaf and a few flecks of butter and bake four about 15 minutes.
2
Lift out the fish, remove the skin and bones and flake into largish pieces.
Lift out the leeks with a slotted spoon and set aside.
Strain the cooking liquid into the remaining milk.
3
Make a sauce by melting 50g/2oz of the butter in a pan.
Stir in the flour and cook gently for about 1 minute.
Gradually add the milk, stirring constantly, and simmer for about 3 minutes until thickened.
4
Stir in about 50g/2oz of the cheese, the eggs, fish and leeks.
Season with freshly ground black pepper and spoon into a buttered ovenproof dish.
5
Beat the remaining butter into the potatoes, season to taste and spread evenly over the fish.
Scatter the remaining cheese over the top and bake for 30 minutes until golden.
Eggs in a nest
This is a favourite recipe from a friend of mine; a quick and delicious snack which I've enjoyed many times.
It makes a perfect supper dish for Easter.
Serves 2
2 cottage or round bread rolls
50g/2oz butter
50g/2oz mushrooms, sliced
2 eggs separated
25g/1oz Cheddar or Red Leicester, grated
seasoning
1
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Pull out the bread insides so that you are left with two crusty shells.
2
Spread the insides of the shells with butter and bake for 6–8 minutes until crisp.
3
Put 25g/1oz of mushrooms in the bottom of each roll, top with the egg yolks and season.
4
Whisk the egg whites until stiff and fold in the cheese.
Spoon half of this mixture into each roll.
Bake for 10–12 minutes until lightly browned.
Weeping lamb
This is a delicious recipe for spring lamb — a traditional choice for Easter Sunday (the lamb represents the innocence of Christ).
It's similar to the old idea of cooking Yorkshire pudding underneath the beef joint whereby the dripping falls into the batter.
Serves 8–10
2.75kg/6lb leg or shoulder of spring lamb
2 garlic cloves, cut into slivers
1 tbsp dried Provençal herbs
50g/2oz butter, softened
750g/1½ lbs potatoes, thinly sliced
350g/12oz onions, thinly sliced into rings
450ml/¾ pint good stock
seasoning
1
Preheat the oven to 230C/450F/Gas 8.
With a sharp knife, make a number of deep incisions in the lamb and insert a sliver of garlic into each one.
Season well.
2
Mix the herbs into the softened butter and rub all over the lamb.
Stand the joint in a roasting tin and cook in the oven for 30 minutes.
3
Take out the joint and remove from the tin while you layer the potatoes and onions in the juices.
Pour over the stock.
4
Place the joint in a trivet over the tin, or put it on the oven rack directly above the roasting tin, so that the juices from the meat ‘weep’ into the potatoes and onions.
Roast for about 1 hour until the meat is pinkish.
Increase the cooking time if you like your lamb well done.
Soufflé omelette
My favourite way to serve eggs at Easter.
I like it with a filling of apricot and orange, but you can experiment with other fruit fillings.
It's also very good made with jam, lemon or cheese.
Separating the eggs makes all the difference.
Serves 2
4 eggs, separated
1 tsp caster sugar
2 tsp butter
2 tsp icing sugar
pinch of cinnamon
1
Whisk the egg yolks with two tablespoons of water and the caster sugar.
2
Whisk the whites until stiff and fold into the yolk mixture.
3
Heat butter in an omelette pan or frying pan and pour in the egg mixture.
Swirl it around until the base is covered — do not stir.
Allow the eggs to cook over a gentle heat — it should bubble and puff up.
4
Spoon your chosen filling over one half of the omelette, fold over and slide out gently.
Dust with icing sugar and cinnamon and serve at once.
My Favourite Menu
Helen Lederer
Actress and comedienne Helen Lederer, star of BBC2's Naked Video and BBC Radio 4's Life with Lederer , is pictured in her kitchen creating an omelette — one of the first dishes she ever learned to cook ‘really well’.
She lives in a Victorian cottage in south London with her husband Roger and their baby daughter Hannah.
I am completely undomesticated and disorganised — it doesn't come naturally to me to be a houseperson.
Even so, I love cooking, but not every day.
It makes me cross — all that work and then it's all consumed in two minutes.
But if I've been away working for some time, it's completely different.
I recently came back from a trip to Egypt and despite the fact that I enjoyed the food there, I had an urge to make a really wholesome fish pie.
It was the first I had ever made, would you believe, and it was delicious!
Food and fatness is a real problem with me, particularly after the birth of my daughter Hannah.
I tried everything to get rid of the extra weight with no success.
I've come to the conclusion that dieting makes you self-conscious, and I don't weigh myself any more because I find it much too depressing.
I do try to keep away from fattening foods, but my greatest weakness is chocolate cake.
I started making cakes when I was 10 — sandwich cakes were my speciality — and now I'm a real expert.
My grandmother was Czech and her cooking was wonderful.
She used to make things that are now quite commonplace but which at the time seemed really exotic — fabulous cakes like kugelhopf and filled croissants which were wheeled in on a trolley for tea.
I've got all her cake tins and her chopping board, which still smells very evocatively of her wonderful Wiener schnitzel.
It's amazing how strongly childhood smells stay with you.
There was a phase in between school and college when I was a vegetarian, when I shared a house with friends who were macrobiotic.
They did lots of things with brown rice and even made macrobiotic ice-creams.
I'm not a vegetarian now, but I'm not a great meat eater either.
Some people lust after roast beef and Yorkshire pudding, but I don't.
I absolutely loathe steak and I can't understand why anyone in their right mind would want to eat raw steak with an egg on top.
I enjoy what I describe as ‘cool food’, lots of interesting salads with fresh, wholesome ingredients like grated carrot, mozzarella cheese with tomatoes, tzatziki and crunchy, nutty things.
It's probably the vegetarian influence coming out again.
I like strong flavours and unusual combinations; a piquant raspberry sauce with fish, for instance.
I tend to steer away from what I consider to be the boring mainstream in cooking.
Jocelyn Dimbleby does great things with the sort of dishes I like.
Her turmeric pies are a great favourite — cream cheese flavoured with turmeric in pastry.
I made them for a friend a couple of years ago and she's still talking about them!
I like experimenting and if I led a less erratic lifestyle I would do more of it.
You need time, affection and love to experiment.
The second thing I learned to cook after cakes was omelettes, which I still enjoy making, and I try all sorts of fillings — herbs, tomatoes, mushrooms.
I'm quite good at mixing things up in the pan and throwing in whatever's available.
Somehow, it ends up looking good and people are quite impressed, even though there's no particular recipe to follow.
I prefer white wine to red and I sometimes keep a bottle of champagne in the fridge ready for any impromptu celebrations.
I don't know that much about wine as a subject — you really need the time and the inclination to study it properly.
Because I'm not very organised, I don't get round to entertaining very much, even though I love having people around.
For a special meal I might start with the turmeric pies and follow with a crunchy salad and couscous from a health shop with vegetables or spring onions, salt and sultanas.
I wouldn't want a pudding unless it was chocolate cake!
Helen Lederer talked to Sian Kinsey.