

HOSPITAL DELIVERIES Why new mums miss out on vital care
TOO SHY — OR TOO TOUGH?
Help your toddler settle in at playgroup
NOT SO FAST!
Meet the babies who couldn't wait to be born
PARENTS' PLAYTIME SPECIAL •Instant toys for bored babies •Water games •Best-buy pools and sandpits •Playing safe in the playground
TRAVEL COTS ON TEST
WILL STARTING SCHOOL TOO EARLY HARM YOUR CHILD?
WHEN BREAST ISN'T BEST Why mums who bottle-feed deserve support
WHO CARES THAT YOU'RE PREGNANT?
What those antenatal checks are all about
FREE GOODIES TO SEND FOR Nappies, toys and lots more!
Contents
PARENTS PLAYTIME SPECIAL
THE PERFECT PLAYGROUND
What makes the ideal play area?
We've asked parents, professionals and children for their views Erika Harvey 
HAVE A SPLASHING TIME
Fun and games with water Sonia Leach 
FUN FOR FREE
Kate Taylor
A BEACH IN YOUR BACK YARD
Paddling pools and sandpits on test Cathy Bryan 
NEW LIFE
YOU'RE ON YOUR OWN NOW
Does the new short-stay hospital policy mean new mums miss out on vital care?
Heather Welford 
YOU'RE PREGNANT
— SO WHO CARES?
What the experts want to know about you at your antenatal clinic Nancy Stewart 
OUT LIKE A SHOT!
What's it really like to have a two-hour delivery?
FEATURES
YOUR FIRST BABY — COUNTING THE COST
Jean Williams
DON'T BASH THE BOTTLE!
Our guide to guilt-free bottle-feeding Nikki Bradford 
CYNTHIA FELGATE: CRUSADING FOR KIDS
The woman who decides what your children will watch on television Libby Purves 
BYE BYE BABY!
How to find the perfect babysitter Wendy Varley 
LEARNING & DEVELOPMENT
EARLY SCHOOL ENTRY: TOO MUCH TOO YOUNG
Should we be pushing our three- and four-year-olds into primary education Karen Gold 
TROUBLESOME TODDLES
How to handle your child's difficult behaviour Dorothy Einon 
LOOKING GOOD: SPOTTING EYE PROBLEMS
Penny Nathan
REGULARS
FIRST WORDS from the Editor
UPFRONT News and reviews
COMING NEXT MONTH
IN TOUCH
FREEBIES!
Reader offers to send for
WIN OVER £5000 WORTH OF PLAY-DOH PRODUCTS
STORYTIME Tony Bradman 
CAN WE HELP?
Our experts solve your problems
O–5 News and know-how for you and your child
First Words
There's nothing as exciting as having a new baby, I keep thinking, as I gaze into other mums' prams at their new arrivals.
My youngest daughter Ella will be two on Sunday — yet it seems like only yesterday that I looked at her pink, scrunched-up face for the first time and fell in love with her funny, quirky personality.
There's nothing like watching your ‘baby’ blowing out her birthday candles to make you feel nostalgic about newborns; those downy heads, the curled fingers, the contented milky sighs…
Fortunately, my sister-in-law Kate has filled the gap in my life by producing a baby brother for my nephew William.
Patrick's arrival was pretty spectacular (you can read about it on page 50), and perfectly timed too.
I've been able to enjoy hours of intensive cuddling, and my elder daughter Arcadia (four — and almost as baby-mad as me) has been in heaven too.
‘He thinks I'm his mother’ she said blissfully, as Patrick gazed up at her from her lap — dolls will never be quite the same again.
Kate has taught me a lot about motherhood — mostly because she approaches it in a completely different way to me.
Everybody's version of mothering is unique — you don't suddenly lose your personality as soon as you give birth, and turn into ‘A Mum’.
You're just you, being a mother.
Which is why Kate deals with tantrums, bathtime and cuddles one way, and I do it another.
Neither way is ‘right’— they're just right for each of us.
That's why the best magazine is one which give you all the practical information and advice you need, so you can get on with enjoying bringing up your children your way.
To make sure you get the magazine you really need, from next month we've planned lots of exciting changes which will made Parents bigger and even better.
You can read all about our new look on page 68.
We've done it all by talking to parents and finding our what they really want from us, so let us have your ideas, comments and requests too — after all, it's your magazine.
And we want to hear all about your own experiences as a mum — whether it's a tip you can pass on, or a story to tell.
So grab five minutes for yourself, pick up a pen and write to us — we can't wait to get your letters.
See you next month.
upfront
Compiled by Lucy Gillick
Soft shoe shuffle.
Although babies don't really need to wear ‘proper’ shoes, it's nice for them to have a soft covering in ‘breathable’leather to protect their delicate feet.
Giant Shoes, from Giant Shoes For Little People, are beautiful bootee-style shoes perfect for tots — from tiny babies to toddlers taking their first tentative steps.
They come in seven eye-catching designs, including hot-air balloons, flowers and stylish polka dots in blues, reds, greens and pastels, and feature soft leather soles that protect the feet without affecting sensitivity or balance.
Their unique overlapping front and back design means that the fit is adjustable, and they are more difficult for babies to pull off than ordinary shoes.
Available in three sizes to fit babies from 0–18 months, priced £11.95, Giant Shoes are available by mail order from Giant Shoes For Little People, Packer's Cottage, Albion St, Exeter EX4 1AZ (0392 219560).
LG
Kitchen safety
All mums worry about safety in the kitchen, and hot glass oven and grill doors are a particular hazard.
This is why Kiddi-Proof has come up with the Ovensafe and Grillsafe — covers in heat-retardant plastic which can be clipped on to almost any make of appliance.
They are available in white or brown from nursery outlets and stores nationwide; phone 071–499 3410 for nearest stocklist.
OJ
In the swim
Many pregnant mums enjoy swimming to keep in shape, but have trouble finding anything stylish to wear in the pool.
Just Mums, a mail-order company based in Cornwall, is aiming to fill the gap in the market with a range of swimwear in different styles and colours.
All come in a Lycra-mix fabric, and prices range from £12.99 for a very plain swimsuit, to top-of-the-range styles at £38.50.
For more details, contact Just Mums at Meadowcroft, Trevellas, St Agnes, Cornwall TR5 0XX (0872 573882).
OJ
Cosy head-gear
Young babies can sometimes look so uncomfortable when their heads loll and wobble about as they sit in their car seat or carrier.
Bettacare's Head Hugger — a softly quilted, specially shaped cushion which rests around the baby's head, supporting it from all sides, provides the answer.
There are two types of Head Hugger available — the 0–9 month variety which fits all 0–9 month car seats, and the Universal Head Hugger, which fits all car seats, using velcro fastening to secure it into position.
Both Head Huggers can be used in buggies, bouncing cradles and baby carriers too.
Made from machine-washable polycotton in a wide variety of colours, and priced around £10.99, the Head Hugger is available from large department stores and retailers nationwide.
For stocklists and mail order details, contact Bettacare Ltd, Welbeck House, Cliftonville, Dorking, Surrey RH4 2JF (0306 888299).
LG 
Parents in need
Many families these days are finding it very hard to make ends meet.
One source of help and support are the Family Service Units, which run schemes of all kinds to help needy families, giving advice on benefits, debt and legal problems, community education programmes, literacy schemes and activity groups for under-fives.
If you would like a copy of the FSU's latest journal, offering an insight into all aspects of family poverty (priced £1.50), or if you like to become involved with this extremely worthwhile organisation, contact the Family Service Units at 207 Old Marylebone Rd, London NW1 5QP (071–402 5175).
OJ
What a puzzle!
The classic jigsaw puzzle never goes out of favour with kids, and Paul Lamond's Travelling Giant Floor Puzzles — in a neat little carrying case with handle are sure to be a big hit.
Designed especially for young hands, from age three upwards, the puzzles have 24 extra-large pieces, and are all based on popular nursery rhymes — including Humpty Dumpty, Hey Diddle Diddle and Old MacDonald's Farm.
Available from stores nationwide.
LG
Cotton wool revolution
For mums who want something more convenient than hanks of cotton wool, Púr has come up with Little Tearaways, sheets of flat, highly absorbent 100% cotton wool.
Soft enough to be used on your baby's face, they are also big enough to wipe her bottom with, and of course Mum can use them too.
They come in a dispenser of 50 sheets, priced at £1.69 from Boots and department stores.
EH
See them grow
Children are fascinated by how things grow, so the new series of books from Dorling Kindersley entitled See How They Grow will have them enthralled.
Intended to introduce the young reader to natural history, the first four books in the series — entitled Puppy, Kitten, Frog and Duck — chart the growth of these animals and birds from birth through the first crucial weeks and months of life (see above).
The fascinating close-up photographs were specially commissioned for the series, and these, combined with the clear captions and colourful artwork borders, make the books (priced £3.99 each) a really pleasurable learning experience for parents and children to share.
LG
Playground events
The Preschool Playgroups Association (PPA) celebrates its 30th birthday this year, which should give an added boost to Playweek 91, from 15–22 June, when playgroups around the country will be organising a whole range of fund-raising events.
Get your playgroup involved by writing off for the Playweek kit, which contains all kinds of money-making ideas.
Fruit squash-makers Kia-ora are again backing the week, providing cash prizes for the most deserving playgroups in the PPA awards later in the year.
Playgroups were originally set up to fill the gap until the Government started a network of nurseries countrywide.
It's rather ironic that, over a quarter of century later, we're still relying on a charitable organisation to meet most of our preschool provision needs.
Isn't it time the Government acknowledged all the hard work mums have done and gave playgroups some official funding?
Contact the Preschool Playgroups' Association, at 61/63 Kings Cross Rd, London WC1X 9LL (071–833 0991).
EH 
I can see you!
If you sometimes wish you had eyes in the back of your head to see exactly what the children are getting up to in the back of the car, you'll be pleased to hear about The Lane Changer from Automotive.
This ingenious super-wide, 180° angle rearview mirror eliminates blind spots on both sides of the car to make overtaking and reversing easier and safer, and enables the driver to keep watch on any rear-seat occupants without taking his or her eyes off the road.
Priced around £6.49, The Lane Changer is easy to fit: simply stick it on above the existing rearview mirror.
Contact Automotive, Gelderd Rd, Leeds LS12 6NB (0532 791791) for stocklist details.
LG
A little pampering!
Disposable nappies are notoriously bulky — and the thought of lugging home enormous packs is far from appealing.
Realising this, Pampers have just launched their New Compact Pampers — which are the same top-quality nappies in boy and girl varieties, in the same sizes, but in a smaller, easier to carry and more convenient pack.
A new packaging method means that the nappies are gently compacted immediately before packing, allowing them to fit inside a bag which is extremely solid and roughly half the size of the old packs.
A new side-opening device releases the pressure in the pack, so they expand gently on opening to their usual size, making they easy to remove.
Not only are the New Compact Pampers less effort for mums, but they're more environmentally friendly too — as they use 20% less raw material and are more efficient to transport.
New Compact Pampers are available from supermarkets, shops and chemists nationwide.
Reading help
Because so many parents were asking her how they could help their children with reading, teacher and mother of three Barbara Geere wrote Seven Ways to Help Your Child With Reading (Seven Ways Series, £1.95), which sets out simply how to make a start, build up your child's confidence, make reading fun (with plenty of learning games to make or buy) and, at the end, how to form letters.
The book sold so well locally that she's now published it for sale countrywide; available from WH Smith, Sherratt & Hughes and Waterstone's bookshops or direct from Barbara Geere at 15 Stamford Drive, Bromley, Kent BR2 0XF (081–460 3646), priced £2.30 (inc p&p).
EH
Water mat
An idea fresh from the US is the Pat Mat.
Made from see-through plastic, it looks like an elongated bag filled with little toy fish, ducks and starfish.
All you do is fill the bag with lukewarm water and lay it on the floor.
Your toddler will be fascinated by the spongy texture of the filled bag and the movement of the floating toys.
Suitable from six months old to three years, the Pat Mat is available from major department stores, priced £6.99; for stocklists, phone 0633 838080.
EH
Best dressed
Stylish yet comfortable maternity wear isn't always as easy to find as it should be.
Features — the mail order fashion company — are changing all that with their popular maternity range.
Designed by Barbara Jones — a mother of two — the designs are comfortable and practical: high-waisted leggings with adjustable elastic; unrestricting, baggy tops and T-shirts; and stretchy mini-skirts — all in fashionable fabrics such as Lycra and cotton jersey and monochrome colours.
Prices range from a reasonable £17.50 for their black or white jersey top, to £25.50 for their short-sleeved Lycra tops with shoulder pads and pockets, and £27.50 for their excellent high-waisted Lycra leggings.
For mail order details and catalogue, contact Features at 33 Kensington Gardens, Brighton, Sussex BN1 4AL (0273 697498/690227).
LG
You're on your own now…
Brand new mums are often out of hospital in a couple of days, back home with no chance to adjust.
Are they missing out on vital care, asks Heather Welford?
Ask your grandmother how long mothers of her generation rested after having their babies.
The chances are it was something like four to six weeks, if they could take the time off from household chores.
They called it ‘lying in’— and if you couldn't actually ‘lie’ all the time, people around you made quite sure you took it very easy indeed.
Stove-blacking, coal-scuttle filling and vigorous work with the washboard were definitely out.
Our own mothers, giving birth in the Fifties and Sixties, took it fairly easy as well.
I laughed when my mother told me of the entire postnatal fortnight spent in the maternity hospital, with bedpans and blanket baths and fierce ward sisters who wagged fingers at you if you as much as stuck a big toe over the side of the bed.
We're so much better off these days: we're in and out of hospital in 24 hours, 48 hours or three days at the most.
Off with the nightie, on with those jeans (OK, don't bother fastening them just yet), pop your baby in the brand-new car seat, and zoom off home with proud daddy.
Next day, it's off to the supermarket to catch up with the shopping — don't forget the newborn-size nappies!
Having a baby?
Like shelling peas!
No reason why you should be treated like bone chine just because you've had a baby, for goodness sake.
Perhaps not — but there's precious little risk of that happening these days, and anyway, what happened to speed up the return to ‘normal’ after birth?
In just a few short years, the average hospital stay after a baby has dropped from eight to ten days in 1982, to just three to four in 1989.
Even mums who have a Caesarean section leave after just five or six days at the most.
The main reason for this change is money, and the consequent pressure on hospital beds.
Bringing virtually everyone into hospital to have their babies meant the ‘luxury’ of an eight or ten-day stay had to go.
Midwifery itself is also undergoing a crisis.
In some areas, especially big cities, there may be anything up to 50 per cent of posts left unfilled.
Countrywide, the shortage is 17 per cent.
Many midwives leave shortly after qualifying because of difficulties in combining childcare with work and a lack of satisfaction with their salaries.
But more subtly, lack of job satisfaction has had a profound effect on their morale and ‘staying power’.
One recent survey done for the journal Midwife, Health Visitor and Community Nurse showed that 82 per cent of midwives felt unable to give the quality and quantity of care women need.
The shortfalls in the hospital system, combined with skimpy postnatal care in the community, mean that the pressure on new mums to ‘get back to normal’ quickly is immense, and that the huge change which has taken place in their lives isn't being given the attention it needs.
A new life
‘Having a baby is a total life change,’ says midwife Caroline Flint.
‘I feel women are pushed out of hospital, just as if they'd had a minor operation, or a very mild illness.’
Caroline points to the way actually getting dressed to come home changes the way you feel.
‘Coming home after six hours or so, as you do with a  domino birth, is actually more restful than staying in for 24 or 48 hours,’ she says.
‘You stay in your nightwear when you come home and you go back to bed.
In ordinary clothes, you feel you should be up running the house again.’
Caroline says midwives don't like to be bossy, and resist ‘ordering’ a woman to rest even if they feel she should.
‘It's understandable.
But I don't mind being bossy at all!
I tell women to stay in or near bed with the baby, and not to get dressed.
If there are other children in the house, then of course they can come up and see mummy.
But she's bound to be rather boring, so they won't want to stay all that long.’
This more gentle, gradual return to normal relies on a lot of family support, of course, and it's easier to achieve, says Caroline, with a home birth or with a domino delivery (when you're examined by the community midwife at home, delivered in hospital by her, and then brought home again a few hours later).
A chance to adjust before plunging back into normal life after the birth is important — and so is the postnatal care you get from the midwives, in hospital and in the community.
The British government's specialist advisers are quite clear on this.
In a government document on maternity care, the Maternity Services Advisory Committee rounded up advice on good practice in postnatal care: ‘The care a mother and baby receive in the first weeks after the birth is as important as the care given antenatally and during childbirth,’ it says.
Under pressure
Jackie Moore is a community midwife in North Tyneside.
She says staffing problems in her area aren't especially acute — but that these days, short hospital stays mean more work for the community midwives.
‘For instance, the Guthrie heel prick test — to check for the disease PKU — is almost always done at home.
This means a longish visit, as the mother needs explanations and reassurance about the test.’
There are very pressured days, says Jackie, when she has several visits as well a clinic, when she goes up every front path praying both mum and babe will be problem-free.
Community midwives used to have to visit every mum, as a minimum, twice a day up to postnatal day three, and then daily up to day ten.
Since 1989, their code of practice allows then to use their own judgement about the frequency of visits.
In some cases, then can continue with visits for up to 28 days, though in practice this is rarely done.
‘Flexibility means we have some space to make more frequent visits to the mums who need it,’ says Jackie.
‘I've visited some mums three times a day, especially if they've had breast-feeding problems.’
Caroline Flint says the change doesn't address the real problem: that all women lose out on the right level of postnatal care.
‘Sometimes, the hardest weeks after the birth are weeks three and four — but the community midwives have moved on by then.
In other cultures, there's a tradition of on-going support for 40 days.’
High stress
What are the results of our often skimpy postnatal care?
One must be our lousy breastfeeding rates.
Sixty-five per cent of women start off breastfeeding — but that figure plummets to 40 per cent in the six weeks after delivery.
Isolation is another.
According to Greta Balfour from the Royal College of Midwives, ‘Longer hospital stays gave women the chance to make new friends, and contact with other mothers showed them how the early problems did get better.’
It could be that a lack of support in the community also contributes to postnatal depression — it certainly increases anxiety and unhappiness.
And the fact that having a baby and adjusting to motherhood are only permitted to cause a few days' disruption must be a bad thing — when what mothers really need is adequate time to rest (between feeds), plenty of boosts to their ego, lots of love and confidence building.
The high occurrence of so-called ‘baby blues’ and feelings of isolation alone shows us that the birth of a child is a very stressful event — a dramatic physical, psychological and social transition.
And the way this leap into motherhood is treated must play a large part in determining the future happiness of the woman and her family.
If mothers feel obliged to step straight out of hospital and back into real life, with the minimum of care and fuss because of cutbacks, they simply won't fare as well as their seemingly pampered mothers and grandmothers did, which is a pity in this supposedly socially enlightened era.
Kim's story
Kim gave birth to baby Rosie earlier this year, in a large maternity unit in outer London.
It was a normal, though tiring, delivery.
Kim had booked for three days — the longest time available.
‘By the time I came home, on the third day, I had huge problems with feeding,’ she says.
Help with feeding in the hospital had been poor, mainly because, says Kim, the staff were hard-pressed to give even basic care, let alone the sort of unhurried support often needed to get breastfeeding going.
Once home, Kim looked forward to getting help from the community midwives.
But she didn't get a visit for 24 hours after coming home — by which time her problems had worsened.
‘I was very engorged and extremely uncomfortable,’ she says.
The midwife's visits, says Kim, were ‘very rushed’.
None of her advice helped and Kim was still trying to feed with a nipple shield after a fortnight.
On one particular day, the midwife didn't turn up, and never even phoned.
I felt really let down,’ says Kim.
‘Rosie was still unable to latch on to the breast properly, and I was quite sure she wasn't getting enough milk.’
Kim switched to bottle-feeding — with great sadness.
‘I just don't feel I had the right level of care.’
Being pushed for time, it can be tempting for midwives to go for a shortcut solution — one that doesn't involve sitting with a mum for an hour or more, as often as necessary, supporting her, encouraging her and increasing her confidence.
Diane's story
Diane had her baby in a big teaching hospital in Yorkshire: ‘Stephen's birth was OK — I had an epidural and forceps in the end, but it was all very calm and pain-free.
Afterwards, things were different, however.
‘The hospital was really overcrowded — one ward was closed, but they had to open it up and get agency nurses in to help the staff cope with all the babies.
I couldn't get any help with breastfeeding, which Stephen refused to try.
‘In the end, they told me to give him a bottle because he was too hungry to feed properly, but looking back I'm sure it was because they didn't have time to help me; and after two days I had to go home because they needed the bed.
‘Back home, I hoped the midwife would be able to give me some advice.
But she was in such a hurry that she just couldn't stay for long enough to help me with breastfeeding Stephen.
‘My best friend Gillian had given birth to her baby Laura in another hospital nine months before, and had been able to stay in for ten days.
By the time she left, she had really got the hang of breastfeeding, and was over the birth and everything.
She gave me a lot of support, but felt really angry about what had happened to me — I was too exhausted to care.
‘But now I do feel bitter about what happened — I really believe I lost the chance to breastfeed my baby because I was left to cope on my own.’
The Midwife's Role
What's the midwife's job when she cares for you after the birth?
She checks that you and the baby are well, that any stitches are healing, that your uterus is normal and that the baby's cord is healing properly.
She also helps you to establish happy feeding.
A good community midwife also gives you emotional support and reassurance.
Early school entry: too much, too young?
Sending your child to primary school at three or four could be a handicap to her education, not a help, as Karen Gold reports
Emma is only three and lives in Shropshire.
The village primary school has already told her parents she can go into the youngest class in September, a month before her fourth birthday.
Sam will be five this summer.
He is more than a year older than Emma, but he lives in Dorset, an area which doesn't encourage early school entry.
So he still goes to playgroup.
His parents asked the local headteacher when Sam could start school, and the answer?
In September.
Sam's parents think this is unfair.
They want him to have the best possible educational start, and they see children elsewhere, like Emma, getting a whole year's schooling more than Sam.
They would be amazed to hear that most experts think Sam is the one getting the good start — while Emma is the one at risk because she may not be ready to tackle the things a rising five-year old can.
Potential dangers
The experience of Lincolnshire parents illustrates the potential dangers of early school entry with worrying clarity.
These parents were initially delighted last year when the local council announced that, in response to parents' campaigning for a nursery class, all four-year-olds would be offered a school place.
What they didn't realise was that the places being offered were in the reception class — designed for children of five and over —not a nursery class.
The school couldn't afford to adapt the toilets or playground so that younger children wouldn't be scared by the older ones, so the situation was less than ideal.
And according to one teacher, who fears she might be victimised if she gives her name, only one of the two teachers taken on at her school for a total of 48 four-year-olds, was actually trained to teach under-fives.
Two unqualified ancillary helpers were brought in for mornings only, even though all the children stayed all day from the new year on.
‘At playtime, the little children stay on the edge of the playground so the 11-year-olds don't knock them over,’ she says.
‘And when assembly lasts too long they start getting bored and roll on the floor or play Pat-a-cake.’
Parents are now having second thoughts: ‘I've heard people saying they wouldn't have chosen to put their children in school, but their friends were going for it and they were afraid they would miss out,’ she said.
‘I wouldn't want any child of mine to have to cope with being thrown in at the deep end like that.
I think they're getting a second-rate education.
Is your four-year-old out of her depth?
Four-year-olds are very different from five-years-olds, says Sandra Brown, an educational researcher who has looked at how four-year-olds get on in primary schools.
Four-year-olds have only four-fifths of the talking skills, social experiences and physical development that five-year-olds have behind them.
Although children of four may  look like pint-sized fives, they have much less concentration.
Their coordination is less well-developed, too: they find it harder to turn somersaults or hold a pencil properly for long.
Like toddlers, they demand individual attention.
They learn by discovery and pretending, and they desperately need to talk about what they are doing while they are doing it.
So, they need more adults around to talk to: one grown-up to every 13 children is what the Government's nursery guidelines recommend.
They also need play materials like sand, water and dough, and lots of talking and doing.
Most four-year-olds do not, for example, fully understand that six cakes are six cakes whether they are in a row, a circle, divided into two threes, or inside a small tummy!
And they need to discover that fact with real cakes, not pictures or by learning the number six.
Nursery schools and classes should provide all these experiences.
But reception classes in infants' schools are traditionally designed for five-year-olds.
They can have up to 35 children with one teacher, training the children to adapt to being at ‘big’ school: working quietly, learning letters and numbers participating in larger groups for assembly or playtime.
Five-year-olds now follow the National Curriculum, pressurising teachers even more to get academic momentum going.
Some schools have transformed their youngest classes so they resemble nursery schools, says Sandra Brown.
Children start the day in a more relaxed way and don't go to assembly; they have larger toys (Duplo rather than Lego); and some of the tables and chairs have been removed to make more room.
Some schools have even knocked down walls to increase the space.
Separate toilets for younger children, staggered playtimes or separate playgrounds for under-fives also mark schools that are really gearing themselves up to the educational needs of these younger pupils.
But many have not changed.
School inspectors regularly say they are worried to see four-year-olds sitting at desks colouring in pictures or learning numbers, when they should be talking, exploring and imagining.
‘There's no evidence that early teaching leads to top marks’
Part of the problem is that once children go to ‘big’ school, parents expect them to do ‘proper’school work, says Neville Bennett, Professor of Primary Education at Exeter University.
But while there is evidence that young children can be bored or confused by doing work too advanced for them, as well as frightened by bigger children in the toilets or playground, there is no evidence that early teaching of the three Rs leads to top marks and academic success for the child later on.
‘What should be priorities in any preschool provision are good quality talk and good quality play,’ he says.
Different needs
Some parents are definitely in favour of early school entry.
Amina Shah would like her four-year-old daughter Anna to be in a reception class rather than the nursery class where she will stay till she is nearly five.
Anna already reads, and is bored by lift-out tray puzzles and water play.
‘There is nothing in the nursery to stretch and stimulate her,’ Amina says.
‘It's a shame she's being held back.’
But social worker Jenny Barker wishes she had held out against pressure to promote her four-year-old daughter Ruth from nursery to reception.
‘The teachers said she would be the oldest in the nursery and wouldn't be with her peer group,’ she explained.
‘But there are only 14 children in the reception class.
In the nursery she could do what she wanted when she wanted.
Now she can't and she protests.
And she doesn't like lunchtime.
They are herded here and there, and I don't think she can cope with so many children.
Sometimes she doesn't want to go to school at all.’
Keeping up with the Joneses
So why are parents putting their four-year-olds into school reception classes?
Part of the answer is that schools are offering them places.
Headteachers began filling empty reception class places with under-fives in the Seventies because the low birth-rate had caused a shortage of five-year-olds.
And once one child in the street is offered a place, other parents naturally feel under some pressure to put their children into school too, for fear that they might fall behind educationally.
The children will be with their friends, and parents have childcare provided, which they often desperately need.
Of course, what is really needed, and what would be better for the children's education, would be either more nursery schools, or reception classes that have the right equipment and staff, and the ability to cope with the three and four-year-olds they are being handed so prematurely.
Check schools out
What should you look for in a primary school, before agreeing to send your child at four?
Good signs:
A gentle start on a part-time basis, with new children beginning on different days
Parents welcome in the classroom
Teachers trained for three to eight-year-olds
One trained adult per 13 children; nursery nurses as well as teachers
Large, colourful toys; Duplo as well as Lego
Lots of talking — stories, songs and discussion
A well-stocked, cosy book corner
Dice, board games and scales for early maths
A playground area reserved for under-fives away from older children
Bad signs:
Toilets a long distance from the classroom and shared with older children
A playground shared with older children
Classroom full of tables and chairs leaving no room to move about freely
Too few ‘pretend’ play costumes and props
Equipment out of reach so children can't choose what to do
Strict division between ‘work’ and ‘play’
No system for recording each child's progress
Insufficient staff who aren't trained to teach under-fives
NURSERY VERSUS SCHOOL
When people talk about three and four-year-old children going to school, you often think they mean nursery school.
But only a tiny proportion (around 50,000) of Britain's under-fives are in nursery school.
Most of the 530,000 children in preschool education in 1988 (the latest available figures) were in primary schools.
Almost half were in nursery classes in school.
But 248,000 three and four-year-olds were in reception classes meant for children of five and above.
Look for a school with plenty of open space to move about in.
Your first baby — counting the cost
Babies certainly don't come cheap, but how much do the average couple spend on their firstborn?
Jean Williams reports
When you first break the news about your forthcoming baby, well-meaning friends and relatives are quick to predict financial chaos.
You can hardly believe that a few stretchsuits and some nappies can possibly cost as much as they say, but nine months and a lot of shopping trips later, you will have been forced to accept that your new addition has managed to tip the scales severely in the debit direction.
Janine Parkes is 28 and lives in Birmingham with her husband Kerry.
Their first baby, Tanith, is now seven months old.
‘I bought everything new for Tanith.
I was lucky, I could afford to do it because I was working full time as a youth training officer.
I bought exactly what I wanted and I did spend a lot of money, but I enjoyed doing it and had fun.
‘I made a list of everything I bought and it came to around £700.
I had worked as an assistant in Mothercare for quite a few years, so I took out a discount card with them when I was pregnant and I bought everything there at 20 per cent discount.
‘I don't think I made any expensive mistakes.
I was very concerned about the safety aspect, especially with car seats and bedding.
‘I didn't buy a crib.
I think they are a waste of money because the baby's only in one for a couple of months.
Someone lent us a carrycot and Tanith slept in that to start with, until she was big enough to go into her cot.
‘The cot was a major item; it cost £120 and I bought a spring mattress which cost £20.
It was more expensive than the foam sort, but it will last longer.
I saved money on cot sheets because I bought a couple of king-size sheets and cut them up to make three cot sheets out of each one.
I enjoy dressmaking, so I made all the cot bumpers, cot drapes, curtains, cushions and a bean bag for the baby's room.
The material only cost me £25, so must have saved about £100 there.
‘The pushchair and all its added extras was another major expense, but luckily my parents treated me to it.
It's a good, well-made, sturdy one (a Mothercare Taxi), so it should last for a second child and it's easy to fold down with one hand.
‘Because Tanith was premature and only weighed 5lb 4oz, none of the clothes I'd bought her, or was given, fitted.
I had to buy another six tiny stretchsuits.
The little dresses specially for premature babies were very expensive, but my Mum bought those.
‘I've borrowed a playpen and a baby sling.
I'm glad I didn't buy a sling because I only used it a couple of times.
By the time Tanith was big enough to go into it she was too heavy to carry any great distance.
The baby nest I bought, a sort of quilted bag, was a waste of money because I never seemed to have the opportunity to use it.
‘I've just bought an armchair from Adams which I'm very pleased with.
I folds down flat and cost £42.
‘I'd tell any new mum who wants to treat herself to buy a steam steriliser.
My husband Kerry bought me the Boots one for £30, and it's been fabulous.
Everything is done in 10 minutes.’
Tracy and Mike Rogers live in Elstree, Hertfordshire.
Rachel, who is their first baby, was born eight months ago.
‘We've been terribly lucky because we've had a lot of help with everything we needed for Rachel.
Our family and friends have been so generous and both sets of parents have been especially good.
They bought us our cot and the combination carrycot and buggy, the two most expensive items, and lots of other things besides.
I dread to think how we would have managed without all their help.
‘We've been fortunate, too, because Mike's sister Judy has a three-year-old, and now a new baby, and lots of our friends have babies, so they've lent us things and also been great with advice about their best buys.
We also read up before we bought anything.
‘Everything we bought had to be practical for our flat; light and easy to move around.
We were concerned about safety too.
I wouldn't buy anything unless it had the British Standard kitemark on it to show it was safety approved, and I also went for reputable makes, taking cost into consideration, too, of course.
‘I didn't bother buying a crib; Rachel went straight into her carrycot and stayed there until she was four months when she moved to the cot.
The carrycot, with buggy combined, has been really good value; it cost about £120 but I've had so much use out of it already.
My only complaint is that it is so heavy.
It nearly killed me getting it up and down the stairs.
‘Rachel's cot cost £130 and we bought a horsehair mattress for it which cost £50 — expensive but it will last a long time.
Three cot sheets and three blankets came to £27.
Our highchair was a present too.
‘My steam steriliser is brilliant.
Although it was quite expensive (it cost £36), it's so easy to use and saves so much time.
The Avent bottles for it are much more expensive than others, about £6 each, but I think they are worth having.
The top fits really snugly over the teat and keeps it sterile, so you don't have to bother inverting it into the bottle.
The only thing I bought and didn't use was a breast pump.
I only fed Rachel for about three weeks.
‘My first baby changing bag (Mothercare, £13.50) fell apart, so I had to buy another one and I bought a baby changing mat (£6).
I didn't bother with a changing table, but we bought a new cupboard for Rachel's room and I changed her on top of that until she got too big.
‘We didn't go too mad decorating the nursery because Mike also uses that room as an office.
We papered the walls white and put up a border: with curtains and a lampshade to match, it only came to around £50.
‘Our baby bath is borrowed from friends, and so are Rachel's car seat and playpen.
I had to buy a safety gate which was about £20.
Before Rachel was born I bought about six stretchsuits, and I've just been given 12 more but I haven't had to spend much on her clothes yet because I've had so many presents.
‘The cost of nappies and formula milk each week alone amazed me, although it's getting less now that Rachel's going on solids.
Altogether this little girl has cost us quite a lot of money.
You have to have another baby to help spread the expense!’
Sharon Stevenson 31, and her husband, Graham, live in Bridgwater, Somerset.
Their first baby, James, is 11 months old.
‘My best buy has definitely been a second-hand Silver Cross carriage pram.
It was in excellent condition, was only a year old and cost me £85.
They're at least £200 new.
James was a winter baby and the pram was very snug and comfortable; completely wind and waterproof.
He can still lie full length in it.
It's been great.
‘I've bought a number of good-quality second-hand items and they've all been excellent value.
I have a neighbour with a toddler who was outgrowing several of the things I was looking for; the pram came from her, and a few other things as well.
There's also a very good children's clothes shop nearby which deals in second-hand baby equipment.
My Silver Cross pushchair came from there.
It cost me £58 and again is in excellent condition, and would have been double that price new.
Like the pram, it is sturdy and well made, and I've been very pleased with it.
‘James' cot and bedding was another major outlay.
The cot was £95 and the mattress was £20.
I saved money on cot sheets by making my own from single sheets.
The price of baby blankets surprised me at £5 each.
I needed four; two for the pram and two for the cot, and I was given two more.
They all get used.
Then, of course, there was the cot quilt and bumper.
‘I bought about six stretchsuits for James, but I had a lot as presents.
I saved on the knitted things by making all his little woollies myself and I was given six baby vests.
I've used a mixture of terry and disposable nappies which has worked well, and I think has saved money, but it meant I needed nappy buckets, rubber pants and pins.
‘I didn't need bottles or a steriliser because James was breastfed.
One thing that infuriates me, though, is juice cups.
Why can't anyone make one with a lid that stays on!
I must have wasted money on four or five that are hopeless.
I got so tired of having juice pouring into my bag that I take it in a little lemonade bottle now.
‘My big extravagance was a Moses basket and stand.
I think they're so pretty I just had to have one, even though I knew I wouldn't get much use out of it.
I cost me £38 in Boots.
It was reduced because it was a discontinued pattern and James used it until it was about four months old.
‘I am very pleased with the highchair we bought.
It's an Italian design and is the only one we could find that folds down into a little square shape.
It's good for getting into the car boot and into our caravan.
‘Another thing that we've had a lot of use from was the baby bouncer; it's the type that hangs on the door frame.
James loved it and had hours of fun bouncing until he got too big for it.
I loved it too, because I could get on with things while he was bouncing.
‘We had to clear out our junk room to make a nursery for James.
It's only a small room so we got an offcut of carpet, and we painted it and put up a frieze and curtains.
A new chest of drawer for his things cost £75.
‘I think the biggest waste of money was the baby bath and stand.
It was such a fuss putting up the stand and then filling and emptying the bath.
And James grew out of it in about three months!
Now it's just in the way.
Another thing I'll be glad to see the back of is the lobster-pot playpen.
James hated it and screamed every time I put him in.
I'm glad it was one of my second-hand buys; it only cost £10 so I suppose I've had my money's worth out of it a few times in the garden.
The other thing that was a waste was the baby sling.
James got too heavy for it very quickly.
We like walking so we bought a second-hand backpack for him which has proved to be a lot more useful — it's much easier to carry him in it.
‘I think the things I've been most pleased with have been my excellent second-hand buys.
I wanted things that were solid and well made, and of course safe; that was more important to me than appearance.
I always looked for the kitemark when I was buying things.
I also wanted equipment that was practical and would fold up easily, out of the way.
That was a major factor when choosing the playpen and highchair.
If you can find good quality second-hand things in good condition as I did, it works out to be a real saving.’
Troublesome toddlers
Has your textbook baby turned into a tantrum-throwing toddler?
Dorothy Einon explains how to cope with her behaviour.
As any mum with a toddler will tell you, two is a confusing age, full of the best and the worst bits of parenthood.
You can take your toddler to the park one afternoon and have a happy tome together, feeding the ducks, playing on the swings, stamping in puddles.
Next day, at the mum-and-toddler group, your gentle, chatty child turns into a little monster: she spitefully destroys another child's sandcastle, throws a tantrum when she can't have the toy she wants, or screams in terror if you so much as walk across the room away from her.
Two-year-olds are learning so much all the time — and are eager to learn more.
They're just mastering the basic skills of walking and talking, which open up a whole new world for them.
They're still young enough to rely wholly on you, but mobile enough to want a certain amount of independence.
They're starting to want to make friends with other children, but are not sure how to go about it.
And although they may be sure of their own importance within their small family group, they will be uncertain of how to assert that importance when it comes to people other than their parents.
Your toddler may also not have much experience of being with other children, and find that learning to mix with them is difficult.
If you have more than one child, you'll know that brothers and sisters teach each other hard lessons.
Siblings fight, they're mean, they bully and pinch, and know how to paint themselves as the innocent victim.
Without this practice at dealing with other children, the ‘only child’ has to learn the hard way that they may push and shove, cry and scream, and grab her spade.
She'll also learn that she can't ride someone's bike, just because she wants to.
So it's not surprising that toddlers act so explosively when placed in a strange situation.
Here are some of the classic problems, their causes, and how to deal with them.
Bullying
Within a family, children fight and squabble, tease and goad each other.
They may well love the new baby, but that doesn't stop them giving it a tweak when your back is turned.
But while this ‘violence’ is to be expected within the family, it's not acceptable when your child does it to other children she encounters.
The problem here lies in the fact that toddlers are egocentric.
At two, your child doesn't realise that if she bangs someone on the head with a spade, it hurts.
The only pain she really understands is her own.
The fact that the other child cries and you shout at her lets her know that it was naughty — and may stop her doing it again if you're lucky — but it doesn't mean she understands the pain she's caused the other child.
What you can do
Try to make her understand how other people feel by putting herself in their shoes; by that, I don't mean hitting her over the head yourself, but explaining to her the pain of the other child when she hit him.
Say, for example, ‘You remember when you fell over and hit your head on the door — well, that's how Jimmy felt when you just hit him.’
This may take her some time to really believe (probably not until she's around three), but eventually it'll give her a healthier respect for the pain of others.
Other children will also fight back, unless she's picked on a particularly timid child.
If the aggressiveness and bullying continues, though, make your disapproval plain by explaining that it's naughty and that you're disappointed in her.
Always give her plenty of praise when she does behave more gently.
Don't smack her, as this only underlines the fact that aggression can help you get your own way.
Instead practise what you preach: after all there's no logic in you telling her not to hit people if that's exactly what you're doing.
If her bullying ways persist, forget the mother-and-toddler group for a few weeks.
This way, everyone — including the other mums — has a chance to forget her bad behaviour, and you'll break the habit of aggression that your child might have been getting into early.
Selfishness
Unless children grow up in a family, they are bound to find it hard to share and, until she starts playing with other children's toys, she may well think that all toys belong to her.
Before 18 months, a child won't recognise herself in the mirror and for a long time will describe herself in terms of attributes (like smallness) and her possessions.
She is the girl with the green coat and the new bike.
Now, if she's the girl with the bike, what happens if someone borrows it?
Is she still the same girl?
No wonder she feels she ought to hold onto it, especially since she's also uncertain whether the bike remains hers while someone borrows it.
Letting others have her belongings is therefore fraught with insecurity.
You may first come across this problem when a new baby arrives and suddenly the things she thought of as hers — like her cot — are taken away and given to the ‘interloper’.
If she has older brothers and sisters, then the idea of sharing will be less of a shock for her, although even in these cases children cling to those things they think of as theirs.
If she doesn't have any of these experiences before meeting other children, however, she won't understand the concept of ‘sharing’ at all, and will howl inconsolably if a toy is taken away from her.
She'll also make a grab for any toy that takes her fancy, even if she's told it belongs to another child.
What you can do
The way to stop this problem developing is to make sure that your child plays with other children from an early age, and gets accustomed to the give and take of play.
If she doesn't have older brothers and sisters, or young cousins, adults will do, as long as they're prepared to play with her — so commandeer aunts, uncles, grannies and granddads.
Later on, at mother-and-toddler groups, introduce her to the idea that not all toys are hers.
If she wants a particular toy that isn't hers, explain that it belongs to Jamie and she must ask him if she wants to play with it.
Make it clear, too, that she can only have the toy if she gives one of hers in exchange.
This way, she'll begin to understand the basics of sharing, although she won't do it very willingly until she's around 2½ to three years old.
The people that your toddler feels most confident in showing generosity towards are you, her parents, so encourage this trait by asking her to give you things: for example, ask her to give a toy, drawing or her teddy to Daddy.
Once she realises that she will eventually get back what she's lent, she'll be happier to share.
Naughtiness
She's cheeky to the other mums, she ignores you when you tell her to stop doing something, she upsets pots of paint and is generally mischievous.
And you can't think why — she's normally such a good little girl.
Many of these actions are simply a way of getting attention.
Two-year-olds thrive on attention and they'll get it any way they can — crying for no reason, breath-holding, tantrums and general naughtiness.
They soon learn that bad behaviour is a sure-fire way of getting attention.
While she plays quietly, you can read the paper.
But bad behaviour brings you over straightaway.
What you can do
Handling naughtiness is one of the thornier issues that parents have to face.
Should you smack her?
Ignore her?
Withdraw your affection?
The best way to approach bad behaviour is to tell the child to stop whatever she's doing and give her a reason why.
So, for instance, if she tips a pot of paint over Jamie's drawing, tell her she mustn't do it again, because she has spoiled the picture, Jamie is upset — and how would she like it if someone did that to her picture?
Be calm and, if she does it again, correct her until she understands.
Telling her she's naughty probably won't have much effect on her at this stage, as she won't really understand what that means.
She'll understand your anger and stop what she's doing for the time being, but that won't stop her doing it again when you can't see.
Smacking doesn't work, either, because she just learns that you'll hurt her if you catch her doing it again.
It doesn't teach her why she should obey you — so she'll carry on with her naughtiness.
Withdrawing affection takes away a child's security: you're the pivot of her world and if your love isn't stable what in her world can be?
So give her reasons not to be naughty.
If these tactics don't work, look for a deeper reason for her misbehaviour.
Children pick up on our worries and stress, so try to find out what's bothering her and take time to reassure her.
It may also be that her naughtiness is her way of telling you she's not ready for the toddler group yet.
In this case, leave it for a few months and try going again later.
Throwing tantrums
Having a toddler thrown a wobbly in public is perhaps one of parenting's most embarrassing episodes.
You can only watch helplessly as your child screws up her face, stamps her feet and screams because she can't take the toy she wants home with her, or have that alluring packet of sweets she's seen before tea.
Tantrums aren't just attention seeking exercises, but also opportunities for your two-year-old to get rid of her pent-up frustrations and aggression at the world.
Children of this age want to do so much, but don't yet have the ability to tackle many things — which makes them feel frustrated.
They're also testing exactly how far they can go with mum and dad.
What you can do
If you sense a tantrum brewing, distract her with a toy or an activity that will get rid of some of her pent-up energy.
If you can bear the looks of other mums and the noise level, try ignoring her — if she doesn't get the attention she's seeking, she'll give up.
But maybe your best course of action is to hold her, while explaining clearly why she cannot, for example, have the toy.
Tell her you know how she feels, but don't give in to her demands, as she'll soon latch on to the idea that throwing a tantrum gets her what she wants.
Then you'll be struck with an established pattern of behaviour that's harder to break.
While going through the worst of the tantrum season, keep in mind that most children grow out of them by the time they're three — this thought will help you to cope when you just feel like hiding!
Timidness
It isn't just bad behaviour that makes us wish the ground would open under us: there are times when you'd gladly disown your child when she gets to the top of the slide, freezes there and screams hysterically to be carried down.
With a timid child, you can take her to the mum-and-toddler group, but you can't make her play.
She'll cling to you instead, hide next to you and won't be persuaded to talk to anyone, child or adult.
For some children, this clinginess is just a phase, which will disappear when she gets more used to the rough and tumble of the other children.
But some children are just shy by nature and there's not much you can do about it.
Timid children need gentle handling to build up their confidence.
Don't push, and you'll be surprised what they achieve.
What you can do
Make a point of visiting friends with children before starting at the mother-and-toddler group, so she has a chance to widen her circle before meeting more children and being overwhelmed.
Don't push her to join in if she doesn't want to.
Just let her sit with you and watch until she feels ready to play with the other children.
Let her take a favourite toy or comfort object with her, as sometimes a little piece of home can make her feel more secure among strangers.
If she's frightened of using the more adventurous play equipment at playgroup or in the park, start with gentle activities — playing in the sand pit, painting and reading — letting her gradually develop an interest in the other equipment.
When she's ready, place her a little way up the slide and let her move down with your standing by the slide for reassurance.
Push her gently on the swings.
She'll soon realise that she's safe and that the world won't bite.
Crying
Crying is a perennial problem with young children from babyhood on.
Babies cry for quite basic reasons — they're hungry, cold or in need of a cuddle — but later, crying is either from frustration or insecurity.
If she's playing with some children on the other side of the room and suddenly looks up to find you're not there, she wails.
When you comfort her, she clings to you, because she worries that you will disappear again.
What you can do
If she's feeling insecure, offer her lots of love and reassurance when she cries so she knows you love her and won't leave her.
Don't leave her on her own at someone's house or with a new babysitter, until she feels really confident in their company.
You may think Jamie is her closest friend, but that doesn't mean she's happy to be left with him and his mum.
However, a child who forms attachments from a young age with a wide group of people, rather than just close family, feels less insecure than a baby who has been close to only one or two people, so try to introduce her to as many people as possible, right from the beginning.
Always tell her when you're going out of the room and, when she can understand, that you'll be back soon.
If you're leaving her somewhere and will be gone for some time, don't sneak out: she'll learn to mistrust you and crying when you leave her — even for a minute or two — becomes almost inevitable.
WHY SHE'S BEHAVING BADLY
If your child behaves badly, remember:
At two, she doesn't do it on purpose.
She doesn't understand the consequences of her actions.
She may be frightened.
She may be trying to get your attention.
She cannot feel for the child she hurts.
She may be under stress and reacting with a tantrum.
She can't help her personality — if she's a shy child, then there's no point in forcing her into situations which make her feel uncomfortable and uneasy.
She needs you: you are her lifeline — and that's probably why she's acting as she is.
You're not alone in your embarrassment — most of your friends will know exactly what you're going through, having been through it themselves when their kids were the same age.
Don't bash the bottle
If you can't — or don't want to — breastfeed, why does it seem that the whole world is out to make you feel guilty?
Mum and health writer Nikki Bradford takes on the bottle-bashers
Breastfeeding may be best — but isn't it time for all those who make non-breastfeeding mothers feel guilty to mind their own business?
That goes for the well-meaning GPs, health visitors and breastfeeding counsellors as well as the woman down the road who fed four babies herself until they were two years old!
I remember my own — normally kindly — mother-in-law saying rather scathingly, ‘Supplementing at three months?
He can't still be hungry.
I never had a bottle in the house.’
Then there are members of the medical profession who bark, ‘Breastfeeding, I trust?’ when you slink in for your six-week check-up.
Or pressure groups like the Baby Milk Action Group which, among other things, campaigns against women being pressurised into bottle-feeding.
It's the mother's choice how she feeds her baby,’ their spokesperson told me.
‘Just as long as she knows about the increased risk of her baby getting gastroenteritis with bottle-feeding…’
It would be nice if people didn't force their advice on mothers when they're feeling so vulnerable.
It would be even nicer if people remembered that the way you feed your baby is a matter of personal choice.
Of course, there is some very good help around for women trying to breastfeed — for health visitors, midwives, nurses and breastfeeding counsellors, who you can contact through organisations like the National Childbirth Trust and the La Leche League.
But mothers don't always get the help they need when they need it or for long enough, due to shorter hospital stays and shortage of staff or volunteers.
‘Women in this position shouldn't feel guilty about not breastfeeding’, says the Baby Milk Action Group.
‘They should feel angry that the help they needed wasn't available.’
If you feel breastfeeding isn't for you, the most important thing is not to feel guilty about it.
Millions of babies have grown up happy and healthy on formula milks and your baby will thrive if he has a mum who's relaxed at feeds, not anxious that she's not giving her baby the best start in life.
Taking to the bottle
Anatomically speaking, says the National Childbirth Trust, 97 per cent of women can breastfeed if they wish.
In fact, six out of ten mothers try to breastfeed but, because of problems they can't solve, only 26 per cent are still doing it six months later.
Some of the most common stumbling blocks are physical, but bear in mind that there are usually solutions.
Postnatal problems can make breastfeeding difficult because sitting is so painful; for example, if you have haemorrhoids from bearing down during delivery or long labour, or stitches in the perineum.
If you manage to get both, as I did, sitting of any sort is painful.
Try feeding lying down (not easy to master) or standing up all the time (exhausting).
Breast problems, such as mastitis (sore, red areas on the breast, flu-like symptoms and a temperature), caused by a bug entering the breast tissue or by a blocked duct, can make life a misery.
So can cracked or sore nipples.
All these problems tend to occur if the baby isn't positioned properly — ask for advice from your midwife or a breastfeeding counsellor of you have recurring problems.
Inverted nipples can make breastfeeding more difficult at first, although with a bit of patience, your baby can learn to draw out the nipple with his sucking action.
Sheer exhaustion is another big problem.
Lack of sleep, if the baby is demanding to be feed every two hours or so day and night, can be hell if it goes on for long.
It's tempting to consider bottle-feeding instead, as babies take longer to digest formula milk, so feeds don't need to be so frequent.
You can obviously share the load with your partner, too.
Insufficient milk supply is another common complaint.
Many women feel that they can't satisfy their baby's demands and become very frustrated and worried.
Don't assume you haven't got enough milk — your body is programmed to make as much milk as your baby needs and any problems are treatable.
Check that you have the positioning right and encourage your baby to feed for as often and long as he wants to stimulate the flow.
The are also certain other problems which can make breastfeeding just as distressing.
Certain medical conditions, such as being HIV positive, or which need particular kinds of medication, may make breastfeeding inadvisable.
If baby is sick or very premature and in intensive care, this may also disrupt the establishment of breastfeeding.
Social pressures also play a part — the reaction when you try and feed a baby when you're out, for instance, can be demoralising.
In a recent NCT survey, 19 out of 20 British people said they approved of breastfeeding in principle, but didn't like to see it in a public place.
You may have problems with work — although many women are  entitled to full maternity leave, they are actually expected to be back at work in eight to ten weeks, otherwise they're regarded as lacking in commitment.
Your partner's feelings may also make you feel uncomfortable, if he sees your breasts as sex objects.
One father was spotted at a lunch party, gazing fixedly at his wife breastfeeding their four-week-old son.
‘Ah, isn't that sweet?’ said his hostess conversationally.
‘Sweet?’ muttered the father, coming out of his reverie.
‘Don't know about that, but I do know it's the only good look I'm going to get for months so I'm making the most of it.’
Many fathers also feel jealous about the bond breastfeeding makes between mother and baby, shutting him out.
A woman may turn to bottle-feeding to give him a chance to join in.
A FRUSTRATING EXPERIENCE
Glennis O'Connor, a secretary in London's East End, whose son Conrad is now 14 months, says, ‘I had a horrible time trying to breastfeed — I had one nipple that was so sore it felt like hot pepper was being rubbed into it each time I fed Conrad.
Yet I tried and tried for over a week thinking I ought to for his sake.
‘But my poor right nipple just got sorer and sorer.
I don't think Conrad was latching on properly, but I must admit breastfeeding did confuse me.
When it did work, I was never sure what I'd done right, and when it didn't, I was never sure what I had done wrong — it was very hit and miss.
‘I did have help from my cousin who's a midwife and also a good friend.
She told me just to feed him from the other side, so I did, fully expecting my right breast to explode, but it didn't!
I just leaked like mad each time I fed Conrad from the other side.
‘It was all very frustrating.
Feeding only seemed to work when my cousin was there to help, and I wasn't sure if Conrad was getting enough milk.
So in the end, after a week or so, it was a real relief to give up and bottle-feed him instead.’
Getting started
Breast milk is always there, sterile and at the right temperature and strength.
Mixing up bottles of formula, on the other hand, sounds fiddly, but once you've got the hang of it, it's really quite straightforward.
To start you need the basics:
several feeding bottles
a good supply of teats
appropriate formula milk (see Formulas Explained 
sterilising equipment
There's quite a bit of choice when it comes to sterilising units, from state-of-the-art steamers to mini travel sets.
But you don't need to pay out a lot of money: a large, lidded Tupperware box with enough room for four bottles and teats, disinfected with plain sterilising tablets and changed daily, will do.
Dos and don'ts of bottle-feeding
Do follow the directions on the tub of formula carefully, only adding the required number of scoops.
Fill the scoop by lifting powder from the top of the tub and smooth off the excess with the blunt edge of a knife.
Don't press it down to get more in the scoop or add an extra scoop for luck — it's not necessary.
You'll just make the formula over-rich, which may make the baby dehydrated and, if you continue, overweight.
Don't make the baby finish the whole bottle if he doesn't seem to want it.
Throw away any unfinished milk.
Do make sure all your equipment — and dummies if you use them — are thoroughly washed and sterilised after use.
Stale milk is an ideal breeding ground for germs.
Buy a brush and scrub bottles well before sterilising.
Do choose bottles that have no indentations inside that might make them difficult to clean thoroughly.
If you're using sterilising solution, follow the manufacturer's directions.
Make sure everything is submerged, and never remove the bottles before the time stated.
If you have prepared bottles of formula in advance, cool them quickly in the fridge and keep them there until you're ready to use them, with sterilised teat caps on.
Don't give you baby his bottle straight from the fridge as it might chill him.
Some babies will take their milk at room temperature, but many prefer it if it's warmed up.
Don't heat up bottles of formula in the microwave — there might be hidden ‘heat spots’ in it that could burn your baby's mouth.
Heat it in a jug of hot water until it is just warm and check it's not too hot by testing a drop on the inside of your wrist.
Don't let a feed stand in a bottle warmer, as this can breed germs.
As soon as the milk reaches the correct temperature, give it to your baby.
If you're going to be away from home, think ahead.
A bottle will keep for a couple of hours once out of the fridge, but if you need to keep it for longer you should store it in an insulated cool-bag until it's needed.
When you're feeding the baby, make sure that the teat is always full of milk, or he'll suck in air with his feed which could to a bout of indigestion.
Formulas explained
Nutritionally, infant formulas are almost identical to breast milk, although, as Dr Peter Sullivan points out, as far as building up your baby's resistance to infection goes, they have absolutely no effect.
Ordinary formula
There are two types, both suitable for babies from birth.
The basic sort (like Aptamil, Farley's Ostermilk One or SMA Gold Cap) is very similar to breast milk.
It's made from skimmed cow's milk and vegetable and animal fats and is fortified with important vitamins and minerals.
The second sort, often described on the tins as ‘for hungrier babies’, contains more protein and carbohydrate and takes longer to pass through the baby's stomach than normal formula.
Examples include Ostermilk Two, SMA White Cap, Cow & Gate's Premium Plus.
Prem formulas
These are often given to very low birthweight babies (under about 4lb) as they are easy to digest and have a different balance of salts or minerals, especially calcium and sodium, to breast milk.
You get them from the hospital or your doctor, not over the counter.
Follow-on milks
Supposed to bridge the gap between breast milk and doorstep pints, these are basically the ‘hungry baby’ formula with added iron and vitamin D, and can be used from six months on.
Many paediatricians think they are unnecessary, though.
Examples include Progress and Farley's Junior Milk.
Soya Milks
These are sometimes suggested if a baby has an allergy to cow's milk or if the parents are vegans, and is made from a soya bean protein (an example is Wysoy).
They're also on sale at the chemist's with other formula milks, but you should not give them to your child without talking to your doctor or health visitor first to see if they're suitable.
Giving breastfeeding a try
Don't let us put you off having a go at breastfeeding; it can be an extremely rewarding and satisfying experience for both mother and baby.
Many women find it easier and more convenient in the long run.
Even if you don't continue with breastfeeding after the first few days, giving your baby colostrum (the fluid produced by the breasts immediately after the birth) has major benefits and is obviously better than not breastfeeding at all.
Dr Peter Sullivan, senior lecturer and paediatrician at the Westminster Hospital for Children, explains: ‘Colostrum is not just a food.
It's more like a living tissue, like blood is.
It contains wonderful substances like Secretory IgA, which literally coats the baby's gut with an antiseptic paint to protect it from bugs.
It's also packed with the mother's antibodies against common things like flu, which help protect the baby from infections in the first few months of his life.
Another vital component are macrophages, cells which attack bacteria, and other substances which fend off the bugs responsible for many stomach upsets, so babies have far greater protection against diarrhoea.
And from a bonding point of view, breastfeeding — even for the first day or so — is very valuable.’
Trying again
Don't forget that it's possible to start breastfeeding again after a pause if you want to.
Let the baby suck regularly — even if nothing comes out at first— and the milk should start coming through again.
Women who've adopted babies have been able to breastfeed them, though not always fully.
Contact the La Leche League if you feel in need of any help.
Enough's enough
Lydia Browning from Nottingham, feels she gave breastfeeding her best shot.
‘I think my trouble was that I had too much help and felt as if my boobs were all anyone was interested in.
At one point, I had the head of the local NCT, my midwife, my health visitor and my GP all coming over regularly.
Sometimes they'd bump into each other on the doorstep!
My milk didn't seem to be coming through so I was told to stuff myself with rich food and carbohydrates.
The menu plan they gave me was all doughnuts, porridge with cream, big steaks, milky drinks and huge puddings.
‘Then there was the electric breast pump the health visitor gave me.
I was supposed to use it for 20 minutes on each side in between Holly's feeds, which were every two or three hours anyway.
It was breast, breast, breast all day, every day, as if the rest of me didn't exist.
I felt like a cow being fattened to produce full-cream milk, then stuck on a milking machine.
‘It was impossible to do anything, as there was always either a baby or a machine attached to me.
It became increasingly frustrating, while the health visitor and the NCT person began to regard me, unfortunately, as something of a professional challenge.
‘And all the time poor Holly was steadily losing weight.
After six weeks I got so worried about her, I changed to bottle-feeding, and she gained weight like there was no tomorrow.
I didn't feel guilty about it, though I did feel a bit inadequate somehow.
But by then I truly reckoned enough was enough.
Cynthia Felgate crusading for kids
Libby Purves meets the woman who's become the guru of children's television — from Playschool to Playdays 
When you are a new parent, preschool television programmes can look rather ridiculous: strange mincing mimes, presenters who say ‘Hello’ in that peculiar staccato voice never heard anywhere else, apparently pointless dolls and puppets.
What is this strange world?
Whatever happened to Bill and Ben?
And isn't Muffin the Mule on any more?
But generations on from Bill and Ben, things are neither bad nor — after a while — all that baffling.
Despite its lapses, British children's television is the envy of the world.
And in the particular art of making programmes for preschool children, without being violent or patronising, we have some the finest producers anywhere.
These producer's lives are not easy though: not only is there a constant pressure on TV bosses to axe unprofitable baby programmes, but their lives are a constant struggle to be simple without being simple-minded, to give information without being dull, and to work in one of the most sophisticated media ever invented without losing that childlike sense of wonder.
When it works, it works wonderfully well and inspires enormous affection: remember the rumpus in 1988 when Playschool was threatened?
There were leaders about it in all the newspapers, societies were for the defence of Humpty and Big Ted, and I actually heard two young City whizzkids reminiscing about the Playschool clock on the tube.
Baby television is important, and one woman at the heart of the whole business deserves the credit for much of its excellence — Cynthia Felgate.
Not only was she a founder of Playschool , and responsible for commissioning Postman Pat, Bertha the Big Machine and Charlie Chalk for the BBC; but when Playschool came under threat she formed her own independent production company to make — and sell back to the BBC — a modern replacement for it: the current Playdays (first known as Playbus ).
It has now passed its 500th edition, outlasting all other independently produced programmes for the BBC.
Cynthia is in her early 50s, and is a good-humoured, comfortable figure.
She never had children of her own: ‘Not from choice, not at all.
When I was young in the Sixties, children either turned up or they didn't.’
The absence of her own, however, has enabled her to spend a lifetime amusing and instructing other people's.
‘I started in drama school, doing a teaching and acting course.
Then I taught in a secondary modern in Hackney, before getting involved in the pioneering days of schools' drama, touring happily doing plays in schools and inspiring them to do their own.’
In 1963 she joined the BBC and worked on everything from Steptoe and Son to That Was The Week That  Was , before reaching her real ambition to work on Playschool .
Her philosophy is clear: ‘I hate wasting time.
Whatever you do, for the smallest children, has to be really worth putting into your precious 20-minute show.
I don't like too much slapstick or hitting.
Small children of two or three tend to be alarmed at a banana-skin fall, not amused yet.
And we don't go in for naughtiness.
If children on the programme stick their tongues out, we don't condemn it.
But we don't teach them how!’
Cynthia Felgate thinks a lot about her audience.
‘We must not make assumptions about that child watching.
It would be nice if all children were on an adult's knee, able to ask questions.
But a lot aren't.
Some of them don't have both parents, so we never say ‘ask your Daddy’.
Some aren't strong on language and need time to just look at things, like a fish, without words.’
Teaching without preaching, expanding a child's horizons without risk, often replacing a parent rather than working with one, is a minefield of responsibility.
But it is one which Mrs Felgate treads with great sure-footedness.
Humpty and Jemima and Bid Ted may be gone, leaving young bankers grieving for their lost childhood.
But Humphrey and Wobble and Dot have come into their prime.
When the hands of the clock move on again, it will be our children mourning them on their way to work.
Cynthia Felgate's Tips
Find the right programmes.
Look out for programmes specially made for young children, like Playdays and See-Saw .
Tell them this is their programmed.
This makes it easier to switch off at the end.
Watch with your child — if you can!
For many parents there isn't time to do this more than once a week or so, but it can be a rewarding time.
Don't keep up a running commentary.
There are quiet times during good children's programmes.
If a child is watching absorbed, don't interrupt.
If she asks a question or has clearly misunderstood something, it is fine to talk, but the silences matter too.
Find an activity to fill the gap when you switch off.
Often a programme will immediately suggest a game; or sometimes there is a discussion the child wants to have.
Keep in touch if your child watches without you; take note of any new phrases or ideas she has, and remember they may have come from television.
Be ready to discuss things which might puzzle the child.
NEW PARENTS' GUIDE TO PLAYDAYS (10.05 DAILY BBC 1)
There are five bus stops, one for each day of the week.
MONDAY is the Why Bird Stop.
The Why Bird is an inquisitive cloth bird with a Welsh accent and a personal computer.
It pecks at the keyboard, asks a lot of questions and often gets a story in reply.
TUESDAY is Playground Stop, which is a double-act featuring the puppet Lizzie and presenter Dave Benson Phillips who appears surrounded by hordes of real children.
As Cynthia says: ‘We found Dave entertaining children at Chessington World of Adventures, and in 25 years I had never met anyone who got on more naturally with children.’
WEDNESDAY is Dot Stop, a musical event.
Dot wears dotted outfits and never speaks.
She is a bit disconcerting to adults at first, but children watch her very carefully.
There are actually three or four Dots: one to play the violin, one to dance, one for percussion days, one to dance, and so forth.
Dots mime everything they want to convey, with surprising success.
THURSDAY is Patch Stop.
Peggy Patch is a freckled, rather passive rag doll who is discovered lounging around on location — by a trout stream, up a mountain, sitting on a shire horse — accompanied by a presenter in an anorak who strides around explaining things.
I learned quite a lot about hydroelectric power!
Peggy Patch just sat.
FRIDAY is Tent Stop.
A group of actors and actresses rehearse and perform a story in a circus tent, with some help from Humphrey the Victorian posing toy, and Wobble the giant clown.
These are becoming cults: Wobble got mobbed once in Leamington Spa.
Bye bye BABY…
When you're out, it's important to know someone trustworthy is at home caring for your children.
Wendy Varley helps you find the perfect babysitter
We all need a chance to get out sometimes, even those of us with babies.
And most parents have found themselves desperately ringing round friends and family trying to find a babysitter.
Unfortunately, finding a trustworthy person to watch the kids can seem nigh-on impossible.
So, if you feel in need of a night on the town, our rundown of the babysitting options available should make sure you have a carefree time!
Babysitting circles
Babysitting circles are a good way of making sure you can get a babysitter when you want one, but they do involve some effort on your part — you'll have to do babysitting in exchange!
A circle is basically a group of parents who share out babysitting duties between them, on a rota basis.
A member of the circle will babysit for you and, in exchange, you'll babysit for someone else in the circle while your partner stays at home with your own children.
If you're a single mum you may be able to take your children with you when it's your turn to sit.
How to set up: It's easy if you know other families in your area, and an ideal circle is one in which you all know and trust each other.
If you don't know other families nearby, though, you could find out if there's any local interest in starting one by putting a notice up in your health centre, local nurseries, mum toddler groups, schools and shop windows — anywhere mums regularly go and would see it.
Once you've established that you have the interest of around a dozen parents (the number can be bigger or smaller, although a circle can be rather unmanageable if too many people are involved), decide on a system of allocating sitting ‘jobs’ so each parent in the circle gets a fair share.
Using tokens also works well: parents ‘earn’ tokens for babysitting — say, one an hour — which they can use to ‘buy’their own babysitter when required.
Each parent keeps a phone list of other members of the circle, and works through it to find someone who's available.
Alternatively, you could have a book with all the names and phone numbers listed.
Each participating parent would have a turn keeping the book and be responsible for allocating babysitting fairly.
This method call for a bit more work and commitment by those involved in the circle, though.
Advantages: With 11 or so other parents involved in the circle, it's unlikely you'll be stuck for a sitter; it's free of charge; you'll probably make friends in the area.
Disadvantages: You may find yourself doing ‘unfair swaps’(ie, you'll look after three children who are still playing wargames at 10pm, while the exchange sit involves watching TV while your baby sleeps peacefully); if the circle is big, you may find you're leaving your children with a virtual stranger; you may also find that the circle involves a male babysitter (see overleaf).
Family swaps
This is really a babysitting circle on a small scale, with only two families involved, and it can work well.
Sally and Graham have a two-year-old son and a five-year-old daughter and have babysat for their neighbours' three children regularly for the past year.
‘I babysit for them about once a fortnight while Graham stays at home with  our own children, and she or her husband do the same for us,’ explains Sally.
‘The nice thing about keeping it small and knowing each other well is that it's very flexible; if one of us has an emergency it doesn't create problems or ill-feeling.’
Sally finds that the exchanges are working better as their children get older.
‘We did try swapping while our youngest children were tiny — they're about the same age — but found that the erratic routines caused havoc.
We all felt exhausted!
But once all the children had a more settled routine at night, it clicked into place.
Now we can really look forward to our nights out without worrying.’
How to set up: Ask friends, family or neighbours in the same situation as you if they'd like to do a babysitting swap, and take it from there.
Advantages: It's free; your children will know their babysitters well and you'll feel comfortable leaving your kids with them.
Disadvantages: If there's a last-minute emergency, you may find yourself without a sitter; you have to watch out that neither side abuses the bargain you've made by going out far more than the other.
Agencies
These can be a useful standby, though they're rather few and far between across the country.
It also means leaving your child with someone you — and your children — don't know, unless you use the same agency babysitter on a regular basis and have a chance to build up a relationship.
Judy Thomas runs Babysitters Unlimited, a long-established agency operating in Southwest London.
Her babysitters are mainly women in their late 20s and she doesn't take on anyone under 18.
She checks them out carefully through face-to-face interviews and obtains references, but is still surprised that so few customers ask her any questions about her sitters.
So, if using an agency, make sure you find out the following facts:
What the sitters qualifications/background are.
What experience they have of looking after children.
If they came with references and, if so, were the references checked.
What insurance cover the agency has.
(Judy Thomas points out, however, that if anything were to go wrong during the evening the agency wouldn't be legally responsible.)
How to find an agency: Look locally for ads in health clinics, doctors' surgeries, shop windows, or check in the telephone directory.
Advantages: An agency can usually find you someone at the last minute.
Disadvantages: It's an expensive option (Judy's client's pay an annual membership fee of £35 or a one-off fee of £6, plus an hourly rate of between £2.90–£3.75 per hour); you'll be leaving your children with a stranger.
Babysitters Unlimited: 081–892 8888.
Friend's children
This is perhaps one of the most common babysitting standbys and can work out well, if you know the teenager to be responsible and she's confident when it comes to being left alone with children.
They're usually happy to help out, as it gives them extra pocket money.
But don't leave your children with someone under the age of 16.
If you do, you remain responsible for your child even while you're out and if anything goes wrong, you'd be held responsible for your babysitter's welfare, too.
Judy lives in Manchester and hires her friend's 17-year-old daughter who's studying for her A levels.
‘She knows my children and gets on really well with them.
I pay her £1.50 an hour — I couldn't afford anyone who charged more than that, to be honest.’
Advantages: It can work out quite cheap, depending on what payment you negotiate; the children will know her; she won't mind getting down on her hands and knees and playing horses with them!
Disadvantages: She may not have had much experience looking after young children; she may let you down at the last minute if something else crops up — like a boyfriend.
Other options
You could always try advertising for a regular babysitter — at health clinics, shop windows, in the paper, and so on.
Pensioners very often welcome the chance to earn a little extra money and are happy to babysit for an evening.
Students are also another option — try placing an ad on the notice board at a local university, poly or college — and they don't usually charge too much.
Sarah has found student teachers a godsend.
‘I got to know one girl at the local teacher training college, and now if she isn't available she puts me in touch with one of her friends.
They've all been very responsible and they seem to have loads of energy and a sense of fun, which is essential if they're babysitting for my three-year-old during the day.
They charge £2 an hour at night and £2.50 during the day.’
Advantages: Students open up a vast network of potential sitters, and pensioners are usually reliable, so there shouldn't be many last-minute hitches; it can be fairly cheap; you're leaving the children with someone older and more responsible than an experienced teenager.
Disadvantages: Difficult to get character references, so you'll have to rely on your own judgement; you'll be leaving the children with people you don't know very well, although if you get a regular commitment you should soon get to know and trust your sitters.
Male babysitters
‘We've got a bit of a problem in our babysitting circle at the moment,’ says mother of two, Yvonne.
‘One of the couples is dividing the babysitting so that she stays at home and he goes out to do the babysitting.
Some of the other parents in the circle aren't happy about this — and I must admit I have my qualms.’
Judy Thomas at Babysitters Unlimited doesn't have any male babysitters on her books.
‘I wouldn't want my clients to have to make the decision and feel guilty about saying no.’
It's one thing to leave your children with a couple you know and trust, but quite another to have a man you only know through a babysitting circle look after your children for an evening.
And it's a difficult topic to raise with those concerned — how do you voice objections without implying that you think the man is a child molester?
It's important that you don't leave your children with anyone you're not happy about — you'd only spend your entire evening out worrying about it.
So, if you feel strongly about male babysitters, speak out — while making it clear that it's not personal, it's just for the sake of your peace of mind.
What your babysitter needs to know
Where you can be contacted.
Give a phone number if at all possible.
Your child's doctor's details, with both daytime and emergency phone numbers.
Details of your nearest accident and emergency department.
(Make it clear that, in a medical emergency, they should ring the doctor or hospital before ringing you.)
Your own address and phone number.
It sounds daft, but it's amazing how many babysitters regularly visit a house without knowing the full address, and it your number isn't written on the phone, they-re unlikely to remember the it.
Both would be vital in an emergency.
Up-to-date information on your child's routine: meals, bath, bedtime, any allergies.
Any special policies you've introduced (eg. restricting a dummy to night-times).
What to do if your child is restless or upset.
Where you keep supplies: nappies, milk etc for the baby: coffee, tea, snacks for her.
When you'll be home.
The law and your child
There is no legal minimum at which you can leave your child unattended.
However, if you left a child under 12 (England and Wales) or under seven (Scotland) in your home with an unguarded or inadequately guarded fire and they were injured as a result, you would be legally responsible.
ROSPA (Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents) advise that you shouldn't leave a child under eight alone in the home.
Happy babysitting guide
Do let your children know in advance that you're going out, tell them who'll be babysitting.
Reassure them that you'll be coming back later.
Do come home at the agreed time; if you're going to be unavoidably late, ring your babysitter and let her know.
Do make sure your babysitter gets home safely; always give her a lift if it's late at night.
Do pay extra for daytime babysitting; it inevitably involves more work.
Do try to get your child into a settle routine, especially at night.
It's so much easier to leave a child in the hands of a babysitter if you know that he or she will go to bed without fuss.
And it's much easier to find willing babysitters, too!
Do have a clear policy on babysitting if you employ a nanny or au pair.
Make sure you agree from the start on whether babysitting is part of her job, and if so how often.
If it's paid for separately, agree an hourly rate.
Disagreements over ‘extra’ babysitting often cause rifts between parents and nannies, so respect whatever agreement you've made with her.
Don't hire a babysitter who's under 16.
Don't ask a babysitter to look after several children for a long time — for example, a whole day.
It's exhausting enough for you; imagine what it is like for someone who isn't used to your kids.
Don't ask a babysitter to look after a sick child.
You're pregnant — so who cares?
What's behind all those questions the experts ask when your pregnant?
Nancy Stewart explains how your answers build into a complete picture of your pregnancy
From the moment you first suspect you're pregnant, you are alert to each change in your body and the way you feel.
Your midwife and doctor, though, see many pregnant women, so they need to use all their skills to help them build up a picture of your individual, unique pregnancy.
Some clues to your pregnancy will come through asking questions, and some from checks.
The first visit.
As this visit your doctor will need to establish the following:
Q. Are you pregnant?
On your first visit to the doctor, he or she will want to confirm your suspicions by running a pregnancy test on a sample of your urine.
It's best to bring an early morning, mid-flow sample with you, because the hormones that show that you are pregnant are most concentrated in your early-morning urine.
Your doctor may run the test himself, although it's more likely he'll send it off to a laboratory.
Q. What's your medical history?
Your doctor or midwife will ask about your medical history to establish the background to your pregnancy.
Such things as whether you or any one in  your family has had diseases like diabetes, high blood pressure or heart conditions will be noted.
as well as any current diseases and drugs you may be taking to treat them.
You will be asked for details of any previous pregnancies, including miscarriages or abortions, and whether there were any problems in pregnancy, birth, or afterwards.
If there are any twins in your family, your midwife or doctor will want to know, since this could mean your chance of having twins might be greater.
You may even be asked your shoe size, which is thought to give an indication of the size of your pelvis.
Q. How healthy are you?
A physical examination will let your doctor know about your current state of health.
Your height and weight will be measured and recorded, and your doctor will listen to your chest with a stethoscope to check on your heart and lungs.
Your blood pressure will be measured, and you will be checked for any swelling in fingers or toes, and for varicose veins in the legs.
Your doctor or midwife may also check your breasts and abdomen, though the womb is still hidden in the pelvis in the early weeks and may not be felt.
Q. When's the baby due?
The date your last menstrual period started will help your doctor or midwife to calculate the like date for your baby to arrive, or EDD (estimated date of delivery), by adding on 280 days.
If you have regular periods, though, or unusually long or short cycles, mention it since this could affect the due date.
Your doctor may want to carry out an internal examination to check the size and position of your womb, which will help indicate how far along you are, or this may be done at your hospital appointment.
The doctor will ask you to relax; he will insert gloved fingers into the vagina and feel your abdomen with the other hand.
Q. What kind of birth do you want?
The doctor and midwife may start getting to know you and your wishes about pregnancy right from the first visit, by talking over your plans for antenatal care, where you want your baby to be born, how you plan to feed the baby, and so on.
You may not know the answers to some of these things at first, but there will be plenty of chances to discuss them later.
Regular check-ups
At each antenatal visit, there are several standard checks that your doctor or midwife will use to keep track of your progress.
Q. How much weight are you putting on?
You will probably be weighed at each visit, not because there are strict guidelines about weight gain, but because it gives a general indication that all is well if you are gaining steadily.
Not gaining weight could mean you're not meeting the increased dietary needs of pregnancy, the risk being that you are more like to have a low birthweight baby.
On the other hand, a sudden large weight gain that's not from eating good food, but from retaining large amounts of fluid, could be a sign of pre-eclampsia, a condition that restricts the blood flow to the placenta.
Around ten per cent of first-time mothers get it — usually in the last three months.
Is your blood pressure normal?
Your blood pressure will also be checked at each visit.
Your doctor will expect a slightly lower reading in the middle part of your pregnancy, followed by a rise in the later weeks.
But if it rises suddenly or to a high level, he will need to consider whether you are developing high blood pressure problems or pre-eclampsia.
It's not unusual for blood pressure to go up as a result of stress, so if you have a high reading at some point, your doctor or midwife might suggest you rest and try to relax for a while before they check it again.
Or you might even have a home visit from your midwife to recheck your blood pressure away from the crowded scene of a busy antenatal clinic.
Q. Do you have an infection?
Your urine will also be checked regularly, both for protein and for sugar.
Protein in the urine could indicate a urine infection, which should be treated with antibiotics even if you are not feeling any symptoms such as burning.
Higher levels of protein in the urine can be linked with high-blood pressure or pre-eclampsia, so this would be an important warning sign for your doctor.
Q. Is there a possibility of pregnancy diabetes?
Some sugar in the urine is fairly common in pregnancy, but if the level is high your doctor might run another test for sugar levels in your blood, to seen if you need special attention and advice about diabetes.
Fortunately, most cases of diabetes which arise during pregnancy disappear afterwards.
Q. Are you having problems with swelling?
Each visit will also include a check for swelling in your fingers and feet.
Some swelling is normal in later pregnancy — in fact the majority of women with healthy pregnancies have a certain amount of swelling — so your midwife or doctor will not be concerned at slightly puffy hands, face or ankles near the end of pregnancy.
But if it comes on very suddenly or the swelling from retained fluid is very pronounced, it is a sign of pre-eclampsia and will require medical attention.
Q. What blood group are you?
Blood tests will provide information early in pregnancy, and a small sample of blood will be taken for testing.
One test will determine your blood group, and another will reveal your Rhesus factor.
If your blood is Rhesus negative and your baby is Rhesus positive, and fetal blood enters the mother's bloodstream, you may develop antibodies against it which mean that any subsequent pregnancy of a Rhesus positive baby will be in danger of contracting Rhesus disease — a potential cause of stillbirth or neo-natal death.
Other blood tests will see if you are anaemic (see How Are Your Iron Levels?), immune to rubella (German measles), and find out whether you have syphilis, which could infect your baby if it isn't treated.
Q. How are your iron levels?
The blood test for anaemia checks the level of haemoglobin, which helps carry oxygen through the blood.
If the level is low, your doctor may give you iron tablets, and run another blood test later on to check their effectiveness.
Q. How is the baby growing?
Your doctor and midwife will also build up a picture of your pregnancy in a ‘hands on’ style.
At each visit they will feel your abdomen, and find out how high the top of the womb has risen.
They can compare this with your dates to get an impression of how the baby is growing.
By about the fifth month they will be able to hear the baby's heartbeat with a stethoscope, and may feel if the baby moves — in any case, they will check with you that you can feel movements.
Before long, the baby will be large enough for the midwife and doctor to feel her position inside you.
They can feed the hard, round ball which is the head, the softer round rump, and the firm back that tells them which direction the baby if facing.
Q. Is the baby's head engaged?
By the end of pregnancy, they can tell when the baby's head has moved low in the pelvis ready for birth.
When they can feel that the widest part of the baby's head has entered the brim of the pelvis, the baby's head is engaged.
By nine months your doctor and midwife will have gathered and recorded sufficient details about your pregnancy to keep them well in the picture for the arrival of your baby.
Is anything wrong?
If there is any reason to suspect a possible abnormality in the baby, such as two blood tests showing high levels of alphafetoprotein, or simply if you are over 35 (older mothers are more likely to have babies with genetic disorders), your doctor will offer you an amniocentesis or possibly a chorionic villus test.
Both of these involve culturing some cells from the baby so they can be tested for genetic abnormalities.
With amniocentesis, the cells are found in a small amount of the amniotic fluid withdrawn from around the baby, while chorionic villus sampling involves removing a tiny amount of tissue from the developing placenta earlier on in pregnancy.
If an abnormality were found, your doctor would discuss the possibility of a termination.
If you wouldn't consider this, then the tests may not be for you.
Your ultrasound scan.
As well as their own skilled observations, your doctor and midwife may take advantage of medical technology to help them see how your pregnancy is going.
Ultrasound scans may be used to give an internal picture, which can help in finding out whether you are expecting twins, whether your baby's size ties in with your dates, and the position of the placenta in case it is low-lying in late pregnancy — covering the cervix and blocking the baby's exit (placenta praevia).
Out like a shot!
What is it like to have a very quick labour, when instead of the agonising hours in the delivery room, you're not sure you're going to make it up the hospital steps?
Three women talk about their speedy deliveries.
Mums who struggle for 12 hours or more to give birth look with envy on those lucky women who have short labours of two to three hours.
There's certainly a feeling that such labours are ‘easy’, and studies have shown that they are better for the baby — rapid deliveries mean less chance of the baby becoming distressed and therefore involve fewer forceps deliveries and Caesarean sections.
But a short labour can take its toll on the mother.
Although you have to put up with the pain for a shorter time, you may not have any real build-up to it — suddenly, strong contractions hit you — so it's difficult to pace yourself and put into practice the breathing exercises you rehearsed so carefully at antenatal classes.
In addition, some painkillers are ruled out (such as epidural), because they take too long to administer and take effect, so your plans for your birth may have to be altered at the last minute.
And however, easy it may be physically, a labour like this is emotionally very demanding and can leave you feeling shocked and drained.
Many mums who have apparently short labours have actually been gently dilating for a few days without realising it and without having any of the other traditional ‘signs’ of labour: a ‘show’as the plug to the cervix is expelled, waters breaking or the first contractions.
Three mothers talk about their amazingly rapid deliveries; what happened, and how they felt before, during and after their successful births.
Liz's story
Liz's labour began at 2.30am and ended with the arrival of a 7lb 5oz baby boy, James, at 6am the same morning.
‘IN the middle of the night, I woke up with gripey pains low down in my abdomen, rather like a stomach upset.
I decided it was something I'd eaten and went back to sleep.’
By 2.30am, Liz was feeling increasingly uncomfortable, though, so she got up to go to the loo and by ten to three, she was finding it impossible to get back to sleep.
At 4.30am, husband Mark woke up.
They began to wonder if perhaps something was happening.
‘We checked my symptoms in some of the six or so books we had on the subject of birth, but none of them matched up with what I was feeling.
And when we tried to time the contractions, there seemed to be only a 45-second gap between each one!
At around 4.45am, Mark rang the hospital and was told to bring me in when I was in pain.
By the time we left the house half an hour later, there was absolutely no doubt about the pain!’
Once at the hospital, Liz was taken to the delivery room immediately and Mark went off to find the waiting room, which was full of exhausted partners who'd been there for hours.
Moments later, the midwife appeared and suggested that Mark get into the delivery room or he'd miss the birth.
‘My waters had broken at the bedside,’ says Liz.
‘The midwife disappeared and I had an overwhelming desire to push, which I tried to fight.
The midwife took one look at me — the head was already on its way out — attached a fetal monitor and told me to push.
Once everything was under control, it was as if the pain and fear were lifted away — from then on it was just hard work!’
Liz was on the labour room bed for only 25 minutes before James was born at 6am.
She didn't tear and had no stitches, but she was a little bruised.
‘I resent the way people seen to devalue my achievement, saying ‘Oh, you had it easy’.
I feel that it was actually so quick — not at all what I'd been led to expect from antenatal classes — that I couldn't savour the birth or get used to the idea.
At 30 years old, I'd really expected a slow labour.
I also wonder what will happen if I have a second child — Mark might not make it back from work in time to be with me.’
But she admits her first experience of birth hasn't put her off — she's just glad they live so close to the hospital otherwise she'd probably have given birth in the car!
Margaret's story
Margaret, already a mother of eight, decided that she wanted her ninth baby to be born at home.
But her consultant wasn't too keen on the idea and she eventually settled for a domino birth.
‘It was the day before my estimated delivery date, which also happened to be one of the children's birthdays and half-term holidays, so I was very busy.
‘I lay down for a rest after lunch and was about to drift into sleep when there was a definite pop inside me, which made me think my waters had broken.
I threw back the covers to seen but the sheet was completely dry.
I got back into bed, not sure what to do.
There hadn't been a show, I had no contractions and I couldn't be sure that my waters had broken.’
In the end, though, Margaret called the midwife, who didn't think there was much to worry about.
‘She said she'd come and see me after she'd finished clinic, at around five, but I should call her again if I began contracting.
I lay down again and then, very gently, I could feel myself starting contracting — every three minutes exactly!
So I rang the midwife again, who decided she'd better come over after all.
Then I rang my husband to tell him to come home.’
Margaret had two friends in supervising the children downstairs, and they were both rather surprised when first the midwife and a student and then Margaret's husband crashed through the front door.
‘As the midwife came into the room, I had a strong contraction which really felt as though I was in labour.
The midwife examined me and said, ‘If we go now — and I mean now — we'll get to the hospital in time…
I think.’
‘We only live ten minutes from the hospital, so I stuffed my arms into my dressing gown and shuffled into my slippers ready to go.
Then the midwife decided it would be better to phone for an ambulance, but even as the student was phoning, she examined my again and told the student to fetch the delivery pack from the car.
‘Then I suddenly had an urge to give a gentle push and the baby just fell out!
Luckily, the midwife caught her.
Then the student rushed in with the delivery pack, followed by my husband, and the ambulance arrived outside, siren blaring.’
Margaret got back into bed, ‘which isn't easy with a baby, umbilical cord and midwife between your legs!’, to allow the placenta to be delivered.
‘A little later, after a lazy bath, I stretched out in my own bed and fed my new baby.
I'd got my own way about the home birth after all!’
Kate's story
Kate, pregnant with her second baby, thought she knew what to expect when it came to giving birth, especially since she'd had a long labour first time round.
But both she and her husband Tony were unprepared for little Patrick's hasty entrance.
‘Patrick arrived in the early hours of the morning, exactly on the hospital due date.
When I went to bed, I had a few ‘sort of’ pains, but I didn't think anything of them as I'd had these kind of niggly pains a lot over the last week or so.
Anyway, at about half past two, I got up to go to the loo and my waters broke — just a trickle, but I knew what it was.
So I rang the hospital and told them very calmly that we'd be arriving shortly, then I woke up Tony and — thinking I had loads of time — ran a bath.’
Tony rang Kate's parents to tell them to come round (they were going to look after 2½-year-old William) and, by the time they arrived, Kate had just about finished her bath.
‘It was then about quarter past three.
The contractions were coming quite quickly but they just didn't feel like proper contractions.
By 25 past, we'd made it to the car when I realised that I wanted to push — panic!
We had a quick, worried debate about whether to call an ambulance but decided we'd probably get to the hospital quicker under our own steam.
It was only a 15-minute drive.’
The arrived at around quarter to four and Kate staggered across the car park.
‘I knew something was happening as I got to the hospital steps.
I yelled at Tony behind me, ‘The head's born!’
I think my race across the car park and the force of gravity just made the baby slip out!
‘The delivery room was up two flights of stairs, so Tony picked me up and ran up the two flights with me.
He virtually threw me on the delivery bed and the midwife yanked down my trousers — and there was the baby, with his head and a hand out, gazing at us.
It was probably only my trousers that were holding him in!’
All in all, from the time Kate's waters broke to the moment Patrick made a full appearance, the labour lasted only one hour, 20 minutes.
‘Patrick weighed 8lb 7oz —‘I'm lucky he was a big baby, or I might have ended up having him even more quickly.
‘After the birth Tony and I both felt very shaky and the midwife got us some tea right away, while they were tidying me up, just to calm us down.
I tore a little but only needed three stitches, and they were no problem at all.
I hadn't had any kind of pain relief — well, there wasn't time!— but the pain, although very intense, was only for a short time, so it was easy for me to bear.
And I felt fabulous afterwards!’
LOOKING GOOD
Spotting eye problems
When is a squint not a squint?
Should your child wear glasses?
Penny Nathan has the answers
Babies aren't born with perfect vision.
The world is blurred and they can only focus on things that are very close — seven to 12 inches away.
They don't have a very wide span of vision either, and they have no sense of perspective.
They can't tell what bit of an object is nearest to them, so they're very clumsy when they reach towards things.
They also have not yet learned to use their eyes together (called binocular vision), so they may be seeing double or seeing only through one eye.
Gradually, though, a baby's brain learns to cope with the information the eyes are feeding it and by six months, most babies have more or less normal sight.
But there are sometimes hitches in this complicated process and problems can develop.
Detecting problems
It's important that some eye problems, like a squint, are picked up early before they become entrenched and hinder your baby's development.
So look out for signs that there may be a problem, such as:
In very young babies, a lack of interest in brightly coloured toys and any highly patterned objects held about eight inches from their face.
By the end of the first month, you should notice your baby watching things and following them as they move.
She will really stare at things that interest her.
Once she's moving, clumsiness or inability to see things in her path.
After the age of around three months, an inability to look at an object without an eye turning in or, rarer, an eye rolling slightly outwards or upwards.
This is an indication that your baby has a squint.
Don't panic about a squint that comes and goes in the first few months, though, as this is quite normal and happens because she hasn't developed binocular vision yet.
Also, the folds of the skin around a baby's eyes sometimes make her look cross-eyed when she isn't.
But a constant squint in a baby under three months indicates a problem and you should speak to your doctor about it.
There may also be eye problems if:
Your family or your partner's have a history of sight disorders.
Your baby is premature.
Your baby is mentally handicapped.
If you suspect there's something wrong with your baby's sight, take her to your doctor.
If he has any doubts, he'll refer your baby to an eye specialist for further diagnosis.
Who looks after your child?
An ophthalmologist is an doctor who diagnoses and treats eye disorders by medical or surgical means.
An orthoptist is a specialist who diagnoses, measures and treats a squint non-surgically.
An ophthalmic optician or optometrist tests for and prescribes glasses and can diagnose eye conditions, but doesn't treat eye diseases.
He or she sometimes provides glasses and contact lenses.
A dispensing optician supplies glasses, but doesn't test your child's eyes for the prescription.
Eye problems and treatments
Short-sightedness
If your baby is short-sighted, it means that her eyeball is too long from front to back.
With normal sight, what we see is brought into focus on the surface of the retina at the back of the eye.
In short-sighted people, images are brought into focus just in front of the retina, so distant things are blurred.
Long-sightedness
This is caused by the eyeball being too short from front to back, so images are brought into focus behind the retina.
Again this causes blurring and it's difficult to see near details.
To measure long or short-sightedness, a narrow beam of light is shone into the eye from a distance of about two feet.
An optometrist can calculate the strength of glasses a person needs by judging the light reflected back from the retina.
Treatment: The usual prescription for these problems is glasses or contact lenses and although babies can wear them, parents are often advised to wait and see if the problem corrects itself.
It's fairly common for young babies who are long-sighted at six months, for example, to have normal vision by the time they're four.
‘Babies will tolerate glasses or contact lenses if they really help them to see,’ says optometrist Margaret Woodhouse.
‘But vision is a developing process and unless a baby has really bad vision difficulties, I wouldn't prescribe glasses until the baby is about two years old.’
Astigmatism
This is linked to long and short-sightedness, in that it's the result of a malformation of the eye — in this case, an uneven curving of the cornea (the covering over the front of the eye) which means light enters the eye at the wrong angle.
Treatment: Again, glasses or contact lenses can correct the problem.
Squint
The main reason for squinting is that a baby has not developed three-D (binocular) vision, which is what stimulates her eyes to move together.
This is usually because the vision in one of her eyes is less good than the other and the brain has ‘switched off’ this eye, letting the better one do all the work.
When the baby squints, her good eye remains straight to do the looking while the ‘lazy’ eye wanders.
Squinting is particularly common in long-sighted babies who have to focus very hard to see near to.
As the nerve that controls focusing is linked to muscles that move the eyes, the squinting eye is pulled inwards.
Sometimes a baby inherits an inability to use her eyes together and if her vision is equal in both eyes, the squint can alternate from one to the other.
The simplest test for a squint, apart from observation, is to shine a bright light in the child's eyes when she's looking straight ahead.
The reflection should be in the same spot on both eyes, so any deviation indicates a squint.
The other way to find out is to cover each eye in turn; if there's a squint, the bad eye will generally move outwards to take over the job of seeing.
Treatment: The sooner treatment for a squint is started, the more likely it is that binocular vision will develop, which will then push the eyes to move together.
If there is a lazy eye, a parch is placed over the good eye to force the lazy one to work.
Glasses can correct over-focusing and stop the squinting eye swinging inwards.
If these measures don't work then the squint will have to be corrected by an operation to straighten the eyes by altering the position of the muscles that pull them round.
This means going into hospital for two or three days, and the redness and soreness may last for a month.
If the squint is the result of paralysis or an imbalance of the muscles, an operation is essential.
NHS screening and tests
Soon after birth your baby's eyes are checked by a paediatrician.
He or she will look into them with an instrument called an ophthalmoscope to check that the eyes are healthy and there's no sign of cataracts (where the lens of the eye is opaque instead of transparent).
At the test, extreme long or short-sightedness is sometimes detected.
Simple tests to see that your baby's sight is developing as it should be are carried out at her normal child health clinic checks, but a detailed examination by an eye specialist won't be given until a child is between three or four years old.
Many optometrists are worried by this and feel there should be a routine in-depth eye test much earlier.
At present, if you want an eye test for your baby at six months, you have to pay for it, unless you are referred by your doctor for treatment.
But how do you test a baby?
At six months babies like gazing at patterned objects.
So, to test how well she can see, a baby is shown a plain grey card and a black and white striped one; the patterned one will grab her attention.
Then the size of the stripes is decreased until she no longer reacts.
This indicates how her sight is developing.
The eye is like a camera: the glass on the camera lens is the cornea; the aperture is the pupil; and the shutter is the beautifully coloured iris, which contracts and relaxes to let in more or less light.
The lens in both the eye and the camera brings the world into focus.
The retina at the back of the eye, onto which images are projected, is the film.
What makes a perfect playground?
A visit to a good playground is a real treat, offering our children fun and adventure.
But do they get the playgrounds they deserve?
By Erika Harvey
Play is one of the most valuable learning activities of childhood.
Children will play wherever they happen to be — in the garden, the street, at the park, with friends or alone with their toys.
Outdoor play is particularly important because it helps them develop in a whole variety of ways.
They build up physical strength, stretching their limbs and testing their agility.
They learn how to get on with other children, as most types of outdoor play involve some kind of cooperation — hopscotch, tag or just taking turns on the slide at the playground.
They learn all about sharing, winning and losing, and making friends.
They stretch their imaginations in the playhouse, the sandpit and at the top of the climbing frame, pretending to be the king of a castle.
Playgrounds provide children with a safe environment in which to let themselves go, and are far preferable to the street or to waste ground as a place to play.
Although there are around 13,000 hospital admissions in the UK annually due to playground accidents, fatalities are very rare, whereas in 1988, 282 children were killed on the roads.
Since playgrounds give our children so much, it's a great shame that in many areas, the old playparks are being allowed to run down until they're in such a bad state that it's easier and cheaper to knock them down and build a carpark than try to make them safe.
Although many pubs, shopping centres, garden centres and schools have stepped into the breach, their play areas can't really compare with a good adventure playground in the local park.
We should be fighting to hold on to the playgrounds we have, so our children have a safe environment in which to play.
But what should a first-class playground offer?
And how can you make playgrounds safe, without cutting out the adventure and fun?
We've asked an expert what he considers important, looked at what children really want and at what would make mums happy.
By putting these ideas together, we've drawn a portrait of the perfect playground.
Parents' perfect playground
In an ideal playground, there'd be a good selection of equipment covering as wide an age range as possible.
For example, a sand pit, a playhouse, harness swings, seesaw and low-level activity frame for the very young, and climbing frames, long slides, a trampoline and an aerial bridge for older children.
From a safety point of view:
Cradle swings for younger children would be made of rubberised material and those for older children would have hand grips up the ropes.
Slides would be built over a mound, so there's no danger of children falling from a height.
If possible, ladders should have a number of exits, particularly important on high slides disguised as playhouses or dens, for toddlers who bottle out!
Climbing frames should be shaped to encourage imaginative play — airplanes, wagons or spaceships are popular.
Seesaws should be properly cushioned at each end — tyres are ideal.
Roundabouts would have firm handrails and soft ground around them.
There would also be the smallest gap possible between the base of the roundabout and the ground.
Where possible, there would be ramps, so special-needs children can make the most of the playground, along with double-width slides, bridges with handrails (so children can pull themselves along), and swing beds.
A mini-assault course is also a good way to keep children nearer the ground, with tubes to wriggle through, tyres to jump in and nets to crawl on.
The expert's view
Richard Lamb, managing director of SMP Playgrounds, is an expert when it comes to designing playgrounds and his company has been in the business for over 30 years.
‘One of the first things we think about when we're asked to design a playground is position.
Is it in the right place?
Do children have to cross a busy street to get to it?
Then we think about who's going to be using it; in an inner-city area, for instance, we might consider what other play opportunities there are nearby to find out whether we should cater mostly for toddlers or older children.
Or we'd find out if there's a special-needs school in the area which would benefit from special equipment for handicapped children.
‘We always separate the area for toddlers from that of older children (over six).
Three and four-year-olds have very different play needs to older children.
Something like a trapeze, for instance, is no good for four-year-olds, who don't have the gymnastic ability to use it, but it's a great adventure for a gang of seven or eight-year-olds.
‘Separating the areas also means there's less bullying of younger children.
A 13-year-old is too embarrassed to go into a toddler area because it's babyish.
‘We've done a lot to make sure that our equipment is safe (it complies with British Standards 5750 and 5696), but you don't want the playground to be too safe or there's no fun or adventure involved.
What children need is good, exciting play appropriate to their age.
‘With regard to positioning, swings are always placed in a corner, so children can't run in their path — most playground accidents involve swings.
Toddlers' cradle swings should be made of rubber and there should be a rubber surface on the ground near the swings.
‘We try to make playgrounds into more than ten-minute stop-offs; they should be a community meeting place, where parents can bring a picnic and spend a happy Sunday afternoon with the children.’
Keeping your child safe
Keep a watchful eye out for ‘hidden’ dangers.
It's easy to look at your child harmlessly pedalling along on his trike without noticing he's heading towards moving swings.
If the equipment in a playground needs repairing or isn't firmly fixed to the ground, or if there's a lot of rubbish and broken glass lying around, don't hesitate to notify the authorities.
Make sure your child is wearing sensible clothing, like nonslip shoes, not wellies, and that he isn't too tightly wrapped up in colder weather so his movement is hindered.
Woollen gloves can make gripping difficult.
Take off scarves, too, while your child is playing and tuck in the dangling toggles on anoraks and jackets.
Encourage your child to use play equipment that is suited to his abilities.
A lot of accidents occur on slides, for instance, which are mostly designed for use by seven to 12-year-olds, but which in practice are used more by preschoolers.
Don't let your child play dangerously, turning around on ladders, running up and down the slide, turning the roundabout too fast.
The children's view
If you want to know what kind of playground children really want, ask them!
That's exactly what Haringey Council in London did when they needed ideas for rebuilding Finsbury Funpark.
Local schools entered the competition to design a playground, and some of the ideas in the older age group will actually be put into practice.
The under-sevens group were equally imaginative: there were three joint winners — the five-year olds in class 3K at Noel Park Infant School made huge model of their Castle of Adventure; Parkhurst Infant School devised a huge pre-historic turtle playpark while St John's Highbury Vale Primary School opted for a detailed adventure playground.
Noel Park's model was made from corrugated card and had a drawbridge and four towers, two with staircases and two with ramps.
Inside there was a climbing frame, Lego roundabout, swings and a wooden catapult for firing naughty children out of the castle.
The star attraction was a model of the Princes of Wales's head which doubled as a playhouse, with her tongue as a slide!
The five-year-olds at Parkhurst were concerned about safety.
‘Someone should guard the sandpit,’ said Emma.
‘We could write a notice to say cats and dogs are not allowed in the sandpit.’
Sarah designed some swings: ‘There are green triangles at the sides to stop children banging their heads and getting hurt.’
The five-year-olds at St John's Highbury Vale visited the old Finsbury Funpark.
When they got back, they wrote about what they'd seen and drew pictures of their ideal playground.
‘We want a seesaw.
We want a slide.
We want a swing.
We want a puppet show.
We want the park to be fun,’ said Hayley.
‘I want safe toys for children and safe landing,’ said Tina.
‘I'd like picnic areas for patents, bins for rubbish and a medical person.
I want animals to look at because I like animals.
I'd like a climbing frame for big children and a tree phone for children to talk on.’
‘We want a train for our funpark.
The ground must be soft so babies won't hurt themselves.
I want sand for babies to play on,’ stated Klynton, while Henry admitted, ‘I don't like big boys climbing up the slide.’
The slide was Michael's favourite: ‘I like the big slide because you go fast and I like it.
It is not good for little children.’
Other additions to the funpark St John's thought important included shelter if it rains, toilets and drinking fountains, plenty of bins, fences around swings and safe ground to land on.
A mother's view
Paula, mother of Nicola, 4½, and Richard, 2½, was pleased when the local council made the playground in the town park more child-friendly.
‘It had been there for years — I played there myself as a child — but it was situated in the worst possible place.
The gates led right onto a busy road, there were some derelict public loos next door and a boating lake opposite.
There was nothing but an old, rickety fence between the playground and the water.
Children were fascinated by the ducks and it would have been easy for a toddler to slip through the fence, leaving mum stranded on the other side.
There was also a huge paddling pool smack in the middle of the playground.
It was never properly looked after and could sometimes have as much as two inches of muddy water in it — enough for a child to drown in if he fell over.
‘A few years ago, though, the council completely rethought the playground, covered the pool over and put new equipment in on top of it.
There's proper fencing, and they've put down tree bark, which makes me confident about letting Richard run around — he's a bit ham-footed sometimes!
There's also some new kind of rubberised surface by the swings and at the end of the slide.
‘I like taking the children to the playground — it's such a good way for them to wear themselves out, particularly Nicola, who's a real bundle of energy!
Richard is interested but wary — he prefers watching the ducks to anything more adventurous.
‘I think the equipment is really geared to slightly older children.
There's a slide, for instance, which is about 12ft high — it scares me watching the kids at the top, they just don't look safe.
Things nearer the ground would be better, like a little assault course with bridges, nets, tubes to crawl through, and so on.
‘It's not easy to make playgrounds completely safe.
Children just do dangerous things — they run in front of swings, go down the slide backwards…
I suppose you have to let them experiment and then learn their lesson the hard way when they take a spill.’
Have a splashing time!
As a low-cost learning toy, water is great value for money.
It's cheap, it's easily available and playing with it teaches children all about weight, volume, the way liquids behave — and how to have fun!
Bathtime fun
From the age of about six months, your baby will enjoy splashing and kicking in the bath, as long as you are holding on to her.
If you pop an empty plastic bottle with the top screwed on into the tub, she will try to take swipes at it and watch it bob about.
Let her play with a sponge and see how it fills with water, which slowly drains away once she lifts it up.
Remember to be careful, though.
A non-slip mat will help prevent her sliding around.
Keep her away from the taps — or buy a tap cover — never leave her unattended.
Splashing at the sink
A child who can stand unsupported can move on to more serious water research at the kitchen sink or in the garden.
Set a washing-up bowl or baby bath on a chair or two chairs, preferably on a surface where splashing won't matter — outside is ideal.
Roll up the child£s sleeves and tie on a plastic apron or mac.
Then fill the sink or bowl with warm water and add some home-made equipment.
Your water-play equipment can include empty yogurt pots and plastic containers and bottles of various shapes and sizes.
Pierce holes in the base of some yogurt pots with the hot tip of a skewer.
(Hold the skewer with an oven-gloved hand and let the tip heat quickly in a gas flame or candle.
Do this when your child is not around to help).
Pierce one large hole in the bottom of one pot, several small holes in another, and try making three holes — one above the other — in the side of yet another pot.
(The water will spurt out of the lowest hole with a stronger jet than from the top hole, and so demonstrate water pressure.)
Get some syphon tubing from a shop that sells home-brewing equipment and cut off a manageable length.
Blowing bubbles through this will probably amuse your toddler for ages.
Other good inexpensive water toys include a funnel, an egg whisk, a plastic colander or a sieve.
Let your children play with these ‘toys’ freely so they learn about the basic properties of water.
Later on, you can guide their play by, say, suggesting that they see how many little cups of water it takes to full the big jug, or by getting them to find out how long it takes to fill a floating cup with water until it sinks.
Can you pour water into the bottle more easily from a jug or a bowl?
What will happen if you try to pour the contents of the big jug into the little cup?
You can give your child the language she needs to make sense of the experience.
Experiments with water
Older preschoolers will enjoy these simple experiments, which will need your supervision and explanation.
Float or sink?
Fill a bowl with water and, one by one, try dropping various items into the bowl, such as a matchstick, a cork, a penny, a bottle top etc.
Ask your child if she thinks it will float or sink.
You'll be surprised how excited children get as they wait to see whether their guess was right.
Water spills
Place a plastic cup full of water inside an empty bowl.
Drop a couple of marbles into the cup and watch the water spill over.
Explain that the marbles have taken the place of the water that has spilled out.
In the bath, mark the level of the water with a wax crayon before your child gets in.
Show her how the level rises when she gets into the bath.
Now you see it…
Put three glasses full of warm water on a tray.
Mix a teaspoon of sugar into the first glass, a teaspoon of tea leaves into the second glass and a teaspoon of washing powder into the third.
Where has the sugar gone?
Has it disappeared?
No, it's just dissolved.
Water levels
Fill a clear, plastic bottle half-full of water and screw the top on tightly.
What happens to the water when you turn the bottle over slowly?
It always stays level, no matter what position the bottle is in.
Magic straws
Take a beaker full of water and some drinking straws.
Let your child suck water up the straw, blow it out and play around for a while.
Then show her how you can suck water up the straw, put your finger quickly over the top and lift the straw out of the water.
The water remains in the straw until you life your finger off.
When air gets into the top of the straw, it pushes the water out, but not when you finger is over the top.
Ice test
Fill a small bottle to the brim with water and make a loose-fitting cap out of silver foil to cover the top.
Put the bottle in the freezer and leave until frozen solid.
When you take it out, you will see the ice has pushed up the cap.
Explain that this is because ice takes up more space than the water that froze to make it.
Aquatic games
Bubble blowing
To head off a tantrum, try squirting a shot of washing-up liquid into a beaker, adding a bit of water and giving her a drinking straw to blow bubbles with.
(Make sure you tell her not to suck!)
Water painting
Take her outside in raincoat and wellies to ‘paint’ the garden shed, or perhaps the car, with water.
She just needs a big paintbrush and a bucket of water.
Washing dollies
Warm water, washing-up liquid, scrubbing brush and cloths, plus waterproof dolls, are an irresistible combination.
After you've scrubbed the dolls clean, do their laundry.
Hot-day cooler
If it's very warm and you have two bored children on your hands, send them to the bottom of the garden in swimsuits with a bowl of cold water and two plastic cups.
Show them how to play ‘splashing duels’.
The children each hold a cup full of water and stand back to back.
They must count out three paces, turn round quickly and throw the contents of the cup over their opponent.
Entails much shrieking.
Water babies
Fill balloons with warm water and knot the tops securely.
Draw faces on them carefully with a biro.
Toddlers will love carrying these warm, floppy ‘babies’ around in buckets, wrapping them in teacloths and cooing over them.
Encourage them to play outside as there is always the possibility of bursting.
Gone fishing
Help your child cut fish shapes from glossy magazine pages and drop them into a washing-up bowl of water.
Hand her a tea-strainer and see if she can carefully lift out all the fish.
Fun for free
At your wits' end for ways to entertain your child?
Kate Taylor has lots of ideas for keeping him amused — and they won't cost you a single penny!
‘What on earth do you with a baby all day?’ asked a friend when he became a dad for the first time.
‘What games can you play when they're so little?’
The responsibility of entertaining his daughter seemed awesome.
Such feelings are not uncommon in new parents, so if you're wondering how to amuse your demanding little newcomer, you'll need some ideas to help you improvise.
Your starting point will be the sobering realisation that most babies ignore the expensive boxful of toys their parents invest in so hopefully, in favour of the much more exciting, and usually dangerous, object you happen to have in your hand.
Consequently, it's often better (not to mention cheaper) to make things and entertain the baby yourself.
Our round-up of safe games and home-made toys should inspire both you and Junior.
Stargazing
Young babies
Toys mean little in the first few weeks — you are all your baby needs.
It must be love — he can't take his eyes off you — so why not prop your baby up in a bouncy chair, car seat or beanbag and enjoy the limelight?
Smile and chat to your baby, make eye contact and hold hands.
From around six weeks you should be rewarded by an answering smile.
Stick your tongue out, then say, ‘Your turn!’— if you keep trying, he'll soon copy you.
Play peekaboo, using see-through scarves or your hands.
In no time, your baby will be starting this hilarious game himself.
Take your little partner and dance and sing: anything from waltzes to tangos, nursery rhymes to blues and rock.
Most babies love rhythm and movement.
A mobile can make nappy changes and bedtimes more fun.
So make your own.
Cut out and stick pictures of animals and smiling people on to thin card (pictures from wrapping paper, old birthday cards, catalogues, or your own drawings).
Suspend them on long and short threads, tied to a wire coat-hanger.
Get together a range of things to bash.
Dangle assorted objects from string near him, so he just has to reach forward slightly to hit them.
Wooden and plastic spoons, spatulas, empty plastic tubs, measuring scoops, a cat bell inside a taped-up plastic bottle.
Colourful pictures give your baby something to focus on — tape a smiling fact inside the cot in the first few weeks.
Once there's a danger he might decide to eat the picture and choke, stick posters (or wrapping paper with pictures on) and family photos around the room.
Help him discover his senses: show him the flowers in the park, for example, and get close enough to catch the scent.
Touching the new textures will absorb your baby for a while, so  pile up a collection of carpet tiles, vinyl tiles, plastic box lids, corrugated cardboard, egg boxes, fabric, tissue paper, and crinkly chocolate box inserts.
(A great excuse to buy chocolates!)
Play finger rhymes like Round and Round the Garden, Pat-a-cake, Row Your Boat, and This Little Piggy.
Take the mirror off the wall for your baby to look into and enjoy hours of fascination.
Joining in
Older babies
Movement is, of course, the big obsession from very early in the baby's life.
Egg him on by providing plenty of soft, carpeted space.
When he's crawling fast, direct him towards a noisy beanbag.
Arrange sturdy furniture to help your child pull himself up and take those first steps.
And, above all, provide plenty of cuddles, consolation, and enthusiastic, encouragement for every achievement!
Silly noises like raspberries are an excuse for a good giggle — see how many you can come up with, and let him copy you.
Once they can sit up, babies love to bash saucepans, plastic boxes, biscuit tins, cupboards and fireguards.
Give him a plastic or wooden spoon and plug your ears!
Fill an empty plastic bottle with a few lentils.
Screw the lid on tightly, tape it up, then draw a face on the bottle with a marker pen.
Then let him play rattle and shake.
Let your baby rip wrapping paper, scrunch tissue, paper, mangles magazines (no, no, not this one!).
He'll love the feel of it.
Play rolling games: if you haven't got a ball, an orange or a roll of tape will do.
Posting things, then finding them again is an obsession for babies.
Make a post box out of a cardboard box, a shoe box with a lid, or a baby wipe container.
He'll enjoy posting clothes into the washing machine, too, but always supervise this game and check the machine before switching it on.
Kitchen-roll tubes make great telescopes and megaphones.
Take then into the bath and watch them fall apart!
Big Ideas
Toddlers
By 18 months your thoughtful livewire will be coming up with plenty of ideas of his own.
Who needs a toy telephone, when the real one makes such great noises?
Let's seen how many buttons I can press on the video and radio!
And — this idea really takes the biscuit — the cute TV puppy impersonation; you know the one — grab the end of a full toilet roll and run off with it, laughing, Mum in hot pursuit!
Tea parties are wonderful fun — especially if you hold them in the garden on a hot day.
They you can provide a plastic jug full of ‘tea’(actually water) to pour and even a real picnic.
No tea set?
No problem — use yogurt pot cups and cottage cheese tub lids for plates, or a plastic picnic set.
No table and chairs?
Use cardboard boxes or cushions on a picnic blanket.
If there's no time to summon your child's friends round to join in, invite Teddy.
Make a sock puppet.
Just take an odd sock, put your hand inside and pull the toe in for a mouth, stick paper shapes on for eyes and nose.
Whiskers and ears are optional but the squeaky voice is essential!
Make one each so you don't fight.
Cut the fingers off an odd glove and stick pater shapes on for instant finger puppets.
Make a paper bag lady.
If you draw a face on it, even a paper bag can be a puppet.
Make cardboard crowns (your toddler can stick on paper stars for jewels) and collect washable hats and scarves and dressing-up clothes from jumble sales.
Make music.
When biscuit-tin bashing gets boring, lend your toddler a real musical instrument for a treat.
Try penny whistles, maracas, guitars, recorders, bongo drums and the piano for melodious fun.
Buy 18 months most toddlers love sorting things out.
From a heap of shoes and slippers in the hall, he'll bring you first one of your shoes, then the other.
He'll love helping to sort the washing, too, running off with his own jumper and refusing to let go.
Let him match pairs from heap of socks, and he'll soon learn about colours and sizes.
BE SAFE — BE THERE!
Don't leave your baby or toddler alone with any home-made creations.
It's surprising what can become dangerous in the wrong hands.
For instance:
Ban all polystyrene, such as packing chips, meat trays and some egg boxes.
If swallowed, it can choke your baby, and it doesn't even show up on X-rays.
Sew up the zips of beanbags.
Beware of corks, too.
Even if they're too big to swallow, your baby could bite a lump off and choke on it.
Size everything up to make sure it's too big to swallow.
(Buy a choke tester like the one from Cannon Babysafe, £1.49 from Toys-R-Us and Boots.)
Tape up home-made rattles firmly and hide your purse so your baby won't choke on coins.
Beads can choke babies if swallowed, and long strings of beads can also half-strangle older children.
Don't let babies play with child-proof medicine containers.
Once walking and jumping starts, remove sticks and long-handled spoons, in case your child falls while chewing the handle.
A beach in your backyard
If this summer is as warm as last year's, we'll all be spending a lot of time out in the garden.
This month Cathy Bryan looks at the best buys in sandpits and paddling pools
Babies and toddlers love getting messy, and playing with sand or splashing in water outside in the sum must come close to their idea of heaven.
Many babies are perfectly happy with an old washing-up bowl filled with water, but a simple inflatable paddling pool is easy to find in the shops and generally fairly cheap.
Many paddling pools can also be used as sandpits, but once you've filled your pool with sand, you're unlikely to want to take all out again to make it into a paddling pool for the afternoon.
As summer approaches, many stores start to expand their range of outdoor toys and, in some supermarkets, you can often pick up a paddling pool with your weekly shopping!
Prices vary widely so shop around before you buy and make sure that you can get your purchase into the car — some boxes can be bulky!
To help you choose, we've examined several different paddling pools and sandpits, together with some of the extras you can buy.
Six parents, Paula, June, Christine, Cathy, Andrew and Linda, each tested out the products with their children.
Handy hints
For pools:
Make sure there are no sharp objects underneath the paddling pool which could hurt delicate feet or tear the pool itself.
Most manufacturers recommend that you change the water daily.
A hosepipe is almost essential to fill a large pool — not much use if they're banned.
For sandpits:
Use silver sand, available from garden centres.
Builders' sand leaves an orange stain.
Always cover a sandpit or the local cats will use it as a toilet.
Don't forget…
If you leave a sandpit or pool out for a while, the grass underneath will die.
If left outside in winter, the plastic may go brittle and crack.
Keep your child's skin safe
While your child is splashing about in the sunshine, be very careful to protect her skin from the sun's rays, which can still burn her even in the water.
Don't expose babies under six months to strong sunlight at all; after that they should wear a strong water-resistant sunblock.
Use sunscreens that contain both UVA and UVB filters to protect the skin properly.
UVB rays cause visible burning, but UVA penetrate deeper and cause long-term damage.
Apply sunscreen generously and evenly, and reapply regularly — each time the child comes out of the water if the sun is strong.
Look for suncreams specially formulated for babies and children, and never use a suncream with a factor of less than 12.
in touch
Contact other mothers with our parent link-up scheme
Women's Institute
June, who lives near Weedon in Northamptonshire, has a suggestion for mums who are feeling bored and lonely.
‘Why not join the WI?
When I moves to this area just over two years ago I knew no-one, my two older children were at school and, although I enjoyed being at home with my two-year-old toddler, I felt that I was getting past the stage of discussing sleepless nights and dirty nappies!
A neighbour suggested I go along with her to the local WI and, despite my reservations, I had a wonderful time.
‘There is an interesting talk every month by a visiting speaker on a whole range of topics, from calligraphy and batik to reflexology and environmental health.
‘There is a country hike every summer, which has helped me to get to know the area better, and lots of opportunities to go on courses and outings to places of interest.
Members are all ages, from young mothers to greatgrandmothers, and it is wonderful to be able to chat to women who have a whole range of experience.
‘If you are feeling bored and fed up with the daily routine, give the WI a try.
For details of your local group, contact the National Federation of Women's Institutes, 104 New Kings Road, London SW6 4LY (071–371 9300).’
Caesar Mum
Cynthia from Witham in Essex has two sons, both born by Caesarean.
‘I am 32 and I live with my fiancé.
We have two sons, John who was born in July 1979 and Oliver born in July 1900.
They were both born by Caesarean, one under general anaesthetic and one under an epidural.
My interests are writing, reading, the countryside, historic houses, cooking, music (1960s/1970s), medical matters and homemaking.
‘I would love to write to or to meet anyone with similar interests, or with children of a similar age.’
Keep-fit fans
Like so many of us now, these mums are all keen on trying to keep fit.
Nicola writes from Woolavington in Somerset: ‘Please put me in touch with some other mums before I go totally insane!
I am 20 years old with a one-year-old who is adorable, but a real tearaway.
I am also pregnant again!
‘We have recently moved to this village and I have never been so bored in all my life.
I would love to hear from mums around my age with children the same age as mine.
I enjoy keep-fit, cooking, crosswords, kids and anything exciting.
I like writing letters and reading anything I can lay my hands on!
I am also hot-tempered and totally crazy!!’
Lisa lives in Ebbw Vale in Gwent.
‘Please put me on your In Touch page as I am very lonely.
I am 21 and married with a beautiful baby called Zack.
I try to go to keep-fit as often as I can, and I also enjoy knitting, listening to music, going out and looking after my son.’
Gina from Barnsley in South Yorkshire has a fairly unusual hobby!
‘I am a single parent with a little boy who will be two in September and I would love to get to know some other young mums, either by letter or in person.
My hobbies are mud-wrestling, keep-fit, letter-writing and watching TV soaps like Neighbours and Home and Away .’
Odette from London W6 is also a single parent.
‘I have a year-old little boy and I get very bored sometimes, even though I go to a mother-and-toddler group now and again.
My boy-friend left me when my son was six months old, after an eight-year relationship.
I would love to hear from anyone in the same situation.
My hobbies are weight-training, window-shopping and going out to discos.’
A problem shared…
Nicola from  Chartbury in Oxfordshire is very worried about her younger son, and she is hoping that some of you may be able to help.
‘I am married with two sons, Freddie, who is four and will soon be starting school, and Henri, who is 10 months.
Henri was a totally normal baby until six months, when he suddenly started having infantile spasms.
The cause of these has not yet been found, but they can be very serious and there is a chance that he will be mentally handicapped.
‘At the moment he is progressing normally for his age, but the worry is always there.
I would desperately like to talk to any other mother who has had experience of this problem.
Although I have has a lot of support, I feel heartbroken about Henri's future.
‘Do please write to me.
My hobbies, when I have the time, are riding my horse and walking the dogs with Freddie.’
New cookbook
Janet is hoping that many of you will be able to help her with her new project.
‘I believe that babies and children are hard done by where food and cookery is concerned because not enough books are published with them in mind.
‘I aim to publish a book specialising in food for babies and children up to 12, focusing on everyday, simple recipes which put more fun into eating.
I would like to include party food and themes and lots of ideas for special occasions like Christmas and Easter.
‘I would like a fun format with perhaps a photo and a letter from various children with their favourite recipes.
I am sure that some of your In Touch readers will be able to help.’
If you would like to help Janet by sending in your young children's favourite recipes, write to Mrs Janet Rhodes, 18 Abbotts Drive, Sneyd Green, Stoke-on-Trent, ST1 6HU.
It's in the bag
Some travel cots can be stowed away and carried over your shoulder: others are big enough to double as sturdy playpens.
Our buying guide helps you decide which is best for you
Buying a travel cot isn't as easy as you might expect, mainly because you have to think about exactly what you need from it beforehand — and how much you want to pay.
There's not much point in paying out over £100 if you're only going to use it for two weeks a year on holiday.
On the other hand, you may want something sturdy enough to take a growing baby on frequent weekends away, or to double as a playpen on trips to friends, which will make your investment really worthwhile.
We've looked at the travel cots currently in the shops, from baby-sized cots to full-sized cots-cum-playpens, and tested them for portability, sturdiness when under attack from energetic toddler, and over all quality and value for money.
Make sure that, whatever cot you choose, it meets the criteria in our Travel Cot Safety box.
Parents buyers' guide
Before splashing out on a travel cot, ask yourself the following questions to make sure you buy one that really going to do the job you want it to:
How portable do I need this cot to be?
For example, if you need to take it abroad with you, opt for a bagged cot will go as ordinary baggage on the plane, rather than a fold-up model which would be much more cumbersome to transport.
Will it fit in the boot of my car?
Measure your boot before going out to buy.
How long do I want it to last my child and will it be sturdy enough to take the punishment a toddler metes out without keeling over?
Make sure you see it in the shop properly erected and test it out by rocking it back and forth (as a toddler would) to see how much it would stand before falling over.
Does it have wheels or castors on all four legs (which could be dangerous with an active toddler)?
Is the mattress — or its cover — washable, and the fabric at least spongeable?
The cot is sure to get grubby, especially if it's going in the boot of the car.
Storytime
Tony Bradman reviews the pick of this month's books
Book of the month
My choice this month is Roaring Billy by Dee Shulman (Bodley Head, £6.99).
Billy Brown had rosy cheeks, blue eyes and smiled all the time.
Except, that is, on the day when he woke up roaring — and kept on roaring.
All parents know the scenario — all you can do is pace up and down rocking your baby while he screams the place down.
The next morning everyone finds out what the problem was.
Billy was teething, and his first tooth is now through!
This is a real family book you'll all enjoy.
(2–5)
Cat's whiskers
I Want A Cat by Tony Ross (Red Fox, £3.99) now out in paperback, has to be one of the funniest picture books I've seen in years.
Like many children, Jessy wants a pet.
She's decided she wants a cat, and goes to enormous lengths to persuade her reluctant parents to buy her one.
She dresses in a cat suit (which she even wears in the bath), she eats raw fish on the floor, and sits on the garden wall at night, howling.
In the end, all the neighbours tell her patents to give her what she wants.
They give in and buy a cat — but then Jessy decides she wants a dog, too!(2–5)
Anthony Brown is one of the most talented artiest working in children's books today, and it's always exciting to see a new book by him.
It's even more exciting when the book in question is about Willy, the marvellous character he created in Willy The Wimp.
The new book is called Willy and Hugh (Julia McRae/Walker, £6.99), and begins with Willy feeling lonely.
He doesn't seem to have any friends, and that obviously makes him unhappy.
Then he quite literally bumps into someone who turns out to be a very good friend indeed.
What's nice about Willy and Hugh is that the two main characters are, apparently, so different.
Willy is small, shy chimpanzee, Hugh is a huge gorilla.
But they both have things to offer each other as friends, and that's something children will understand instinctively, especially those of playgroup age.
(2½–5)
High energy
Families with sleep-destroying babies will enjoy Beeswax The Bad's Noisy Night by Andrew and Paula Martyr (Hamish Hamilton, £7.99).
Beeswax is a cat who, during the day, doesn't do much except sunbathe and doze.
But things are different at night, when he hisses, growls, howls and generally causes mayhem.
Children will love the crazy pictures and the funny rhyming text.
They'll also enjoy the neat way the family eventually solves the problem.
(3–5)
Cats also feature in a brilliant book by cartoonist Ralph Steadman.
No Room To Swing A Cat (Red Fox, £3.99) begins with Tom saying his room is too small.
‘There's not even room to swing a cat,’ he says, and there is a wonderful picture of Tom imagining himself doing just that with a surprised-looking feline.
Tom imagines doing the same to larger and larger animals, all of whom look equally shocked.
Children will love the manic energy of the drawings, and the fact that all Tom really wants is room enough to be swung around himself .
Great fun!(3–5)
Fun-time!
If you fancy a bit of baby fun, you might enjoy some new board books for babies by Angie and Chris Sage.
There are four titles in the Baby's First Books range — Happy Baby, Sleepy Baby, Hungry Baby, and Big Baby (Frances Lincoln, £2.99) each).
The books feature various babies getting up to all sorts of tricks in different situations.
Both pictures and text are very entertaining.
(0 — 1½)
The action centres around animals in two charming pop-up books, Funny Business and Hocus Pocus, by Julie Lacome (Walker, £6.99 each).
Hocus Pocus features a rabbit magician, as well as a rabbit you can pull out of a hat and other surprises.
In Funny Business it's a clown who's at the centre of the fun.
Both books are ideal for the very young.
(1–3)
Keep them safe in the sun
A new survey shows just how many parents are still ignoring the very real dangers of sunburn.
One in five British parents let their children play out in the summer sun wearing no form of sun protection at all.
Scottish parents are apparently even more likely to do this — one in three parents never protect their children from its harmful rays despite the fact that many of them have particularly delicate skin.
Of those who do use some form of protection not all use a sunscreen…13 per cent rely instead on a long-sleeved shirt or T-shirt and another 17 per cent on a sun hat.
It is only the Lancastrians who appear to be at all sun-wary.
Over a quarter see that their children always wear a sun block playing in the sun.
In the dark…
The fact is most parents seen to be a little unsure about what it is best to do when it comes to letting their children out in the sun.
The same survey — commissioned by Sun E45, the new sun protection range from dermatological skin care specialists E45 — shows that people are generally less obsessed about getting a tan.
However, the vast majority are still in the dark when it comes to understanding the importance of protecting not just their children from the sun's harmful rays but also themselves.
One in ten adults regularly suffered sunburn despite the growing evidence that this can put them even more at risk from skin damage.
And while some people might use a sunscreen abroad, over 40 per cent of those who often suffered sunburn didn't use anything when holidaying in the UK despite the recent hot summers.
Last year's summers was one of the hottest on record here yet two out of three men and 50 per cent of women never wore a sunscreen.
Making the right choice…
All of us understand that the sun gives out ultraviolet rays and most traditional sunscreening products at least offer protection from those referred to as UVB, the rays that burn.
In fact the sun protection factor (SPF) number given on the pack generally refers to the level of protection against those particular rays only.
But many of these products offer much less protection against UVA radiation, far more of which reaches the earth.
Yet while these rays tan it now seems UVAs are also the rays which are much more capable of penetrating deeply into the skin, and so cause damage, especially where children's sensitive skin are concerned.
Safety in the sun
Experts say that babies under six months should be kept out of the sun altogether and children should wear total block sunscreens, even when just playing out in the summer at home.
One of the newest, Sun E45 is the only sun protection range to use only a non-chemical sunscreen in its formulation.
As such, it isn't absorbed by the skin but stays on the surface where it's needed most, making it ideal for young, sensitive skin.
Clinically proven and truly hypoallergenic, Sun E45 comes in a range of three high protection factors, all of which have been allergy-screened and dermatologically tested and are perfume free.
They also contain a built-in moisturiser to help keep the skin in good condition.
What Sun E45 does is offer the right balance of protection against UVB and the more penetrating UVA.
There are three protection levels to choose from — high — SPF 8, ultra — SP15 and sun block — SPF 25.
The latter two products are also available on prescription for skin problems caused by the sun's rays.
The other good news with Sun E45, is that sand doesn't stick to the skin.
It's water-resistant too and long lasting.
A little really does go a long way, so apply sparingly, by dotting on minute amounts and rubbing in well — only re-apply every three hours or so.
Just perfect for children and anyone else in the family with a fair or sensitive skin as well as those who want to limit their tanning or protect those extra sensitive bits.
Can we help?
Worried about a crying baby, breastfeeding, a clinging child or your relationship with your partner?
Whatever your problem, however small, write to us and one of our experts will be able to help and reassure you
Is he at risk?
Q.
I am concerned about my seven-year-old son.
He recently ate a piece of cheese when his hands had just touched his shoes — and I later found out he had stood in some dog dirt.
I've heard such a lot about the risks to eyes after infection with dog dirt and I'm very worried.
A.
There would only be a very tiny risk of your son picking up toxocara — and the germ that has the effects you're worried about — in the way you describe.
The sort of transient contact with dog dirt you mention is really very common, and it's never possible to protect children from all the infections they might be exposed to.
However, you're right that contact with dog dirt should be minimised.
Children should always wash their hands before handling food, particularly if they've recently been in contact with pets.
Dr Tony Waterston
Secret conception
Q.
I'm 21, and I've been with my boyfriend for almost four years now.
We both live with my parents.
We're very happy together, but my problem is I really want a baby.
I felt like this for about four months now.
I've now come off the pill without telling my boyfriend.
Do you think this is selfish of me?
A.
I can't really judge if you're being selfish or not without knowing more about your circumstances.
But if you want a baby, why don't you talk about it with your boyfriend?
It could be that you think he'll say ‘no’ or that he'll raise doubts and practical concerns.
There may not be much room in the house you are sharing with your parents for a baby, perhaps, or he may be worried about money if you intend giving up work.
If you get pregnant accidentally-on-purpose, your boyfriend may feel deceived, or left out of the decision.
He could feel resentful, and even angry, and that's not the best possible start for a pregnancy, or for a family.
Still in night nappies
Q.
Tom was clean and dry during the day shortly after his second birthday, but at over 3½ years old he still needs a nappy at night.
Once I left his nappy off, just to see what would happen, and he was soaking by 9.30pm.
He can last for hours during the day without needing to go to the toilet, so I can't understand why it's continuing to happen at night.
I don't want to cut down on all his drinks, and I don't really want to start ‘lifting’ him to the toilet.
A.
Your son sounds like a normal three-year-old.
Bladder control at night sometimes happens a long time after control in the day, and as with daytime training, it's best to wait until a child shows signs of being able to develop control.
You're right in not wanting to restrict drinks or to start ‘lifting’.
Excessive restriction of fluids isn't good for a child's kidneys, and unless the child is really awake, ‘lifting’ can just encourage passing urine while asleep.
Try leaving his nappy off again in a few  months' time.
Stay relaxed about it all, whatever happens.
Toilet Training and Bedwetting by Heather Welford (Thorsons, out of print) may be helpful.
Look in the library for a copy.
Alison Spiro 
Permanent hazard
Q.
I am six weeks pregnant, and have just received a present of some beauty products.
In them is a bottle of peppermint foot lotion.
Do you think it will be safe for me to use it?
I have heard that women shouldn't use peppermint oil when pregnant.
A.
I don't know of any conventional beauty products that should be avoided in pregnancy.
However, the skin does tend to become more sensitive when you're expecting and may react adversely to certain products.
When you ask about the dangers of using peppermint oil, you may be thinking of the concentrated essential oils used in aromatherapy (the massaging of the skin with oils or creams containing plant extracts to relieve tension) which are very potent and should not be used undiluted.
If you buy them for your own use, ask the assistant for advice, as some should be avoided in pregnancy.
These include pennyroyal, clove, sage, thyme, bay hyssop and sweet marjoram, some of which can cause miscarriage.
Diluted aromatherapy products, such as the ones you buy in The Body Shop, are quite safe to use, though.
Caroline Flint
He doesn't want another baby
Q.
My baby was born at 29 weeks, after an emergency Caesarean section, because the placenta wasn't working properly.
The weeks after Carl's birth were very traumatic for myself and my husband, as the baby was very small and weak.
It was four days before I was able to hold him.
I feed this could be the basis for desperate longing for another child.
Carl is 15 months now, and he's fine, so I'm sure I could cope with another baby.
My husband says ‘no’, and puts forward all sorts of reasons.
He insists we can't afford another baby, and that's that.
I won't feel ‘complete’ until we have at least one more baby — but I daren't bring up the subject very often as my husband just gets more and more adamant.
I have a close friend who's pregnant, and I'm getting to the stage where I can't bear to see her because I just feel so jealous.
A.
When times are hard financially, many people feel very anxious at the thought of committing themselves to another baby.
Others, like yourself, are aware that in the end a new baby is normally incorporated into the financial structure of family life somehow or other.
Your husband may also be very concerned about what happened to you when Carl was born.
He will remember how long it took you to get back to normal after your caesarean, and the distress you both felt when Carl was so small.
But don't assume that you would need a Caesarean again.
Remember that no two births are the same, and a second one is often more straightforward.
You are also like to feel more confident and able to cope the second time around.
Try contacting the Caesarean Support Network, 2 Hurst Park Drive, Huyton, Liverpool L36 1TF, or the Cambridge Caesarean Support Group, c/o 81 Elizabeth Way, Cambridge CB4 1BQ.
Both groups can send useful leaflets as well as putting you in touch with other women who have been in your situation.
Caroline Flint 
I'm afraid to go out
Q.
I had my daughter 17 months ago, but I still have lots of worries about getting out and about.
I know I should be thinking about taking her to a mother-and-toddler group so she can meet people and make friends, but something keeps putting me off.
Basically, I'm terrified.
I stay in as much as I can, even in hot sunny weather.
I go out to the shops about once a week, just to get absolute essentials.
As I'm going along the street, I feel everyone is staring at me.
I can't wait to get back in the house.
I can manage better if I have someone with me, but this isn't always possible.
I have no friends nearby, and my family live some distance away.
I have lived in the same flat for 2½ years, and so far I've made no new friends at all.
I'm worried that I could be developing agoraphobia.
Does it sound like this to you?
A.
Yes.
It could well be that you have agoraphobia or some kind of depression.
Whatever the cause is though, your needs should be taken seriously, and you want help and support to stop the problem from getting worse.
It's not just that your inability to go out is restricting your life; as you say, your daughter is missing out on many of the events and activities that help a child's emotional and social progress.
Playing with other children, joining group activities, spending time in the park and playground — they're all important parts of growing up for pre-school children.
Your GP and your health visitor are sources of help, and can arrange suitable treatment, or refer you to someone who can help you.
Perhaps a member of your family can come with you when you approach either of them.
There could be a voluntary group, or befriending scheme, offering support to isolated mothers like yourself.
In some areas, the organisation Home Start provides this service.
You can contact the co-ordinators on 0533 554988.
Another group to contact is Phobic Action, Greater London House, 547 High Road, Leytonstone, London E11 4PR (081–558 3463/6012).
Diane Melvin
Why the wait?
Q.
I recently had a miscarriage.
I've been told I should wait three months before trying for a baby again — but why is this advice given?
A.
The usual advice is to wait for three menstrual cycles to go by, which is roughly the same as three months.
This allows the lining of the uterus to be cleared out properly, and thus provide a good implantation site for the new fetus to settle on.
Professor Geoffrey Chamberlain
The worm's turning!
Q.
I'm really embarrassed about my problem — I have worms.
At first I thought it was piles, as I had terrible itching round my anus.
However, as none of the chemist's creams worked, I ended up going to see my doctor.
But I feel so awful — how on earth did I catch them?
A.
There is no need to be embarrassed about having worms.
It's quite common and there are often outbreaks in schools.
Children pick up the eggs from contaminated food or pets, and the worms hatch out at night.
There are several effective preparations you can buy over the counter, in the form of pleasant-tasting drinks or tablets.
It's important for the whole family to be treated even if symptoms are not present, as infection occurs very easily.
To avoid reinfection, be very careful to wash your hands and brush your nails after going to the toilet, after handling pets, and before touching food.
Keep your fingernails short, and boil bedclothes and towels.
Caroline Flint
I'm still worried
Q.
David is my fifth baby, and his birthweight was 6 lb 10oz, which was a lot lighter than any of my previous babies.
He breathed normally, and there were no obvious problems.
However, once I was home, he started to get very ‘twitchy’.
He completely lost interest in feeding and became very listless.
He then had a number of convulsions, and it was a very worrying time for us all.
Amazingly, he recovered, but no-one could ascertain what had caused the fits.
We took him to hospital and he had various tests and a brain scan.
Everything proved normal.
At four months old, he is apparently developing well, though I am still extremely worried about the possible long-term effects.
A.
Early fits in a baby are one of a number of children's disorders that we can't yet fully explain.
The most common reason for early fits is a shortage of oxygen round about the time of birth, but that doesn't apply in your case, as David breathed right away.
Sometimes, an infection or a metabolic disorder can cause fits, and sometimes it can be something that just runs in the family.
When no cause is to be found — as with David — the outlook is very good, and the babies usually recover well.
You can't help worrying when you've been through a bad time, but do share your anxieties with your family, and with your doctor, who should be able to reassure you.
Dr Tony Waterston 
0–5
news and know-how for you and for your child from our experts
Pregnancy and birth
Getting the needle
On an official visit to China last year, UK midwives were impressed by the success of acupuncture in relieving labour pain.
But this traditional Chinese technique — using fine needles inserted into the patient's skin — is becoming more common as a method of pain relief during labour in British hospitals.
Sarah Moon, a London acupuncturist who specialises in pain relief during labour, says that women are often referred to her through the National Childbirth Trust or an active birth group.
‘Acupuncture is very helpful in labour and can reduce pain levels by an average of 50 per cent.
Some women experience more, some less.
It depends how susceptible they are to the treatment.’
Needles can be placed in the ears, hands, legs and lower back and contrary to what you might imagine, you can move around during labour with the needles in.
Sarah likes to build up a relationship with a woman before she has her baby, using acupuncture to relax her, to treat any pregnancy ailments and to help her recover after the birth.
She has found doctors and consultants very receptive to using acupuncture during labour, but unfortunately, the therapy is not available on the National Health.
‘It would be ideal if midwives could do it,’ she says ‘but they would have to be thoroughly trained in all aspects of acupuncture first.’
For addresses of acupuncturists specialising in pain relief during labour, write to the Council for Acupuncture, 10 Panther House, 38 Mount Pleasant WC1X 0AP.
Penny Nathan.
Don't smoke!
Even though most women know that smoking in pregnancy is bad for their baby's health, being linked with low birthweight, premature birth and miscarriage, 25 per cent of pregnant women carry on smoking.
Now, a Canadian study suggests that smoking during pregnancy can have more long-term effects, causing hyperactivity in the child up to seven years later!
Researchers at Carlton University in Ontario interviewed 700 women up to three times during their pregnancy, focusing on their drinking and smoking habits.
Neurological and behavioural tests were given to the children soon after the birth, and at regular intervals after that.
When the children were between four and seven years old, they were each given a task — a video-type game — and were assessed on their levels of cooperation and concentration.
The children of mums who smoked during pregnancy were far more likely to show signs of hyperactivity, suggesting that fetal exposure to tobacco can be linked to later developmental problems.
Dr Richard Woolfson 
Left-handed links
Whether your baby grows up to be right or left-handed may not be just a matter of chance or heredity.
Thumbsucking in the womb, for example, may trigger a preference for being right or left-handed, according to De Peter Hepper at Queens University in Belfast.
He observed babies using ultrasound and discovered that each showed a preference for one or the other thumb.
Most fetuses sucked their right thumb, with only 5.4% preferring their left.
In-the-womb sucking may stimulate one side of the brain, which in turn may affect left-handedness.
Researchers in Canada, however, studied college students over five years and found that lefties tended to be born to older mothers.
Mums who were 40 and over when their children were born were twice as likely to have left-handed children as those mothers who were under 25.
Baby
Milk scares
A recent ad for follow-on milk, quoting from an article in the British Medical Journal , stated that cow's milk given at six months caused ‘subclinical but appreciable gastro-intestinal bleeding in about a third of children.’
On the face of it, this is very alarming and seems to imply that giving your baby cow's milk will have her haemorrhaging blood.
This is not the case, and the truth of the matter lies in the word ‘subclinical’.
In everyday language, this means that the blood loss is so tiny, it can only be detected in the baby's faeces via a special test.
What the ad doesn't mention, either, is that cells which contains traces of blood are naturally excreted in the faeces and in some babies the amount of cells that are shed increases if they are fed cow's milk — but still not enough to worry about.
The medical profession has known this for some time, though, so it's hardly hot news.
The research team referred to in the follow-on milk ad took it as an established fact and were interested in finding out what effect this minimal rise in blood loss had on a baby's iron levels.
They found that, although it did make a difference in a few cases, most babies got enough iron from solid food to make up for any loss through drinking cow's milk.
However, if your baby is a picky eater and you're worried about her getting enough iron, there's still no need to change to follow-on milk.
Just stick to the Government recommendations by breastfeeding or giving your baby infant formula, as well as a variety of solids, until she's a year old.
Prem babies and breast milk
Premature babies are more susceptible to illness in the first days of life than full-term babies, and being fed exclusively on breast milk can help them in the fight against infection.
A recent study, published in The Lancet , found that premature babies were six to ten times more likely to get necrotising enterocolitis — the most common, serious gastro-intestinal disease seen in special-care units — if they had been fed formula milk in place of breast milk.
Because many new mums can't produce enough expressed milk — or choose not to breastfeed — there's a real need for donated milk from milk banks, but according to the National Childbirth Trust these are becoming few and far between.
In 1986–7, an NCT survey found 70 active milk banks; now they only know of a handful.
Many banks closed down because they couldn't need new Government guidelines designed to stop the spread of the HIV virus.
‘People are just not seeing the value of breast milk,’ says Alison Spiro, NCT milk-bank coordinator and Parents Family Health Adviser.
‘More effort should be made to encourage and support women to express their own milk and greater cooperation is needed between midwives, NCT breastfeeding counsellors and special-care staff to help mothers succeed.’
Safe delivery home
Hats off to the Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital for introducing a new scheme which means no parents will have to take their new baby home from the maternity unit without a proper infant carrier.
When leaving the hospital, parents are loaned a rear-facing car seat for the baby, which the midwife collects when she makes her first home visit.
The scheme is a collaboration between Exeter midwives, Devon County Council and Britax-Excelsior.
It would be nice if more hospitals were to follow the Royal Devon's example!
Toddler
Treating cuts and grazes
Once children start toddling, cuts and grazes are a hazard of life.
Some cuts of course need medical attention, but others only need a plaster and some cuddling.
If your child cuts himself:
1.
Make sure the cut is clean — wash it well with soap and water.
2.
Remove any bits of gravel or splinters which are still on the surface.
3.
Rinse the area with clean, running water and pat dry.
If you need to put on a plaster, gently push the edges of the cut together and carefully place the plaster over the cut.
Your child may need medical attention:
If a cut bleeds heavily, is very long or deep, or has jagged edges.
If the cut is very dirty, your child was playing in a dirty area (like a muddy garden), or the wound was caused by something dirty like a rusty nail or tin.
If there's anything embedded in it like glass, wood or dirt.
If the cut won't heal or you notice redness, pus and swelling in the area.
This means the cut has become infected.
Drink problem
Finding something relatively healthy for your children to drink is becoming increasingly complicated.
According to a new study from the Ministry of Agriculture, one in six 2–5-year-olds are consuming more than the recommended daily intake of saccharin, largely through soft drinks.
Part of the problem is that, because we know we should be cutting down on the amount of sugar we eat, we're turning more and more to diet drinks, which contain artificial sweeteners like saccharin.
So try to regulate how many drinks of cola and pop your children drink in a day, and encourage them to have milk and pure fruit juices instead — although you should check the list of ingredients on fruit juice cartons, too, to make sure they haven't had sugar added.
Fruit juices contain natural sugars anyway, so added sugar may only have the effect of making your child expect oversweet drinks.
Everyday dangers
Chasing disappearing water out of the bath, a two-year-old got his hand trapped in the metal ring of the plug hole, each pudgy finger neatly jammed through a separate hole.
The bath had to be dismantled by the fire service to remove the ring and the attached toddler.
It was then cut away from his hand in hospital under general anaesthetic.
Luckily, he was unhurt.
One of the surgeons who reported the case, aptly named KC Saw, said they didn't know of any similar cases but the holes in the metal ring with their inward-turning rims were a perfect trap for a child's fingers.
Another potential hazard is suction burn — toy car phones being the main culprit and parents usually the victim.
For a quick laugh, you stick the receiver part of the phone on your forehead with the rubber suction pad.
You can be left with a red mark a couple of inches across that takes days to fade.
PN 
Child
Coping with constipation
Constipation can be a real problem for children, especially once they start school.
Many four or five-year-olds don't like using the school loo because it's often dirty, allows no privacy and frequently runs out of loo paper.
But not going when you need to causes water absorption and hardening, and the longer the child holds on to a movement, the harder it will be — making the problem worse.
Sometimes a constipated child may not pass a stool for two to three weeks, with embarrassing toilet-blocking results; suppositories and enemas just add to his humiliation and discomfort.
But what can you do to help your child?
Make his life as easy as possible when he first starts school to avoid the problem occurring in the first place.
Send him — or her — along in tracksuit bottoms, as there are no buttons, braces or zips to cope with.
Check that your child knows where the loo is and that the teachers regularly ask the children if they want to go.
If your child says the loo paper often runs out, tell the teacher.
Be sympathetic and supportive to your child.
He may be shy and intimidated by school.
If your child does become constipated, take practical measures to soften the stool — your doctor can prescribe a suitable laxative and course of treatment.
A full stomach makes a person want to defecate, so if a laxative is given at night, your child may go to the loo between a good breakfast and school.
To help him pass a large, firm stool, make sure he's able to push with both feet: put a small step in front of the loo if his feet don't touch the floor.
If it's a recurring problem, try giving your child more fibre with lots of cereals, fruit and vegetables.
Diet and intelligence
A recent TV programme in the BBC's QED series has reopened the debate about the link between nutritional supplements and children's development, and further support in favour of the theory comes from Professor Richard Lynn of Ulster University.
Following a recent study involving 310 primary school children in Northern Ireland, he claims that the results showed that good nutrition, growth and intelligence were linked.
He also rejects the whole notion of pre-school ‘hot-housing’ programmes aimed at boosting the intelligence of young children.
He points out in the British Journal of Educational Psychology that the results of these schemes have been disappointing and it is doubtful whether they have any permanent effect on intelligence.
‘This may be because nutrition not outside stimulation is the major environmental determinant of intelligence,’ he concludes.
However, Professor Lynn gives no clues about what makes the perfect diet.
But he is confident enough to assert the best way to tackle the problem of low intelligence among deprived children may be through measures designed to improve their nutrition.
And since the vast majority of children in the UK are lucky enough to eat a balanced diet, there's no worry about your own child falling short on intelligence.
Cartoon capers
Champion is a new comic which helps to educate newly diagnosed diabetic children about their condition.
It's been developed by a consultant diabetologist, Dr S Greene, and his wife Alexandra, with cartoons by Barrie Appleby of Beano fame.
In the first issue, Owen finds out he has diabetes and we follow him through his first visit to the doctor and then at the hospital, as he learns how to manage diabetes so that he can go on living a normal life.
If your child has recently been told he's diabetic, watch out for the comic at diabetes clinics, or by contacting Ames Division, Miles Ltd, Stoke Court, Stoke Poges, Slough SL2 4LY.
Making a big splash
It's easy when you have got the right toys…
Few children can resist playing with water.
They may not always be too keen on having to wash with it…but give them the chance to make a big splash somewhere and they will never be any happier.
That's why bathtime is often the most popular part of the day.
With all their bathtime favourites to play with it's not surprising it quickly becomes a real highlight for even the youngest toddler in the family.
That's why it's worth taking some trouble over choosing the right bath toys.
Though it's lots of fun, water play is also educational.
Working out what floats and what doesn't as well as what makes the biggest splash is all part of a pre-schooler's early education.
While a few basic tubs are fine for filling and pouring, when you come to select something larger you will want to be sure that what you choose is safe as well as stimulating.
Names to trust
These days more and more of us are going for names we can trust — household names like Matchbox for instance which we remember from our own childhood.
But while you can be just as sure as you ever were about the quality of what you choose, the kind of toys on offer from Matchbox now are very different from the huge fleet of little cars most of us associate with this particular name.
Take Bathtime Bear for example.
He's the brother of one of the company's other classics: Activity Bear.
No fewer than one in five homes in the United Kingdom now boasts an Activity Bear.
And he, together with Big Band Bear and Bathtime Bear, now make up  Matchbox's complete family…
The Three Bears!
Bathtime Bear fixes quickly and easily to the side of the bath using two suction pads.
Not only is he fun to look at with his bright colours, he's very durable too and more than able to withstand the very worst kind of punishment little ones are capable of dishing out!
Watch out…
Bathtime Bear offers no less than 10 different activities.
Included are a water wheel, water float, his very own magnetic brave diver who dives from Bathtime Bear's nose and slides down a shoot into the water.
And whoever is in charge of bathtime should watch out…there's even a water pistol cleverly disguised as a flower.
Of course now it's warm enough to start getting out in the garden, what could be better than to take a selection of water toys to play with in the paddling pool outside?
Even if you haven't a pool, a large bucket of water can be just as good if you have the right kind of toys.
Any child will love taking Matchbox's Tubby Tooter outside for instance.
He's a floating penguin that literally toots with joy when he is pushed down under the water.
And he certainly isn't too bothered whether that water is in a proper paddling pool or a washing-up bowl!
With any kind of water play it's important to follow the safety code.
You can never leave children playing with water unattended whether it's in the bath or outside in the garden — and that applies to even the smallest amounts.
Delivery notes
Giving birth can be a heady, exciting and unpredictable experience.
Harriet Angell tells her story
My contractions started at midnight — not very considerate bearing in mind how much I need my sleep.
Was this it then?
It was certainly uncomfortable enough.
I dozed fitfully until morning, when I awake feeling knackered; my spouse looked worried and ashen in sympathy.
I decided the best thing to do was keep busy, so I tried to recall my antenatal classes — I couldn't remember a thing.
Then I began to worry about my birth plan.
Had I really meant it when I'd written I wouldn't have any painkillers?
Yes.
No.
Oh, how should I know?
I unpacked my hospital bag and then packed it again.
Did I really need all this?
The Evian spray, the nuts and raisins and the disposable knickers?
I do, according to my best friend who's just had a baby.
And she didn't have any painkillers either.
I went to lunch with my mother, who told me giving birth was like being run over by a steamroller; thanks for the reassurance, Mum.
The contractions stopped and I wondered for the hundredth time what my son would look like.
What if the scan has been wrong, and it was a girl not a boy as they'd said?
Then Oliver would become Olivia, or Jessie or…
The contractions returned, and my husband got out all the books on pregnancy he could find.
As usual each one said something different, so I began timing my contractions and breathing deeply as I'd practised.
I hadn't seen any show yet — all the books seemed to imply I should have had one by now.
My spouse told me to just calm down and breathe.
I had a bath and felt the baby doing a rumba.
The contractions were getting stronger all the time.
I ate an energy-giving meal — bakes beans and jacket potato — a combination the midwife would later curse me for.
By now the contractions were lasting 45 seconds and coming about every five minutes.
I had just decided I was managing very well — there's nothing to this after all — when something went pop.
Was it a show?
My waters?
The baby?
Thank goodness I had my knickers on at the time!
I lumbered to the loo and then rang the hospital excitedly — the midwife told me to come in.
By 10.30pm the contractions were getting even stronger and I was beginning to feel like I'd just finished running a marathon.
I arrived at the hospital and was shown to the labour room.
Did we remember to lock the front door?
I wondered.
We examined all the machinery, and then the midwife examined me in between my grunts and groans.
I was 1cm dilated: 1cm dilated?
Ha ha, very funny — now tell me how much I'm really dilated.
My husband had to restrain me.
I threw up dramatically.
Felt dreadful.
I wanted to go home, but was led to the antenatal ward instead.
The midwife suggested I go into the birthing pool as I'd requested on my birth plan.
I couldn't think of anything worse and suggested she tear the plan up.
I was offered gas and air — hated it.
Shouting and swearing, I yelled for an epidural.
My husband tried to distract me, and the midwife offered pethidine instead — but the pain — my legs were buckling, I had to have an epidural.
It was arranged — I felt a failure, but didn't care.
I was now 6cm dilated.
Back to the labour ward.
I insisted on an epidural now .
Couldn't look at anyone.
Wouldn't let the midwife examine me.
Shaking all over.
Swearing without inhibition.
Even the midwife looked shocked at my behaviour.
A sleepy anaesthetist arrived — looked about 18 years old — a little disconcerting.
But as the drip and epidural took effect, I felt wonderful.
I couldn't stop talking and kept thanking the anaesthetist profusely.
I'll never criticise epidurals ever again, I told him.
I was now 7cm dilated.
The top of my baby's head could be seen — nearly there.
Started to push — it was wonderful.
Started to snow outside and I kept on laughing.
Oliver was born at 6.26am weighing 7lb.
No tear, no episiotomy.
I felt very proud, As Oliver lay on my stomach, O stroked him and introduced myself.
Spouse was gobsmacked.
After tea and lots of talking, I rang my Mum, singing the praises of epidurals.
Then I phoned my ‘natural birth’ best friend.
My ‘failure’ to do the same as her didn't matter any more.
I cuddled Oliver, and cuddled my husband, and felt an overwhelming love for both.
My partner suggested perhaps we'd better not do this again.
The next day we went home, all ready to live happily ever after.