

Elizabethan Enterprise
The mid-Sixteenth Century found the English mining industry bereft of skill, and of diminished material benefit to the state.
But the country was quite aware of the benefits of home production, and Parliament together with the indefatigable Elizabeth became desirous to "…that benefit  State might reap by making Copper  in her Realm therebye to be provided of a Competent Store for her necessary without being beholden to forragne Princes her Neighbours…" 
Rights were conferred upon one Thomas Thurland (a clergyman and Master of the Savoy Hospital), Sebastian Spydell and John Steynbergh as early as 1561 to search for mineral thought little positive was achieved.
During 1563 a German, Daniel Höchstetter, obtained rights to prospect for minerals in a number of counties including Lancashire and Cumberland (now Cumbria), and it appears that he was satisfied with the findings.
A year later Thurland, and others, including Höchstetter, English merchants, and members of the nobility, were granted the right to open and work mines, and events now moved with swiftness.
Daniel Höchstetter, like his father Joachim, was a master miner and he is credited with the invention of a mine pumping engine.
Joachim had been involved in mining operations in the British Isles some 40 years previously.
The family was still of some standing but the merchant firm of Höchstetter had become bankrupt in 1530 with the failure of a heavily financed speculation in mercury and the end of a dream of world monopoly in that substance.
Höchstetter, Daniel Ulstat, and Hans Lonner, came acting as agents for the outwardly prosperous merchant company "David Haug, Hans Langnauer, and Mitverwandte" who had also involved themselves in mining.
The Haug company had long ago established links with London, trading in textiles, and in doing so developing relationships with politicians, and with the Crown, by allowing credit.
Their structure was by no means on a sound footing by the 1560's however, and heeding what must have been glowing reports from England, and having seen for themselves good samples of the  ore, they were probably quite eager to invest in the English adventure.
They had been suffering trading reverses and were anxious to increase their status.
Unfortunately their involvement with the English mining, together with other matters including expensive alchemical transmutation experimentation, led to their eventual bankruptcy and the imprisonment of the principals and the use of torture (in the true spirit of the times) to obtain testimonials.
But that is quite another story.
The mining grants empowered the group to search, dig, try and melt all manners of mines and "ures" of gold, silver, copper and quicksilver in a number of counties which included Lancaster, Cumberland and Westmorland.
The Queen was to have one-tenth of native gold and silver, and one-tenth of gold and silver ore "holding 8 lb. weight in the hundred weight." 
Of every cwt. of copper she was to receive 2s. or one-twentieth during the first five years thereafter to have 2s. 6d., or one-fifteenth.
She was also to have the preferment in buying all "precious stones or pearl" to be found in the working of these mines.
Furthermore she also reserved rights over tin and lead.
She also expected to be paid in cash.
By 1567 Thurland and the Germans were able to inform the Crown that at last they had manufactured copper on a commercial scale and that their prospecting had revealed much in the way of exploitable minerals.
Ultimately, in May of 1568 in the 10th year of her reign, the Queen incorporated "The Governors, Assistants, and Commonalty for the Mines Royal" , reciting the Letters Patent granted to Thurland and Höchstetter on 10 October 1564.
Höchstetter and Lionel Ducket, Citizen and Alderman of London, were ordained as the governors.
Of the 24 shareholders Haug & Co. now held 9¾ shares having released 1¼ since 1564; Sir William Cecill with 2 was the second major shareholder.
Thomas Thurland held 1½ but Daniel Höchstetter does not appear to have held a portion.
Below is a list of apparent shareholders by 1580.
The Germans had encouragement put their way by tax exemptions and special privileges concerning the cutting of timber.
Orders proclaimed for them to be protected against local prejudice for such there was, and assault, and even murder was committed against the strangers!
Here was a circumstance where a great number of foreigners, who would be unable to speak the local language, whose customs would be regarded with suspicion, and whose mariner of worship differed significantly, were suddenly thrust upon a remote community.
It might even be that the very military orderliness with which the Germans performed their mining affairs could have resulted in alienation.
It is probably quite likely that the foreigners were honest and hard working, keeping themselves much to themselves but it was clearly a tinder-box situation with the tiniest spark capable of leading to a conflagration.
The Queen had convenanted not to give licence to any others to search or dig etc. in the eight counties reserved, or in Wales, and that none would search without consent of the patentees, and that she would "deface and distroy all tools, instruments &c. save only of the Patentees." 
She had clearly by various decree created a force majeure over mineral workings and whilst at the time this would have appeared an admirable standing, nevertheless the monopoly began to serve, in later years, as a disincentive to exploration and development.
Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland, was certainly aggrieved by trespass, and in his opinion, illegal working of the copper ore on his land at Newlands nr.
Keswick; ore which was his by ancient right.
He lost the protracted litigation with the Queen and this could have been a factor amongst those which persuaded him into treasonable activity later which cost the worthy earl his head!
By the late 1560's work was well in hand up at Keswick and in the formative years of the society the northern mining concentrated itself amongst the mountains and valleys around Keswick.
It was there by the River Greta at Brigham that the miscellany of workshops and smelting houses were erected.
It was to be a good many years before Coniston came within the sphere of operations however.
In the meantime the fortunes of the undertaking fluctuated but by the late sixteenth century it was in financial difficulties.
Some of the English shareholders withdrew from the enterprise and during 1570 Haug & Co. pulled out entirely having lost heavily.
It was not that the mines were not producing for between 1564–1570 metal to the value of £31,167 was sold, but even this did not cover the operating costs.
The chief problem lay in political requirements which engendered a saturated home market and also that the society was not empowered to manufacture the more profitable battery.
Daniel was recalled to Germany for discussion, and it appears that he decided to throw in his lot with the mining in England.
He returned with his wife, five children and two maids.
After wintering in London on they travelled in March 1572 up-country to Lancaster and from thence across the first part of the Morecambe Bay sands to their stop-over with the Prestons at Holker.
Their guide was paid 2/.
From there they covered the remainder of the bay crossing, paying the guide 1/4 for the Leven Sands section, arriving at Furness Abbey.
Possibly Daniel's heart beat a little faster as he caught sight of the Cumberland mountains which he had come to know so well.
Getting on in years, he might well have considered the possibility of never seeing his homeland again.
He must have wondered what the outcome of it all would be, though he was not to remain in doubt for much longer.
The mines went from bad to worse and during 1579 Höchstetter proposed that shareholders be levied an assessment of 14 per share, or, that the mines be leased to him.
A five year lease was granted though not to him alone — it included Thomas Smythe, the Queen's Customer, who was one of the original group associated with Höchstetter's early prospecting back in 1563, and himself associated with mining in Cornwall.
Customer Smythe was to accept liability for the Queen's Royalty of one-fifteenth part; to pay the company a one-ninth part of the production; and a money rent of £433: 6s. 6d., providing thereby funds to be distributed as a dividend.
Money surviving these payouts would be available to Höchstetter and his partners for the running costs of the works.
Daniel could hardly have favoured this arrangement, probably considering Smythe, with his London connections, as something of a Cerberus.
Nevertheless matters did improve, but Höchstetter's dreams ended with his death in May 1581.
Long after the schism between Anglicanism and the Roman Catholic Church — even as late as 1571 — the forbidden services were still observed in Keswick (and indeed elsewhere in the north).
During that year a directive was issued by the Bishop of Carlisle to the vicar of Crosthwaite; the 18 sworn men; the churchwardens; and a number of dignitaries, were to assemble in committee at Crosthwaite Church and elect 18 sidesmen, and new churchwardens for the ensuing year — these to take an appropriate oath office.
But they were also to swear to root out every remnant of the old religion.
All the Popish relics and monuments of superstition and  idolatry in the church and the parish were to be sold off.
These included the allies and amyses, gold embroidered cloth, candlesticks, hand-bells, silver chalices, the holy-water tankard of brass, and all the canopies, sepulchral cloths and the painted cloths with the trinity and the images of Peter and Paul.
The vestments, tunicles, chestables et al were to be defaced, cut up, and made into coverings and cushions for  the church.
The same treatment was to be accorded to the other chapels in the parish.
No services were to be held in the church or chapels on certain forbidden former holy days; nor was any concourse of idle people to attend church on those days, which included All Souls (nor the evening or night before) and those of Saints Catherine, Nicholas, George, Lawrence, Ann, and so on, including Thomas-a-Beckett, Mary Magdalene, the Conception, the Assumption, Wednesdays during the Easter or Whitsuntide weeks all being forbidden by law to be kept as holidays.
In other words, so far as Keswick and district was concerned, albeit belatedly, the Reformation had made its advent.
So how did this affect the Almain miners?
The writer has often pondered on the manner of their selection, and likes to feel that their skill carried more weight than their religious affiliations.
It has been suggested that they were all Lutheran, but really there is no reason why they should not have been a mix Lutheran, possibly Calvinist, and Roman Catholic.
It might well be that upon their selection the Roman Catholics were appraised of the atmosphere in England and advised not to be too obvious in their worship, galling though that would have been to those proud and independent men.
Yet what did they find at Keswick?
A township seemingly unaffected by Parliamentary influence, with Roman Catholics worshipping openly with, perhaps a despairing vicar trying, perhaps half-heartedly, to depress the old and infiltrate the Anglican requirements possibly to a largely unwilling (or might they have been uncaring?) flock.
It is possible that the Bishop had himself received an ordnance from a higher authority.
Had someone, perhaps the "Sealer and Receiver of the Queen Majesty's Portion of the Mines" communicated to the capital about the flagrant disregard of the religious law?
At any rate from 1571 it might well have been very disadvantageous for anyone in the district to openly profess allegiance to the Popish ways and Roman Catholic miners well might have been driven underground — and that is not fully intended as a pun.
Worship might have taken place in any of the sheds or barracks of the men, but there was always risk of detection.
Although prejudice lessened as time went on, there would always be those who resented these foreigners and their strange ways, and who would be ready to point a finger.
Nothing came of a suggestion to bring over a preacher from Germany to take care of the miners' needs.
The loss of the holy day holidays might have annoyed the local inhabitants more than it did the off-comers.
Had not the latter fought in the mining camps from which they hailed, to reduce the number of enforced religious holidays which so depleted their  incomes?
Perhaps, in course of time, some of the Roman Catholics saw the wisdom, and endured less anxiety, by adopting the Protestant ways — different maybe, but easier for their children…some of the men began to marry local women.
Paradoxically, the patron saints of miners are the Catholic ones Daniel and Barbara.
No matter what denomination these two were honoured.
Daniel Höchstetter was interred within the parish church at Crosthwaite (founded by St. Kentigern), and alas, there is no memorial.
If we choose not to include the lasting works in the lonely mountains, only church registers survive to remind us of this remarkable facet of Keswick, and indeed Coniston's, past history.
The visitor can pass on without an inkling of these rare events, and in walking through the church pass over the Teutonic bones of those ancients.
After the death of old Daniel, the five year lease was carried on by old Smythe who renewed it for a further term of two years though at a lower rental.
During these seven years profit amounting to £3,691 was realised allowing many of the old debts to be cleared.
When Smythe died (June 1591) it was his son John who took over his interests.
But the mines became increasingly unprofitable despite efforts to improve them, and in course of time they were "farmed out" to Emanuel and Daniel, both sons of old Höchstetter.
By 1597 they were in default on rents and Royalties.
It is possible that there was an improvement when the copper veins at Coniston and Tilberthwaite began to be worked, though the latter were not very successful as it turned out.
Whether they had been worked at some preceding date is a matter of no little conjecture but is unlikely and it seems that the miners from Keswick started there in 1599.
Prior to this date there had been suggestions from London that the miners in the north had been acting more in their own interests than the society's.
A couple of years previously a letter had been sent to Keswick suggesting as much.
Emanuel Höchstetter, Mark Steinberger and Richard Ledes replied, claiming lack of production to shortage of peat for smelting"…whereby such great quantities of ore remain on our hands unsmelted…
"
There were, they pointed out, heavy costs incurred by level driving (presumably through barren ground), water draining, shawdering (prospecting), hand picking and dressing; carriage etc.
Their reply continued"…
Of this matter we thought very meet to certify your honor less otherwise we might be suspected of fraudulend dealing towards the Company, from which the God defend us.
We do most humbly refer our cause and ourselves to the Goodness of your Honor and the Company beseeching you to consider favourably of our unfeigned hindrance beside the great loss of our own stock laid down on these mines.
And  we all according to our bounden duties shall both be ever ready to use our uttmost endeavour in furtherance of their minerals…"
Sir Robert Cecil, then Governor of the society, was still not satisfied and he cancelled the current lease at Christmas 1597, even though it had one and a half years to run.
This was rescinded however, and the miners willed to carry on, but on the 9th June 1599, Cecil, still not satisfied with the position regarding these northern operations, urged Thomas, 10th Lord Scrope, at Carlisle, to have an investigation made into them.
He mentioned that great charges and costs had been incurred by the works far above any returns, Some course was to be made for the  maintenance of the workmen if the mines were as worn out as the Germans pretended.
Cecil made it quite clear that in his opinion, at least, the "strangers" in charge of the works were pretending to act simply and fairly towards the society but were thought to be dealing more for their own "private lucre" than for the benefit of the society, "…this despite diverse great sums of money due by them for rent having been remitted for their better encouragement to carry on the work…" 
Richard Ledes was considered to be in a position of trust and was recommended as a fit person to be consulted in any investigation to be made by Scrope.
His Lordship decided to act and selected Christopher Pykering, Edmund Dudley and George Bowes to report.
Bowes was the third son of George Bowes, Marshal to Queen Elizabeth and a member of her Privy Council.
The men met at Keswick on the 4th February 1600, but were prevented by severe weather from carrying out any of their intentions.
The next meeting was set for the 23rd April but three days later disaster struck the party whilst they were viewing the God's Gift Copper Mine.
It may be that they were climbing up into the older parts of the mine above the Grand Level to ascertain whether all the worthwhile ore had been taken out.
Suddenly, a ladder broke away, precipitating them down into a heap and unfortunately one was killed.
The miners probably resented the intrusion but must have been fearful of the possible consequences of this calamity.
Daniel Höchstetter reports on the accident: "…
My brother Emanuel and myself going into God's Gift Mine with the Commissioners Mr. Robert and Mr. George Bowes with others coming up the ladders from the level, it pleased God that the ladders slipt from their hold being upon them Mr. George Bowes, his man Turn, my brother Emanuel, Mr. Robert Bowes, Martin Moser and myself.
In which fall Mr. Robert Bowes took his death by a wound he received in his soul with some clamp and the most of us bruised and hurt.
God bless us from the like…"
One can visualise these gentlemen each with a candle or dim lantern, perhaps totally unused to situations like that, climbing  fearfully up the ladders, hard on each others heels, taking comfort from the nearness of each other and climbing awkwardly with the lights they carried which would cast but a feeble glow about them.
The big stope up into which they were climbing would have appeared immense and would have eerily distorted the sounds in the mine creaking windlasses, rattling chains, voices, hammering, broken rock, the splash of water and the clatter of ironwork.
Perhaps the miners were castigated for not checking the route beforehand in view of the importance of their visitors.
However, it seems that the incident was regarded as a blameless accident and the investigation continued with the Commissioners visiting Caldbeck, and the new workings at Coniston and Tilberthwaite; these last two being adjacent to each other.
They found things at a very low ebb indeed, with less than 25 kibbles of ore mined a week and in fact from mid 1600 to mid 1601 the production was a very poor 92 cwt. of metal.
The works were very much dilapidated and in need of capital injection.
A meeting was convened on 1st July 1600 to discuss the state of affairs but it was very poorly attended; still the Germans were granted £200 to lay in peat, coal and other fuels for the next winter…and there was concern for the plight of the workmen should the mining halt.
It is obvious that the remaining members of the Commission of Enquiry must have been shaken by the events in God's Gift.
It seems that not all of the answers were provided in their report.
At any rate the Directors appeared not to be satisfied, because another Commission was despatched on the 1st August 1602.
The investigators were George Bowes and Francis Nedham son of a shareholder in the mines.
Bowes must have taken Nedham into God's Gift to show him the place where the accident happened.
He and Nedham must have been amazed to see the new water wheels towering above them powering the pumping and winding machines, for the miners were now working well below the Grand Level, and a shaft had been put down.
It does seem that since the last investigation certain development work, "Minerall Adventures," had been carried out and it is possible that this was in progress at that time.
The position was now to be reviewed to ascertain whether production was at last to be increased and sustained.
There were hopes that the "farmers" would at last have some recompense for their repairs and improvements, thus enabling them to repay some of the money advanced to them.
Or simply to "…suffer the farmers to continue the said works according to Covenants of their Lease…" .
Certain letters had been recently received from the miners telling of a new discovery in Westmorland.
Bowes and Nedham were instructed"…that it hath pleased God that Certaine Copper Oares  should be  near about Kendall where none were ever heretofore heard of…it seameth 11 Kibles will yield a qintall of Copper…
"
It was thought fit that the men should meet at Kendal on the 29th of July at night, where the leasors, or one of them, would attend them and on the next morning take them to visit the "said  Myne" and examine its prospects.
Henry Cobham, Sir Robert Cecil and Sir John Popham, who had ordered the report, further informed the two men"…it seemeth by some purport made unto us, that eight Kibles of God's gift and Conistone Oares should make a quintall of Copper, and in matter of experiment in the worke, it appeareth that tenn Kibles or more doe but make a quintall of Copper, you are therefore to informe your Selves the best you can how many Kibles of the Oare now gotten at Gods gift, and Coniston will yield a Quintall of Copper, what the particular charges will amount unto, of making the said Quintall.
And whether the Oare now gotten is like to prove richer or leaner than now it is, or to continue the same state of goodness that now it is in…
"
The weight of a kibble of ore would depend upon the size and richness of its contents but might be expected to be around 175 lb., whilst a quintal was one cwt.
It must be inferred that in this context the "ore" would be dressed and ready for smelting.
Nedham and Bowes were further required to acquaint themselves with the costing of the roasting and smelting.
The leasor's father"…in his life tyme, did say that the making of a quintall of Copper did then stand but in 17s or 18s, and but of late years 25s, and yet (in the present time) it seemeth to be rated sometimes at 32s a Quintall, and now very lately charged with an encrease of 1s of every Quintall…
"
It was very important to know as near as possible the number of kibbles which could be mined weekly "upon which the projects of gaine or loss are to be framed." 
It was considered that unless 400 or 500 quintals of copper were produced in a year there could be little gain.
The two men were to assess the likely future production and the number of pickmen to be employed.
They were to ascertain "whether some of our own Nation inhabiting in those parts, may not be trained up in the said worke." 
The question of battery manufacture was to be examined.
Earlier estimates of the conversion of copper into vessels etc., were in the region of £5: 7s: 0d, or more, a quintal, whereas a cwt of such battery could "not be sold dearer than £4 3s: 4d, or thereabouts." 
God's Gift Mine, it was recognised, lay conveniently near to the Brigham smelters enabling ore deliveries to be maintained throughout the winter months whereas the other ores "further distant, can not be brought to the said smelting house, but in the sumer only…you may therefore consider how farr forth those Mynes soe farr distant may bee sett upon with good strength in sumer and what number of kibbles will weekly be gotten and towards  winter when that will faile, to drive those pickmen from there to work in Gods gift, if the winter shall not hinder untill we may be furnished either out of Germainie or our own Nation with a sufficient number of pickmen to man all the works thoroughly & withall to consider whether the Myne of Gods Gift be not so plentifull as some other new Stolnes (G. Stollen — tunnel, adit etc.) or head (possibly a forerunner of our word" heading ") may be driven thereby to gitt the like weekly pportion (proportion) as hath formerly been gotten there." 
The Commissioners were required to make a comprehensive inventory of the houses and buildings, even "…household stuff plate & implemt…" , and covered equipment, wheels etc.
They were to make every endeavour to find out what they could by studying books of account, for example, or personal interviews.
The death of Robert Bowes must have been in mind when a warning was incorporated into the questionnaire: "…sundrie accidents may befall fitt for you to observe, and search out…" 
In their submitted report Bowes and Nedham make observation that the plentiful veins of Coniston (and God's Gift) were found by "…poor shepherds & people tending their sheep in ye Mountaines." 
Mention is made of how in the viewing of the mountains "…it is to be seen how the very naturall working of those flood falling from the height in winter stormes have broken down & worn such rifts & slitts in the rocks as hereby the dead leaders or mettall finnes or vaine have appeared unto us above ground which before were hid by the earth & stones formerly covring the rocks some 2 or 3 fathomes deep…" 
Hopes were pinned on the continual development at the God's Gift Mine, and the expanding operations at Coniston (though Tilberthwaite was something of a disappointment).
Meanwhile some men were kept occupied on poor veins in the Keswick area.
At one such, six English pickmen "learned reasonable" , were getting four kibbles a week at 4s. a kibble.
At St George Stollen some two kibbles weekly were gotten, from the "outcast" , towards their maintenance.
The cost of the Coniston ore delivered at the smelters was reckoned at 3s. 6d. a kibble, or more, which figure would improve or worsen depending upon output, and included "getting & shawdring & the carrieage." 
The charges of converting rough copper to marketable battery — vessels etc., including waste, vessel dressing, the copper hammer and workmanship, amounted to about 13s. 8d. a quintal.
It was considered that rough copper was costing at that time £3: 15s: 0d to produce but would sell for only £2: 16s: 0d at the most.
With vessels costing a total of about 13s. 8d. a quintal to produce, the costs would be about £4: 8s.: 8d. but then sell at £4: 13s.: 4d.; a small profit  indeed.
The price however, was expected to rise as the quality of product became known, and the vessels "doe continue longer & when they become worne or broken are changed with farr less wast which untill now of late was never knowne nor looked into." 
Certainly English youth should be trained up in the industry, especially in the battery work.
It would be quite impracticable to carry waste rock any great distance and it is quite certain that ore being produced at Coniston, was machine and hand dressed to as great a concentration as possible, before filling into strong saddle bags for the 20 mile pack-horse journey, over the mountain tops, to the Brigham smelters.
The miners themselves probably found some sort of lodgings in the area but also spent most of their time living in small draughty shelters or "hutts" built near to their work places only severe weather shifting them down to the valley bottoms.
Examples of these huts are still identifiable around these old mens' workings.
In view of this irksome journey to Keswick, not surprisingly, regard was given to the possibility of setting up smelt houses at Coniston: "…if the Mynes hereafter should hereafter prove so rich as to countervale the charges of erecting any worke houses, there is more there about but water sufficient to make some competent buildings and good store both a wood & peets at more easy rates than at Keswick if the said wood may be preserved for those uses…" 
Extensive descriptions of the mines are quaintly supplied:
Reference to possibly these small trials is made in Underground In Furness (1967, p. 57 59, E. G. Holland).
They also complain about the shortage of wood brought about by iron smelting, and ask for opinions on that matter: "…also of any opinion conceived of the great consumpcon of timber and all other kinds of wood made in divers places thereabouts by the Iron Mynes" (they must refer to wood taken for charcoal burning for the furnaces, the iron mines at this stage would not be using large amounts of timber, but the woodlands were decimated for this reason.
They refer to the mines being set up by some Londoners and others "…of which nature they conceive this Copper worke to be, but to spend a farr greater proportion of fewell and therefore more odious, the redress wherof we leave to your honbl consideration." 
In their report Bowes and Nedham provide information that the governors would hardly be unaware of.
Thurland and Höchstetter had, they wrote, divided the mines into 24 shares or "whole parts" and sold them to Nobles and Lords, who paid 11,200 for one-twentyfourth part, besides 1850 towards the maintenance of the works.
The picture would not be complete without some idea of the mining costs of the time.
The Commission shows that the cost for mining & smelting Coniston ore amounted to £1 11s.: 5d. for the mining and £1: 3s.: 6d. for the smelting — per cwt.
For Tilberthwaite ore the figures are £2 3s.: 3d. and £1 15s 4d. respectively.
These together exceed the approx. selling price of copper metal by some 18s. 4d. per cwt. showing that milling at Tilberthwaite was hardly a viable proposition in itself.
Even the profit based on the Coniston ore could hardly be considered handsome.
Small wonder that the company had earlier petitioned without success to be allowed to manufacture battery — plates, vessels etc. from the refined metal, for it appears that there was a ready sale and it was a more profitable manner of disposing of the metal.
These powers were vested in the parallel or sister company the "Mineral & Battery Works" and doubtless they would have jealously resisted  such a move.
Copper vessels were selling for around £4: 13s. 4d. the cwt., although manufacturing costs accounted for some £2 17s.: 8d. of this.
Copper metal sold for about £3 the cwt.
Still it suggests that some profit might even have been made of the Tilberthwaite work.
W. T. Palmer recounts, in More Odd Corners in English Lakeland, a rather amusing anecdote…
"The copper ore of Greenburn was so fine in colour and texture that it came near to gold!
It occurred therefore to one of "the Teutons" who came over with Daniel Höchstetter in the days of Royal Bess, that guineas and half-guineas might be coined without anyone being the wiser.
The small smelter and mint was said to have been set up in the heart of the Rusland woods down towards the Leven Estuary, and coins were turned out in large numbers.
The story tells how everyone accepted the coins and the cointerfeiters prospered mightily, and so It seems, did the mine!
Alas!
There was a dance in an inn at Hawkshead, a miner his pockets bulging with "Rusland gold" lost the lot on the floor when his pocket split open.
The secret was out and the magistrates issued a warrant to arrest the illegal mint.
The wife of the chief coiner however, being tipped off about the search had the stack of coins, the moulds and other equipment thrown into Rusland Pool."
It is perhaps interesting to note that Baines in his History of Lancashire tells us that there are no mines at work in this Parish, nor any minerals found, except some fine specimens of copper ore which are picked up occasionally near the brooks in Rusland!
Mining in the Coniston fells, and elsewhere, continued after the turn of the century and probably, as more veins were found and the mining expanded and output increased, increased in profitability.
Still, on 30 July 1616, Daniel Höchstetter received a questionnaire from one Mr. Dainford, acting for the company, asking for information on the state of the mines.
It was to be known whether the mines "are like to continue as they have been, & whether the Oare is like to continue at the same rate it hath been at, and whether it be of the same goodness as it hath been." 
The company wished to know how many kibbles every workman "doth weekly land" , what charges had been incurred by building at Coniston and what repairs might be needed to uphold the works.
Details were wanted on the number of Englishmen employed "in the Mynes or at the said worke, either for getting Oare or about roasting & melting furnace or hamers, & whether there be any skilful to manage those works if the now farmers should dye." 
Questions were to be asked on matters of lead and silver production, and on what prospecting was, or could be, carried out, and so on.
By 1618–19 output had improved sufficiently, it seems, to warrant the building of a water-powered stamp-mill at a site believed to be at   the foot of Red Dell or Thriddle and which, despite its altitude, was well placed to serve the mines about there which would now include the newly discovered God's Blessing at the head of the dell and which like its namesake (almost) in Newlands Valley near Keswick, was highly esteemed but mistakenly so.
There would also be the high workings on Black Scar (above Levers Water) between Great How Crags and Little How Crags.
The mill received ore from those extensive workings close by and also those by Levers Water itself.
Where possible the ore, as has been mentioned, was hand dressed in preparation for the long journey to Keswick.
Some ore was so intermixed with gangue however, that the concentration by hand was extremely laborious and the mill must have been needed for a long time.
Fig. 6 attempts to reconstruct the scene at the mill.
Ore from the further mines was pack-horsed but from the Red Dell Foot works it was probably carted.
The drawing shows a preliminary   cobbing on a block or anvil followed by a screening or grading.
The undersize was wheeled to the hopper feeding the stamp heads, with a supply of water, and the coarsely pounded stuff was then washed in a buddle or jig, the heavier sulphide ore separating from the lighter gangue or waste.
To effect the separation it was needful that the particle size was more or less the same.
The material from the iron mortar boxes was washed out onto a screen and the oversize returned to the stamps.
The whole process required constant skilled attention.
The mill, which was probably a battery of four stamps, each a heavy timber balk shod with iron and lifted alternatively by cams on a revolving axle, was the cause of a dissension in 1620 between Sir Daniel Fleming's tenants of the low lying land upon either side of the St. Martin's beck, between Coniston village and the lake; and Daniel Höchstetter for the mining works.
It seems that the slimes and waste gravel from the mill were discharged directly into the beck which obligingly carried the man made detritus downstream and depositing them in the less boisterous places causing silting and then, during heavy rain, flooding.
Complaints were also uttered concerning the damage done to the fishing ill the same beck.
The findings were against the miners.
The transcript of the "trial" is so unique that it has been reproduced here in full…
Yet affairs which, perhaps, appeared to be progressing well enough were not to remain so for many more years.
By 1627 the northern works were again in difficulties and Daniel and Joseph Höchstetter petitioned successfully to a sympathetic Charles 1st. for release from the moeity of the one fifteenth part, or measure, of the copper raised.
Relieved of this burden, quite likely things improved to some extent.
By 1631 Daniel Höchstetter had paid off £8 on a loan from Sir Daniel Fleming (Lord of the Manor of Coniston) made earlier during one of the lean periods.
This was for £208: 35.: 0d. (a considerable sum of money for the times) yet all of this was restituted by the end of 1633 suggesting, if nothing else, a degree of integrity.
Ore was still pack-horsed to Keswick, and indeed sufficient was produced to keep the Brigham smelters busy.
Although the irksome trod over the mountain ways had earlier prompted the Höchstetters to suggest building smelting facilities at Coniston, nothing was implemented.
Indeed, decline established itself even further, and a contemporary reported the mines as "absent and decayed" .
The governors of the Mines Royal decided to send up one Captain Thomas Whitmore to investigate, and if possible, educe some means of reviving them…but there is no evidence of any real improvement.
Even so, mining did not cease entirely until the outbreak of the great Civil War in 1648.
By then Daniel had died, and Emanuel long ago in 1614.
It was the latter's son Joseph, now about 55, who lived to see the whole enterprise brought to a halt by the hostilities.
Francis, Daniel's son, who was probably involved, had died three years earlier.
After the Coniston mines were started, the miners, despite the convenience of a place of worship in Coniston itself used the Hawkshead church of St. Michael and All Angels, and as may be  expected, their names appear with some  frequency in the registers.
If any memorials were erected at their burials, as at Crosthwaite, none remain today.
W. G. Collingwood describes one of these men Balthazar Puchberger,(altered in course of time to Puthparker) whose shaggy or tousled head earned him the nickname of Towsie.
He died in 1637 but it appears that for years he was something of a figure in the district.
The Höchstetters themselves managed things from Keswick, though no doubt, making periodic visits to Coniston to see how things were running.
What actually transpired upon the outbreak of the Civil War is lost in the mists of time it would seem.
Did an armed Parliamentarian contingent call in and order the works closed?
They were certainly patrolling in the region.
The governors of the Mines Royal were identified with the Royal cause and the society became moribund in status.
Did soldiers go further than issuing orders, and without justification, destroy vital machinery and accoutrements?
If ever there was any documentation relating to this episode, none appears to have survived or is yet to be unearthed.
There is no evidence that any miners were pressed into military service.
Henry Hamilton claims, in his well managed English Brass and Copper Industries to 1800, that "most of the German miners were killed," but this is certainly not so; nor is there any premiss conferring authenticity upon his statement that "the works at Keswick…were destroyed." 
Alter all is said and done, it might be that the cessation of activity was as much to do with the enervated economic clime as anything else.
Almost certainly some of the workers would have left the area.
Quite likely there would be those who travelled to the Continent in the hope of establishing family links though most of the original strangers' would by now be dead.
Still others remained in Cumbria.
A number had already married English girls; their Anglicised names may still be recognised in the region.
So the Civil War saw the termination of this remarkable, though ill-fortuned, north-western fascicule of one of England's first joint-stock industrial enterprises, which spanned almost a century.
Was it all worth while?
Who benefited?
Certainly not the firm of Hang, for within the space of ten years from their involvement they had expended around £31,758 and all that money, and a deal more, found itself disseminated in two or three quiet corners of this remote part of England.
Few others, other than the employees, made anything out of it at all, though Elizabeth had her Royalties.
One family, that of Höchstetter, will always be associated with the venture.
They eventually ramified, quite spectacularly indeed, into English society, and although they subsequently left their marks elsewhere they played no further part in the mining adventure.
Restoration And The Years To 1700
The end of the wars found the mines abandoned and derelict.
An impression is provided by Fuller: "I am sorry to hear and loath to believe, what some credible persons have told me, that within these 20 years the copper within this country hath beet, wholly discontinued, and that not for want of metal, but mining it.
Sad that the industry of our age could not keep what the ingenuity of the former found out.
And I would willingly put it on another account, that the dumping of so much steel in the bowels of men, during our Civil Wars, hath hindered their digging of copper out of the entrails of the earth; looping these peaceable times will encourage to the resuming thereof"
Stringer (Opera Mineralia Explicata), tells us that prior to the wars 4,000 persons derived employment from the Keswick Mines; surely an exaggeration.
The malaise had spread countrywide however; Coniston and Keswick were not the only mining regions to suffer inactivity.
To alleviate the shortage copper began to be imported, though naturally this was expensive.
Charles II took a personal interest it, matters relating to mining and it is reported that he united the old Mines Royal and the Soc. of Mineral & Battery Works which had for so long run as separate enterprises.
Prince Rupert, the king's cousin, was made the governor and a laboratory was set up in Whitehall wherein the king, as an example, worked oil mineral matters with his own hands.
Yet any influence that might have radiated from the Capital appears to have had little effect upon these northern fells.
Indeed, not for many years yet do we come upon any positive evidence of revival.
Sir Daniel Fleming was certainly interested in the formerly productive mines in his fells around Coniston, but it is not until 1658 is there further note of mines and then not for copper viz:
 "…given to the Miller of Conistone for going along with me onto the fell 1s." 
That was dated 21 January, and on 22 March"…given to Parce (Pierce?)
Corratts when he came to look at black lead mine at Conistone 2s. 6d."
Black lead, or wad as it is sometimes called, is found in a number of places in the Lake District and has been mined for centuries at Seathwaite in Borrowdale.
In those days it was in demand, and expensive.
By May old 1658 there appears some doubt in Sir Daniel's mind.
He noted given unto a Newlands man who came to look at the supposed Wad Mine at Conistone 5s."
Where was the "mine" ?
It is difficult to tell.
There was a trial for black lead in Tilberthwaite Gill, but one would have thought that his Lordship would have mentioned that place.
A more likely source is a curious deposit of fine black material in a fault below the waterfall in Mealy Gill (spanned at its lower end by the railway bridge at the rail head, Coniston).
At some time two short tunnels have been put in to investigate this, and early in the 19C. it was known as the Boot Polish Mine.
A mill manufacturing that material was established nearby on the banks of the Church Beck but was washed away in a flood.
However, the tiny amount of "wad" obtained from the mine could never have supported a mill and all alternative supply must have been arranged.
The earliest lease of the mines, subsequent to the Civil War, which has been located by the writer, is dated 18 October 1678, being between Sir Daniel and his son William; Thomas Shiphard of Natland (near Kendal) described as a gentleman; and Lancelott Fforth of Kirkbie-Kendall.
The latter had been described as a pewterer and metaller in 1666 (see The Boke off Recorde of Kirkbie-Kendall, ed. by R. S. Fergusson) later to become the well beloved "first and modern mayor of the Burgh" (1684), and re-elected in 1708.
Cessation of activity for six months without notice could have resulted in the lease becoming void, unless the stoppage was caused by snow.
The concession covered any of the estate in Westmoreland, Cumberland, and Lancaster (Lancashire), but there appears no evidence that any work was actually put in hand.
In June of 1684 Sir John Lowther of Stockbridge wrote to Sir Daniel asking him to make enquiry if there were any men still living in the area who might have worked the copper mines at Caldbeck Keswick or elsewhere in Cumberland.
He enclosed a paper of questions to be put to them if any such were located and clearly this request was responsible for a report Sir Daniel had compiled on his own account about the Coniston mines that same year.
Sir Daniel bade his brother Roger, then living at Coniston Hall, make a report on the mines as they were at that time.
Three old men who had worked in the mines were found "…being all there alive in this County" , and based upon their evidence —"An account of the names of the severall Copper Workes or Mynes in Coniston fells that wer wrought in, when the smelt houses were up at Keswick.
And these places discovd since, which were never wrought,"such an account was assembled, viz.:
These are the workings (some still to be seen though partly obscured by later working, and some now deep open stopes of later vintage) which stretch across the foot of the Red Dell valley following the strike of the Bonsor Vein.
These had many years earlier been started by Ffabian, Clocker, Hawkins, Gibson and Hagrig (M. B. Donald includes the name Haukriggs) and others.
Those workings westerly of Red Dell Beck would have been the White or New Work and those oil the east of the beck the Low Work.
The report continues:
Collingwood was unable to locate this but it might, perhaps, have been a working on the Kernal Vein, at a point just above the Levers Water Waterfall/Red Dell"water-race, at N.G.R. SD 29 NE 2843.9900.
Undoubtedly this is the small mine up in the head of Red Dell.
The old hand-chiselled level was opened some years ago by the writer and a description of this, along with these others, is given in the guide to the orefield and its mines.
It seems that what we now know as Red Dell was earlier known as Thurdle.
This name has survived as Thriddle but nowadays is taken to mean that area around and up  above the old dressing mill at Red Dell Foot.
The ore in God's Blessing was thought to be rich in gold!
This small working is another of these old mines which was dug open and entered by the writer years ago.
It appeared to have been driven by plug & feather and is located at the end of a small gulley on a plateau high up on Swallow Scar on the easterly flanks of"Wetherlam at about 1800 ft. alt.
at N.G.R. NY 20 SE 2940.0028.
A tiny "hutt" on the plateau is obviously of considerable antiquity.
The account of the mines provided here is derived from an old document brought to my attention.
Variants of Roger Fleming's report however, appear in West's Antiquities of Furness and in Philosophical Transactions Vol. xvii, 1693, pages 536–7 where it appears under the heading "Abstracts of two letters from Mr. David Davies, concerning several Copper Mines; in answer to some Queries proposed by Dr. Lister, S.R.S. No. 200, p. 737." 
Davies' description provides additional information and the writer has taken the liberty to amalgamate those which concern the 6th Work:
These workings up by Levers Water ultimately became known as the Back Strings.
Standing there, looking out over the expanse of the tarn, the reader will surely be astonished that these miners of old had once contemplated draining the tarn by driving a level underneath it.
One can scarcely comprehend a hand-chiselled stollen being taken right through to the water — no drill holes to probe ahead and no explosives to blast the last few feet away.
Under those conditions a miner would have to be quite fleet of foot!
The three old miners considered that it was intended to carry out this operation a little before the smelt houses "left off" and of course they left off by persuasion of the Parliamentary forces, violent or otherwise.
Collingwood considers this to be the Black Scar Workings which are located high above Levers Water, between Gt. and Little How Crags, or, "Hookriggs" .
presumably by the latter he means the mine at Hawk Rigg, north of Blake Rigg, north of Tilberthwaite Gill.
and in this latter he may be correct.
On the other hand Thomas Hirn's work, 360 ft. wrought, could have been along the outcrop of the North Vein at the nearby Tilberthwaite Mine.
It must be confessed that it is really difficult to pinpoint the precise locations of these ancient workings, which, at that time may have been little else than shallow holes on the outcrops.
The Three Kings had by then be, en worked along a length of 240 ft. and this could suggest Benson's Lode.
This whole area is well covered in the Field Guide.
Perhaps it is worth noting that the old miners make 110 reference to any.
deliberate wrecking of the Coniston workings.
It is interesting to observe that although there were no roads along the valley bottoms to Keswick which were usable by carts, it was quite possible to cart materials down to Penny Bridge.
In fact, transport of materials around Coniston was quite well organised, with many roads in a fair state for the times.
There was also much traffic on the lake.
The iron forge at Coniston was quite an important affair.
It was built about 1675 for Sir Daniel Fleming, at a cost of £1 15, by Robert Parke who was a local contractor and carter.
Some of the buildings are still in use for residential purposes, and are known as the Forge Houses.
In his report Roger mentions the probable cost of a level to drain Levers Water as £16.
This must surely be a dramatic underestimate.
The tarn would have been about 50ft. in depth at that time with the bottom around the 1,300 ft. contour.
For a drainage level to come in at this depth would have required some 600 ft. of tunnelling and of course, since the art of blasting was not yet introduced, it would have been a protracted and costly operation.
It was thought that "if the certaine or standing water had been drained, that all the 7 works would conic into one, and that then it would be the best worke that ever was in these parts." 
The visitor will see that much work has indeed been done at the south eastern side of Levers Water.
The numerous fissures there, which came to be known as the Back Strings, represent these early excavations upon the vein outcrops, though they have been modified and deepened over the years.
They have false floors, so beware, it is very dangerous to climb down into them!
The longest of these, Simon's Nick,(see Fig. 5) is along the Paddy End Vein and shows  as a conspicuous cleft or scar in the cliff.
It has an unusual legend attached to it.
Simon, a miner of long ago, was not doing too well at his task…of copper there was very little.
One day however, probably as a result of something he had wished, he came face to face with the Devil, none other.
He, being fully aware of Simon's financial predicament of course, made him an offer which he did not refuse.
In return for guidance to riches in copper, Simon would upon his death part with his soul to the terrible one…it was however, to be a very secret pact.
No-one else was to know.
Simon did well after that but made a pretence of simple good luck to anyone who questioned his apparent good fortune.
However, his new found wealth was also his undoing for he began to think too much and there came a night when, awash to the hack teeth, he boasted of his unholy aide.
Retribution soon followed, possibly by rock fall and it is said that Simon's bones still lie a'mouldering it, the depths — no-one, you see, had the courage to go down into his mine and search for him.
Just a story of course, yet, could it be that long long ago something happened up there; something which gave rise +, o such a legend?
On the 25th May 1686 (two years after Roger's report) one John Blackwall wrote from Patterdale to inform Sir Daniel Fleming that he had studied the report, that he had examined the ground at Coniston, and that he was prepared, with a company, to open the mines "if terms can be agreed upon." 
On the 1st of January"in that year Sir Daniel had also had a letter from a Robert Tolson about the leasing of his copper mines.
Tolson was most urgent in his request for details on Royalties and likely conditions of lease, promising none-the-less to make a start the next summer.
There is no evidence that anything was done.
Although such overtures to work the mines were directed at the Lord of the Manor, really at this time the landowner was not it, a proper legal position to let out the veins on his land where these Carried the Royal Minerals, gold and silver.
Both of these are frequently mixed or compounded with other minerals such as copper or lead and so a virtual monopoly was held by the old Mines Royal Company, and its permission was needed.
Yet although the old company was largely moribund its legal powers were still extant and this had resulted in a decline in milling since the Civil War, here and elsewhere, for it was plainly an obstacle to private enterprise.
Taking advantage of the disordered and uncertain state of things it is not surprising that some mineral "owners" felt they ought to have reward for the working of minerals on their land, and there is little doubt that legal issues could and did arise where such "illegal" mining was detected.
However, to remove this cause of dispute the year 1688 saw William & Mary", by Royal Mines Act, repeal the old statutes, declaring that NO MINE of copper, tin, iron or lead would thereafter be adjudged a Royal Mine — even though gold or silver could be extracted from the ore.
Later, a first claim became available to the Crown, at a pre-determined rate per ton of ore produced…for copper this was £16.
In default of this being taken up, however, it became lawful for the mineral or metal to be disposed of as convenient.
It is unlikely that this Royal prerogative was often exercised.
Mines which were primarily of gold or silver were in a different category entirely, however.
Following the Act of 1688, the first developments took place at Tilberthwaite.
Much of the territory above Tilberthwaite Gill lies within the Royalty of Muncaster and was owned then by Sir William Pennington of Muncaster Castle, Baronet.
It so happens that for some distance the Gill itself forms the boundary between that estate and the Manor of Coniston, although it is possible that the boundary between the two manors was rather ill-defined at that time.
It was about the time of the William & Mary declaration that a group, predominately Quaker, and motivated by one Dr. Edward Wright "Physician at the Sign of the Ship neare the Monument in London" , became interested in mining and smelting.
Their association became known as the Royal Mines Copper (as distinct from the old Company or Society of Mines Royal).
Wright acted as Chairman with two principals, John Haddon and Samuel Davis, and these three were probably the founder members.
The numerous shareholders included Thos.
Cooper, Peter Delannoy, Richard Mathews, Capt. William Thompson and William Monson.
They appear to have acquired mining rights from Muncaster in that area around Tilberthwaite.
Preceding them on this sett however was Richard Patrickson of Calder Abbey and Thomas Anison, Esquires.
The former was first cousin to Sir Daniel Fleming's wife, and in a letter of 10th August 1691 he proposed to lease "ye Copper Workes att Coniston, or elsewhere in yr libertyes." 
The bearer of the missive had been instructed upon the terms to be made and according to Patrickson other persons would be willing to join the venture.
He obviously desired an immediate reply but nothing has come to light to suggest that there was one, favourable or otherwise.
As it transpired though, he was to find the lease of the le Fleming mines unavailable.
Patrickson had certainly been mining at Tilberthwaite on a lease from Sir William Pennington the date of which is obscure.
The William and Mary declaration being 1688, it suggests that such a lease might have run from that date, but it could have been earlier, in which case such an arrangement would have been almost certainly ultra vires.
In fact Patrickson, under such circumstances, could have found himself at variance with the old Company of Mines Royal which still had the powers vested in it and doubtless to his  mortification be forced to give up his work or pay a Royalty — not however, to Muncaster estates.
A. Raistrick (in Two Centuries of Industrial Welfare) considers that the period of the Royal Mines Copper — forerunner of the famed London Lead Co. — was from 1692 to 1704, but the actual conception must have been earlier than this, as the following shows.
A search of the Pennington Papers brought to light a declaration of sale of equipment & buildings at the mines above Tilberthwaite (on Muncaster territory) which had formerly belonged to Patrickson & Co.
This is dated 1690.
These items had been acquired by the Quaker group and were being sold to Sir William.
In addition they were selling their works in the Greenburn Valley to the north, which they themselves had erected.
But how much work was done, how much, if any, ore was obtained and how long the Quakers or Patrickson had been at work we may never discover.
Parts of the declaration of sale are given here.
They conclude by declaring that they are the owners of the property and have full powers and right to bargain and sell the same, setting their "hands & seals" on the 28th day of February 1690, and witnessed by Knipe, Enoch Floyd and Isaac Ashley, the latter two being quakers and shareholders.
From the document we learn that not only were pumps installed to drain the mines but a water-powered battery of stamps had been erected at Tilberthwaite.
Investigation by the writer revealed a likely site for this machine on the western bank of Muckle Gill, just above the ford (shown on the O.S. map) about 40 yds. upstream from the gill head, and by the side of the workings on what we now call Benson's Lode.
The equipment might possibly have been reconstructed pre-Civil War relics.
Woodwork or course, could not have survived this long, but certain iron castings might.
There is no evidence to indicate that the old Mines Royal ever did any more work hereabouts following  the War.
John Blackwall now reappears, five years after first expressing his interest in working Sir Daniel's mines.
He entered into an understanding with Sir Daniel's brother Roger.
This was ratified in an agreement of 20 Feb. 1691 wherein every pound of money in profit was to be shared as indicated in the table below:
No wonder Roger was scathing about the visitors, here they were, two parties of them, refusing to talk to him and vying to persuade Blackwall into some sort of agreement with them or even possibly to part with whatever rights he had.
Likely they were unaware of the contract between Roger, Blackwall and the others.
At any rate he probably had nothing to worry about.
Blackwall was only a miner but not likely a fool — few miners are.
It seems that there was some activity in the fells for in an "accompt" dated 10 August 1691 Roger Fleming wrote down what he had paid John BlackwaIl and others as partners; himself having a sixth part of"ye mynes in Coniston Ffells…
"
Viz. 
A note stated that Roger was a partner having a sixth and a "two thirtieth part" of mining works at Coniston since July 1692.
Yet figures for 1692 show that Roger paid varying sums as his share in the venture:
Now we come across another indenture, this time dated 20 May 1692.
Again it is between Roger Fleming, John Blackwall, Anthony Blackwall (now described as a stocking weaver) from Litton in Derby, Penelope Wright and Roberta Maria Anna Wright both of Longston in Derby, and Daniel Morley (now seen as an Iron  Master) of Ashbourne also in Derbyshire.
The lease was to run for 21 years yielding a Royalty of one ninth in the first three years; an eighth during the next three, and a seventh part or dish for the remainder of the term.
This Royalty, of course, went to the Lord of the Manor — Sir Daniel Fleming.
Associated with this new variation were the names Mulgrave, Tobias Cramar of Derby, Rith Young, John Borwick, Rob't.
Holme, Roper (the miner living at Coniston), Thomas Poshall or Boshall of Staffs., John Allam and Mr. Whinforth.
For 1693 there was a lay of £140 of which Roger paid sums totalling £25: 10s.: 9d.
In 1694 he paid to Rith Young £34: 0s.: 4d., and to John Allam 11 and to Mr. Whinforth for "powder" £2: 5s.: 9d. — this "powder" must surely be gunpowder, and if so, is the first reference to the use of explosives at the Coniston mines, heralding the first departure from the age-old, and honourable, methods of winning ore and breaking rock.
Gunpowder is said to have been in use in certain Continental mines early in the 17th Century.
A paper was contributed to the Royal Society on the art of blasting but all evidence points to its introduction in this country at the Ecton Copper Mines in Stafiordshire in 1670.
From the material available for the year 1695 two amounts of money only are given.
£53: 155.: 4d. was paid to Rith Young and a figure unaccompanied by any instruction or advice simply reads £165: 4s.: 1d.
A separate account of Roger's is headed "Money and other things had of me." 
It continues:
And there is a further payment from Roger, on the 27 June, of £2: 10s.: 0d. for the same purpose.
For this trial at Kellett, nr.
Kendal, Roger handed out two other sums…
July 1693: £5, and on October"1693: £2: 10s.: 0d.
A great list of Greenburn and Tilberthwaite ore weighings has come to light from this period, and runs from 13 June 1697 to 22 September 1697.
The amounts range from a mere 56 lb. up to 88 cwt. and totals 48 tons 5 cwt.
Alas, it does not indicate if these are in the form of concentrates ready for market, or whether they are run-of-mine stuff or hand picked cobbed material.
Nor does the document tell us who exactly was at work there.
The end of the 17th Century therefore, found activity on both manors, but like any work in the preceding years, it was clearly only on a small scale.
There was, as we have seen, much interest in the copper veins, and not without surprise we find this continued into the 1700's.
Scarcely worth mentioning at this stage is a rather pointless and uninformative letter sent to Sir Daniel Fleming by Will Kirkland on the 22 May 1692.
Will signs himself off as "ye Miner." 
The Eighteenth Century
It was Sir William Fleming, Sir Daniel's son,(Sir Daniel having died in 1701) who drew up a lease during 1703 reserving one-seventh as Royalty and requiring at least four able workmen to be employed for a minimum of six months in every year.
There is no evidence of a taker however, and work may never have started under it.
Subsequently Daniel Morley, a partner mentioned in an a agreement made in the late 1600's with Roger Fleming, wrote to Roger the letter reproduced below:
Morley's missive concerns clearly the sale of ore from the Fleming Manor, though the sentence "…we shall doo something at the Mynes." 
suggests a period of inoperation.
A chapman was a dealer or buyer.
John Doe was to make satisfaction for all damages any person or persons"…
Shall Sustaine in their Grass Hay or Corn through Manniagment of ye sd Works…
"
Clearly Sir William had in mind the remarkable litigation, almost a century previously, between Sir Daniel Fleming's agricultural and mining tenants.
Did John Doe do much up at the Tilberthwaite Mines?
Probably very little, if anything, for four years later on 20 September 1717, Nehemial Champion of Bristol, and James Gorton —; a miner —; of "Sorrow" at Gunnerside in Swaledale appended their signatures to a lease of these mines.
Almost certainly becoming part of the structure of the Bristol Brass & Copper Company (1705) the lease was for Tilberthwaite together with all the engines and instruments and "…all of the dressings or huddles of oar…" paying a duty on the ore of 14s. per "Tunn" and for lead 10s. a "Tunn" .
It was stipulated that there was to be 23 hundred pounds to the "Tunn" and five score and twelve pounds to the hundred… "the bank to be made clear of ore Twice every year at least a week before ye 29th Sept and ye 1st day of May…" 
There is no trace of a lease for the adjacent Coniston Manor at this period though one would have expected the Champions to have taken this "sett" if it had been available.
For how long they operated in the Coniston Fells is not known.
Certainly they had left Tilberthwaite by 1730.
During 1714 the Backbarrow Iron Company shipped 20 tons of copper ore to Chepstow, via Penny Bridge, at 16s. per ton through their agent Samuel Milner"…the same being charged to the furnace amongst the Freight of Pigs (iron ingots)…
"
There is no telling though, from where they obtained the copper.
They might easily have bought it.
There certainly were Adventurers (i.e. mine operators) on the Coniston Manor at this time.
This is proved by a letter from one Mr. Wildhagen to Sir William le Fleming and dated the 19 October 1721: "hellip; your honr know it is impossible for the men to work att your Fells of Conistone in the winter season for long as their houses are unbuilt, they haveing so far to come and go to thir lodgings…
"
He informs Fleming that he had had to put them to work elsewhere and hopes that it will not be thought strange that the men are taken away.
On the 2nd of the following month Sir William also received a letter from William Millford who claimed that he had met  "trouble" at the Pennington (Muncaster) Lease.
He had been abroad, and things had been too much for his younger brother, he having been deserted by his partners.
He pointed our,"…
Pr (partner) John Shaw is resolved to proceed along with a Mr. Wildhagen…
"
They had, it appears, expended upwards of £100 to that date and Millford asked for a new lease upon Fleming Royalties in Shaw's and Wildhagen's names.
Apparently money was owed in Royalties for earlier operations.
Millford describes Shaw as a "moneyed man" and able to clear small remaining debts.
Although the name Shaw has not arisen before this date, from here onwards it was never to be far from the Lakeland milling scene.
A few days later a local man, George Fleming, wrote to Sir William to tell him that Mr. Millford had quitted all his pretensions in the le Fleming mines at Coniston to John Shaw, and that the next day Millford left the country!
In the meantime Sir Joseph Pennington, aggrieved perhaps that his mines were not yielding income to his estate, issued a grand proclamation on 21 February 1730 offering his copper and lead mines and works at Tilberthwaite and Langdale (including Greenhurn) for a term of 21 years maximum to any substantial persons allowing a duty of 14s. per "Tunn" for copper and 10s. for lead, reckoning"…
Twenty hundred pounds Weight to the Tunn And ffive Score & Twelve pounds to the Hundred…"
An iron mine too was offered: "…an Iron-ore worke open in Langdale Afforsaid, To be leasd (leased) as above upon Reasonable Terms, & Lyes Comodious to Haikett fforge…," 
We usually refer to this nowadays as Hackett Forge.
The iron mine could have been any one of several in this region there are a number of veins or strings of haematite which have been tried, as well as some quite extensive deposits.
Some information is given about these iron deposits in Postlethwaite's Mines and Mining in the Lake District page 127.
Quoting Robinson (1709) he says that the iron produced at the forge "is made, not much inferior to that of Dantzic" .
The proclamation may not have had the effect which was desired for the next lease to come to light is 17 years later, between Sir John Pennington bart., and Thomas Gorsuch of London, described as a goldsmith.
This was dated 11 June 1747 and was for Tilberthwaite, with a requirement that Sir John would also have a key of the mine storehouse, with free access.
The Royalty was fixed at one-tenth part payable"…when as soon as 20 Tunns of Oare shall he gott…
",
It is interesting to note that the Royal metal gold was included, as well as copper, lead, tin, "and all oares." 
The proviso of the key must have raised a few eyebrows.
The following year, on the 29th June, agreement was made  between Baronet William le Fleming, of Whittington, and one John Gorsuch of London, described as a gentleman.
This was a 51 year lease to mine gold, silver, copper, lead, tin, iron and all other minerals in veins, beds or pipes on Sir William's Manor of Coniston…coal, slate and stone excepted.
It allowed John Gorsuch six months to begin to make search and a whole year from the time of commencing the said search to "…have use and employ all the ore metals or minerals he or they shall find during the said year for himself…" but it was providing that efforts, trials, and searches were diligently made, employing "four sufficient and skilled workmen thereat…" 
Gorsucli gas empowered to "Break Ground Blast Work Dig and Smelt…to build and erect coves and huts…," for the purposes of work and workers' accommodation.
He was bound in the sum of £100 and allowed 24 months, from the time of starting, at the end of which all ore lying upon the ground was to be prepared for market, paying duty of one-twelfth part or "Dish" of all the merchantable ore.
It does seem though, that nothing came of these leases, and during 1749 upon request by Sir William Fleming, one John Lawson (a Quaker) sent up Joseph Vipone to see the mines at Coniston and for this Lawson paid him 12s. plus 4s. for a horse for four days.
The following year Lawson requested reimbursement of this sum from Sir William, claiming that it had been paid from his own pocket!
Likely, over the next few years, there was this continued interest in the mines with nothing ever starting off.
The most important period of the 18th century was now at hand however.
Charles Roe, a wealthy silk industrialist born in Castleton, Derbyshire, in 1715, formed the Macclesfield Copper Company in 1758.
Roe obtained Mineral Rights from Sir William Fleming on 13 September 1756.
Together with Dr. Rowland Atkinson, also from Macclesfield, they agreed to a Royalty of one-twelfth; the lease to run for 21 years.
The first half-year was to he duty free and clear of all taxes "impositions and assessment whatsoever which may be imposed by act of Parliament or otherwise howsoever…" 
When Roe took over at Coniston he inherited the old eighteenth century workings which had been taken down on the Bonsor Vein, in one place, at least, as deep as the old hand chiselled "stollen" Cobbler's Level.
Over the years his workings were taken well down below this horizon, raising ore from two shafts, Bonsor East and Bonsor West.
At the start he almost certainly took out the floor of Cobbler's Level, using gunpowder, to make some ore at once available.
The "old men" may have also left patches of unworked ground which could now readily be worked with explosives.
As the workings deepened, up-to-date pumps were installed, and part of his Fast   Shaft rising-main can be seen in the floor of the Deep Level at its intersection with the Bonsor Vein.
W.H. Chaloner writes that during eight years between '58 & '67 a total of 904 tons of ore were made ready for smelting; Sir Michael le Fleming, the new Lord, receiving dues amounting to £376: 15s.: 0d. it is not known where the main ore dressing floor was located but it was probably on the site of the 19th century floors — near the present youth hostel.
Nevertheless, some preliminary cobbing could well have been done as the ore was brought out to grass.
Fig. 9 attempts to reconstruct the site at the Bonsor East Shaft.
The ore was taken down to the lake, boated down to Nibthwaite, carted from thence to Penny Bridge or Greenodd,(the latter was quite a busy small port) from where it was shipped to the Macclesfield Co's. smelters at Liverpool.
Much of Roe's earlier activity was at the Alderley Edge copper workings where, reports Henry Holland in his General View of the Agriculture of Cheshire, not less than 40 or 50 men were kept constantly   employed.
The Macclesfield firm had also, since 1763, been working on Parys Mountain, Anglesey, and during 1768 his men discovered a most remarkable copper deposit.
This was to provide handsome dividends for the company, but depression for the copper industry as a whole.
Roe took his men from Alderley Edge and concentrated the company's efforts at the new ore-body and it is possible that interest in the Coniston venture waned to some extent.
Meanwhile, during October of 1756, Anthony Tissington of Alfreton in Derbyshire, set men to work at Coniston on the westerly edge of the sett, that part which became known as Paddies' End.
Roe and Co. were working the eastern side.
Tissington's workmen were installed in the Forge Houses as reasonable boarding was not available.
The following spring the company obtained two houses for the men.
Tissington's agent in these parts was Robert Barker, then living at Penny Bridge.
The Barker family had for many years been involved in mining, with for example, the Champions in their mines in Ireland.
It is riot unlikely that Robert was connected with this family.
Tissington however, did not hold on to his lease for very long.
Barker let it be known that his (Tissington's) company sold out well before 1760, passing all Coniston accounts with his company to Mr. Hall, who was Roe's man-on-the-spot, getting a receipt from   the same, in full, free of all demands, for thirteen twenty-fourths belonging to Anthony Tissington.
Tissington also gave a number of other items to Roe including the tools of the mine, valued at about £40, "at the time of the sale and not mentioned in the bargain…" 
Anthony's motive for surrendering his interests on the Fleming Lordship is not fully clear.
It may have simply been an offer by Roe which he couldn't afford to ignore.
On the other hand Tissington & Co. (or the Arrad Company) were not being very successful in their business activities.
In 1759 he was operating under a lease from Geo.
Gibson at Arrad Foot nr.
Ulverston searching for whatever ores he could find.
In that region he would have found none.
Permission was given to build a quay and a warehouse at Greenodd.
(See Fig 11.)
He also held mining rights in the Hawkshead, and Egton-cum-Newland region, but probably wasted money in fruitless searches over there.
Also, by an indenture of 12th September 1759, he acquired mining rights at Tilberthwaite from Sir John Pennington.
This was intended to run for a term of 15 years, yielding a Royalty of one-twelfth during the first two years, and a tenth part thereafter,"…sufficiently washed cleansed and made merchanteable…
"
He was expected to employ six able well-experienced and sufficient miners for nine months in each year, and as soon as "Tenn Tunns" be raised, to employ ten able well-experienced workmen to dress the ore.
The lease required a proportion of one-twelfth of "waste ore" to be made available at the end of every three years and made saleable — failure to do so resulting in forfeiture of all such material.
Waste ore is a somewhat obscure term and in this context might refer to the residual sand and gravel, which did have a market of sorts.
The lease  was signed by Tissington and Robert Barker.
On the 20th March 1757, two years prior to Tissington getting rights to Tilberthwaite, a spirited party of adventurers had made an agreement with Sir John Pennington.
The area demised was Upper Langdale and Tilberthwarte, with Sir John reserving one-twelfth of the prepared ore as his Royalty, and this was in addition to his percentage of the profits, for he became a partner in the venture upon his own insistence!
Thomas Gunson, of Middlesex, a glass seller, was to he the treasurer or receiver — advancing monies from time to time to carry on the works arid to pay miners or other workmen.
With him were Richard Reynolds of Middlesex, a butcher; William Frears, a pawn-broker; James Newton and Richard Gunson, gentlemen; Edward Frears of Ravenglass, a yeoman; and George Maidwell.
On the 28th of the same month the list was altered in a new agreement, with Richard Windle joining the "team" .
In this Windle and Maidwell are described as glass sellers, whilst Thomas Gunson has become a pawnbroker.
The final articles of agreement drawn up on the 17th April allowed the lease for a term of 21 years.
All were to be at equal expense for the working of the mine.
Each partner was to bring in £50 per share; they were to meet once a month at least, with the accounts made up and settled every three months.
Three or more miners were to he supplied and paid "from time to time" for the first three months but after this duration six able bodied miners were to he provided.
 "and to pay them." 
All had agreed that one Christopher E. Chryselius would be employed in the workings, and he was to he paid one guinea a week — no mean wage.
It appears that his was an on-site managerial position, and it is quite intriguing to note in Gunson's first account the details of his recruitment.
Christopher was probably a master-miner from the Oberharz mining region within the administrative influence of Hannover.
 "Count Munichhausen" who "supplied" him was probably the Premierminister des Kurfurstentums Hannover, Adolph Freiherr von Munchhausen (1698–1770)(not the "Lugendbaron" Hieronymus Freiherr von Munchhausen notorious for the mendacity of his tales of his military exploits!).
These outgoings were balanced as follows.
This last total is seen not to be correct.
Furthermore only a few days later, 20th July 1757, a new lease was made out to Thomas Gunson the treasurer, all of the others (including a new name, that of George Frears) having sold out to him for, and in consideration of the princely sum of five shillings!
What did Gunson do with his new found prize?
Probably very little, for we have already seen that Anthony Tissington took Tilberthwaite mining rights in 1759.
It is also worth speculating on the fate of what must have been a nonplussed Christopher Chryselius, Sir John Pennington must have been thoroughly annoyed at the outcome, too.
How much work, if any, Tissington did under his lease we will probably never discover.
In 1762 the Langdale bailiff for Lord Muncaster was paid on two small accounts, 3s. for 6 journeys to the copper mines, and 1s. for each of 3 visits to the mines.
Meanwhile Roe's Macclesfield Company's activities continued at Coniston and output figures in John Moore's estate book are provided below, Moore was acting as steward to Sir Michael le Fleming and this was a position of great trust.
Three years after the death of the third baronet he was sworn well and truly to execute and perform the will of Sir William.
The name of Roe's agent, Mr. Hall, appears regularly against entries:
This makes a grand total of 1,031 tons 14 cwts. for those first 12 years operation.
Under the heading "Sulphur Ore" , probably iron pyrites, there is over the period 1763–1769 the weighings of nine packets amounting to 88 tons 15 cwts.
Royalty dues on all these figures were worked out as follows:
A rent terrier for 1760–66 reveals that Atkinson & Hall together paid a total of £172 in rent.
During the same period a Mr. Bowes & Co. paid £75 in 1762 and £129 in 1766, although there is no indication who Bowes, in fact, was.
Royalty paid by Atkinson & Hall during the years 1759–66 amounted to £403: 15s.
: Od.
A further list of ores weighed, by order of John Moore, is headed"Mr Rigg's last acct.
Copper Ore weighed in 1769."
It shows a total of 32 tons 2 cwts. of ore, probably concentrates, and 8 tons 1 cwts. of "Slime Ore" — probably very finely divided ore.
Who this Rigg was, unfortunately we have no means of knowing.
He might well have been working a small place on his own behalf.
Dr. Rowland Atkinson, who was Charles Roe's brother-in-law, probably paid frequent visits to Coniston and may have rented a house for these locally.
Hall would have been the resident manager.
Atkinson had other responsibilities — he was Head Master of Macclesfield Grammar School until his death in 1773 at the age of 61.
The Macclesfield partners alas, were not experiencing smooth running at Coniston.
The following letter, transcribed in full, leaves us perplexed over the question of who precisely Dixon was.
Was he perhaps, an applicant for the Coniston lease earlier, only to find to his mortification that Roe had effected a fait accompli?
Was he attempting to force them to a stoppage in the hopes of taking over their lease?
We just do not know.
The Parish Registers provide no obvious clue.
Surely he must have realised that he was pitting himself against a concern of considerable strength.
Charles Roe is in no doubt concerning his feelings in the matter.
The letter reads:
The Offer to placate Dixon with such a large sum of money does suggest that be possessed a legitimate grievance.
There is no evidence that Roe's men worked on the westerly, Paddy End, workings which they had acquired from Tissington.
Indeed their efforts were, it is believed, concentrated on the Bonsor Vein (at the foot of Red Dell) and this mine became known as the Coniston Mine.
The writer feels that no "Expensive Sough" was, in fact, driven.
It has been mentioned earlier however, that with gunpowder, Roe modified the old 17th century hand chiselled level which became known as Cobbler's Level.
The letter continues:
Doubtless the reader will ponder over whether some sort of settlement was reached with Dixon, or if in fact he was indeed trounced.
It is possible that because of the more easily won ore from the Anglesey mine a certain amount of interest became lacking in the Coniston Workings.
On the other hand, Dr. Rowland Atkinson had died in 1773, and Roe no longer had his old partner to look after matters there.
At any rate by 1775 work seems to have been discontinued, and the following letter to Moore, created the impression that the mines were once again on the market.
However, on 21st January 1778 Charles Roe once more took a lease of "Mines & Veins of lead ore and copper ore whatsoever within the manor of Coniston." 
The term was for 26 years paying a one-twelfth to the Lord, save for the first six months when no claim would be made.
Permission was given for"making of such engine or Engine Buildings or Buildings for the better & more effectual discovery, working and conveying on of such mines and veins…
"
His earlier lease had been due to expire during the previous year.
Isaac Tubman observing, or hearing, that the mines were unwrought, must have assumed them available.
Towards the end of 1782 Gibson, the new estate manager for Sir Michael le Fleming, wrote to his master informing that a new steward had been appointed at the Coniston Mines on the 10th of November.
He was, Gibson informed, coming to have a look "at a quarry of slate with a view to farming that part of the Royalty." 
Clearly the mines were once again working, and a year later, Gibson wrote again to Sir Michael in London, advising that there were 17 or 18 men constantly at work and that they were getting a good quantity of ore…about 15 tons were then ready for weighing.
There was also "…a considerable quantity of small ore which was got at the beginning of the work and cannot be weighed until stamped or broken by an Engine and washed for which purpose they are going to erect one to go be water with all speed and were disstressed for some sycamore wood for the water wheel." 
Gibson sold them four trees on the estate "…all of poor value…" part at 1s. a foot and partly at 1s. 6d.
The miners also wanted two oak trees and were willing to pay 2s. a foot.
After having Sir Michael's approval Gibson had an oak felled, which was to be used for the engine, amounting to 16 ft. of timber at 2s.
The Forge Houses at that time were taken by John Ashburner, of Coniston, to operate as a cotton mill; this was during November 1787 at which date they were still on lease to Roe & Co.
Charles Roe died in May 1781 aged 67.
The sixth son of the Rev. Thomas Roe, 26 years the vicar of Castleton in Derbyshire, Charles was interred in the chancel there.
Details on his memorial in Christ Church, Macclesfield, describes him as "A Gentleman with a slender Portion on his Entrance in to Business." 
A button and twist manufacturer, his epitaph continues, he supported many thousands of families, overcoming obstacles of "Envy and Malevolence threw in his way." 
He was esteemed to excel in the art of mining, and at his own expense built the beautiful church which was completed in the amazingly short space of seven  months.
Alas, a victim of today's trends, the building is to become flats.
Upon his death Charles's eldest son assumed responsibility, and anxious evidently to enlarge the sphere of the firm's activities he took an "option" or "take-note" from the Honourable John Pennington Bart., Lord Muncaster, which issued liberty to"…search for and get lead and Copper Ores & any other ores within the Manor of Little Langdale & Tilberthwaite (save and except in certain parcel of Ground under a lease to Wilson & which Ground & Premises are to be reserved for the sole use & purpose of the said Wilson…
(If) At any time within a year the said Wm Roe by writing in his own band signified that he intended to have a 21 year lease from the date hereof "paying one-fifteenth part of the 1st 7 years and one-twelfth for the remaining 14 years such lease will be executed." 
A clause inserted by Lord Muncaster reserved for himself the right "at any time during the said 21 yrs" , if he so wished, to become a "partner of ¼ in the concern" by paying a "full part of the expenses from the commencement thereof of working the same…" 
After studying the option, or take-note, Roe replied on the 19th July, from Liverpool, pointing out that only the moderate Royalty and the advanced price of copper (this was around £80 per ton for metal) could have reconciled him to such an "unprecedented manner of attaining a Mineral lease." 
The "sett" referred to as being held by Wilson might have been what we now know as the Tilberthwaite Mine; which had been an attractive prospect from the days of the Elizabethan miners and continued to be investigated on and off right up to the 1930's.
Wherever it was, Roe apparently considered it an obstacle to his plans, and he indicated his intention of writing to Wilson offering that man a share, in consideration of relinquishing his rights and transferring these to the Macclesfield company.
Although there appears no evidence that Roe did do any work under this option, they were certainly deepening their workings in the Coniston Mine, on the Bonsor Vein.
On the first of February 1792 there was"…
Copper Ore Wayght at Coniston Mines Belonging to Sir Michael le Fleming Bart.
the same — 283 (tons) 6 houndrd (cwt)…
"
But three years later on 27 July 1795 the new head of the Macclesfield company, Abraham Mills, wrote to the new agent Thomas Harrison of Kendal, advising him, alas, that "…the Coniston Mine has for some time been so unproductive that it has been determined to discontinue the working…" 
They abandoned the mine; released the rented Forge Houses along with the mineral lease, and offered the first refusal of Dixon Ground Estate to Sir Michael at £450.
How they acquired this estate is not explained.
During the period of their operations on le Fleming ground, i.e. from 1758 to 1795, those figures which have come to light suggest a total tonnnage of about 1,454, but this would really be stuff dressed and ready for smelting — concentrate or hand picked best.
Of course it means that many times that tonnage of run-of-mine material was raised and processed.
From then onwards, indeed for a good many years, nothing more appears to have been done on the Coniston Manor.
The Roe workings had, in the Deep Mine, been taken down to a depth of about 372 ft. from surface though the upper parts were of course, much older.
The wooden water-wheel was stilled and the pump stopped.
The old mine filled with water and maintained a level at the  old hand chiselled "stollen" , Cobblers Level, which was approx. 180 ft. from the bottom.
We might bc excused for considering that as far as the 18th century was concerned, mining in the Coniston Fells had come to a standstill, and indeed it might have, but negotiations were still being carried out.
May 1799 found Sir John Pennington offering a 20 year lease to George Wilson and William Mitchell of Coniston, both miners.
An earlier draft had been to George and Rowland Wilson but the latter's name does not appear on the final copy.
The area premised was Little Langdale and Tilberthwaite, and this would include the Greenburn valley.
The lessees were entitled to search for copper, lead, iron ore and iron stone, or mine such as had already been discovered, with liberty for "…ingress egress & regress…" 
Sir John reserved the right to become a partner at the end of the first three years term for a quarter share of all mines and ores, then opened, got, or sold,…or…at the end of six years also to commence as a partner for one quarter share…or…at the end of nine years to commence as a partner for the same…or…at the end of 12 years the same, and at 15 years ditto.
Providing, that is, that he signified his intentions of commencing his partnership one month before the commencement of any of the sub-terms, and beforehand to pay a full one-quarter share of the cost of digging and winning and carrying on the said works.
A proviso stipulated though, that should the working produce a profit (nett) of £10,000 a year, then be could at the beginning of any of the sub-terms enter as a partner and receive one-third of the nett profit instead of the aforesaid one-quarter; and to pay a third of the expenses.
Royalty was to be one-twelfth and this to be paid at the end of every half-year: the said ore to be weighed up every three months and the banks to be cleared at the end of every such three months after weighing up.
Six days notice was required of the time and place of the weighing in order that the Lord's agent could attend.
The weight was to be entered into a book together with a note of sale of the same.
There is no clear evidence that the Wilson-Mitchell partnership survived for long.
Although it cannot be proved, there is a strong likelihood that they were working at the old Tilberthwaite Mine in the early part of the next century…someone was, as we shall see late.
The Macclesfield company's decision to close the Coniston Deep Mine might have been prompted by a patch of unpaying ground.
As events were to prove in subsequent years though, it was anything but exhausted.
Principles Of Employment, Mine Costing And Mining Technique
It will be easier to understand the most important period of Coniston mining — the 19th C — if first of all we look at the way the men were employed and the techniques they used.
Any employee at Coniston Mines during the 19th Century would fall into one of two distinct categories:(1) a dayworker, whose wages were generally based upon a rate of so much per day but which was variable depending upon the degree of skill required, yet at times might be calculated on a piece rate, or,(2) a miner engaged in winning ore from the stopes, tunnelling, raising, or shaft sinking through rock.
Pay-workers were occupied in a variety of tasks which included all the ore dressing, i.e. preparation of the ore until fit for market.
Most of the dressers were on a basic daily rate but some were paid on a measure of their work done.
Wallers, masons, builders and slaters; those engaged building and maintaining water races; surface carters, and labourers who might one day find themselves cutting grass for the mine horses and shovelling tailings or road repairing the next — all fitted into the day-worker class.
Certain other skilled surface jobs were also on the day-rate.
A blacksmith whose work involved much sharpening of jumpers (drill irons), could be paid at the rate of, say, so much per 20 dozen — otherwise at so much per day.
Likewise, a carpenter or joiner might be on a set day rate but who for a period might take on a separate contract to saw timber at a rate per 100 ft., the figure depending upon the hardness of the wood.
For all of these day-rate jobs a time book was kept and wages were reckoned up and paid at the end of the month.
Tutwork and tribute were the two systems under which most of the Underground workers were employed.
In both cases a bargain was struck between the mine captain or the agent (a manager), and a gang, pare, or company of miners.
At Coniston bargains were made privately on setting-day with the leading man — the taker of the gang.
He would generally be the most experienced man amongst  them, and would collect the payment for the work done, distributing the money amongst his partners in whatsoever proportion agreed previously.
An unskilled man taken on in such a partnership, might easily find himself with the smallest share on reckoning day, which was usually at the end of a two month term.
A stranger asking for employment at the mine would not, unless he was skilled in the mining trade, expect to be taken on in a partnership so readily, though a labour shortage might improve his chances.
it is more likely lie would have to take whatever work was going, as a day worker, and await his opportunity making friends and contacts.
Many miners apprenticed their young sons to the trade taking them underground at 15, 16 or 17 years of age and paying them their worth, or less.
Not unnaturally a young man thus taken on might grow up to be a shrewd and skilful miner, and perhaps at some future date form his own gang or pare.
Tutwork was done by measure or volume of ground extracted.
The mine captain might specify a tunnel to be driven 6 ft. high by 5 ft. wide and agree on a bargain of so much per unit of advance invariably the fathom (6 ft.).
Such is a tutwork on volume or measure.
Tutwork was also estimated on a tonnage basis, the miners being paid on a bargain according to the actual weight of material extracted, which might be either ore or stone.
This system was usually applied where the grade of ore was so poor as to preclude it being worked by the tribute system.
In stoping a vein by tutwork, unless the agreement was on a tonnage basis, the price was usually calculated at so much per square fathom of advance for its full width.
Thus: if a lode was 4 ft. 6 in. wide or thick, stoping for one fathom would mean 6 ft. x 6 ft.
X 4 ft. 6 in. block 162 cu. ft.
Where the vein was of considerable thickness it was quite usual to pay the men at so much per cubic fathom.
Tribute meant that the miners were paid upon the value of the ore extracted.
The gang, in effect, agreed to hand over to the mining company all of the ore they got and accept a certain proportion of its value.
If therefore, the tribute was agreed by bargain at ¾ or 15/ in the pound the men would have this amount paid to them for every pound value of whatever they produced.
However, as with the tutworker, from their gross income were deducted a number of items — the blacksmith's cost of sharpening drills and picks; a charge for raising or drawing the stuff up the shaft and tramming or waggoning it out to the dressing floors, and there, the cost of breaking up lumps into pieces about fist size.
There was sometimes a charge too, for dressing until their batch of ore was fit for market, and occasionally a sum for sampling and analysis to determine the worth of the batch.
The gang also had to purchase from the mine shop their tools, wooden halts and hilts; gunpowder, fuze, dynamite and caps — candles too.
They had to provide themselves with powder cans and  the loss of any of these items, including drilling jumpers, meant they had to replace them.
A mining bargain such as this might include the setting in of timbers though the mine might provide someone to do this work independently.
A further deduction was to the mine club which covered the miner and his family's medical expenses, and in the case of his death, if they were lucky…a coffin!
Of course it seems hard in our affluent times that the poor miner should have to suffer all of these deductions.
However, the leading man by his astuteness in obtaining the most beneficial terms for the conditions applying to the pitch he was hoping to take, could realise a goodly income for himself and the others.
Nevertheless if the vein deteriorated, then they stood to come out of their term (usually, but not always, two months), with scarcely enough money for food or even owing to the company.
Debts were carried on to the next account; there was certainly none of the easy attitude of the old 17th Century German masters who regularly wrote workers' debts off.
The men were allowed to draw a sum in advance, in anticipation of earnings subsistence.
If their gross earnings were less than their advance, and the inevitable deductions, then they were consequently in debt to the mine!
The following examples taken at random from accounts of the first half of the 19th Century show how the mine costs were arrived at and how the men were paid.
Heading each month's figures were the payments to the management.
Below is a tutwork wage account which was paid in October 1884.
There were no coins jingling in their pockets on that settling day!
They had had £10: 1s.: 0d. advanced to them but divided between the two men for the 2½ months labour that was scarcely a good wage…average perhaps.
Furthermore, they were in debt 5/5 though that was carried forward to their next account.
The following example is quite above average.
it is seen that if equally split each man would have had £13: 11s.: 3d. for his 3½ months of labour.
TRIBUTE BARGAINS
Really little tributing was done.
In any month in the 1840's and '50's there were rarely more than live contracts settled up and the figure was usually two or three and sometimes none at all.
The tutworker was able to rely upon some reward whereas with tributing it was much more of a gamble.
Obviously some men were quite prepared to rely upon their skill and the contract below represented dramatic earnings for Floyd and his partners…
It meant £9: 6s.: 11d. each per month: be sure they worked hard for their money.
The tributer was far from immune to ill-luck  however.
Take Benjamin Gribble for instance, on the settling day in March 1847 of a contract which had been running for 5 months:
Benjamin's next account is dated May 1847 and his pare was once again himself and two boys but this time for three months.
Their subsistence was £16: 5s.: 0d., but once again there was nothing at settling day indeed, a debt of £2: 5s.: 4d. was carried on.
Not until they had worked (this time 2 men one boy) another three months till August did they come out of debt having an advance of £19: 0s.: 0d. and having a balance due to them of £14: 3s.: 5d.
Reckoned up over the eleven months covered, this represented a take-home figure of £64: 3s.: 5d., but in what proportion this was distributed amongst them can only be guessed at.
The filling and landing of the mine kibbles, and waggoning the ore out of the mine to the dressing floors was regarded as tutwork.
Trucks or waggons might be filled with ore (or waste) mined above level, as well as the deep mined stuff.
During 1847 47,078 kibbles were raised and landed from below adit.
This figure (about 18,830 tons) does not include ore mined  above the ever lengthening Deep Adit Level, or the numerous other adits such as Fleming's, Taylor's, Grey Crag, Middle, Top, Gaunt's, or Kernal — the last five being at Paddies' End.
During the same period 1,888 tons 3 cwt. 3 qrs. were sent off to the smelters; but this does not include 4t. 4c.
Oq. of dressed ore from Tilberthwaite…at least it shows that very little was being done there.
The sequent figures (from December 1843) show the rates paid  
In a lighter vein — There was once a man who was at work kibble filling.
A man, it is said, who had seen better days, but whose humour and wit had not been impaired by his fallen fortunes.
One of the agents observing some fragments of rock clattering down the shaft and falling around him, warned, "take care or you will have your brains knocked out." 
The fellow continued his work replying coolly, "If I'd ever had any brains Captain, I shouldn't have been here now!" 
LANDING
Kibbles filled and raised up the shafts had to be landed and tipped into hoppers.
As the loaded kibble arrived at the landing platform the lander gripped a loose ring in the base of the bucket with a long hooked bar suspended from a chain.
The winchman was signalled to lower slightly whereupon the kibble pivoted over and discharged its contents into a chute feeding a hopper.
The kibble was rounded to assist this rolling action.
The arrangement on Deep Level at the Old Engine Shaft is suggested in the reconstruction Fig 14.
An inclined, self-opening and counterbalanced trapdoor closed after the kibble was pulled through and then formed part of the hopper feed chute.
In December 1843 we find…
In the same account period Thomas Wilson was paid for landing 587 kibbles at a similar rate; Thomas Townson landed 649 ditto, and John Jenkinson Jnr.
handled 1,367.
WAGGONING
It was the practice for mine trucks or waggons to be hauled by small pit horses, probably Galloways, from the hoppers out of the mine to the dressing floors.
Thus in December 1843 we see that…
In addition were…
Joseph Parker who waggoned 926 kibbles at 7/ per 100; likewise Thomas Duke & partner, two men, brought out 1,630 kibbles at a similar price.
James Bell waggoned out of Deep Level 1,625 @ 4½d., and from Paddy End and the Kernal Vein 730 at 3½id. per 100.
From Iiis gross of £39: 8s.: 5d. he suffered deductions of £2: 18s.: 4d. for 100 lbs.
of candles, and 10/ for the mine club.
The rate paid was dependent upon the ease and distance of waggoning, from the loading hoppers, to the nearest dressing floor.
In 1843 Deep Level was still being headed towards Paddy End workings.
When, at last, the deep adit came in below these workings, and connection was made with the deepening shafts, ore from that source was brought out in ever increasing amounts until the Paddy End Mill was closed down.
The underground haul then involved a distance of about 4,500 ft., and very little of it straight.
The rate for waggoning increased and in a few years up to about 11/ per 100 kibbles was paid for ore brought out to the Bonsor Mill.
Below ground but paid on a daily rate, that is to say, at so much per stem, the list of jobs below, were still regarded as tutwork.
DRESSING COST
Under this division came for years, the name of William Latham as Head Ore Dresser, whose salary was £6: 0s.: 0d. per month.
During April 1856, after a period when, it seems, no head dresser was overseeing, his son John took over at a rate of about £5: 4s.: 0d., which figure was apparently dependent upon the weather.
As the fortunes of the mine declined we discover him during 1877 paid as "John Latham and boys" with his account as low as £31 for a month; a far cry from the 1840's-1860's when the dressing staff of old men, women, boys and girls averaged 100 and their total wages ranged  from £142 to £241.
In July 1877 an experienced ore-dresser named Richard Woolcock took over his duties but in June the following year the system changed.
What little ore was mined began to be processed as required by available day workers.
Dressing is dealt with at greater length in a later chapter.
CARPENTERS, SMITHS & c .
William Werry, the Head Carpenter for many years, took home £6 per month less 1/ to the Club.
There were six or seven men under him having wages from about 2/6 to 3/4 a day.
In Jan. 1844 Robert Pearson and partner were paid the sum shown below for sawing wood:
Zachariah Jenkins, Head Smith, received 30/ a week.
Under him were Walker, Shaw, William and George Parke, Pepper, Bowness, Carter and Jenkins — all smiths on a rate from 1/6 to 3/4 a day.
During one month George Parke was paid 3/ per 10 doz. for "steeling" 21 doz. iron jumpers, i.e, fitting steel cutting edges to iron drills.
For sharpening ordinary iron jumpers the next month he was paid 3/ per 20 doz. for 117 doz.
Masons came under the same heading.
Joseph Braithwaite, for example:
SURFACE or DAY WORK
This included a number of payments to men and women for various services rendered but who were not in every case employees as such.
In some months there were employed up to 40 such persons but usually fewer.
These were working for a pay of from 9d. a day to 2/6.
In the list given below, are shown items and pay, selected for their interest over a good number of years.
CARRIAGE
This encompasses the costs of all cartage, both on and off the mine, of all materials other than the ore fit for market.
Carters were getting about 6/ a day, which would include their horse.
In this section John Barratt was paid for "hay for Carthorses £11: 2s.: 0d. for 18½ weeks @ 6/ per week" .
A regular item was the purchase of carrots, straw, oats etc. for the animals.
Large mounts of timber had to be handled on the property and it all had to be brought in from outside.
Gunpowder had to be collected from the various works in the Lake District and a carter had 12/ a ton for handling this dangerous material.
By the 1870's the entries had dwindled, or were missing altogether in some months.
Richard or Levi Pickles appeared to be doing most of the work.
However, some carting was included under SURFACE or DAY WORK.
EXPENSES ON ORES
Under this heading in the accounts are the costs of the transport of the dressed copper ore, from the mine to the quay on the lake side, and from there by boat to the copper house at Nibthwaite at the foot of the lake.
There the ore was stored until carted to the firm's copper yard on the Ulverston Canal where it was mixed, weighed and sampled, prior to shipping after purchase by the Smelter's Agent.
During June 1843, Thomas, William and Adam Barrow, Thomas Grigg, James Bell, John Speddy and the Adventurers' Team, carted a total of 606 tons 17 cwt. 3 qrs. @ 2/4 per ton down to the quay from where Benjamin Dixon and his assistants boated it down the lake at 10d. a ton.
From Nibthwaite to Ulverston it was carried for 4/6 per ton.
A number of men were employed on this task but in this month the tonnage was handled only by J. Lace, R. Sarginson and H.Swainson.
When the railway arrived at Coniston the concentrate and other materials, ie. sand and broken "spar" quartz, were taken to the much nearer new Copper Station at the rail-head for 1/6 per ton.
Carriage on the railway remained constant for 20 years or more at 413 per ton.
This department was for years managed by John Aldersley @  £6: 0s.: 0d. per month and Daniel Bowden at £5: 0s.: 0d.
There were expenses relating to the mixing, weighing and turning, sampling and ticketting, shown in the accounts, not to mention the dinners to celebrate the occasion, attended by mine agents, the department managers and the smelters agents.
Probably partners in the mine also attended these dinners.
When the railway came to Coniston and the ore was simply "shipped out" without ticketting, then this little event would have been discontinued.
The rent of the copper yard at Ulverston was 21 guineas a year.
MATERIALS
Following Expenses on Ores in the accounts comes Materials, which includes a wide range of goods bought from merchants and individuals, and used in the day-to-day running of the mine.
By using examples taken at random over a period of years the following list has been assembled:
The list, however, threatens to grow too long.
It does provide though, a view of the various materials needed; others will be mentioned later on in the text.
SUNDRY PAYMENTS
At intervals in the Costing Accounts is the above category which relates to outgoing expenses and not always connected with the running of the mine.
Some idea of the benefit bestowed upon the community can be judged from some of the inclusions:
A reference to a payment of £10, towards a Survey carried out by the Greenodd Canal Co., is of very great interest.
Clearly a canal from that small seaport village to the foot of Coniston Water would, in the earlier years at least, have been of considerable benefit to the mine and to other lake users.
Nothing, however, came of the project.
Just as well, perhaps, for the coming of the railway around Morecambe Bay, ended Greenodd Port's usefulness, and that of the Ulverston Canal; while the branch line to Coniston in the 1860's put paid to the lake traffic.
One other small item…
Gift to Coniston Brass Band £1: 0s.: 0d.
DEDUCT RECEIPTS
The Monthly Cost Accounts were usually brought to a close under this heading, being incomes from various sources.
Rents from the mine cottages brought in a monthly figure of from £7 to £19.
For some time Willm.
Cameron rented the house and mine shop for 14/ per month.
This was adjacent to Irish Row and is now collapsed.
The total of the incoming moneys under DEDUCT RECEIPTS was deducted from the grand total of the various costs of the mine, and the balance was considered to be the Cost of Working.
For the 1840's-50's this figure usually fell between £1,000 and £2,000 per month.
The profits are not easy to assess, in the absence of receipts for copper sales, but seem to have been an average of £1,248 per month in 1844 and £2,952 p.m. in 1846–7.
In the years prior to the shutdown on Nov. 1884 the costs ranged from £2,300 to £5,600 a year.
We can leave the account book at this point.
Figures are revealing but we also need to know what lies behind them.
MAKING A BARGAIN
The mine captains came up from the ranks, having been tributers and tutworkers themselves.
They were quite aware that in many cases the men were, in a friendly manner, constantly trying to outwit them, in order that their gain might be greater — at the expense, of course, of the mine.
The captains knew all the tricks though, and were constantly on the watch.
In the dark of the mine however, there were always opportunities.
The miners became geologists within their domains, noting alterations in the vein and the country-rock and studying forerunners of richness or poverty.
They knew, for example, that in the Coniston Mines where a fault ran into a vein there might be a bunch, or a general enrichment, particularly if two veins ran into each other .
Some men made a working tour of as many mines as they could, thus gaining experience in the differing conditions between districts and even neighbouring mines.
In order to strike the best possible bargain on setting-day the men might invent stories of difficulty and adverse conditions.
Naturally, some knowledge of the vein ahead would be invaluable and it was not unknown for a tiny probing tunnel to be driven ahead of a working  face just before a new bargain was to be made.
Of course, this would be kept hidden under waste material.
If it showed the vein improving it was important that the captain should be unaware of it.
The richer the vein was the less the tribute paid by the mine; the leaner the vein the greater the tribute.
It was to ensure that the men had a chance to make a fair average wage.
It follows then that if a poor vein on a good tribute suddenly improved then the men working it would stand to profit well, though they might expect to find that on the next setting-day, the rate would almost certainly be reduced in the mine's favour.
In certain mines the men were not allowed to earn more than a certain sum but there is no evidence of this invidious practice at Coniston.
A disadvantage of the tribute system was that each gang's ore had to be kept separately from the others until dressed and sampled.
This was not really convenient as space was tied-up on the dressing floors, whilst below ground it had to be handled so that it was not inadvertently intermixed with other material.
It has been mentioned that at Coniston most of the work by far was done under tutwork.
From the earliest times the spirits of the mine were recognised as one of the hazards of a dangerous job.
Miners listened for the tapping of the tiny hammers of the little wizened old men of the underworld — the "knockers." 
They were known to be present in all good mines — indeed their absence was not a good omen.
The knocking of their hammers on the rock could lead a man to good ground, but their knocking on wood foretold possible imminent disaster.
Certainly the men were only too ready to propitiate their rarely seen companions, leaving them scraps of food, and pieces of candle.
Few men dared whistle or swear in the workings, for the little people would not tolerate that and indeed the men were expected to behave themselves sensibly.
To scoff at or curse the little men was to court disaster, for they made formidable enemies.
The early miners at Keswick and Coniston shared a mutual respect for the ungodly denizens; most incidents in the dark of the underground workings were attributed to one form or other of "Bergeist" — of which there were six different types.
What better place than their gloomy underworld could there be for such beliefs?
Even the oil lamps, candles, or spills of the miners would have only accentuated the shadows, making crevices even darker and threatening, and eerily distorting every shape.
And then there were the noises…the rock of the mountain itself stirring from its immeasurable slumber; the painful groaning of timbers carrying terrible burdens; the distorted echoes of dripping water, and unseen men at their tasks…and the unexplained sounds which all miners know about but rarely speak of.
If the mischievous, though not always unhelpful, "Bergmanlein" were not to be feared totally, certain of the other demons were!
There were those which might even take part in a contract with a miner, and such agreements had not to be broken nor confidences betrayed.
Consequences of default were serious — Simon at Levers Water was not the only miner to pay the ultimate penalty!
Other spirits were extremely malignant and much to be feared, and if prayer or lasting failed to exorcise them then the mine might need to be closed.
As 19th Century Coniston filled up with Irish, Welsh, and Cousin Jacks, they brought with them their own fears.
All of them dreaded seeing the "hand-of-death" .
It was a ghostly hand holding a lighted candle, and the luckless man who beheld it knew that it was a portent of his death.
BREAKING GROUND
Early methods of breaking rock and winning hard ore often involved heating the face with fires of wood, bracken, gorse bushes and any other dry combustible material.
After the fire had died down the rock was doused with cold water.
The sudden cooling of the heated surface resulted in spalling and fracturing.
This could then be attacked with the rude tools then available.
W. G. Collingwood'd description of this technique, as it appears in his book Dutch Agnes Her Valentine, is delightfully vivid…
"They had been heaping dried brackens and whins, with peats here and there among the pelf, in a line along the trench; and one struck a light with his flint and fired the pile.
It flickered and flew along the elding, and then burst into smoke, so thick and foul in the throat that I was fain to get on my knees behind a boulder, for the wind out of the cove sent it downhill…
Towsie (nickname for one of the foreign miners) came and sat down beside me while the smoke cleared a bit, and then took me to the trench, which was full of red embers, roasting the rock as when you roast eggs in the ashes.
The lads came up from the gill with buckets of water and stood a-row along the brink.
Towsie watched until the red began to die out and then, bidding me to have a care and stand back, at the word of command they teemed their buckets on the fire.
The rock hissed and cracked; here and there a stone flew up, and the steam rose like smoke.
When it had quieted down they fell to with their gavelocks and hammers."
The place was an open-cut at the Tilberthwaite Mines, known to the German miners as Three Kings, and the date the early 17th Century.
Collingwood pictures a working on the outcrop of a vein there but fire-setting, as it is called, was also practised underground.
Indeed there was a code of practice governing the dangerous procedure — largely to avoid suffocation accidents.
A variety of small iron blocks, wedges and hammers, were used to break ground; advantage was taken of cracks and fissures.
An  improvement on these were the plug and feathers sets.
To use these however, a shallow hole had first to be drilled by hammer and drilling chisel to accommodate the half-round tapering feathers.
These, thicker at their lower ends, had the plug or wedge driven between them.
A quite enormous splitting action was thus obtained which was also directional depending upon the positioning of the feathers.
With a well placed hole a considerable quantity of rock could be broken off; all that was necessary was to have a free face to work from.
The plug and feathers are still in common use today in quarries and by stone masons, where the intention is to produce split blocks or slabs.
The method may also be applied to breaking rock or concrete on sites where the application of explosives would be impracticable or undesirable.
BLASTING
The advent of gunpowder for blasting, a jealously guarded secret at first, transformed tunnelling and stoping.
It led to the birth of the jumper a slender iron rod with a chisel-end forged by the mine  smiths.
In hard rock the edge soon became dull, and the drilling of one sufficient hole could require the use of quite a few of these drills which had to be carried by the miner to his place of work, even though that might entail climbing hundreds of feet of pit ladder.
Of course much depended upon the temper imparted by the smith.
Hand boring competitions are still held in Cornwall and elsewhere, and remarkable penetration rates have been achieved — depths of up to 13 inches in 6 minutes are not unknown for a team of two strikers and one drill turner.
At Coniston however, it was regular practice for a man to drill his own holes.
In time, the iron drilling chisel was superseded by the much tougher steel, though for many years in the interim, mine smiths steeled, or tipped, the iron jumpers with a steel chisel edge.
Modern drill steels are made from a very tough and resilient steel, more often than not with integral tungsten-carbide inserts — that metal being noted for its durability and resistance to abrasion.
There came a stage though, when the hand methods began to be replaced by the compressed-air (or steam powered) mechanical rock-drill.
These were heavy, often of doubtful efficiency, and required clamping to heavy iron roof-to-floor stanchions.
Even so, the machine drill certainly speeded up drilling operations though it also lessened the need for a previously vital part of the miner's essential skill.
Each hand drilled hole had to be carefully positioned in order that it might have greatest effect, but it did not matter so much with machine holes.
These were put in much faster and deeper, able to accept a greater charge, and be capable of breaking down a greater burden.
It is certainly true that the large amount of rock dust given off from dry-drilling machines, "widow makers" , gave rise to an upsurge in the incidence of respiratory diseases — notably silicosis.
Not until rock-drills became available which injected a spray of water into the shot-hole together with the air which expelled the dust, did drilling in siliceous rock become reasonably safe.
The hand driller could always drill wet, with perhaps a twist of straw or rag around the jumper to prevent the water splashing, except in holes inclined upwards into which water could not be introduced.
Dust from such holes sprinkled down upon the drillers and considerable amounts were inevitably taken in by their vigorous inhalations as they laboured.
At least this dust was somewhat localized whilst that from machine drills could fill headings and stopes until at times it was impossible for a miner to see his hand in front of his face in the dim candlelight.
Gunpowder, blasting powder or black-powder, remained in constant use until replaced by dynamite, which possesses a much greater shattering faculty.
It is a much "faster" explosive, coming under the classification "High Explosive" , which gunpowder does  not.
Gunpowder is still made use of in those quarries where a splitting rather than a shattering action is required.
The old method of charging a shothole with gunpowder merits description.
Firstly the hole, if wet, was dried out with a swabbing stick and wadding and the charge was then poured in, care being taken to avoid spillage around the mouth of the hole.
In upwards inclined holes cartridges were made-up in paper and pressed home.
Greased paper might be used in wet conditions.
Next, a long tapering round metal pricker was inserted so that its point penetrated a short distance into the powder.
Around this was rammed tile stemming — usually clay.
When the hole was tamped to the top, the pricker was carefully withdrawn, and a hollow straw filled with fine gunpowder was inserted.
These were usually made by the miner at home and one can just imagine a man sitting comfortably at the kitchen table, with a bag of gunpowder which he had ground down, pile of straws, a tiny paper funnel, and puffing away on his pipe!
To the end of the straw was fastened a slow-match or fuze and this allowed the lighter enough time to make off to a safe place.
Where several holes were to be tired it was possible to set them off in a desired order by lighting in appropriate sequence.
Premature explosions occurred periodically and often, resulting in death or serious injury, with the loss of a hand or arm, and regularly one or both eyes.
As often as not, the injuries were to the right side of the body, as this was the side most usually exposed to the explosion.
Numerous such accidents happened whilst igniting, for if the slow fuze happened to be not so slow, or the miner inadvertently touched the straw with his candle, then he might have but a few impossible seconds to make good his escape.
Sometimes his route to the nearest safe place involved scrambling over loose rock, or entailed ladder climbing to escape from a stope, with his only source of light a guttering candle held in the hand, or stuck to his hat with a blob of clay.
The image of a miner temporarily, though doubtless painfully, incapacitated by "…superficial abrasions to buttocks…" , might raise a smile, but the following example of blasting injuries, however, leaves no doubt as to the possible consequences of being "shot" in the mine.
"Shot — loss of sight in both eyes.
Severe laceration wounds about waist.
Deep long wound round left knee.
Injuries to forearms and R. thigh.
Loss of pt. of middle finger (amputation of two terminal phalanges), shattering of two terminal phalanges of thumb, large lacerated wound between thumb and forefinger."
When a mis-fire occurred it was the practice to clear out the hole down to the powder, insert the pricker, and again stem the hole.
Another, perhaps even more dangerous method, was to force the pricker down through the stemming, into the powder, and then  insert a fresh straw.
Many tragedies (not just in Coniston Mines, of course) happened through the iron tools used "striking fire" against the side of the hole, or even a piece of stone in the stemming.
Even if the rock was not broken in such circumstances, the fiery blast shooting forth from the hole could inflict awful injury.
The iron pricker which was at first common was replaced by brass or copper.
Iron stemming rods were tipped with such metals but even then explosions still occurred.
By 1873 it had become illegal to have in one's possession in the mine a ferrous metal pricker or scraper.
Oddly for years, it remained permissible to use an iron or steel stemmer providing it was not upon the"…wadding or the first part of the tamping or stemming on the powder…
"
Furthermore it became against regulations to "unramm" a charge of powder which had mis-fired.
Be sure however that risks were still taken.
Picture the poor miner cursing the mis-fired hole upon which he had laboured for several hours.
Now if he was careful…!
The coming of dynamite brought fresh dangers.
Though in itself fairly insensitive under normal conditions it had to be set off by the early, very sensitive, mercury-fulminate detonator which was fired by safety fuze.
It became obvious that to insert any metal object into a hole containing explosive was highly dangerous.
The wooden stemming rod was clearly safer, yet in every mining district there were those who disregarded the new rulings.
If a fuze went out there was always someone prepared to force a metal pricker down through the packing into the dynamite in the hope of inserting a fresh capped fuze, even though inadvertently piercing the thin copper detonator might mean death or mutilation.
The introduction of the slow and uniformly burning safety fuze (which also made gunpowder blasting easier and safer) was a great step forward.
Although not completely immune from failure its advantages were obvious; despite this, initially it met with opposition from many of the old timers.
The sensitive detonator needed to be crimped onto the end of the safety fuze, and a tool was available for this purpose — a pair of pliers would serve well enough.
Even so it was common practice (and indeed still is) to crimp with one's teeth!
Every district had its quota of terrible mouth injuries.
It was also possible for fearful accidents to occur to a driller who decided to save himself a few inches by using the bottom of an exploded shot-hole.
It was not unknown for an unexploded portion of an old charge to remain dormant but active for years under such conditions.
Then one day a drill steel or jumper was inserted and — bang!
THE MINERAL VEINS
In general the mineral veins (also known as lodes), strike NW/SE, vary in thickness, and are steeply inclined to the vertical.
The copper content varied from place to place but rich solid chalcopyrite was found in places, particularly where veins came together or at junctions with cross-faults to form "bunches" .
An outline of the geology has been given in the field guide.
Outcropping on the surface, the lodes were relatively easy to find and trace.
Early workings were always upon these outcrops, yet despite their equipment and methods (all very labour intensive) the "old men" sank up to 200 ft. on the Bonsor Vein prior to the Civil War, and drove into it at least two long adits or "stollen(s)" in hard rock without the aid of explosives.
That part of the vein above the roof of a drainage level was known as the "backs" .
The driving of the great Deep Adit Level (the Horse Level) in the 19th Century drained back workings in a number of veins.
Shafts sunk below it however, had to be pumped or baled, though the water needed only to be raised to Deep Adit, through which it ran to the open fell side.
This, of course, also applied to the ore from below Deep Adit Level.
John Taylor Acquires The Mine
With some justification one could argue that copper did not play an indispensable part in the technological achievement popularly called the Industrial Revolution.
The durability of the red metal had been recognized centuries before and copper and brass domestic ware was, as the 16th Century copper smelters were at pains to point out, far better than their brittle cast-iron counterparts.
Still it was not vital and buckles, buttons, thimbles, locks, tobacco boxes, wire, nails et al, did not have to be of brass or copper, though employees in the related industries assumed considerable numbers.
The most important application of copper was in the cladding of wooden ships, until it was realised that the iron bolts also used corroded rapidly (galvanic reaction doubtless) and in doing so affected the timbering, causing the loss of many important vessels.
The committee appointed to enquire into the copper trade and mining (1799), said in their report that copper bolts had never been considered strong enough, and that the practice of copper bottoming was stopped by about 1750, as a result of the losses, and the fact that at one time a third of the navy was in dock under repair.
Copper plate for ships was as high as 10d. per pound in 1787, and in 1799, 15d.
In 1798, 874 tons of plate were used by H.M.
Navy (presumably for repair work); 130 tons of bolts; 100 tons of nails; and 1,127 tons of sundry items of which there are very many on a vessel.
By 1799 these figures were much reduced — by as much as two-thirds.
For years the world price had been governed by the prolific yield from Anglesey and many British mines, especially marginal workings, had gone to the wall.
Alas, as the output from that source lessened, would-be benefits to other mines were decreased by the immense deposits found in the New World, much of which was native metal.
The situation was worsened by the reduction in navy orders, as the wooden-walls surrendered to the iron plate.
Taking everything into account it is remarkable that the Coniston Mines, tucked away as they were amongst these remote mountains in the north-west of England (and with the smelters so far away), were able to sustain so many years of almost unbroken continuity.
Even these mines, though, were unable to escape the serious effects of the continual decline in copper prices as the nineteenth century drew to a close.
Still, so.
far as our story is concerned, it was the 1800's which witnessed the greatest mining activity in these fells.
The period began quietly enough but the re-opening of the Deep Mine and those at Paddy End and elsewhere, and the erection of mills for the dressing of the ore, coupled with the gradual introduction of ever improved machinery, led to a little Industrial Revolution all of its own there in the Mines Valley.
It was a scene of intense bustle at the mills, with scores of children busily at work, and from the Bonsor Mill the roar of the machinery, at times, penetrated down to the village itself.
Local historian W. G. Collingwood, pictured the setting; "…a little town of sheds, offices, workshops and water-wheels, which, with the constant clatter of the machinery issuing therefrom, presents a most extraordinary contrast to the silence and solitude of the surrounding wilderness." 
In his Report on the Agriculture of the County of Lancaster (1809), Dickson provides evidence of the Cheadle firm "Watkins, Borrow and Atkinson" working the mines in the Tilberthwaite area.
The mine at Coniston was also in production but the workings were very poor in metal.
The small operation at "Hartriggs" (see "Haggrieg's Mine at Hawk Rigg" page 91 in the Field Guide), was providing a "rich liver coloured ore" (cuprite?), whilst at Muckle Gill, above the top waterfall in Tilberthwaite Gill, the veins, even then, "as the shafts get deeper, become less rich…getting more coarse and more mineralised with sulphur." 
These two workings were on Lord Muncaster's territory and a Royalty would have been paid to him.
In Muckle Gill the "shaft" was driven in from the "side of the mountain" and, Dickson reports, was then about 30 yards in depth.
There was a problem with water for some "sort of lifting pump, moved by water power," raised water in large buckets or barrels — 30 or 40 of which were discharged every morning.
The mine in the gill had been established about 5 years but it is very likely that it would have been an old working re-opened.
Some 12 or 15 men worked underground doing a six hour day but in small "companies" .
Tools were chiefly "picks and jumpers…tempered very hard." 
The men were paid a rate depending upon the nature of the ground and were producing 2½ tons a week, giving a yield of 2–3 cwt. of metal in the ton but none more than 3.
Ore was crushed and stamped on the spot, being sent as a concentrate to Cheadle in Staffordshire for reduction and the manufacture of wire, and Dickson says, sheets for coppering the bottoms of ships.
Up to 10 men were at work on the surface, ore  dressing.
Ore breakers here paid 13/ a ton.
Boxes were evidently those water-filled tubs in which men agitated shallow sieve bottomed trays loaded with ground ore.
These, as we know, effected a reasonably good gravity separation in the hands of a skilled operator and the finer material was always recoverable on buddles.
The boxmen were paid 1/6 a day.
Boys were paid eight pence a day.
Dickson reveals that the Coniston Mine was being managed in a similar manner though fails to disclose who the operators were.
However, in 1803 Sir Michael le Fleming had granted a lease to William Evetts Sheffield of the "Polygon Sommers Town" in Middlesex, promising him all minerals save slate for a term of 21 years at a Royalty of one-twelfth.
Although evidence that Sheffield did any work appears lacking, his might well have been the activity reported by Dickson.
It is probable that Sheffield did make a start, for a fresh lease was issued to him on 5 December 1806 for the remaining 18 years of his term by Lady Anne Frederica Elizabeth le Fleming — Sir Michael had died.
Mention is also made in an estate valuation book of a lease made out in 1806 to one John Little.
Further material presents itself in 1816 concerning George Benson "a tenant of the copper works at Coniston" having just made a start and promising to pay one-twelfth to her Ladyship.
Benson could not truly estimate the value of the ore in his sett but suggested a figure of £8 to £10 per ton.
Around this time George Wilson sent 40 tons to Swansea paying the estate agent Jackson £16: 16s. — his one-twelfth.
This puts the value of the ore (concentrate it must have been) at £5 per ton at the smelters.
Allowance had probably been made for transport costs.
Little, Benson, and Wilson were diversely working small, easily operated veins.
The Lonsdale Magazine of 1820 remarked, however, that the mining was discontinued "though lately in the hands of some spirited and intelligent adventurers" .
Word was now about that the mines were available, and it reached the ears of a Cornishman acting as resident agent or manager, at the great lead mines at Grassington, in Yorkshire.
John Barratt, for that was his name, paid an investigatory visit to Coniston Mines, was impressed with what he found, and wrote on the 4th August 1823 to Lady le Fleming to say that he was considering taking the mine.
He had accepted the services of a Mr. Gelderd, an account keeper, and promised to operate in a "proper workmanlike manner…," 
The matter was yet to be discussed with his employer, John Taylor (then of Bedford)— mining engineer, financier and entrepreneur.
concurrently with his numerous other interests Taylor was running the Grassington Mines for the Duke of Devonshire.
A take note was issued allowing exploration to start at once and men were set to work in December of 1823.
During March 1824, whilst Barratt and the estate agent, Jackson, were discussing the  terms of the proposed lease, the latter refused to allow Mr. Gelderd, previously appointed mine purser, to enter the devised partnership.
He felt that the agreement had been made "in rather a hurry" !
Alas, a fortnight later poor Mr. Gelderd died.
A friend wrote requesting to have his salary allotted to the widow "and that she would get a person to do the business" , but Barratt could see no way for the widow to be of service.
Duly a lease was issued to the satisfaction of the Lady of the Manor and partners John Taylor and William Richardson of Butterston in Staffordshire, who was clerk to the Grassington Mines.
The term was to cover 21 years with a Royalty of one-twelfth of all metals and minerals — in a merchantable condition.
This began on the 14th of September 1824.
John Barratt was to oversee the Coniston adventure from Grassington but making frequent visits.
It was Barratt who, as we shall see, was really the moving spirit and who kindled a new era of prosperity by resuscitating the old Paddy End and Coniston Deep Mines into an entity capable of comparison with any in the country.
Barratt came from an old mining family and indeed, had been captain at Wheal Friendship, on Dartmoor, where his father, for years, had been manager.
Taylor had persuaded Barratt to take up his present position in 1818 — it was a decision Taylor never regretted.
At Grassington the miners worked in small setts, or meers, and there were regular disputes over boundaries and underground trespass despite the presence of a Barmoot Court and Barmaster, and other customs anciently brought in from the lead districts of Derbyshire.
The free style mining had brought about a situation quite undesirable to the Lord who claimed the mineral rights.
There were hundreds of small workings out of which the "eyes" had been picked and indeed Grassington Moor had the appearance of a lunar landscape — and still has.
As the mines became deeper companies found themselves unable to provide the necessary capital for winding and pumping equipment.
Much of the leaner ore was left unworked.
Most of the easily detectable veins had been long found…the output was in a steady decline.
It was Taylor's job to put things right.
Upon taking up his position Barratt's first action was to stop all mining for two months before allowing the men back, to work in a more orderly fashion.
Bargains began to be made for the first time, and it became readily apparent to the men that whatever rights they thought they had lost, had been transposed by an orderly system which benefited them as well as the Mineral Lord.
Barratt's introduction of stamps and roll-crushers, and other improved facilities for ore dressing (this included the mechanisation of jigging) brought praise from John Taylor.
Labour was utilised more efficiently, and as well as being mindful of his employer's interests, Barratt demonstrated that he also had a care for his workmen.
In an attempt to reduce the omnipresent "miners' lung" had he not attempted to persuade the men to grow bushy moustaches which would, he reasoned, act as dust filters?
Mine captains were appointed together with surface supervisors.
One Aldersley, a worker in the industry for many years, was given the task of time-keeper for the dressing floors, ore weigher, and sampler.
After his success at Grassington Barratt was now presented with the task of shaping the Coniston Copper Mines into a viable entity.
Meanwhile there were problems.
Trouble was encountered at Coniston with one Michael Knott of Hawkshead who, it would appear, had the possession of certain mining rights on adjacent territory being part of Muncaster Estate Royalties.
Knott is  probably the same Michael who until 1812 had been a principal in the long established iron mining and smelting company of the Furness Fells which had become known as Knott, Ainslie & Co., and which was to become known later as the Harrison, Aitislie & Company which dominated haematite mining on the Lindal Moor in Low Furness.
During 1823 Knott trespassed his workings onto the Coniston Estate, and it had been suggested that he agree to arbitration with a "gentleman of the bar" as umpire.
By April of 1824 he had failed to abate the nuisance, and it was decided to present him with a formal notice to desist.
If that did not succeed in stopping him, then it was quietly suggested that the new tenants of the mines could "…pull down the encroaching fences." 
Knott had made it clear, it would seem, to the le Fleming estate agent that he wanted rights to all of the copper on the Coniston Manor, though without any success.
Taylor was, perhaps, considered a more likely proposition.
Under Barratt's direction work was soon commenced, though he felt that there was a need for caution.
He decided that operations in the first instance were to be confined chiefly to level driving at Paddy Etid (the Levers Water side of the grant), and also to cross-cut to the Bonsor Vein both in, and below, Red Dell.
Two tunnels were planned there to start with.
Charles Roe had, in places, taken his mine down some 188 feet or so below the old 17C. workings, themselves about 181 ft. deep from surface; and had worked along the strike of the Bonsor Vein for perhaps 150 fathoms.
Ore from this operation had been brought up his Bonsor East Shaft, approx. 359 feet in depth, which was really a clear, roughly timbered space extending up through the stopes.
Such shafts were common enough, though not conducive to efficiency, and not a little dangerous.
Following the varying inclinations of the vein the kibble, during winding, thudded from side to side, skidding on the wet planking where the shaft sloped…often shedding part of its load which rattled down to the bottom or lodged dangerously amongst timbering.
Wear and tear on the woodwork was excessive and snagging could tear away large sections of board; or worse, the sudden jolt could cause the winding chain to part allowing kibble and contents, chain and all, to hurtle down doing damage all the way.
Added to this of course, was loss of time for repairs.
The miners' ladder-way in Bonsor East Shaft ran down one side of the shaft in the usual manner — highly risky to the climber rubbing shoulders with the up-and-down moving pump rods, and the iron rising water-main.
The ladders were bracketted to the side of the shaft or to woodwork.
Safety platforms were rare and these were often dangerous in themselves.
Thus a miner who slipped from the worn and greasy rungs was liable to fall a long way and a dropped  tool could clatter its way down to cause death or injury to some fellow below.
In such conditions fragments shed from the kibble presented an obvious danger.
The 17th Century Wide Work or New Work is separated from the White Work (known by this time as the Deep or Old Mine) by a steeply inclined bed of well cleaved ashes and tuffs which, in places, have been found suitable for roofing slate.
Wide Work, despite the richness and width of the vein — 6 ft. and more in places — was much the same as when the "German" miners had left it.
Barratt considered it as having a very promising appearance; "a large champion lode" , he reported to Taylor.
Several attempts, he wrote, had been made by "former prospectors" to sink upon this lode "but it is heavily watered that they could not go down more than 3 or 4 fathoms deep" .
In fact, the "Old Men" had sunk to 50 ft. or so at its southern end, by the beck.
The upper parts of these early workings are to be seen in the fenced-off area at Red Dell Foot.
Nineteenth Century operations have left them deep and dangerous.
At their north-westerly end was a shaft put down by the Macclesfield Copper Company during the 18th Century.
Readers who visit the area are advised not to enter the fenced enclosure.
The Bonsor Vein appeared to Barratt to be cut off, at its northern end, by a strong fault or cross-course.
It could be traced up the boulder strewn fellside easterly of the beetling Kernal Crag, along and over Thriddle Scar (in which were ancient workings but little other than trials) across ground with pits, trials and trenches, made by early miners along its strike, to pass below the northern margin of Levers Water.
Next it cut the steep mountainside between Great and Little How Crags, where, at about the 2,100 ft. contour, the 17th Century miners had — by means of open-cut and tunnel — opened their Black Scar Workings.
Clearly, a great length of this promising vein was intact.
Barratt decided to drive one of his levels in Red Dell, towards Kernal Crag.
A cross-cut, it was intended to decussate the vein and at once became known as Fleming's Level in honour of Her Ladyship.
The second level, Taylor's, was to be located downstream from here and driven into the western side of the Red Dell Beck to come up about 180 ft. below the old workings on the surface — Wide Work.
Taylor's Level was reckoned to require driving of 60 fathoms at an estimated £6 per fathom plus about 140 for the railway.
Fleming's Level was expected to be 35 fathoms before intersecting the lode and was assessed at a likely £4: 10s. per fathom with £23 10s. for the metals and sleepers.
In all, Barratt considered that an effectual trial on the Bonsor Lode could be made for about £1,000.
At Paddy End (it was still at that time known as Paddies End), Barratt considered it sufficient to set pitches to gangs of men in the existing old workings.
Jackson, the estate agent, met Barratt on one of his visits having brought with him Michael Knott who was now desirous of talking business with John Taylor when he was next up.
Knott claimed to have taken the mineral rights of "all the Isle of Man" , and claimed to have discovered some promising lodes there.
Barratt listened to what he had to say but he really had other things on his mind that day.
He was more concerned with the work in hand and he pointed out to Jackson that the expense of making trials was great.
Could some allowance be made?
Whether he had in mind a reduction in the Royalty, or perhaps a contribution towards the cost of the trials, is not clear.
Jackson did promise some attention to the matter but it seems that nothing was granted.
The estate agent was only a young man but quite an astute one at that…no-one was going to put one over on him.
It has been suggested that Barratt was "afraid" of him, but the writer feels that having a wary respect, comes nearer the truth!
January of 1824 found the two cross-cuts to the Bonsor Vein being driven in very hard ground.
Several drilling jumpers were needed for each shot-hole and three or four holes drilled, fired, and the debris cleared, were about as much as two men could manage in a day.
At Paddy End two Cornishmen had, during December, raised about six tons of ore worth about £12 a ton.
They received 11s. in the pound for this but during January the pitch worsened and they were now taking 13/4 in every 20/ of value.
In another pitch, in ore valued at £7 a ton, the men were getting 15/.
There was no doubt in Barratt's mind, that when the stamps being assembled were ready to work, they would pay their way.
In February Old Kewlany had intersected a two inch vein in Fleming's Level — a quartz string believed to be associated with the vein ahead.
Later the level was taken off left and right along this, only to be proved a barren string.
But not yet.
The immediate object was to get to the lode (Fleming's Vein it came to be called), estimated to be some 25 fathoms ahead.
Progress was only about 30 ft. a month and the rate had been raised to £5 a fathom.
In Taylor's Level the ground was equally as hard and the rate had been increased there to £9 a fathom.
By the end of March about 40 tons of ore lay on the bank, having been carted down from Paddy End, and was ready for dressing.
A Mr. Nichols was put in charge as a surface foreman and Thomas Jones, working on the stamps, said to Barratt, "they is sure to work" .
Knott meantime offered his mines to the Taylor partnership in return for a share in the whole.
Barratt had been up to Tilberthwaite to see for himself the likely value of Knott's sett on the Muncaster estate land there and he considered it to be a worthwhile proposition  having seen, as he put it, "good bunches of ore under water" .
Knott wanted a quarter share, and was prepared to include his leaseholds in other places, as an inducement.
Barratt did arrive at some tentative agreement with him but left the decision to Taylor, who, in due course, entered into some form of arrangement the details of which, however, are wanting.
By August of 1824 the stamps were pounding away and 50 tons of concentrate were ready for market.
By December however, Fleming's Level had still not cut the vein despite having been driven 47 fathoms.
Barratt was most concerned.
Close investigation of the lode, where it was exposed in Thriddle Scar high above, suggested that it was hading, 18 inches for every fathom in depth, away from the advancing heading!
Taylor's Level progressed very slowly and was thought to still have about 20 fathoms to go.
A new cross-cut had been started at Paddy End (probably Courteney's Cross-Cut), and this had come into a 6 inch vein carrying chalcopyrite.
This was later named South Vein and the level driven off along it in both directions was often referred to as South Vein Day Level.
Operations were also in hand at Tilberthwaite.
Shallow Adit, started at the bottom of the Gill Head waterfall, had intersected Spedding's Lode at once, then after a short distance, Benson's Lodes.
A trial off along the latter having a unpromising appearance was soon stopped.
Shallow Adit was being carried on, driven for much of its way at first through "flockan" , along a fault, to intersect Shaft Lode, South Lode, and finally the North Lode.
On most of the veins in the area there were ancient workings including those of Borrow and Atkinson which were now full of water.
To carry out a proper exploration of these veins in some depth it was necessary to have a drainage adit otherwise there would have been continual hindrance with water.
Another tunnel was being put in along Benson's Lode, in the western bank of the beck a little upstream of the top waterfall.
At that time it was paying £3 per fathom but the vein did not prove to be worth following very far.
It was amongst this jumble of workings that the "Germans" had at one time their "Three Kings" — mines probably dedicated to the Magi…
Balthaz'ar (Lord of Treasures); Caspar (The White One); Mel'chior (King of Light).
Good names for mines really, when one thinks about it!
Alas the ancients did not do so well at Tilberthwaite as we have seen.
By February of 1825 neither Taylor's nor Fleming's Levels had "struck-home" and Barratt, starting now to have doubts about the latter, suspended driving until the elusive vein was cut in Taylor's, and when doing so, perhaps, shedding some light on the matter.
Old Kewlany and his mate, as mystified as anyone, were set to work elsewhere for the time being.
Not until early December of 1825 was a "…capital course of ore…nearly 2 feet thick of solid ore…" cut in Taylor's Level after driving 65 fathoms.
Kewlany was put back into his tunnel and eventually the vein was cut after 70 fathoms 210 ft. further in than the original calculation and much further than the second estimate based on an 18 inch inclination in every 6 feet.
In fact the hade of Fleming's Vein is nowhere regular as the miners were to find out in due course.
On the 14th of February 1826 Knott and Taylor partnered in a 21 year lease (from the Rt.
Hon.
Lowther Augustus John, Lord Muncaster, Baron Muncaster) of all minerals whatsoever in the Lordship of Little Langdale and Tilberthwaite, at the usual one-twelfth Royalty.
They did not, however, appear to have sole rights at Tilberthwaite for there was an annoyance this year when a small company working on the Baron's land, encroached onto Coniston ground, and illegally mined ore rightfully allowed to Taylor & Co.
The trespassers were Fawcett and partners, and appeared to have been financed by one Crackenthorpe.
No ore had actually been taken off the property however, and the affair was settled amicably by a payment.
Probably these men were persuaded to relinquish their rights for a sum of money in lieu.
To prevent incidents of this nature recurring it was felt desirable to have the intricate boundary between the two manors properly staked out.
This was done.
There was a grand meeting of all concerned and the fence line perambulated and points agreed upon.
Indeed, the ruined fence can still be seen running from above the top waterfall in the Gill to high up onto the side of Birk Fell.
It is clearly marked on the map recommended for use with this, and the field guide.
Below  the top waterfall, the centre of the Gill itself was considered to be the line of demarcation.
When Taylor acquired his Coniston lease it excluded a small sett previously granted to one Mathew Spedding.
He was probably soon bought out, and employed by the company.
Mathew was later credited with a form of dry-stone tunnel arching suited particularly to slabby rock.
"Mat.
Speddy Arching", as it became known, was often used in slate workings and good examples may be seen here and there.
Meanwhile work continued at Tilberthwaite and two new tunnels were in hand one said to be upon the South Lode, the other in a lode cut in a rooting slate quarry, probably Penny Rigg.
In January of 1825 Barratt had decided upon an ambitious and costly project; a deep adit level to be driven as a cross-cut, some 230 yds. downstream from Taylor's Level into the eastern bank of Red Dell Beck and in a northerly direction, to come in below the old workings and to explore the vein, especially below that section expected to be opened up by Taylor's.
The discovery meanwhile, of the rich ore in the latter seemed to vindicate Barratt's plan.
Known in due course as the Deep, or Horse Level, it was the lowest tunnel which could conveniently be driven and still serve the new Bonsor Mill.
Clearly though, any workings below the floor of this tunnel would require continuous pumping.
It is doubtful whether at this stage even John Barratt envisaged it being driven all the way to the veins at Paddy End — as indeed it was in years to come.
He had decided by now to draw the water out of Charles Roe's old Deep Mine to the depth of the Deep Level.
The heading was advancing steadily towards the flooded workings and the incipient dangers of holing through to the "house-of-water" were well enough known.
No one knew for certain what volume of water was pent up, but the old mine must have been full to the random of the 17th Century Cobblers Level.
This would mean that Deep Level was heading towards a head of perhaps, 84 ft. of water!
To pump it out a new water-wheel was required, suggesting that the old Bonsor East Shaft wheel was too far decayed to repair, or missing altogether.
It is hardly likely that Roe's pump was still in working order, assuming it was left in, and a fresh unit must have been brought on site.
With no waste of time all the equipment was installed and set to work.
It seems likely that the water was lifted as high as Cobblers and led to there along wooden launders, to run out through the level.
If however, there was no open way remaining, then the rising main must have been brought all the way up to the top of the shaft.
Barratt probably acquired the disused wheel at Threlkeld Mine which he thought "might be had cheap." 
As the water level lowered below the Deep Level horizon, it was decided to start driving a tunnel from the shaft side, to meet up with  the advancing Deep Level from the south.
Headings were also taken off S.E. and N.W. along the Bonsor Vein.
In due course, no doubt much to Barratt's chagrin, it became apparent that, because of survey error, the two foreheads were not going to meet squarely!
Adjustments were needed to the alignments and this resulted in a steepened length about 190 yds. from the portal.
The contemporary visitor can locate the approximate link-up by studying the directions of the numerous shot-holes.
The completed cross-cut now meant that water needed only to be lifted to the level and allowed to run out to day.
The old iron rising-main still protrudes from out of Roe's old flooded shaft where it was unbolted all those years ago.
In Jan. 1829 the company had asked a second time if Lady le Fleming might not offer some assistance in view of the great expense of development work.
The advice from her solicitor was that they undertook the adventure at their own risk and ought to abide by the consequences.
 "If they think they can discover the lost vein, or by driving a new level find a fresh one, they will do one or the other for their own advantage" .
They did not receive any favour as a result, but work continued.
All in all, however, over the next few years things in general appeared to be going well enough.
Driving and development was well in hand all over the mining leasehold and matters should have appeared promising to both the Adventurers and the income of the estate.
Nevertheless, Jackson, the estate agent, must have had some misgivings about the way matters were progressing.
Perhaps he was impatient, feeling that the output should be greater.
It may be that Taylor had again asked for a reduction of Royalty.
Whatever it was, he appointed one John Leathart, a mining engineer, to conduct a survey of the Coniston Mines and to advise on the true position there.
Leathart had interests in lead mining and came from the well-known mining town of Alston, in the Northern Pennines.
(In 1840, he was to devise an improved method of lead separation, applying this at the Roughtongill Mine in the Caldbeck Fells, where he was one of the proprietors.)
There can be little doubt that Barratt was not very pleased with this intrusion; these were still early times; the "dead-work" , development, building, and so on, had to be done.
He was as anxious as anyone could be to get the mine on a proper footing and producing profitably…but it all took time!
In the meantime there was little he could do to prevent Leathart's inspection.
As well as the worry of Coniston, he had problems at Grassington.
The price of lead was falling, men were being laid off and John (along with others) and with as much grace as they were able to muster, had had to be prepared to accept a reduction in salary.
Leathart in his report, dated 10 September 1833, felt that"…generally the mines are carried on with spirit, and conducted with skill…
"
He found that Deep Level had been carried S.E. on the vein for 30 fathoms beyond the old works and was yielding a little ore.
N.W. the level had been driven 110 fathoms, and was almost to a sump sinking down from Taylor's above.
This would, he considered; effect a ventilation through both levels — "much needed" in the Deep Level; also it would drain the soles in the level above.
Good courses of ore had been met with in Deep Level, but Leathart pointed out, "the whole of the ground has been more or less worked prior to the present adventurers" .
He found that from the intersection of Fleming's Cross-cut with the vein, the level had been taken S.E. along it for 40 fathoms, at the forehead of which was a cross-course which cut off the lode.
This was the same fault, as it turned out, which cut off the Bonsor Vein at its northern end, and became known as the Great, or Kernal Cross-course.
A search beyond it failed to locate any continuance of Fleming's Vein (it was often called Thriddle V.) and it became considered that Fleming's was best regarded as a continuance of the Bonsor but shifted by the movement along the fault.
Here at the fault a ventilation shaft was being put up to the surface where it linked with a short low drift driven into the boulder clay near the foot of Kernal Crag.
Later this raise had a stopping put in it when its function became obsolete.
Along this length the vein proved, in general, rather poor, though stoping above and below the sole was in progress.
North-westerly from the cross-cut the level was driven 20 fathoms to another cross-course and a good bunch of ore was being taken out of the floor with overhead stoping in progress.
From this to a second fault was a further 30 fathoms, with good copper being worked above and below.
Beyond this fault the vein had proved in default and a considerable search had failed to locate it.
It was however, considered but a matter of perseverance, for it was well exposed on the surface above.
Leathart considered that the bringing of Taylor's Level up to below here would certainly make available a great amount of paying ground.
To drain the works in the soles of Fleming's Level, a pumping and winding sump was put down at the intersection with the cross-cut and it is believed that power for this was by hand.
About this time a shaft had been started from the end of a 42 yds. long tunnel, Bouncy Level, driven into the vein from a point much higher up the boulder strewn fell-side quite close to the Crag.
A great ramp of rock was built up to its mouth which became known as the Thriddle Incline — a conspicuous present day feature.
Eventually this deepened below the random of Fleming's Level and rendered the pumping and winding sump at the intersection obsolete.
There is no trace of this sump nowadays but the underhand stopes have been largely  back-filled with deads and the hanging wall has fallen in places.
Rollers for the pump flat-rods or chains, and the winding chain, were positioned at intervals up the incline to a pivot and a wheel at the tunnel mouth, then along the tunnel to a balance-bob which stood on a platform cut out specially, and the winding chain over a heavy sheaved wheel above the shaft.
The shaft was, of course fitted with a signalling apparatus.
In due course it became known as Thriddle, or Bouncy Shaft.
Power for this shaft came from a 30 ft. diameter iron wheel, later to become known as Millican's Wheel.
There may have been a wheel on this site since the 18th Century when the Macclesfield Company put down a shallow shaft — Bonsor West Shaft — at the north-westerly extremity of the old 17th Century open works.
Any earlier wheel-pit on this site could however, either have been demolished and rebuilt, or enlarged to take the new wheel.
The old workings which were flooded had first to be unwatered before connection could be made by the workings rising from Taylor's Level below.
At the time of Leathart's survey, Taylor's Level had been carried on for some 210 fathoms, and was then about 35 fathoms short of being below the deepening sump in the floor of Fleming's.
Clearly their linkage would drain and ventilate Fleming's Mine effectively.
The forehead of Taylor's was in fact, approaching the Great Cross-course.
A sump was being put down 30 fathoms along from where Taylor's first cut the vein.
After a further 150 ft. it had been found that the Bonsor Vein bifurcated.
The level taken along the northern branch had yielded good copper (and was still in good ore) with a deal of ground yet unwrought.
It had been taken along here for 30 fathoms and stopped at a fault beyond which the vein had been lost.
Leathart considered a new search should be made.
The main level which ran along the southern branch of the vein had been brought in some 210 fathoms from the entrance.
It discovered poor ground in general and was then below the eastern end of Kernal Crag and about 30 fathoms from the pumping/winding sump sinking below Fleming's Level 210 ft. above.
This level should, Leathart advised, be pushed on with speed to the Great Cross-course, and then on to the second fault, seen in the northern end of Fleming's, which had cut off the vein, and there to institute a search.
The connection with Fleming's Level should be made with all haste.
Deep Level, he found, entered the vein after 120 fathoms, and had been taken south-easterly 30 fathoms beyond the "old works" — and was yielding a little ore.
North-westerly the level was taken along the vein about 110 fathoms and was estimated 30 ft. from the intended connection with the sump descending from Taylor's Level 102 ft. above.
Both ends of this level should be carried on, productive or  otherwise, without any delay.
(Study map Fig. 19.)
At Paddy End there were three principal levels — Top being 96 ft. above Middle, and Low or Grey Crag Level being 30 fathoms below Middle.
The main lode was the Paddy End Vein but it was associated with a number of strong veins.
Mineralisation was encountered in cross-faults; at intersections of these with veins; also at the junction of veins.
These "bunches" were rich though of short duration.
Paddy End Vein was the first to be cut in these levels and its course can easily be seen in the cliff or scar to the west of Levers Water where ancient mining has left a conspicuous cleft known as Simon's Nick.
Simon, it will be remembered, is said to have traded his soul to the Devil in exchange for wealth in copper!
Beyond the cliff is the tarn (acquired by the Furness Water Authority as a supply source for the northern parishes) and between there and the cliff are the Back Strings.
These are a complexity of outcropping veins on which 17th Century miners worked but in places they have been modified by subsequent operators.
Paddy End Vein runs through these, under the southern margin of the tarn, to outcrop in like manner to the Bonsor, on the precipitous face of Little How Crags.
No laissez-aller exploration of these fissures, the Back Strings, should be undertaken.
The floors of these are, in the main, rubble covered timbers forming the "roofs" of 19th Century workings below.
Death or injury lies in wait for the imprudent in Brobdingnagian chasms below.
By studying map Fig. 5, it will be seen that small ruined sheds or "hutts" are sited about the opened veins whilst piles of hand cobbed, or knapped, deads are associated with these.
Grey Crag Level had, Leathart found, been taken up along Paddy End Vein as far as the "Simon Nick cliff" .
Here it proved a network of veins including the powerful Belman's Hole Vein, the result being a rich and continuous course of ore — The Californian Bunch — all the way down from surface to 10 fathoms below its random…not much short of 70 fathoms in all.
He thought this level should be pushed forward below the Back Strings.
Middle Level had been taken almost to below Levers Water.
It found itself amongst the stockwork of veins and rich ore was being found continually.
Leathart thought it expedient to cross-cut to all of the veins in the vicinity.
Top Level ran into the under part of the Back Strings.
It was yielding some ore but had found itself amongst the old bottoms out of which "the eyes had been picked" .
It was carried on well underneath Levers Water but an alteration of the country rock into a "clayey character" led to impoverishment of the vein.
To eliminate the cartage of run-of-mine stuff to the Bonsor Mill adjacent to the Deep Level mouth, a second mill was being erected at  Paddy End with the reception hoppers on a horizon with Grey Crag Level and Courteney's Cross-cut.
Ore was also carted down from a hopper at Top Level, the track crossing the beck directly below the waterfall then winding around to connect with the Levers Water — Paddy End track.
Ore was also brought out of Middle Level, along a gantry, and tipped into a chute feeding a hopper, partly cut from the rock, and partly of timber.
Below this was a tiny loading floor where waggons were tilled.
On this floor was located a braked sheave wheel and loaded mine trams were controlled by this means as they descended the Middle Level Incline (still a conspicuous feature at Paddy End) to the reception floor below.
This being a self-acting incline the empty trucks were dragged up by the full ones, the long chain or rope to which they were linked, passing, of course, around the sheaved wheel the stanchions for which are still to be seen.
As the mine developed, and Top, Middle, and Grey Crag, became linked by ore-passes and shafts, more and more ore came out of the lower.
Eventually, though not yet for many years, when Deep Level came up under here ore was dropped down to there and trammed out all the way to the Bonsor Mill; Paddy End Mill was then shutdown.
During part of the 1830's into the 1840's the Back Strings were investigated and ore worked which the "old men" had left in.
Timber was carted up, a tough job for any horse, and ore brought down to the Paddy End Mill in the same manner.
During one period 84 X 9 cwt. cartloads were brought down at 1/8 the ton…37 tons 16 cwt. came to £3: 3s.
One or more levels were put in from the side of Levers Water to carry out a shallow sub-surface investigation of veins which appeared to be untried, or suspected to be covered at outcrop.
One, Levers Water Level, was put in to try what was probably the South Vein, with a branch taken off to try other lodes.
One level is believed to have been taken in along Belman's Hole Vein just below its outcrop.
Leathart missed quite a lot during his survey, and his report was not very concise.
Nevertheless he did suggest a remission of duty to one-fifteenth on all ore mined in the sole of Taylor's Level; on the N.W. course of the vein on Deep Level; and in all the ground S.E. of the Deep Level Cross-cut intersection.
His opinion was that such a reduction would act as a stimulus to further development work, and recommended its immediate implementation.
In the light of evidence however, it seems that it was not granted.
Certainly it would have been difficult for the estate to know which ore came from where.
Perhaps it was considered possible, though doubtless unjustifiably, that some sharp practice might result, such as admixing rich ore from other parts of the mine with that at the reduced Royalty!
On the 19 September 1834, Taylor and Knott proposed to  surrender their current lease with a view to renewal for a fresh term of 11 years.
Their present one was due to expire in 1845.
They were willing now to start drawing the water out of the bottoms of Charles Roe's old workings i.e. below Deep Level random.
It appears that the bottom of Roe's old shaft was believed to be in the region of 88 to 100 feet below the point where Deep Level was taken off.
Veteran miners had claimed that there was good copper in the sole of the shaft when it was left off.
At least, Barratt must have mused, they were going to be proved right or wrong.
Trouble was with old miners, they tended to exaggerate — a gleam of mineral seen decades previously often became transmogrified in mens' minds to a wonderful thickness, be it lead, copper, tin, gold, or whatever.
Not only was the water to be lifted out but they were prepared to erect drawing and pumping machinery to sink deeper.
There was talk of a grand new rock shaft to be sunk and there were other expensive trials they intended to prosecute.
During the last 10 years they had, Taylor explained, expended a large sum of money without deriving "any profit whatsoever" , and were inclined to hope that this and the further anticipated expense entitled them to consideration by "Royalty reduction or otherwise" .
He pointed out that the ores raised from greater depth would be at a greater expense though the Royalties would in fact increase.
Once again, it would appear, the request was denied.
The lease was not renewed but the partners carried on under the terms of the existing one.
But it was not to be for long.
Partner Richardson died intestate, leaving no directions for conveying his estate and interests in the mines.
On the 30 September 1834 the lease was surrendered and a fresh indenture made from 1st October between Lady le Fleming, and Taylor, one Richard Gaunt of Leek, and now John Barratt who had left Grassington to live in Coniston.
He was now a partner, and surely deservingly so, for there can be little doubt that he had been the "guiding light" all along.
There is no mention of Knott in the new lease.
In the draft copy, submitted.
for approval, a certain provision was included based upon a recommendation made earlier by Mr. Leathart.
This was to the effect that the lessees should be convenanted to place a "bunnin" of strong oak timber across any stope where the sole of the level was cut away; this to be put in 4 ft. below the railway.
It was then to be infilled with debris and sealed with puddled clay to prevent water falling into workings below.
The Adventurers were also to ensure that all levels were driven with only a slight gradient… "just sufficient to drain out the water" .
This was, in fact, standard practice and Barratt was fully aware of it.
With regard to the gradients, Leathart must have had in mind the steep section of the Deep Level.
That however, undesirable as it was, was the result of a surveying error.
Unfortunately Lady le Fleming's agent appeared to take Leathart's advice a little too literally and caused great concern to the partners by proposing a covenant binding them to prevent "all water" from filtering down into any part of the mine below Deep Level.
This was quite untenable to Barratt and Taylor and in a letter Taylor complained that there never had been such a requirement in any mining lease and any experienced miner would reject it as attempting to enforce an impossibility.
He pointed out that although they would automatically have carried out such precautions, water would always be found in the deeper parts of the mine.
Who then, was to determine whether or not the water came from faults and fissures in the rock, or from the vein itself in the usual manner?
Under such uncertainty they could be involved, he declared, in protracted litigation.
Furthermore, it would certainly not encourage their development below Deep Level.
Never in all his experience, wrote Taylor, had he seen or heard of such covenants in a mining lease.
He ventured to suggest that there was nothing in the manner in which they had brought the concern into its active and productive state of working, which ought to subject them to such new and vexatious problems.
Indeed, he thought that they were entitled to encouragement and to some increased advantage (a hint for a reduction in Royalties, doubtless) and under that impression he solicited a new lease.
There was only one benefit, he found, in the new indenture and that was an extended term.
Since that was so counterbalanced by conditions, which may lead them into disputes and difficulties, they would be better acting upon their current lease.
The adventurers were, of course, quite aware that Jackson, the estate agent, had been advised by "practical miners" to propose these covenants.
Taylor expressed his surprise; was Jackson not aware that in the district in which these persons derived their experience, there was little, if any, knowledge of mines worked under day levels or of what takes place in them when they are drained to considerable depths by machinery?
Taylor begged leave to deny that analogies drawn from lead mines in stratified rocks are to be applied to deep copper mines and he considered it rather hard to have "crude suggestions of this sort pressed upon us" .
Clearly there were many sly digs directed at Leathart, and the partners must have known that their comments would be passed on to him.
Leathart hoped fervently that the story wouldn't leak back into the Alston district.
Barratt and Taylor must have raised their eyebrows in apprehension when they discovered that the copper mines were in the "clay slate formation" …according to Leathart.
The result of these strong words was that the irksome proviso was deleted and the new lease agreed.
Any new vein discovered, but left unwrought for the space of six months after notice was given by the  estate to the captain or purser of the mine, could be licenced to any other person to work.
Twelve able miners or pickmen, at least, were to be employed at all times (Leathart had recommended 30 or 40 or the lease to become void).
All shafts, levels, adits, watercourses and works to be kept open or upstanding for present or future working, and to yield up these at the end of the term, with the bottoms clear of all dross and rubbish; and the drifts, cross-cuts, sumps, pits, buddles, water-courses, dwelling houses, cabins, smelting houses, store houses, bingsteads, smithies, forges, workshops, etc.
The lessees were not to permit any employee to obtain any "settlement by virtue of the Poor Laws of the Township of Church Coniston by any act of them" (the lessees).
The tenants of Coniston Hall were to have the preference for carting ore.
Mathew Spedding, it seems, was still working his small mine up on the fells somewhere, and again, his small sett was to be excluded.
Her Ladyship promised to build seven cottages at the old forge at a rental of seven per cent, per annum , of the outlay.
A further three were to be built at the old carding mill at a gross rental of £10 per annum.
These were in addition to the eleven then occupied by the lessees oil a 21 year term at a gross rental of £27: 10s. a year.
To the mortification of the partners the Royalty was to remain unchanged at one-twelfth.
About this time work commenced on sinking the proposed perpendicular rock shaft.
A spacious tunnel was driven into the fellside to the appropriate spot and the work began.
The shaft was positioned outside the Bonsor Vein a short distance north of the old Bonsor East Shaft.
As it deepened to the random of the East Shaft top landing station a connecting tunnel was driven between the two and sinking debris was now brought out at this point and tipped on the fellside.
Examination of the heaps today still reveals the cleaner unstained rock amongst the iron stained waste from earlier operations.
Little water would have been met with and what was encountered was brought up in the kibble.
At the connecting tunnel it would have been led out of the entrance to the East Shaft top by wooden launder.
As the rock shaft reached the Deep Level horizon, a link was driven to the East Shaft, and from then on, debris from the continued sinking and seepage needed only to be lifted to that height.
A large shaft station was blasted out at the rock shaft at Deep Level (see Fig. 14) and the work revealed a bonus in the form of a nice bunch of ore on a narrow quartz vein — Dry Gill Vein — which at that point runs approximately parallel to the Bonsor Vein.
This unexpected find would have helped pay for the dead work of the shaft sinking.
It soon petered out however, and a short probe showed the vein assumed its normal character.
It might reasonably be queried why this probe wasn't taken much further along the vein.
Some years previously, however, a long tunnel, North Cross-cut, was taken off (along a fault) from a point further along the Deep Level (see Fig. 19a) to try the Dry Gill Vein — at the intersection it was found to be a barren quartz string.
About this time licence was obtained to prospect in the Seathwaite and Dunnerdale region but no great discoveries appear to have been made.
It seems certain that over the next few years the returns for all the work done did not satisfy Taylor, who wrote again in 1840 to the acting agent Moser, asking for a reduction of the Royalties to one-fifteenth.
He had made enquiry in Cornwall to ascertain what dues were typical in that county and from the information he had gleaned he was able to show that Consolidated Mines paid one-twentyfourth; Tresavean and South Roskear one-twentieth; and North Roskear to two different Mineral Lords — one-twentieth and one-fifteenth.
Clearly therefore, the Coniston rate was well above the Cornish average!
It was Taylor's opinion that their experience had proved that although a considerable quantity of ore remained to be got from the various veins, the expenses of all kinds in the district, remote as it was from other mining fields, prevented fair remuneration for risking capital and exerting their skill.
He pointed out that they had from the start prosecuted a vigorous trial even though cross-courses had led to "vast expense" and that they were, as spiritedly as ever, carrying on "bold works" .
An account to substantiate his claims showed that there had indeed been a great output with £8,000 paid in Royalty over the last 17 years of operation.
They the Adventurers however, had profited to the amount only of £412: 12s. 9d…without reckoning any interest on the first outlay.
The partners' hope was that Her Ladyship would act towards them, as before, with "spirit of liberality and fairness" .
This time Lady le Fleming acquiesced to the plea and from the beginning of 1841 working continued at the desired one-fifteenth.
The presence of the mine must have had an effect upon the small village of Coniston and the surrounding area.
The mine, with the associated influx of workers, and the demand for materials, must have injected a deal of money into the local economy.
It is not easy to assess the social implications of the mine, but certainly there would have been overcrowding.
Single miners, and those with families left behind, tended to drink a great deal, perhaps to drown their loneliness and sorrows, and often slept it off in barns and outbuildings adjoining the pubs and beer-houses.
Local tradespeople obviously benefited, but to what extent can only be guessed at.
Many materials — iron work, gunpowder, candles, timber, coal, and so on, were obtained from further afield and even     the benefit of smelting the ore was denied the area.
Times were not easy and there would have been much evidence of hardship, although actually we know very little of the ordinary day-to-day life of the miner and his family.
Some kept fowl and/or a "Christmas pig" and that was always something to look forward to (though not for the pig).
The Tutworker could have a reasonable income which was more or less guaranteed; the Tributer was more in a position of winning or losing; the Day Workers, with the lowest wages, were only hired as required but even so were better off than the local farm labourer; bearing in mind that the mine was not a particularly unhealthy one.
The Tradesmen were well placed, with a constant demand for the services of blacksmiths, carpenters, masons, timbermen and the like.
The introduction, in October of 1840, of a Mine Club, was probably welcomed by the majority though there would always be a few who would begrudge the payments.
This was to provide sick or "hurt money" to an incapacitated man:
It was in 1842 that the Kinnaird Commission, appointed to enquire into children's employment, reported that 97 children and young persons were engaged in mineral dressing activities at the Church Coniston Mine.
The youngest of these was a girl of six; the other's ranged up to the age of 12, after which it seems, they were regarded as adult.
Wages earned by the male children were from 2/ to 8/ a week.
The girls earned less — 1/6 to 4/6 weekly.
Hours of work were from 7 am. until 6 pm, allowing one hour for lunch.
These however, were summer hours, and as the days shortened into winter with lighting not practicable for the surface sheds and floors — no work was done before or after daylight.
Advantage was taken of the earlier hometime, during the winter period, to attend night or day school towards which the company contributed about £24 per annum.
Sunday school was a "must" for many of the children and the institution was for teaching the "three R's" as well as the obligatory religious instruction.
A fee of one penny a week was initially charged to attend the night classes but after objections from the 18 to 20 year olds the teaching was provided gratuitously resulting in improved attendance with the "boys" advancing rapidly.
The concept of early 19th Century working class education needs to be viewed cautiously.
Poverty amongst the lower classes was an expected and accepted facet of societal structure and education was rarely of a good standard, being intended for a lowly station in life, laced with religion and related to prescribing the sanctity of the sabbath.
Exactly how efficient the system was at Coniston is difficult to assess.
Of 70 male young persons and children who worked at the mine, and whose ages ranged from 7 to 17, only 8 or 11.5 per cent were able to write — only one of the eight being below 13 years old.
Those able to read totalled 63 (90 per cent), whilst 76 per cent attended Sunday School with 81 per cent being present at public worship.
Of 16 female children between 6 and 12 years of age, not one was able to write, though 15 could read; 14 attended worship and Sunday School.
Of 11 young females between 13 and 15, only one was able to write; 10 were able to read; six attended Sunday School, and nine public worship.
The extent to which these young people were able to read and write, even when claiming that ability, was often limited to stringing together a few simple words — the Lord's Prayer might be learned "parrot fashion" .
Little help might be expected from parents.
Many of the children, even if not born in Ireland, were of Irish parents who  had left behind appalling deprivation in their homeland and whose lives had been one long struggle for survival.
The 1851 Census shows that in Church Coniston, the township which supplied most of the labour for the mine, there were 370 children between the ages of 5 and 15, of whom 76.6 per cent were listed as scholars only.
Of the children at the copper works it is not indicated precisely how many attended at least some form of educational establishment, though of course many did.
For most of these children their attendance at school would be limited to a pitifully short period of their young lives.
Many of the child workers at the mine, suffering as they did such long hours and the effect of the physical demands of their labour, would be constrained from attending evening classes.
They would be unable at times to concentrate or even to stay awake, It is very noticeable that Barratt required "as far as possible" the attendance of the children at school during the winter "when they are unemployed" .
The Rev. Thomas Tolming, incumbent of Church Coniston, not surprisingly was of the opinion that the Sunday School was excellent; certain ladies of the parish superintended it with great care and attention, improving the moral conditions of their young charges, and no doubt at the same time driving home the virtue of obedience, and respect for God and their betters.
It appeared then, that the mining company cared that the children should have the chance of some education.
The same paternalistic attitude probably emanated from some of the more indigenous landed gentry of the district, who at the same time harboured misgivings over the flood of workers into the quiet township.
Altogether, it can be assumed that there was a fair degree of literacy generated, bearing in mind the times and the remoteness of the region.
In 1842 the youngest employee at the mine was a girl aged six, yet numbers were turned away as being too young!
Some of the children must have been taken on subsequent to harrowing, tearful, interviews with mothers with babies in arms, or even the children themselves.
Those extra shillings, or even pennies, were often sorely needed, But what was a reasonable age for a boy or girl to commence a life of labour at a copper mine?
Would John Barratt have considered ten or nine or eight as suitable?
Still we cannot compare those days with these.
At least the children were not subjected to the brutal excesses common enough in the collieries of that time.
The harshness of the new poor law of 1830, and the fears it instilled in the minds of the working class, can scarcely be comprehended by the "poor" of the present times.
It is true that relief from the parish might be obtained in case of distress, but there would always be those whose pride would forbear them from applying for the pittance — at least they would avoid the humiliating and rigorous means test.
Ann High's husband worked at the mine, but with eight children it  was so difficult in winter that she was forced to apply for relief to buy extra clothing.
Three of her children actually worked at the mine.
In 1843 there was David earning 3d. a day; Isaac on 5d.; and Thomas with 1/.
A year later and they had all been given a rise of one penny a day.
Anna Fleming, a widow, had seven children.
Her husband, up to the time of his death, had been a miner although there had been occasions when he had made scarcely any wage — but still he had never sent his children to the mine.
Those of Anna's offspring who were employed, were themselves unable to help her with money.
One child was in the care of the Misses Beevers, prominent local  philanthropists .
One was almost 10, whilst the youngest attended school.
Upon application for help she was refused, and nothing was provided to bury her husband either.
Indeed, she was asked why she had not sent her children to the mine.
The Rev. Thomas Tolming said that the Relieving Officer refused aid to deserving poor families who had children, considering that they ought to be put to work at the mine.
This, said the Rev. Tolming, even when the children were so young that they should not have been sent out, and also when the nature of their health rendered it dangerous.
At the mine the work itself was certainly tedious, and physically demanding, but the young ones were not driven beyond their capability.
Barratt considered that he paid "great attention" to their welfare, and no corporal punishment was administered.
Instead wrong-doers, or even the mischievous who came under the stern eye of the chief dresser, were sent off home to their parents, and like-as-not, a strapping.
They were not included in the mine club.
Most of the tasks allotted to the boys and girls were under cover in open fronted sheds.
During winter ice could petrify the water-races and becks, preventing a supply to the water-wheels powering machinery.
In such cases the dressing staff was sent home — without pay of course.
It must have been a dismal job for those children, who, like children everywhere, would have preferred to have been playing rather than handling ton after ton of cold wet ore and stone.
What did they do for their meagre earnings?
Well, dressing the ore means preparing it for market.
This meant that the stuff from the mine had to be reduced by stages to a coarse sand which was then processed to extract the copper (and other minerals).
This was their task but that sums it up too simply.
Run-of-mine-material was brought out of the mine in horse drawn mine waggons (sometimes it was carted) and tipped onto sloping grizzleys of strong iron bars set apart to allow an undersize of 4 in.
The oversize was broken, or ragged, where it fell by older or stronger boys or women, using heavy sledgehammers, for which task they were paid 1½ pence per barrow load.
(See Fig 21.)
Mixed with the   undersize, it was then hand sorted into three grades: solid chalcopyrite; good ore with some gangue or rock adhering; and low grade stuff The solid ore was passed to the bucking shed where maidens using heavy buckers, hammers with wide flat heads, beat it on iron plates, each fed from a small hopper (See Fig. 22), to about thumbnail size.
This was then ready for sampling and marketing.
The ore/gangue mixture was cobbed or spalled by young women seated at anvils, holding the piece in one hand and beating it with a hammer.
The pure stuff was passed to the bucking team.
The ore mixed with waste to such an extent that it could not be improved by hand was mixed with other low grade stuff and barrowed to the buckers whose job it was to reduce it to walnut size for delivery to Cornish roll-crushers and then to the stamps.
In all cases the broken ore was allowed to fall about the girls' feet from where it was shovelled by the younger boys and girls and wheeled to the respective piles or hoppers, At all stages waste was thrown aside   ready for tramming or barrowing to the spoil heaps.
Obviously the girls were liable to incur unpleasant finger or hand injuries from badly aimed blows.
It was customary to wear heavy iron or brass rings around their fingers, these being made by the mine smiths.
There appears to be no record of such injuries but there is an account, for May 1845, of £1: 1s. paid to Mr. Fell, the mine surgeon, for attending to Sarah Duke who was crushed by a waggon in the mine.
A mine truck was always known as a waggon — horse drawn carts were referred to as carts, so Sarah was obviously in the mine — quite a different thing from being at, or on, the mine.
So what exactly happened to young Sarah, who was only 10 or 11 years old at the time?
Her father Thomas, a Dalton-in-Furness man aged 44, after marrying a Millom girl (also Sarah), moved to Ulverston where he worked in the capacity of general labourer.
Around 1839 the family moved to Coniston where, in 1840, he obtained a start at the copper mine doing sundry or day work and renting one of the mine cottages.
Around this time his wage rate came to 2/3 a day, but he rarely worked more than about 10 days in any month, and in some months  he did not work at all.
Possibly he supplemented his income with some part-time outside work.
By 1845 Thomas was clearly more versatile, putting far more time in at the mine, performing better paid tasks such as kibble filling, and waggoning from the Deep Level to the dressing floors.
He was regularly attending to the pumps on Sundays for which he was paid 1/ the "stem" , or day, and he assisted in the workings by wheelbarrowing and other miscellaneous jobs.
For April 1845 his account runs thus:
The takings would be split with his partner in a previously agreed manner, with Thomas Duke having a greater share being "leading man" .
This would be especially so if his partner was one of his several sons.
His two eldest, William (19) and Thomas (16) and even Richard (14) had all been described four years earlier, in the 1841 census, as miners.
William and Thomas' names never appear in records — they would not if they were part of a company or gang, for it was the leading hand who collected the money and is mentioned in pay books.
Richard did however, work on the dressing floors fairly regularly around this time earning 6d. a day.
The three eldest girls, Agnes, Sarah, and Nancy only worked infrequently at pressing, as if perhaps to get some cash for a new dress, or a pair of shoes, but possibly to assist the family in times of particular money shortage.
During May of 1845 Thomas Duke and his partner, who might have been a son, were waggoning in the mine.
They would fill the waggons from the hoppers at the shaft stations on Deep Level, then after coupling them together, say, in sets of three, the horse would be hitched on and the train hauled out to the grizzleys at the dressing floors.
It would have been customary to allow the animal its own head, and to hold on to the last truck, or hitch a lift by hanging onto the end.
The further the distance travelled in the mine, the higher the rate of payment.
On the day of her accident Sarah was not working at the mine, and this poses the problem of why she was there.
Not to play.
The stern overseer would never have allowed her to distract the other children.
Could it be that her mother sent her there with a hot pie or pasty for her father?
If he was not at the reception hopper grizzleys, it is quite probable that she would wait for him at the entrance to Deep Level.
Did she then grow impatient, and concerned at the pasty cooling in the wickerwork basket, lighted a candle and bravely set off up the tunnel determined that her daddy would have a hot meal?
Possibly her father had earlier taken her up into the workings to show her where he was working; even so it would have been an apprehensive little girl who made her way along that long tunnel.
Was it in there that she met with her accident?
Might it have happened that she met a horse drawn set on its way to day, and that she squeezed herself against the tunnel wall in a vain attempt to let it by without harm to herself?
Possibly her dress caught on a passing truck which pulled her down.
It is a chilling thought that the waggoner was her father, or brother, and horrified, but impotent to prevent it, he witnessed the incident.
Oblivious to her injuries, Thomas Duke would have carried his daughter back to their cottage in his arms, though it is conceivable that she was carried on an old door or something.
Despite the ministrations of the Mine Surgeon poor Sarah died on the 13 June, and after this date none of the Duke girls appear to have worked on the mine again.
The story of this family can be traced a little further.
Richard (15 in 1845) is seen assisting his father underground in October 1845 when he earned 5/ for five days of kibble filling.
His father was wheelbarrowing, apparently in connection with this, and for six shifts or stems at 2/6 he earned 15/ less 6d. for the Mine Club.
That same month he was paid 3/6 per 100 for filling 471 kibbles which came to 16/5 from which 1/2 was deducted for candles, and 1/ for a spade.
During September he earned £2: 15s. for 22 stems at 2/6 less 1/ for the Club.
During August he had nothing; for July he picked up 4/, which was a short payment from June when as leading hand of a gang of four he collected £10: 7s.: 7d.
This shows that Thomas earned about £6: 18s., plus Richard's 5/, during five months…it was not a lot of money to keep a family of 11 (it would have been 13 save that Elizabeth, born in May 1836, appears to have died in infancy; and of course Sarah was gone).
It is true that the two eldest sons, William 19 or 20, and Thomas 16 or 17, might have been working in the mine as subsidiary members of a gang and are unrecorded in accounts.
It might well be that some of them had work as servants, or in agriculture — but there would be strong competition for the latter, for quite apart from the regular farm labourers there were a considerable number of workmen not as fully employed at the mine as perhaps they would have wished.
As for the Dukes, it seems that fate having struck once in the case of Sarah, was disinclined to give up.
Some tragedy appears to have  befallen the family and it appears likely that the grim reaper called for both parents around 1846.
Nancy and Agnes, the two oldest girls, found work as servants in the region.
The two youngest, Mary Ann, and Jane, then 5 and 2, are seen living with their uncle in the Ulverston workhouse.
Frances (Fanney in the '41 Census) married a mason, John Braithwaite of Ulverston, whilst her brother John, 9, became apprenticed to the mason trade, possibly with the Braithwaites.
The three eldest sons are thought to have continued in mining, though one, according to tradition in an American branch of the family, was later believed lost at sea.
The dressing staff was taken on "as required" and a good worker, lad or lass, was more likely to be given regular work.
As a consequence of casual labour the actual take-home pay, irrespective of the rate of payment, could be pitifully small, ranging from just a few coppers in a month to the best wages of all the men on the machines and, top of the league, the head dresser.
Richard Woolcock held this post for ten years or so during which period his day rate of 3/4 rose to 3/6 allowing him to earn more than £5 in a month.
The winters must have been particularly hard on the children of the mine.
They would trudge up the mine's track before dawn, heads bowed before the onslaught of a sleet laden gale, fearful of being dashed into the chasm down which the Church Beck roared unseen.
They would cry with the pain of numbed fingers as they worked on the never ending piles of ore.
During the early 1840's the following girls appear with some regularity in the accounts: Mary Briggs 6d. a day, Hannah Cowper 6d, Hannah and Susannah Kempe 5d. & 6d., Sarah Lawton 5d., Hannah Smith 6d., Sarah Tomlinson 6d., Mary Thompson 6d., Mary Ann Townson 6d., and Agnes and Hannah Woodburn 6d. and 5d.
Mary Woodend, Margaret Tindal, June Smith and Hannah Hodgson were probably older girls and were getting 1½d. a barrow load; they were probably breaking lumps or cobbling, though the last two earned only 1/9 each in July of 1843.
Over the years girls came and went: Jane Robinson, Alice Knowles, Agnes Townson, Mary Mossop, Elizabeth Bowness, Margaret and Mary Walker, Margaret Kinsala, Priscilla Pepper, Isabella Robinson, Ellen Redmond, Margaret Dixon, Mary Martindale, Fanny, Nancy and Mary Tomlinson, Katherine Ryan, Nancy and Elizabeth Smith, Nancy Thompson, Elleanor and Ellen Marr, Caroline, Elizabeth and Mary Ann Truscott, Alice Knowles, Ann and Sarah Birkett, Elizabeth Williams, Ann Parker and Jane Relph et al.
Throughout the 1840's the number of persons in this department varied from 60 to 90+ per month.
By the late 50's their wages had risen somewhat and there were often well over 100 at work in any one  month, although fewer were females.
The only names to crop up with any regularity by then were Isabelia Penny, Mary Ryan, Ellen Redmond, Mary Connor, Ann Kinsala and Jane Fearon.
Space forbids the listing in entirety of the young lads, but what grand names they had, some of them; Parker Denver, Houseby Birkett, Patrick Fitzwilliam, Benjamin Gribble, Abraham Halliday, William Millican, Isaac Nicholson, Moses Tubman, Nicholas Werry: and there were the Atkinsons, the Bowness', Floyds, Griggs, Halls, Donovans, Collinsons, Oldfields, Speddings, Jacques', Lathams, Parkes, Woolcocks, the Lewthwaites, and so on and so on.
Many of these were destined to become miners in their turn, but for the girls it was the problem of finding a good husband and the inevitable hardship of raising a family.
Often whole families of brothers and sisters worked on the dressing floors — in 1845 William High joined his three brothers.
On 5d. a day, he earned 4/3 in his first month.
A battery of stamps consisted usually of four wooden baulks placed vertically, riding in guides, each shod with heavy iron heads which were lifted alternately by means of cams on a revolving axle, acting upon lifters or tappets affixed to the sliding baulks, The stamps were raised and dropped about 12 inches, at a rate best able to cope with the material fed.
The heads stamped the ore in stamp places or mortar's and being subject to much wear and tear were frequently replaced, Mortars weighed about 42 lb., and the heads 300 lb. each,
Attendants ensured a steady feed to each head by scraping the material into a flow of water delivering into the mortars.
When pounded sufficiently fine it flushed out through sieves or perforated plates and thence to hoppers or heaps for further processing, it was important to keep the grills clear, and the stuff moving, for it was vital not to overstamp it into slime.
The next operation would have been tubbing (or jigging), The stamped ore was shovelled onto wooden trays with sieve bottoms, and equipped with handles, and these were agitated by hand in large tubs of water with an up-and-down motion.
This practice, unchanged over the years, effected a good separation of the heavier ore from the lighter dross but was an arduous task, and in winter a severely cold one.
It was performed by boys stooping uncomfortably over the tubs.
Barratt soon made tubbing a semi-mechanical process though the dross still had to be scraped off at regular intervals (perhaps for further jigging), and also the copper ore for further concentration.
In due course the jigs became fully mechanical, and water powered.
A bed of dense material lay on the sieve and the water/ore/dross mixture fed above it.
Agitation caused the heavier ore to fall through  the dense media into hoppers below, whilst the waste rode off with the current of water into further units, and eventually the sand pile.
In time there came to be installed six sets of two jigs, each set holding 5 tons in the base and requiring emptying twice weekly.
Inevitably fines and slimes were produced and these were collected in settling lagoons.
They contained copper so were periodically emptied and processed.
For years this was carried out by the "vanners" ; men effecting a separation on special vanning shovels using a method perhaps best described as somewhat akin to panning for gold.
But this skill was replaced by the inclined table which simply had the slime/water mix fed on at its top end, the stream of water carrying away the waste.
This waste would still contain some even finer copper ore and so there might he several such washings.
These sloping tables were often set into the ground and were then known as buddles, but there were circular convex and concave huddles which were mechanical.
The principle was the same however — the reliance of the mineral with its heavier specific gravity, settling down quickly whilst the waste rode off with the water.
When other ores, such as lead or zinc were mixed with the copper, the separating process became more complicated.
In the early 1840's it was computed that some 240 or so adult male workers found employment at the mines.
Those who were miners worked a three-shift system — eight hours a day, six days a week.
No work was carried out on Sundays, though a watchman was appointed to keep an eye on things, being paid 1/ the day.
The 1841 census reveals 227 "copper miners" , but many of them were in fact children.
According to the census, 23 were 15 years of age; four were 14: two were 13; four were 12; and two were 10.
Some of the 15 year olds might well have been helping underground, but ignoring this, it leaves us with 174 adult underground workers.
All of the young persons listed as copper miners were boys, but the census does not reveal a single girl as being employed at all, and that was just not so.
It also provides poorly for origins of the workers…116 are shown coming from outside the county, which was Lancashire: 106 are from the county, but this does not disclose which were from the district around Coniston.
Only four are listed as Irish in the column provided, with one Scotsman.
Two other immigrants (not at the mine) are listed: an Irishman, McCowey, arid Scotsman, McBracken, both painters.
At the time, the population of both Monk Coniston and Church Coniston consisted of 772 males, and 645 females — a total of 1,417.
They lived in 264 houses which averages 5.36 persons to a household.
In reality the distribution was nothing like as even as this.
The great influx of workers had led to pockets of serious overcrowding.
The Forge Cottages, which are still in use, housed 134 persons of whom 54 worked at the mine.
Seventy-one of  them were 15 years of age and below.
The company was quite aware of the housing problems, and rented accommodation wherever it was available.
Three cottages at Far End, Coniston, cost the mine £6: 15s. every six months and since about 1836 John Aldersley, mentioned later in the text, occupied one of these with his wife and four children, one of whom had been crippled when a heavy cart wheel fell on him in Greenodd.
Some of the houses were very likely in poor condition.
Thomas Duke (mentioned earlier) occupied a cottage up at the mine, probably in Irish Row, and it was bad enough, or unfinished enough, to require 170½ square yards of plastering, for which Miles Mason was paid £5: 13s, 4d.
During 1845 no less than £45: 0s.: 0d. was spent on slating and floor flagging at the Forge Cottages, which suggests the ground floors might originally have been earth — common enough.
Considerable work was carried out at the old carding mill.
It was during 1844 that the mine built 10 cottages for worker's, above the village, on Cat Bank.
William Robinson earned £1: 1s. for 10½ days clearing scrub and top soil from the site.
William Knipe and his partner made a bargain at £24: 17s. to quarry rock for the houses: they were charged £1: 19s.: 8d. for powder, and 11/6 for blacksmith's cost, Abraham Pattinson and William Harrison contracted to build the row for £181: 6s. a figure which included £4: 9s.: 6d, for extra walling — 71 sq.
yds. 6 sq.
ft. 1/3.
Henry Walker had £70: 0s.: 0d. over seven months for plastering the buildings, whilst James Wearing received £284: 0s.: 0d. for the joinery and carpentry, but supplied the wood and nails.
John Barker was paid £22: Os. 0d. for the painting and glazing, and for the survey and drawings George Robinson received £2: 12s.: 6d.
John Barratt seemingly owned the land for which the company paid him (for a little more than, two acres) £244: 7s.: 6d.
For shifting material with a horse and cart James Bell was paid £1: 12s.: 0d. for eight days' work.
During December of 1847 it was decided that the inhabitants deserved toilets and Joseph Braithwaite was given the contract which included 10 peat houses.
For 10½ days cutting the ground he took (2/6a day) £1: 6s.: 3d.; for 273 yds. 1 ft. sq.
of walling at 1/6 he had £20 9s. 8d for slating their roofs, 127 yds. 8 ft. sq.
at 5d. he was paid £2 13s.: 3d.
No doubt the privies, there were two of them, were much appreciated by the tenants, but one wonders how they managed for the previous two or three years.
It is pretty certain that the watercourses which ran down down to the lake were pretty foul in those days, although, it is quite possible that excrement was utilised to a fair extent as a garden fertiliser.
Of course, the houses were built out of necessity, but at the same time they were inevitably a speculation.
For a random block of 12 months prior to Cat Bank's completion, income from rents came to   £124: 0s. 4d.
After completion a random block of 12 months brought in £172: 1s.: 3d.
The Braithwaites, Joseph and Daniel, were employed on a regular basis as masons and did a great deal of work, not only on the mine, but off it, such as at Cat Bank where a large amount of walling was required apart from the actual building.
Their rates of pay were normally 3/ to 3/6 a day when they were not on piece work.
During the building of Cat Bank £3 was paid to Thomas Barrow for damage to his adjoining land, but it was Joseph Barrow who was paid £5: 13s.: 9d. for land taken to widen the road from the Black Bull Inn to the fell gate — in all 273 yards at 5d.
Lucky for some!
But not for others.
Over a period of seven months the widow Hoskin was gifted payments totalling £6: 3s.: 6d. and this must be presumed to be her pension!
Mrs. Davey, whose husband had been an agent for a good many years on £16:0s.:0d. per month was granted £16: 12s.: 8d. upon his death in 1847.
As we have seen the true extent of the migration to Coniston is rather difficult to determine at this stage, but many of the newcomers possessed certain skills which the mine was quite happy to take advantage of, in addition to their abilities as miners.
This applied particularly to the employed-as-required surface or day-workers.
Even so, a miner such as Anthony High, who was formerly a cobbler, could earn money repairing underground shoes for the management, and in June 1846 he was given 3/ for repairing a blacksmith's leather bellows.
William Thwaite was paid for repairing underground shoes from time to time.
Brian Mason was allowed 17/2 for repairing and whitewashing the offices.
Mathew Pattinson (one of two Pattinsons — the only miner's living in Torver, 1½ miles away), was another man with skill at leather work.
Edward Gould made 12/ for cutting three acres of grass for the mine horses, and in another period was making water-races at Paddy End, constructing 242 yards at 3d. per yard.
William Fleming was paid £10: 9s.: 6d. for tailoring flannel and duck underground clothes for the agents, but probably supplied the material himself.
Even John Barratt earned money on the side — £18 for grass for three mine horses over 20 weeks.
Moses Mossop was regularly at work making and mending wooden barrels.
Grocer's and farmers worked at the mine.
Some earnings were probably quite unexpected…
Agnes Barrow was paid 1/ a night for attending upon a sick or injured miner, T. Smith, who probably lived alone, quite possibly in miserable circumstances.
Margaret Robinson at first, then Hannah Parke, were paid for sundry work around the account house.
John Denver was adept at metal work and could earn £2: 7s.: 6d. for making powder cans.
Output in these early years is not easy to assess with accuracy.
In 1837 there had been improvements to the dressing floors, and it was then considered likely that every two months about 400 tons of merchantable ore and concentrate would soon be a reality, though the low price of copper prevailing at that time was felt to be something of a drawback.
Even so, it was hoped that the output might rise to 500 tons.
The produce was being sent to the Merseyside smelters such as Thos.
Daniel, Sutton Copper Works, St. Helens; Messr's Sneyd & Co., Whiston Copper Works; but especially to The British & Foreign Copper Co., Liverpool.
During 1838 and 1839 the latter took the entire amount of 4,719 tons 4 cwt. 6 stones dry weight with a value of £35,302: 11s.: 4d.; Royalty paid was £2,712: 12s.: 8d., being one-twelfth, but after the deduction of certain expenses related to the selling.
The average monthly output is seen to be about 196.5 tons, which consisted of 72 parcels of various weights, copper percentages, and therefore values, ranging from £2: 5s.: 1¾d. to £14: 10s.: 9¾d. a ton; rates being determined by the fluctuating Cornish Standard.
On Merseyside the ore at some stage probably entered into that unexpected and unusual relationship which existed between the soda, salt, glass, soap, and chemical industries.
Barratt was confident to declare a dividend of £1, 200 in 1837 of which he had £300.
During 1838 another dividend yielded £30 per share.
Barratt's salary was increased in April that year to £250, with John Taylor's being stepped up to £120.
Nevertheless, despite the  apparent well-being of the enterprise, expenses ran high and the failure of a creditor to pay promptly could cause the monthly sheet to indicate a loss if only temporarily.
Getting the stuff from the mine to the port of dispatch, was the financial responsibility of the mine, and in fact it was a protracted, and labour-intensive, process.
The heavy material was carted down to a quay on the lake shore, adjacent to Coniston Hall, which had been specially constructed by the company.
An earlier wharf there had been used as long ago as the mid 17C. to off-load haematite brought up from Low Furness mines for the le Fleming family's iron forge on Church Beck.
Names such as Thomas, Adam, William, and John Barrow; Thomas Grigg; James Bell; John Speddy; and Isaac Irving are found amongst the carters.
These were employees of the mine and were paid 2/4 a ton, and it was hard earned, with hand filling and unloading.