

The Seagulls
At low tide the Thames seems rather to let down London.
The majestic river, bringing life from the sea to mingle with the fresh water coming from the wooded valleys of the Upper Thames, has withdrawn: it is like a very old face, once-beautiful skin shrunk and wizened, hollows and grey lines instead of rosy cheeks.
Instead of water lapping the romantic old stone walls of wharves and warehouses, palaces and towers, there is mud — a pallid dark grey mud, littered with the dunnage of long-dispersed cargoes, bits of broken packing cases, carried up with the tide and brought down again, the rusted frames of worn-out bicycles, the pathetic remnants of somebody's pram, upside down, its upholstery all gone, motionless, futile wheels apparently beseeching something from the air.
Yet Shirley Millings, walking across Southwark Bridge shortly before six o'clock on  a June morning, rather liked the river at low tide.
Somewhere in her thirties, long abandoned by a useless husband, and with two small children to bring up, she was not given to self-analysis.
If she had been, she might have reflected that the Thames at low tide symbolises lost opportunities, the failures that are inseparable from other people's successes, the blank misery that is too often the other face of the coin of commerce.
But Shirley Millings, who left school at fifteen, didn't think like this.
And she was not unhappy.
Indeed, she was conscious of good fortune in having at last got a council flat in Southwark, and in having good neighbours in the flat across the landing who saw that her children — a boy of nine and a girl of seven — ate their breakfast, and got them off to school.
It was wonderful, too, to live within walking distance of her job as an office cleaner in a big building in Upper Thames Street.
She'd had bad times before she got the flat, but with the flat and the job she felt herself well off She worked from six in the morning to a quarter to nine, getting the offices clean and tidy for the staff who came in at nine o'clock, and for two hours in the evening, from six-thirty to eight-thirty.
She liked the morning best, for it was then that she and the three other women who formed a team for one section of the building did the rooms, emptying waste-paper baskets, running a duster over desks, and vacuum.cleaning floors.
In the evenings they washed corridors — that had to be an evening job so that the floors would be dry by morning and nobody could slip on them — and did out lavatories.
It was a nuisance having a working day split in two, but on the whole the job suited her quite well.
It wasn't badly paid, and she could be at home when the children came back from school, and get their tea.
She was in food time this morning, and could spend a few minutes on the bridge, looking at the river.
She knew it in all its moods, the formless expanse of a dark winter morning, the bright sparkle of summer, when the water, however dirty it might be really, seemed to have the freshness of faraway springs.
High tide, with the water welling round the piers of the bridge, and the buildings on the banks seeming to grow from water, was nice, but low tide, as on this morning, had a sort of beauty of its own.
The old prams were not, to her, unsightly.
She  couldn't, and didn't try to, put it into words, but prams belonged to life, and an old pram on the mud gave the river scene a touch of common humanity.
She liked to wonder how a particular piece of jetsam had got there.
And there were more birds at low tide, gulls sweeping low over the mud, sometimes walking on it, leaving little lines of three-toed tracks.
There was a flock of gulls now, wheeling and mewing just below the bridge.
Something seemed to have excited them, they'd found something on the foreshore.
What on earth was it?
A bundle of old clothes — what would gulls want with that?
My God, it wasn't a bundle of old clothes — it had a face, and there was a hand, extraordinarily pale and white, stretched out on the mud…
Mrs. Millings's first instinct was to run away.
It was nothing to do with her, and whatever it was she didn't want to be mixed up in it.
Then she thought, "Suppose he isn't quite dead?" 
She ran out into the road and screamed.
At most periods of the twenty-four hours to run into the middle of Southwark Bridge would be to invite suicide in the stream of traffic pouring across it, but at that time of  morning traffic was relatively light, and there were some gaps between the cars and lorries.
Mrs. Millings was doubly lucky, in that she ran into one such gap, and the approaching vehicle was a police car, with an extremely good driver.
Even so, Police Constable Clifford nearly hit her, and it was only by a combination of his skill and the excellent condition of his car's brakes that he was able to stop a fraction of a second before knocking her down.
She had half fallen over the bonnet when the car stopped.
She subsided into the roadway and screamed again.
P.C. Clifford's first thought was, "Mad woman trying to commit suicide." 
He and his mate both jumped out, he to go to the woman, his mate to stop other traffic on the bridge.
Mrs. Millings put his mind at rest about injuries by struggling to her feet.
He put his arm round her shoulders, and said quite gently, "What do you want to do that for" 
 "It isn't me," said Mrs. Millings.
"Look over the bridge!
There's a dead man lying there — or if he isn't dead he needs help."
Leaving his mate to control the traffic, P.C. Clifford went with her to the parapet of the bridge.
Yes, there was certainly a figure lying  in the mud.
While he was considering what to do, Mrs. Millings walked away.
 "Hi! you can't go off like that," he called after her, and ran to catch her up.
 "Course I can — let me go!" she said.
 "It's nothing to do with me, and I'll be late for work." 
 "Look, Miss," he said,"my mate and I have got to get down to him, but you reported him, and I'm afraid you'll have to tell us how you came to see him.
We'll be as quick as we can.
Afterwards I'll take you on to your job in the car, and explain things to your boss — you won't get into trouble.
But please, don't go away.
It really is important to get your statement, but first we've got to see if we can do anything for the poor devil down there."
Mrs. Millings was pleased at being called "Miss" , and the excitement of being taken to work in a police car was another pleasing thought.
 "All right," she said.
 "I'll wait at the end of the bridge." 
P.C. Clifford and the other policeman got into the car again and drove across the bridge to its junction with Queen Street on the City bank, giving a brief report of what had happened on the radio telephone before leaving the car.
There were some steps going down to  the foreshore near a riverside pub.
The body was lying about fifty yards away, a little downstream of the steps.
To get there they had to cross the mud, and sank in it to their ankles, but below the soft surface the foreshore was hard here, and although it was a filthy journey it wasn't particularly difficult.
One close look at the man was enough to tell them that he was dead, but P.C. Clifford felt his hand and cheek.
Both were icily cold.
 "Can't do much more here," he said to his mate,"and the C.I.D.
will want to see the body as it is.
They said they were sending along at once, so they should be here any minute now.
If you wait here to see that no one interferes with the body, I'll get a statement from the woman, and take her to her job, whatever it is.
Don't think you need actually stand in the mud, though — if we get back to the hard it will be all right."
A little group of people had gathered by Mrs. Millings to watch the police activities on the foreshore.
P.C. Clifford extracted Mrs. Millings, and took her to the car.
She hadn't much to tell him — merely that she had stopped on the bridge for a moment to look at the river, had been attracted by the gulls and  then noticed what was exciting them.
She gave her name and address, and P.C. Clifford then drove her to the big office block in Upper Thames Street, just round the corner.
She wasn't more than a few minutes late, but P.C. Clifford kept his word.
Although he was horribly conscious of his filthy boots, he sought out the supervisor of the office cleaning company by which Mrs. Millings was employed, and explained that she was late only because she had been helping the police to investigate a river tragedy "like a good citizen" .
The Supervisor, initially resentful of the extra floor cleaning brought by muddy police boots, soon found herself softened into liking this polite young constable, and ended by offering him a cup of tea.
P.C. Clifford would have welcomed the tea, but said that he must get back to the scene of the tragedy.
Detective Inspector Ian Redpath had sufficient experience of the Thames at low tide to keep a pair of gumboots in his car, and the police surgeon, Dr. Gillespie, was similarly well equipped.
Dr. Gillespie was about to examine the dead man when P.C. Clifford got back.
 "Get those gawping sightseers off the bridge," Redpath instructed him.
While the constable urged the onlookers to "move along there, please" , Dr. Gillespie made his examination.
 "Middle-aged man," he said,"anywhere between forty-five and sixty, more probably in middle or late fifties.
Body seems in fair condition, own hair, not thinning.
Ah, yes — depressed fracture of skull.
That would be the cause of death, I think, heavy blow from piece of lead piping wrapped in sock, or some such instrument.
Impossible to have been self-inflicted.
I'm afraid you have a murder on your hands, Inspector."
 "Can you say how long he has been dead?" 
"Only within wide limits.
He's been in the water for some time, clothing utterly soaked, whole body chilled.
I can give you a better idea after the autopsy, from examination of the stomach contents.
All I can say at the moment is not less than about six hours, not more than a couple of days."
 "Can you do anything more here?" 
"Nothing.
The sooner you can get him to the mortuary the better.
Well, I'll be getting along.
I'll try to carry out an autopsy later  today, and let you have a report as soon as I can."
A mortuary van drew up at the end of the bridge, and two men, carrying a stretcher, came down the steps.
A police photographer finished the task of photographing the body and its immediate surroundings.
 "You can get him away now," Redpath said.
The men laid the stretcher beside the body, and bent to pick it up.
 "God, he's heavy!" one of them said.
Redpath was puzzled for the body seemed to him to be rather on the slight side.
With a considerable effort the men got him on to the stretcher, and Redpath noticed that his trouser pockets seemed to be bulging rather curiously.
They were stuffed full of rifle or machine-gun cartridges.
So were the pockets of his jacket, adding several pounds of dead-weight to the weight of the body.
Redpath didn't attempt any detailed examination on the spot.
Telling the men to see that the body was left fully clothed in the mortuary until he could get there, he let them  go.
P.C. Clifford and the other uniformed constable lent a hand in getting the stretcher with its heavy burden up the steps.
With the body out of the way, the Inspector closely studied the foreshore where it had lain.
The shape was roughly indented in the mud, but little runnels of water were already seeping into the indentation, for the tide had turned.
Soon there would be nothing left to see.
There was a glint of something half buried in the mud, and Redpath extracted a cartridge, unfired, with bullet and cartridge case complete.
He searched the area, but found nothing more.
 "Presumably fell out of one of his pockets," he thought.
There was no sign of any sort of weapon, either a firearm related to the cartridges, or the kind of heavy instrument that might have caused the injury from which the man had apparently died.
But if he had been in the water for some time, it was unlikely that he had been killed at the spot where his body had fetched up, and equally unlikely that the weapon which killed him was there to find.
Feeling that he had done what he could, Redpath walked back to the steps.
He wanted to get on with the job of examining the clothes and, he hoped, identifying  the body, but he had another job to do first — to call on the River Police and give them such facts as he had.
Inspector Redpath belonged to the City of London Division of the ordinary police, although he knew and loved the river and a good many waterfront cases came his way.
But London's river is also policed by a special force of River Police, expert rivermen, who have a distinguished place in the history of the Thames.
The investigation of anything happening directly on the river would normally be the responsibility of the River Police, at least until such time as it might lead to inquiries inland.
The foreshore at low tide was indeterminate territory, setting problems of similar complexity to those posed by property rights in the seashore below high water mark.
Redpath had been called in because the body on the mud had been reported by P.C. Clifford from a land-based patrol car, but whether it was properly a land or a river matter was a moot point.
If the body had come there as a result of a crime that took place on the river, then the River Police with their specialised knowledge of tides and shipping were the obvious people to investigate it.
But had it happened on the  river?
At present there was no means of knowing.
The River Police Headquarters Building was not far from Southwark Bridge, and Redpath felt he'd better call there to put his problem, before getting involved in something that might turn out not to belong to his division at all.
He asked for Superintendent Carstairs, who happily, was on duty.
The Superintendent knew and liked Redpath, who had worked with his own people on a number of cases.
 "Morning, Ian," he said.
"Always glad to see you, of course, though I must say that I'd hoped to go off duty without any more trouble.
And I can't think that you'd come round at this time of day just for a chat."
"Well, really, that's just what I have come for, Super.
But you'll understand that it has to be a sort of business chat."
 "That body on the hard, just below Southwark Bridge?" 
 "So you know about it!" 
"Ah, you don't suppose anything can happen on our river without our knowing, now, do you?
Yes, the body was spotted by one of our patrol boats, but it was low tide, you see, and not easy to get ashore from a boat just then.
Anyway, before anyone from the crew of the boat could get ashore they saw two uniformed constables come down, and reckoned they'd leave them to it.
Then your people telephoned a while back to say that you'd gone to investigate, so I was more than half expecting you."
 "That makes it easier in a way, but I don't know if it's your job or ours." 
"It'll be work for somebody, anyway.
Tell me what's happened so far."
"The body was seen by a woman crossing Southwark Bridge on her way to work — she's a cleaner at a block of offices in Upper Thames Street.
She stopped a police car and pointed to it.
P.C. Clifford, the driver of the car, got her name and address and a statement from her, though it doesn't amount to anything more than that she was looking over the bridge and saw the body.
Clifford and another constable who was in the car got down to the foreshore as quickly as they could on the offchance that the man was alive and needed help, but they soon saw that he wasn't.
Clifford reported to the station by R/T, and I went along with Dr. Gillespie and  a photographer.
I also arranged for a van to take the body to the mortuary.
"The man was lying in the mud, and the doctor couldn't do much in the way of examination on the spot.
He reckons that death was due to a fractured skull, caused by a blow on the head from some heavy but softish instrument — he suggested a piece of lead piping wrapped in a sock, but it might have been a sandbag, or anything like that.
The blow couldn't have been self-inflicted, so presumably it's murder, or manslaughter, or some peculiar accident.
Until we know a lot more about it, obviously we've got to assume that it may be murder.
The doctor said the body could be taken away, and when the mortuary men were lifting it, something very odd came to light — the pockets were stuffed with live rifle bullets.
I've got one here — not from any of his pockets, but from the mud.
I found it more or less buried in the mud, underneath where the body had been.
Presumably it had fallen out of his clothes."
The Superintendent got a paper handkerchief from a drawer in his desk and took the bullet in a strip of tissue from the handkerchief.
 "Looks like an army rifle bullet," he said.
"It's certainly live — at least, it hasn't  been fired.
Whether it would fire after being in the river, I can't say.
Needs handling carefully, but I don't need to tell you that.
It's not been in the water long enough to corrode.
There's a good fingerprint on the cartridge case — presumably yours, when you got it out of the mud."
He rubbed the base of the cartridge gently with a piece of tissue.
"There are some marks on the rim here, under the mud-maker's mark, or batch mark, I'd think.
An expert should be able to identify them.
I take it you'll send it for examination straight away?"
"Yes.
I'll list it separately, of course, because it wasn't found actually on the body, but I thought I'd send it with the others in the chap's pockets."
"Reasonable enough.
You haven't been through the pockets yet?"
"No — I couldn't very well do it on the mud.
But I want to get on with it as soon as possible, to see if there's anything to identify him.
I thought I'd better come here first, though, in case you wanted to take over."
"You've done all right so far, Ian, and I don't see that we could do any better.
He's obviously been in the river, so it doesn't look as if he was knocked out on the beach.
When  it comes to working out how or where he got in the river, maybe we can help.
But none of us can do much without a full medical report, and an analysis of the water in the clothes — how salt is it, whether there are any traces of fresh-water weed, and all the rest of it."
 "If he's been in the tidal river, wouldn't the water be tidal water anyway?" 
"Not necessarily.
Try running cold water into a hot bath — unless you stir it up, it takes ages to mix.
When you get water in the fibres of clothes it takes longer still.
Suppose he went in somewhere above Teddington — you'd almost certainly find traces of fresh water in the clothes.
But that's a laboratory job.
When we've got some facts, we can get to work on them.
It's certainly your case at the moment, but naturally we'll work together, as we've always done.
Look, if you don't mind, I'll ask Detective Sergeant Burgess to go with you to the mortuary.
He's a good man — he did a fine job of identification in that Tilbury case last year.
Then if there's anything in our line that wants following up quickly, he'll be on hand to do it."
Redpath thought this an excellent idea.
The Superintendent got to work on the telephone.
Then he said,"Burgess is at  home, and I've asked him to report to you at the mortuary.
He should be along in half an hour or so."
He looked at his watch.
"Well, I'm beginning to think about breakfast.
I'd gladly offer you some, but you'll be wanting to get on.
Good luck, Ian — and thanks for coming round so quickly.
People talk a lot about departmental friction, and, of course, it does exist.
But we're all doing, or trying to do, the same job.
You've got to have specialised departments in any big organisation — it helps a lot when people recognise that we can't all be brilliant loners."
Inspector Redpath hadn't breakfasted, either, but he didn't fancy breakfast with that distasteful job at the mortuary in front of him.
Redpath had seen violent death in many forms, and to some extent the technical problems it involved clouded the human side of it.
But Redpath was a good policeman partly because he was also a sensitive and humane man.
He could never forget that the broken body on a mortuary slab was linked, somehow and somewhere, to living human beings — wives or husbands, parents, children, friends who might really care about the dead.
Breaking the news to next of kin was a  vile job.
Often, nowadays, he didn't have to do it; relatives might live in different parts of the country, and usually they were best called on by a uniformed man.
But the responsibility for sending out the grim, pathetic news was often his, and he hated it.
That didn't mean that it was a task to be delayed — from every point of view the identification of a dead person was of urgent importance.
He was familiar with the mortuary, and he knew where the body he had last seen lying in the mud would be.
In accordance with his instructions it had been left as it was, forlorn, unwashed, the crumpled clothes.
with their bulging pockets suddenly become grotesque.
He was wondering whether he ought to start going through the clothes at once, or wait for Sergeant Burgess, when an attendant came to say that the sergeant had arrived.
 "Quick work," Redpath thought.
Detective Sergeant Burgess was a pleasant faced young man, but with hair already greying around his temples, for all that he was; till in his twenties.
"Inspector Redpath?
I was told to report to you,"he said.
 "I'm afraid I don't know much about it yet." 
Redpath gave him a brief account of the finding of the body.
"Now we've got to try to  find out who he is — was, rather.
It's not clear at the moment whether this job is a case for the City Division or the River Police.
Superintendent Carstairs thought it might be helpful if you were present when we examined the clothes.
I agree.
I'm glad that you got here so quickly."
Sergeant Burgess looked at the body.
 "There's something the matter with his head," he said.
"Yes.
He seems to have been hit on the head.
There's no external bleeding, but his skull was fractured, and the doctor thinks the blow probably killed him."
"Clothes of quite good quality.
That's a fashionable lightweight suit.
What on earth has he got in his pockets?"
"Rifle bullets, and they appear to be live ones.
We'd better get them out.
I don't think they're likely to go off, but you never know with live ammunition, particularly when it's been jumbled about, as this stuff has.
I'll empty the pockets, and you stand back a bit.
Write down the contents of each pocket as I call them out."
Burgess didn't much like leaving whatever risk there might be to the Inspector, but he did as he was told.
Redpath put on a pair of  silk gloves and started going through the inside pocket of the jacket, following with the outside pockets.
Little piles of cartridges accumulated on the slab — there was nothing else whatever in any of the pockets.
The trouser pockets produced more piles of cartridges, but also nothing else.
There was no money, no pocket book or wallet, no bunch of keys, no watch, no Penknife — nothing The Inspector next examined the clothes themselves.
A slight discoloration of the lining of the breast pocket of the jacket suggested that there might have been a tailor's label, but if there had been, it had been removed.
Closer examination showed that it had been cut out — a row of stitch-holes could still be seen, and in two places there were scraps of the thread that had formed the stitches.
 "We can get the size of the label, anyway," Redpath said.
He had a pocket steel tape, and carefully measured the marks on the lining where the label had been.
He and Burgess then carefully undressed the body, scrutinising each garment as they came to it.
There was a cotton shirt that had once been cream-coloured, but was now a sodden, muddy grey.
This, too, was of good quality, and there was a small patch on the  collar where another maker's label had apparently been cut out.
There was no tie, but a dark red silk scarf was tucked into the open neck of the shirt.
The man wore no vest.
He had light, cellular underpants, again with no maker's label on them.
He had dark red nylon socks to match his scarf.
There were no shoes.
 "Somebody's gone to a lot of trouble to remove anything that might give a clue to his identity," Redpath said.
"Shoes would almost certainly have had a maker's name on them, and such names on shoes are generally stamped in the leather and not easy to take out.
Perhaps that's why his shoes were taken off.
Well, I don't think there's much more we can do here.
The clothes must all go to the forensic laboratory for examination, and as your Superintendent suggested, for analysis of their water content.
The cartridges must go to the firearms experts.
And the doctor will want the body for his autopsy.
Slip along to the mortuary office, would you, Sergeant, and see if you can get some cardboard boxes for the cartridges, and wrapping paper and string for the clothes, while I let the doctor know that the body is ready for him."
These jobs were soon done, and Redpath telephoned for a police car to take the  cartridges and clothes to their respective experts.
 "I'm going back to the station for a wash," he said,"and then I'm going to have breakfast.
Could you come with men There are a lot of things I want to talk about, and it would be easier in my office, where I've got maps and things."
Cleansed in some sense mentally as well as physically by their wash, and fortified by bacon and eggs in the police canteen, the two policemen stood in front of a big wall map of the Thames.
It was still not quite ten o'clock.
 "Lord, I feel as if I've been living with this case for ever!" 
Redpath said.
 "What do you make of it, Sergeant?" 
"It was high water at London Bridge at twenty minutes to twelve last night.
So it would have been pretty well dead low water when the woman saw him,"Burgess replied indirectly.
"Yes, the tide had just about turned when I got there.
It was coming in again before I left.
Where does that get us?"
"It means that he was floating pretty well down — that he was sinking, but not quite sunk.
And that he was meant to be carried out to sea."
"Well, what was the lead for?
If he'd been thrown in as he was, he'd have sunk for a bit, and then probably come up again.
A dead body is liable to do that.
It will go with the tide, more or less awash, until it finally sinks altogether.
That may take some time, and in a waterway as busy as the Thames a floating body is likely to be seen.
They didn't want that, so they filled his pockets with lead."
 "Why didn't he go to the bottom?" 
"Because there wasn't quite enough lead — enough to keep him down, but not to sink him.
If he'd gone right down, he'd have stuck in the mud, and been out of the tide.
He wasn't, so he didn't go right down, but was carried along under water.
Now you can assume that whoever put him in just made a mistake, or panicked, and couldn't find enough bullets, or something, but the careful cutting out of all those clothes labels doesn't look like panic, or making careless mistakes.
So my reading of the evidence so far is that they didn't want a body lying around on the river bed, where it might come up sometime, or perhaps even be found by divers, but they wanted him carried under water well out to sea."
 "And they miscalculated a bit?" 
"Yes.
But probably they wouldn't have known.
The tidal fall this morning was around two feet lower than normal — I know this because we live with the tide tables, but most people wouldn't think of it.
A couple of feet more water, and he'd have gone on being carried along near the bottom, and safely out of sight.
As it was, he just grounded."
"That seems good reasoning.
Can you work out where he was likely to have been put in?"
 "Not without knowing how long he was in the water." 
"Maybe we'll get some idea of that from the medical report.
Let's think a bit more about the man himself.
The doctor put him in the middle or late fifties, though, being a doctor, he hedged a bit by saying he might be anywhere between forty-five and sixty.
From the look of him, I'd say mid-fifties was about right."
"About that, I'd think.
And a neat dresser, with a bit of money.
That lightweight suit with the cream shirt and dark red scarf was just right for a summer evening — smart, but not dressy."
"If they went to all that trouble to take out  the clothes labels, why did they leave his face untouched?
Why not disfigure him?"
"There could be lots of reasons.
First, it would have been a horrible job.
If the doctor's right about the sandbag or lead piping in a sock, and from the look of things it seems right, they didn't want any blood.
You can t disfigure a face — not enough to make it unrecognisable, anyway — without blood.
And his face wasn't meant to be seen — don't forget, the pockets were weighted to keep the body down.
Given that he'd stay under water in a seaway for at least some weeks, the face would be more or less unrecognisable even if he were washed ashore somewhere later on.
Clothes are different.
It's a long time before cloth wholly decays — look how long a bag of cement lasts under water when it's used for emergency repairs to a sea-wall.
Tailors' labels usually aren't printed — the name is generally woven in; They weren't taking any chances — they didn't want to risk the clothes being identified if anything went wrong."
 "Well, something did go wrong — the behaviour of the tide." 
Detective Sergeant Burgess went off to report to his Superintendent, and Redpath, who'd  been on duty since midnight, decided to try for a few hours' sleep.
He could do nothing more until the various reports he'd asked for came in, and he couldn't hope for anything much before late afternoon.
He didn't go home, but lay down in one of the rest rooms at the police station, asking to be called at once if there was any news.
At two o'clock he was called, and told that he was wanted on the telephone.
It was the firearms expert.
 "You asked me to report preliminary findings as soon as I could, so I'm giving you a ring," he said.
"You'll get a written report later, of course, but it won't have any more than the preliminary findings, because there doesn't seem much to find.
The rounds you sent me are all standard N.A.T.O.
army ammunition, all unfired, and most of them probably still usable.
They've been in water but the bullet fits tightly in the cartridge case, and they don't seem to have been in water long enough for much water to have got in to affect the charge.
They've all come from the same factory — a small arms factory in Belgium.
There's a batch mark which should give you the date of manufacture, but you'd have to get that from the factory, or perhaps through the Ministry of Defence.
They're standard  army ammunition, but not necessarily issued to the British Army — again, the Ministry of Defence should be able to tell you if they've come from some British Army depot or not.
There isn't much else to say.
I've examined each round under a microscope, and none seems to have any fingerprints, except the one that you packed separately, which you say you found in the mud.
That has one good fingerprint on it."
"Yes, it's almost certainly mine, but I'll get it checked, of course.
You did well to spot it.
I didn't think there were any prints on the other rounds, and there can't be any of mine because I handled them in gloves.
Thank you for getting on with things so quickly.
Can you get photographs of the maker's mark and batch mark and let me have them here?"
 "I've already had them photographed, and the prints are on their way to you." 
 "You couldn't have done any more, and I really am grateful." 
Redpath was meditating on the cartridges when there was a knock on his door and Dr. Gillespie came in.
 "I've done the autopsy on that man you found this morning," he said.
"It was a perfectly straightforward job.
Well  nourished body of middle-aged man.
Hair originally darkish brown with a touch of red in it, but greying now.
No trace of dye — sensible man accepted his age.
Organs all in good shape.
He was killed by that blow on the head — a thoroughly savage blow.
Can't tell you precisely what weapon, but my guess of a piece of lead piping wrapped in a sock is as good as any.
The blow would have killed him instantly — at least, he might have lived for a few minutes in a technical sense, but he would have been unconscious and effectively dead.
"He'd had a meal not long before he died — ordinary sort of light supper, I'd imagine.
And he'd taken some alcohol either just before, or with his meal.
But not much — a couple of small gins, perhaps, or a glass or two of wine.
He was dead when he went into the river — no trace of river water in the lungs.
"Time of death — well, you say he was found just before 6 a.m.
He hadn't been dead for very long — my earlier estimate of around six hours will be somewhere near the mark.
The fact of his being in the water clouds things a bit, because it alters normal body cooling.
If you add an hour or two, I wouldn't  quarrel.
That would fit in with supper, say, around eight o'clock."
 "Any distinguishing marks?" 
"None.
No operation scar, no tattoo marks."
 "Teeth?" 
"His own, and in good shape.
One or two extractions, and three fillings.
If you could find his dentist, he could probably identify him.
Of course, he might have had dental work done abroad."
"That's the trouble.
It looks as if we're going to have a hell of a job to identify him.
Every scrap of personal property was removed from his pockets, and every maker's label on his clothes had been cut out.
There was nothing on him but an extraordinary collection of live ammunition — rifle bullets."
 "What on earth for?" 
"Well, the River Police suggest that it was to weight the body enough to keep it under water, but not to sink it.
So that he'd be carried out to sea by the tide without coming to the surface."
"Ingenious, that.
But I don't know, of course."
 "Can you estimate how long he'd been in the water?" 
30"He was dead when he went in, and as he'd been dead only for about six to seven hours, it couldn't have been longer than that.
It might have been less, naturally.
There's no means of telling.
Judging from the general appearance of the body I'd say at least two to three hours, but that's a guess.
It might easily have been six.
Afraid I can't help you there."
"Well, doctor, you've done what you could, and you've helped a lot by coming along.
God knows what the next move is.
I hate unidentified corpses — can't help thinking of women and children, living and waiting in false hopes.
But there it is.
Maybe someone will turn up to report him missing."
Redpath decided to pay another call on the River Police.
The Superintendent had gone off duty, but Sergeant Burgess was there, and an Inspector who'd just come in from a river patrol.
Redpath accepted a cup of tea, and reported the information he had had from the firearms expert and the doctor.
 "I'd work on the assumption that he wasn't put in before high water," Sergeant Burgess said.
"Of course, he could have been put in somewhere on the flood and been carried upstream and then down again.
But from the  look of his clothes it wouldn't seem that he'd been jostled about much by the tide.
If the doctor's estimate of the time of death is anywhere near right I doubt if he was put in before the turn of the tide."
 "How do you reckon he fetched up where he did?" 
The two rivermen considered.
 "The ebb runs at about two knots at half-tide," the Inspector said.
"Wind?
Last night was a light easterly — might have checked the ebb a fraction, but not enough to matter.
Of course, two knots is not a constant speed for a whole tide — you've got to allow for periods of more or less slack water.
Then there's the current in the river itself.
At this time of year not much, it's been a dryish summer, and there's not a lot of water coming down.
Say half a knot — and that's probably an over-estimate.
If you say that a freely-floating body — and the weights would help a bit there, because they'd keep it under water and out of any wind — moves down on the ebb at an average of a bit under two knots, you'd not be far wrong.
But there's a lot of things could upset it — eddies from the piers of bridges, local counter-currents near one or other bank, all  sorts of things.
I reckon it must have been a bridge eddy that put him ashore."
 "Where would we have to start from?" 
"Lord, that depends on when he started!
If he was chucked in from Blackfriars Bridge, for instance, he'd have fetched up where he did in about half an hour."
 "How long do you think it would take whoever killed him to go through his pockets and cut out the clothes labels?" asked Sergeant Burgess.
"No, that's not a silly question.
I'm trying to work back."
 "Not long," said Redpath.
"It would depend on nervous strain or other excitement, of course, but from the look of things this strikes me as a fairly cool job.
Twenty minutes, say — half an hour at the outside."
"A body's not a nice thing to have lying around.
Could we assume that he was put in the river within an hour of being killed?"
 "It seems a reasonable assumption." 
 "Then if the doctor's right, and he was killed around 11 pm., he'd have gone in about midnight." 
 "Good enough for a working theory, anyway." 
"The ebb had started then.
He'd have had, say, five and a half hours of it.
That's five and  a half hours at a bit under two knots — say ten miles in round figures.
That means he could have started somewhere around Hew or Brentford."
Redpath was impressed.
 "There are places up there where he could have been put in all right without attracting too much attention." 
 "Don't forget that high water at Hew is about an hour later than at London Bridge," the River Inspector said.
 "If he went in at Hew at midnight, he wouldn't have started downstream for an hour or so." 
"No more he would.
Perhaps we should make it nearer.
Chiswick, perhaps, or even Hammersmith.
But the  arithmatic 's all pretty chancy."
"It seems likely to have been well up-river, anyway.
I'll have inquiries made from Hammersmith upwards.
Someone may have noticed something.
A body needs at least two people to carry it any distance from a car, and it's not easily disguised.
Of course, they could say he was drunk, or something.
But if anyone saw it, they'll remember."
 "Wait a bit— how do you reckon he was put in?" the River Inspector asked.
"He couldn't have been put in from either bank, because the body was weighted, and it would have  sunk in shallow water.
He must have gone in somewhere near midstream.
It's hard to drop anything as big as a body from a bridge without being noticed — even at midnight.
I don't believe it.
I think he must have been put in from a boat."
To both Redpath and Burgess this seemed incontestable.
Looking for a suspicious boat was clearly a job for the River Police, and they did it thoroughly.
But what made any one boat more suspicious than another?
Any sort of boat could have been used to ferry a body to midstream and to put it gently over the side in darkness.
There are hundreds of places for mooring boats on the Thames — and this boat may have needed only a temporary mooring.
The police could not know whether they were looking for a skiff, a punt, or a cabin cruiser.
And they could not rule out the bigger commercial craft, tugs, lighters, oil tankers, and general cargo coasters, pursuing their lawful occasions on the Thames.
Any one of them might have been used for an unlawful occasion, but, if so, the most diligent inquiries failed to bring it to light.
Inspector Redpath and the ordinary police  made hundreds of inquiries on land, but could learn nothing to indicate who the dead man was, or how or where he met his death.
Analysis of the water in his clothes showed that it was similar to water in the tidal Thames, which bore out the presumption that he had been put in the water below Teddington, but otherwise did not help.
His description was circulated to all police forces throughout Britain, and a number of anxious relatives visited the mortuary to see if they could recognise him as a missing husband, brother or son, but no one did.
The Ministry of Defence said that Belgian ammunition of that particular batch had never been supplied to the British Army, and how it had come into Britain was unknown.
The police began to believe that the dead man must have been a foreigner, killed on some ship visiting London's river, his body disposed of in the darkness, leaving the ship to sail away.
It was not a satisfactory solution of what came to be called the Southwark Bridge Mystery, but no one could think of a better one.
The Banker's Tale
AFTER the strange events which took me to the West African desert, I needed a spell at sea.
I could not get away at once because of all the clearing up there was to do, but at last the files on that unhappy case could be put away, and I was planning a fortnight's cruise in my ancient Yorkshire coble Joanna, now moored on the Crouch.
I hadn't deserted my first love, the Salcombe yawl Lisa, but she lived in my home in South Devon, and now that I was officially attached to Sir Edmund Pusey's Police Liaison Group at the Home Office I had to live in London, and the Crouch was much more accessible.
There were times when Joanna's somewhat footslogging performance made me long for the thoroughbred feel of Lisa, but I had an affection for Joanna and she had one advantage over Lisa — her small cuddy where I could cook and sleep, and be independent of the land.
I didn't know the east coast well, and  having to live in London at least gave me a chance to explore its fascinating creeks and swatchways, and those turbulent, shallow waters of the North Sea that have nurtured some of the finest of English seamen.
I was poring over a chart in my room, working out a passage from Foulness Island to Aldeburgh, in Suffolk, when my door half opened and Sir Edmund looked in.
 "Can you spare a moment, Peter?" he asked.
"If you really mean that, of course.
But I'm starting a fortnight's leave tomorrow,"I replied cautiously.
"I know.
That's what I want to talk to you about.
Come along to my room."
Before I could think of a suitable verbal means of running for cover, he had gone.
With a sinking heart I followed him.
 "Sit down, Peter," he said.
 "There's something I'd like you to do for me." 
I did sit down, but said nothing, and he went on,"It's your own fault entirely.
If you hadn't got such a peculiar aptitude for dealing with improbable situations you could go off and be seasick whenever you want.
As things are, I'd like you to postpone your leave for a bit."
 "I am seldom seasick," I said coldly.
"And  I'm not particularly good at dealing with improbable situations.
The only situation in which I am interested at the moment is the wholly ordinary one of sitting at Joanna's tiller.
You yourself were good enough to say that I had earned some leave, and I want to take it."
"I know all that, and I know I'm asking you to postpone something that means a lot to you.
But I also know that you won't let me down."
He put on one of his most winning smiles.
 "I've asked Sir Geoffrey Gillington to come along in half an hour." 
 "And who is Sir Geoffrey Gillington?" 
 "Sir Geoffrey is chairman of the London Metropolitan Bank, the biggest of the clearing banks." 
 "Useful if you need an overdraft, I suppose," I said bitterly.
"Well, you never know.
But he has a rather curious story which the Commissioner at New Scotland Yard has asked us to look into.
Sir Geoffrey met the Commissioner at a Lord Mayor's Banquet, and when he became worried he naturally went to him.
But — if there's anything in it — it's a complicated matter, involving the bank, a shipping company, the Ministry of Defence and, perhaps, the  Foreign Office — precisely the sort of thing our Police Liaison Group was set up to deal with.
So the Commissioner asked me to see him.
As ships are in your line, naturally I want you to see him, too."
 "Small boats are in my line," I corrected him.
"If it's shipping company finance, you've got Paul Seddon.
He was Scotland Yard's financial wizard before he got into your clutches, and he's damned good at anything like that.
Much better than I am."
"Maybe we shall need him.
But you've worked a lot with Paul Seddon, and you get on with him very well.
Come off it, Peter — you're just quibbling.
The point is, are you with us?"
 "If you put it like that, you don't leave me much choice." 
"Poor old Peter!
It's horrid to give up a leave that you really have earned, and I'm sorry to have to ask you.
But if I didn't know I could count on you, I suppose you wouldn't be here."
"I don't need flattery.
I was brought up to obey orders.
What's this banker's story?"
"He'll tell it himself in a few minutes.
Ask Rosemary to make us a pot of tea."
In my tycoon days, before the collapse of my second career, I'd had a fair amount to do with bankers, and my collective memory of them was of thin, precise men, in dark suits and wearing rimless glasses.
Sir Geoffrey Gillington wasn't in the least like that.
He looked more like a farmer, as, indeed, he was, farming ten thousand acres in Lincolnshire as a highly profitable hobby.
He wore no glasses at all, and had alert, and rather kindly eyes.
Sir Edmund introduced me.
 "Colonel Blair," he said.
 "A member of my department whom I have asked to see if he can help you." 
The banker shook my hand politely, but seemed puzzled.
 "Forgive me," he said to Sir Edmund,"but when I went to the Commissioner, whom I know slightly, I understood that the police would be good enough to look into our problem.
I'm not quite sure why I have been summoned to the Home Office."
Sir Edmund smiled.
"I can understand your being puzzled — we are, perhaps, a somewhat puzzling department, and we are not, thank God, much publicised.
In your bank, Sir Geoffrey, you will employ a variety of specialists, and you will have general managers to coordinate their work.
An organisation as big as the police has to turn to  scores of different agencies.
My department has two functions.
We act as a kind of general staff in the war against crime, and we co-ordinate, if we don't exactly control, the activities of all police forces in the country, particularly when they involve liaison with other services or government departments.
The Commissioner discussed with me the statement you made to him, and we both feel that it may require action on a number of different fronts, and that it would, therefore, be helpful if our Police Liaison Group handled matters from the start.
I hope I've made things a little clearer."
"I'm sorry to have asked for an explanation — you will understand that bankers are trained to be cautious.
You've made things admirably clear, and I'm the more grateful to the Commissioner for taking what may turn out to be my unfounded worries so seriously.
Would you like me to repeat my story now?"
"I shall be glad if you will.
Colonel Blair knows nothing of it yet, and it would be better, I think, for him to hear it first-hand from you."
The banker sat down and accepted a cup of tea.
 "To make sense of it all, I must go back a bit in history," he said.
"The London  Metropolitan, as you probably know, was the outcome of an amalgamation between two other banks about ten years ago — the London Bank and the City and Metropolitan.
I was an old London man myself, and at one time I was manager of the branch in Upper Thames Street — that's going back to just after the war.
It was a fairly general branch, holding accounts for various businesses, and a number of professional firms — solicitors, architects and accountants.
One of my customers was a smallish, but well run, shipping company — T. and T. Coastal and Continental Shipping.
It was — is, I should say — an old concern, going back to the days of coastal ketches and collier brigs, and was founded by the great-grandfather of the present chairman to bring coal from the Tyne to London.
The T. and T. of its title stands for Tyne and Thames.
Like many other coastal shipping companies it met hard times after the First World War, when motor lorries began taking the general cargoes that used to go by sea to all the little ports.
It was the motor lorry rather than the train that really hit coastal trading, for the hinterland of many of the smaller ports is ill-served by main lines, and until the coming of the lorry it was still economic to send a lot of things by sea.
"T. and T., however, was well managed by the Stavanger family, generation after generation of mariners who really understood the shipping business.
It was the tradition in the family for sons to serve their time at sea, and then to command the company's ships.
When the time came, one or other of the sons would come ashore to run the shipping offices.
James Stavanger, the father of the present chairman, Andrew Stavanger, ran the business between the wars.
He was careful, shrewd, and thoroughly able, and made up for the collapse of the older coastal trades by sending his ships farther afield.
He was one of the first to see that the tomato was ceasing to be a luxury and was becoming an established part of the British diet, and he developed an important trade in carrying tomatoes from the Mediterranean.
He turned also to the Baltic for timber and wood-pulp, and to the Netherlands for dairy produce.
All this needed rather bigger ships, and he committed the family heavily — the family rather than the company, for it was still a family concern — to a programme of replacement and new building.
"When the war came he had a fleet of eleven ships, most of them modern carriers of eight hundred to one thousand tons.
Being mostly new, they were exceedingly useful to the Navy, serving as minesweepers and coastal patrol vessels.
They had a splendid war record, but a sad number of casualties.
"James Stavanger died in the last year of the war.
He had two sons, both serving as reserve officers in the Royal Navy.
One lost his life on duty with an Arctic convoy, the other — Andrew — took over the running of the business as soon as he was demobilised.
He had a difficult time, having largely to rebuild the fleet in a period when every shipyard had an order book as long as your arm.
But he had inherited his father's ability, and he was just getting things straight again when he was badly hit by a prolonged series of dock strikes that tied up his ships and prevented them from earning anything.
It was a Stavanger tradition to finance their ships by careful management and frugal living for themselves, and through the difficult years between the wars, the firm had never had an overdraft.
Andrew Stavanger was compelled to turn to the bank for help after the dock strikes, and it was then that I got to know him.
Of course we were able to help him — the Stavangers were among our oldest customers, and their T. and T. shipping line had a well-earned reputation.
For Andrew Stavanger himself I developed a great respect.
There were no problems about his overdraft.
Within five years he had paid back every penny, and by 1960 his ships were making a good deal of money.
"I next had personal dealings with him some four years ago, in very different circumstances.
I was on the board of the bank then, and he came to me for advice about a takeover bid for his company.
It was a curious affair — the takeover offer was not from another shipping company, but from the Ingard property group, a network of companies making speculative deals in land, controlled by the financier Desmond Ingard.
I could see no point in the takeover either for Andrew Stavanger personally, or for the T. and T. company.
By that time the shipping company had accumulated substantial reserves of cash, and as the offer was in Ingard shares I could understand the attraction of the deal to Desmond Ingard.
I advised Andrew Stavanger to have nothing to do with it — as he was the controlling shareholder in  the shipping company, all he had to do was to say no.
But he didn't.
He accepted the offer and the deal went through, the T. and T. line becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Ingard group.
Andrew Stavanger stayed on as managing director of the shipping company, with a seat on the board of the group.
"I don't know why he acted as he did.
Partly, perhaps, because he has no son.
His only brother, the one who went down in the Arctic, died unmarried.
His own wife is dead.
He has one daughter, married to a well-known Politician — Vivian Carolan, who is Minister of Fine Arts in the present government.
Possibly he felt that for her to inherit control of a shipping company might be an embarrassment to her husband in his political career.
But, as I say, I don't know.
"I now come to more recent events.
I am, I fear, betraying the confidence which a banker ought to respect for his customers, but I have thought deeply about it and decided that I must.
The Ingard group is in serious financial trouble, and a fortnight ago presented a cheque for £300,000 which it had neither finds nor a sufficient overdraft to meet — it had already exceeded the limit of the facilities which the bank was prepared to allow.
The  manager of the branch concerned could not possibly pay the cheque, but, since the Ingard group has many small investors and its collapse would have wide repercussions, he at once referred it to the board.
"Many property groups have recently been in difficulties, and it is generally known in the City that the Ingard group has not been doing well.
The full extent of its difficulties is not generally known.
Partly they derive from the economic uncertainties that have upset land values, partly from a disastrous speculation in buying a large area of land in the Thames marshes from the Ministry of Defence.
This was land that had been used by the army for infantry training but which, for various reasons, the Ministry had decided to give up.
Had the plans for a third London airport in the Thames estuary gone ahead, the land could doubtless have been developed at considerable profit.
As things are, it's more or less useless.
Planning permission for a big housing development has been refused, and the group is in deep trouble over it.
I'm not sure if it has frilly paid the Ministry for the land.
I suspect not, and, if so, it has further heavy obligations to meet.
On top of the general fall in the value of property pledged  for various loans, and used to inflate share values, the Thames estuary land deal has put the group on the rocks.
"£300,000 is a large sum, but you will understand, gentlemen, that in terms of the sums that come before my board daily it is not a very significant amount.
One may have one's private feelings on the justice of property speculators getting their fingers burnt, but, alas, these property companies attract many people's savings, and we were all reluctant to force the Ingard group into bankruptcy.
After some discussion we decided to hold up the cheque for a day or two instead of refusing it, while I made some informal inquiries.
I couldn't get hold of Desmond Ingard, then I remembered Andrew Stavanger, whom, I must say, I trusted a good deal more.
I telephoned him at the shipping company, but was told that he was not in the office.
Next morning I had a letter from him, sent round by hand.
Here it is."
Sir Geoffrey took a folded sheet of typescript from his wallet, and handed it to Sir Edmund, who, in turn, gave it to me.
It read, Dear Sir Geoffrey, I am sorry that I was out of the office when  you telephoned this afternoon.
I think I know what you wanted to talk to me about — the rather large cheque for Irwin Osnafeld.
Please pay it.
These are difficult times, as you know, and if it is an embarrassment to the Ingard account please use my personal deposit to meet it.
Yours sincerely, Andrew Stavanger
"What was the deposit?
Was there enough to meet the cheque?"
I asked.
 "Yes," the banker went on,"there was.
I'm afraid I must go back into history again.
It was a tradition in the Stavanger family to keep, through thick and thin, enough money to buy a new ship — in gold.
James Stavanger used to keep the gold in the strong room at the Upper Thames Street branch of the bank.
During the war, of course, gold holdings were requisitioned, and it was replaced by a deposit account at the bank.
Andrew Stavanger would never touch it — even when he needed a bank overdraft, and to use the deposit would have kept down interest charges, he preferred to keep it intact.
With bank interest over the years it amounted to some £320,000-certainly enough to meet the  Ingard cheque.
I was relieved, we met the cheque, and that was that.
"But for some reason I was not happy about it.
My initial relief that there were finds to meet the cheque was replaced by a feeling that the letter was out of character with everything I knew about Andrew Stavanger.
He had refused to touch what he called the Stavanger Final Insurance even when he needed the money for his fleet — why should he use it now for what was only indirectly of concern to him?
The deposit belonged to him personally, not to the T. and T. shipping company, and certainly not to the Ingard group.
It was some years since I had seen his signature.
I had no reason to suppose that the letter was anything but genuine — it was on the shipping company's notepaper, and, insofar as such recollections are of any value, the signature at first glance was in keeping with the signature I remembered vaguely from my days at Upper Thames Street.
But something kept nagging in my mind, and a couple of days later I sent my secretary to Upper Thames Street to get the files of our earlier correspondence with him, and the original specimen of his signature kept by the bank.
When I got them  I became more worried.
Superficially the signatures are alike, but when you look into them closely, there are differences.
Here is a signature that I know to be genuine, on a document guaranteeing his overdraft of over twenty years ago, signed in my presence.
Compare it with the signature on the letter.
The "d" and the "w" of Andrew are somewhat different and a pen stroke joining the "w" of Andrew to the capital "5" of "Stavanger" is also different.
Now I know that handwriting changes slightly as men age, but the essential character of a signature remains the same.
I am a banker.
I was a bank clerk in the days before computers, when the signature on every cheque was scrutinised before the cheque was entered — by hand — in the ledger.
I'm not happy about this signature."
Sir Geoffrey paused to drink some tea.
Neither of us said anything, and he continued.
"We had already acted on the letter by meeting the cheque, and you may feel that my fears came rather late in the day.
I felt so myself.
But I was worried, and I telephoned Andrew Stavanger again.
I intended to say merely that we had done as he had instructed us in his letter, hoping that he would thereby confirm the letter as a matter of course.
But  again I was told that he was away from the office, and a girl who said she was his secretary could give no clear indication of when he was expected back.
His private address is listed in the telephone book.
He lives in Stepney — the Stavangers have always lived in Stepney.
That evening I telephoned his home and could get no reply.
I telephoned again early next morning before he would have gone to work, but again there was no reply.
Next I took the liberty of calling on his daughter, Mrs. Carolan.
I'd telephoned beforehand, and she agreed to see me, but she was obviously puzzled by my visit.
I explained that I wanted to see her father on a matter of business, but that his office had been unable to tell me where he was, and that I could get no reply by telephoning his home.
She then said — these are more or less her exact words —"I'm sorry about this, but I'm not altogether surprised.
His office wouldn't want to talk about it on the telephone, because my father has not been well, and at times has been behaving rather strangely.
He's taken to going off on one or other of his ships — quite reasonably, because he is managing director of the shipping company.
But he goes off just before a ship sails, without telling  anyone.
As far as I knew he's at present on the Charlotte T. — all our ships are called something T., as you probably know — on a trip to Hamburg."
 "I asked her if she expected to see him when he got back, and she said," To be perfectly frank, I don't know.
My father and I are not very close — I'm not a son who could be sent to sea."
She said this, I thought, rather bitterly.
And she added,"Don't misunderstand me — we're on perfectly good terms.
But we have little in common, and since my mother died we haven't had much to do with one another .
He did telephone to say that he was going to Hamburg — that was a little unusual.
But it was a few days before my birthday, and he has always remembered my birthday.
I think he telephoned to explain that he would be away.
That's how I know about this particular trip — otherwise I probably wouldn't."
"Well, that didn't get me much forrader, but it was something.
I got my staff to check on the Charlotte T., and found that she had sailed the day after Andrew Stavanger wrote his letter.
So that was all right as far as it went.
But I sent someone to meet the Charlotte T. when she docked at Tilbury on  her return.
Andrew Stavanger was not on board, and her Master said that he had certainly not sailed in her.
That was three days ago.
It was then that I decided to invoke the help of the Commissioner."
 "What, exactly, do you suspect?" 
Sir Edmund asked.
The banker hesitated.
 "In general, I suspect that there's something badly wrong," he said.
"More specifically, I think I suspect the letter purporting to be from Andrew Stavanger of being a forgery — or, if not, that it was signed by Andrew Stavanger without his fully realising what he was doing.
His daughter says that he had been ill — the slight differences in his signature might be due to illness."
 "If he actually signed the letter it would be difficult to prove that he didn't know what was in it," Sir Edmund observed.
"Yes.
And as we acted on the instructions in the letter it wouldn't be easy for the bank to challenge it,"Sir Geoffrey said frankly.
 "But if it were a forgery?" 
"That would be different, certainly.
But, again, it might be exceedingly hard to prove."
Sir Edmund looked at the letter  again.
"It's perfectly normal office typing, with the usual index or file reference — AS/TMJ.
The AS presumably indicates Andrew Stavanger, and the TMJ will be his secretary, or one of the typing staff And it reads sensibly enough — it is just the sort of letter that he might have been expected to write if he got back to his office late and were told that you had been trying to get in touch with him.
It mentions the payee of the cheque — that implies full knowledge of the matter.
"All that may be so, but you don't know Andrew Stavanger, and I do.
The letter is utterly out of character.
Of course, people do act out of character — but not often in a matter involving almost the whole of a man's private fortune.
Stavanger has a considerable holding of Ingard stock, but he must know that it is largely worthless.
I warned you at the outset, gentlemen, that my suspicions may be unfounded.
They are nonetheless real.
I have a lifelong experience of banking, and have had to act constantly on personal judgment.
When you go to a banker for a loan and he asks you what security you can offer, you may think that banks exist to lend on good security.
That is true only up to a point.
The most  important bank loans are made to people — determined by the banker's judgment of the personality of the man he's dealing with.
I've made mistakes in my time — we all have.
But I wouldn't be chairman of the bank if I'd made very many mistakes.
In this case I feel a deep conviction that I'm not making a mistake.
That's why I have broken all the rules of confidence by coming to you."
The man was curiously impressive.
 "Surely the matter can be settled simply by asking Mr. Stavanger about it?" 
I said.
"Of course.
But where is Mr. Stavanger?
I cannot get in touch with him at his office, or his home, or through his daughter.
And the trip he was supposed to have gone on he didn't make."
 "Could you not write to him?" 
"If there is anything in my suspicions, a letter addressed to him might be opened by someone privy to the forgery or fraud.
And for the chairman of the bank to be showing particular interest in him might alert people who, if the truth is ever to come to light, ought not to be alerted."
 "Much the same applies to police inquiries," I said.
 "Colonel Blair is right," said Sir Edmund.
 "That's one reason why the Commissioner felt that our —" he paused, choosing his words carefully"— perhaps slightly unorthodox approach might be helpful.
I'm wondering if it might be possible for Colonel Blair to have access to the offices of either the Ingard group or the shipping company in some capacity that wouldn't arouse suspicion."
"The offices are in the same building, Ingard House.
It's on the site of the old T. and T. offices in Upper Thames Street, but is a new and grandiose building put up after the merger.
I thought it a great waste of money.
But I'm not quite clear what you mean."
 "In all the circumstances," I said,"it seems to me that the bank would have good grounds for putting in a receiver.
I know you don't want to do that at the moment, since it would be tantamount to forcing liquidation.
But you could ask for a special audit.
Apart from the £300,000 which couldn't be met, what is the state of the Ingard account?
A firm of their size must be pouring out cheques all the time, for wages, office bills, all its normal business.
How are these met?"
"The account is exceedingly unhealthy.
Of course there is money coming in — the shipping company makes money, though not  enough to meet the losses on Ingard investments.
And there are some properties producing rent, though not many, because the group's business is in speculative purchases of property to sell at a profit — it's not a property company in the sense of owning blocks of officer or flats to rent.
It has a large overdraft, a matter of some 5 million, secured on Ingard Holdings — that's the finance company holding shares in the various subsidiary companies set up to buy and sell blocks of property.
I say "secured" but the overdraft at present is largely unsecured, because property values have declined so much that many of the holdings are worth very little.
The income from the shipping company and rents is just about enough to keep the overdraft from going above its limit.
For the past few months it's been more or less constantly at the limit — the £300,000 cheque put it unacceptably over."
 "So you would have good reason for calling in your loan." 
"Unquestionably.
But that would push the group into bankruptcy, with severe consequences in the City."
"The Ingard board must know that they are nearly at the end of the road.
If you asked  for a special audit they would probably welcome it, as an indication that the bank was going to great lengths not to put them out of business."
"Possibly.
But I don't see how that would help in clearing up my own suspicions."
"An audit requires auditors.
I was thinking that perhaps you could arrange for me to be one of the team.
That would give me access to the offices, with a reasonable status for asking direct questions."
Sir Geoffrey got to his feet.
"That seems an admirable suggestion.
And I can certainly arrange it,"he said.
"The board will have to accept — I can say that it is a matter of urgency for the bank to decide whether it can carry on.
You had better give me a few days.
Let me see — today is Thursday.
That leaves tomorrow to approach the board, and as I shall insist that the arrangement must be made by Monday — the bank of course, will wish to appoint its own auditors — if you can come to my office at four o'clock on Monday afternoon, Colonel Blair, I shall introduce — you to your superiors.
Er — what name would you wish to go by?
Do you wish me to call you Colonel Blair?"
"I'm not particularly well known, and I  don't see that it matters much, though it might be as well to omit the Colonel.
But as we're completely in the dark about what sort of intelligence service — if any — we're up against it would do no harm to take precautions.
My mother's name was Mottram — I'll call myself Peter Mottram.
My qualifications for the job I leave to you."
 "Well, thank you, Peter," said Sir Edmund, when the banker had gone.
"It may seem hypocritical when you're giving up your leave, but not everyone becomes a chartered accountant quite so rapidly.
On second thoughts, though, I think you'd better not be a chartered accountant.
They are listed in their professional register, and while it's unlikely that anyone will look you up, it's possible.
And that would mean having to borrow someone else's name, and that might be embarrassing.
What did you say about your qualifications.
 "I said I'd leave them to him." 
"That might be unwise.
I must have a word with him on the phone.
If I may say so, you're a bit long in the tooth to be an articled clerk, and — to make up for that — you have an air of authority that scarcely fits you for a  junior position.
I think you'd better be a financial adviser — one of the bank's backroom boys.
Yes, you must certainly be on the staff of the bank.
That will make people respect you.
Not that they wouldn't, anyway, "he added hastily," but you know what I mean."
 "I know just what you mean." 
Then we both laughed.
 "What on earth do you make of it all?" 
"I don't know.
Sir Geoffrey Gillington is one of the ablest brains in the City.
He also struck me as wholly sincere and a very decent sort.
It wouldn't in the least surprise me if there's something nasty going on in the Ingard empire.
What we do about it is another matter.
Why did this upright shipmaster sell out to such a crowd?"
"That's his business, and it was several years ago, anyway.
What puzzles me is why we don't do the obvious and go and find him.
It's not for me to question orders, but I should have thought that running him to earth would be a simple police job."
"Not so simple, Peter.
That was the Commissioner's first thought, and Scotland Yard got to work on it straight away.
They haven't found him.
Telephone calls to the office get precisely the same response as Sir Geoffrey  got — a polite girl saying that Mr. Stavanger is away.
He is expected back soon — she is sorry, but she doesn't know exactly when.
Inquiries in Stepney got nowhere.
The Stavangers have one of those early Victorian houses in Yard — arm Square, built for middling.prosperous ships' captains, declining into slums and now fashionable again.
Great-grandfather or great-great-grandfather bought the house, and the head of the shipping line has always lived there, even when most of the neighbourhood became a slum.
It was near the ships, I suppose.
After Andrew Stavanger's wife died he turned the house into three flats, and he lives alone in the top flat.
He served his time at sea, is quite capable of looking after himself, and apparently prefers it that way.
The flats are self-contained, and the other occupants don't know when he's there or not.
They think they "know Mr. Stavanger by sight" , but that's about all.
One couple didn't even know that he is their landlord — the flats are let through an estate agent.
Of course there wasn't a formal police hunt for him — there seemed no reason for it, and Sir Geoffrey was most anxious for discretion.
All one can say is that discreet inquiries in the neighbourhood produced nothing, save to show that he certainly  appears not to be in the flat now."
 "Isn't there a case for an official police search?" 
"There might be.
But in the circumstances — I don't know.
The man has not been reported missing, his office does not seem to be particularly worried about him, nor does his daughter."
 "Well, I'm not at all clear what I'm supposed to do." 
It is typical of Sir Edmund's somewhat elliptical approach to things that we went through this rather futile conversation before he told me anything else.
Then he said casually, "Ask Rosemary for sheet 178 of the new series of Ordnance Survey maps — that's the one of the Thames Estuary." 
I got the map from his secretary, and when I gave it him he spread it out on his desk.
"As you have doubtless guessed, Peter, there is actually another reason why I have asked you to give up your leave.
Come and look at the map."
He had the northern half of the sheet open, and it made me feel worse, for it showed the estuary, Foulness Island, and the junction of the Crouch with the River Roach — just the area where I wanted to potter in Joanna.
 "Here are the Maplin Sands, off Foulness Island, where at one time we were going to have a great new airport complex," he said.
"Well, maybe the wild duck and the other birds have gained.
That doesn't concern us now.
What I want you to look at is this area to the north-west of Foulness Island, the stretch called Winter Marsh.
It's not really part of Foulness — if you look closely you can see that it's cut off from Foulness proper by a sort of strait linking the rivers Roach and Crouch.
But it's the same Thames estuary country, not all marsh, some of it quite good land, but criss-crossed by creeks and swatchways, and interspersed with saltings.
That's where the army's old infantry training ground used to be.
If we were the Dutch, no doubt we'd have reclaimed it long ago."
He sighed.
"Anyway, here's the old Winter Marsh depot.
It's abandoned now, and might have been a huge new town if politics and economics had gone differently."
"On the whole I'm glad it's not.
I don't know what progress is, but I don't think that would really have been progress,"I said.
"Maybe not.
To be practical rather than philosophical, this is the place that's upset the Ingard empire.
More accurately, it's  made things worse, for it was pretty seriously upset anyway.
Being government land, it was sold by tender.
Ingard, guessing wrong about the airport, put in an enormous tender to be sure of getting the land.
Even the Treasury thought he was paying a ridiculous price, but that was up to him.
Now he can do nothing with it.
As you can see, there are virtually no roads.
He put in some pretty hopeless plans for housing development — it would have been catastrophically expensive — and as Sir Geoffrey told us, they were turned down.
The next news came from Rome.
"Rome may seem to have no very direct connection with Foulness, but a good deal of international business is done there.
In a rather roundabout way the commercial section of the Foreign Office heard that the Ingard land on Foulness was being offered to a group headed by a man called Felix Varsov.
Now we know a little about Mr. Varsov, and he's not the most estimable of characters.
He has been mixed up in a number of shady deals in the Middle East.
His nationality is obscure, but at different times he has been known to use both an American and a Belgian passport.
He is believed to have acted as a kind of broker for that dangerous spy-ring  that was broken up in Holland last year.
Now I don't suppose that even Sir Geoffrey knows this, but Irwin Osnafeld, the payee of that £300,000 cheque, was at one time an associate of his.
Osnafeld is a British subject, a financier of sorts who has sailed very close to the wind on a number of occasions, but there has never been enough evidence to proceed against him.
"Now why is the Ingard group paying Osnafeld £300,000 when, if our other information is correct, Varsov, or Osnafeld on behalf of Varsov, might be expected to be paying Ingard And what does Varsov want with land on Foulness?
It is a sensitive area, well placed for keeping an eye on anything that happens in the Thames, and, seaward, in the North Sea.
I don't like it.
From the present state of the Ingard bank account it looks as if the deal hasn't — or hasn't yet — gone through.
And the cheque to Osnafeld suggests that something very odd is going on.
It is highly important that we should know what.
And that, Peter, is your job."
 "That makes much more sense," I said.
"And I win over you in one way — I'm going to have at least a weekend in Joanna.
I'm going to have a look at Winter Marsh.
I can  do it easily from the Crouch, and old Joanna will attract no sort of attention.
I'll report to Sir Geoffrey Gillington at four o'clock on Monday afternoon."
3 Winter Marsh
I SPENT most of Friday morning having a long talk with Paul Seddon — Assistant Commissioner Seddon, who is our department's special representative at New Scotland Yard.
Seddon knew more about the Ingard-Stavanger case than I did, because, being an ex-chief of the Fraud Squad, he'd been consulted about it before it came to us, and had, in fact, directed the preliminary police inquiries.
 "It's certainly an odd business, Peter," he said.
"On the face of things it should be an ordinary police inquiry — and not a very difficult one — to find Andrew Stavanger, or, if he is abroad, at least to discover where he is.
But it's like digging in treacle — you get nowhere.
And the Irwin Osnafeld link is highly interesting.
It's hard to see what on earth the Ingard group would be paying £300,000 to Osnafeld for.
He's not a property dealer — at least, not in any way we've come across.
And at a time when the  Ingard lot are pressed for money, he's about the last person you'd have thought they'd go to any trouble over.
He's not likely to sue."
 "Who, exactly, is Irwin Osnafeld?" 
"Hard to say.
He's in business as an import-export dealer — quite a substantial business.
Buys and sells anything, from the odd tanker — load of cut-price petrol to the whole output of washing machines from some factory that's going bust.
On the export side, he specialises in bankrupt stock — at least, it's nominally for export, but we suspect that a good deal of it comes back to the home market at ten times the price.
We also suspect that other parts of his business are even less above board.
He was probably mixed up in disposing of the pictures stolen in that big robbery from the Duke of Suffolk's place, and there've been other things.
But we've never managed to get hold of any real evidence against him.
He's a very canny bird."
 "Sir Edmund described him as a financier of sorts." 
"You could say that.
He was behind that very nasty business of the Indian Ocean Bank — that was the nearest he got to coming unstuck, but the thing was so complicated  with nominees in the Caribbean and nominees of other nominees in Hong Kong that he got away with it.
But that sort of finance is not quite his cup of tea.
He likes to deal in physical things — things he can touch."
 "I suppose he could have lent money to Ingard, and been pressing for payment." 
"It's possible, of course.
But I can't see anyone as shrewd as Osnafeld lending money to Ingard.
The Ingards of this world live on the savings of elderly clerks and retired schoolmasters — and then get helped out by respectable banks because of the suffering they cause when they crash.
The puzzling thing to me is how a man like Stavanger ever came to be mixed up with him."
"I wish you'd take part in the special audit instead of me.
You'd be infinitely better."
"No good, Peter — I've been in court in far too many fraud cases.
Someone would be sure to recognise me.
Besides, you have a way of chatting innocently to people.
It's no good pretending you haven't."
 "Well, I'll just be living on your doorstep." 
"Better come home, then, instead of here.
You don't know what you may be up against."
I was not greatly comforted by my talk with Seddon.
It seemed that I was being sent to fish in very muddy waters — and without knowing what bait to use, or what sort of fish I was to try to catch.
Seddon's remark that I shouldn't try to get in touch with him at Scotland Yard set me thinking.
I had no idea what my activities as an auditor might involve, and I might need an address.
There was no reason why I shouldn't live in my chambers in the Temple — but I lived there as Colonel Blair.
If I was going to be Peter Mottram, it might be better to give Mottram an address of his own.
So I went to that big block of service flats in Peel Square, Chelsea, and engaged one of their self-contained one-room flats for a fortnight.
Peel Square flats are really a sort of superior hotel, but they offer a slightly more permanent-sounding address than a hotel.
It was expensive, but as I was giving up my holiday I saw no reason why the department shouldn't pay.
The Peel Square room had a telephone, which was also useful.
Sir Edmund was out when I got back to the office, so I gave my new name and address to Rosemary and went back to the Temple to collect some kit for my weekend with Joanna.
My mooring belonged to a small boatyard near Fambridge, about six miles above Burnham.
It had the disadvantage of drying out, but Joanna took the ground easily, and was happy enough on the mud.
It suited me, because the yard kept an eye on Joanna, and I could leave my car there.
Also, there was a pleasant inn about a quarter of a mile away where I could get a room if the tide — in the way of tides — served at some merciless hour of the early morning.
That evening I was all right— Joanna would be afloat in the late afternoon, and I could get away before dark.
There wasn't much to do.
I kept Joanna in commission, her food locker in the small cuddy where I both cooked and slept well stocked with keeping-stores, and she had a good reserve of fuel for the outboard.
All I had to do was to ferry myself out to her in the inflatable dinghy, with a jerrican of water and a bag of fresh vegetables, eggs, and some rashers of bacon.
It was one of those still, lovely evenings that you sometimes get in October.
There would be mist on the river and the saltings later, but for the moment it was clear, and utterly peaceful.
I decided to sleep on board, but not on the mooring.
There was a deepwater anchorage a few miles downstream, in an inlet of Bridgemarsh Island.
There I should be out of everybody's way, disturb no one, and be disturbed only by the marsh birds.
There wasn't enough wind to stir a lock of hair, but I didn't want the noise of the outboard.
The tide had turned, and the ebb would help me downstream.
And I wanted to practise sculling with the big single sweep that could be worked from Joanna's transom, the sculler standing up to work it.
I have seen an old lighterman take a loaded barge across the Thames in the Pool of London with a few strokes of his sweep — and a canny use of the tide.
I had no such skill, but I was learning, and it was an infinite satisfaction to keep Joanna moving, and going where I wanted her to go, with the sweep.
I was away in ten minutes.
Under sail I should probably have towed the dinghy, but, wanting to use the sweep, I didn't want the tow astern.
I didn't deflate the dinghy.
It was heavy to get on board singlehanded, but I'd worked out a good method of lifting it with a spare halliard fitted with a simple purchase.
Once swung up, the dinghy fitted neatly between  the forrard end of the cuddy and the mast.
Clear of the mooring, I felt the tide, not much yet, for the ebb had not long started, but enough to grip Joanna and carry her seawards in a strong, invisible hand.
I had little to do except to give her steerage way — for a boat simply moving with the water cannot be steered — and to keep her head up.
We were not going fast, but I did not want to.
There would be light for an hour yet, and I had only about three miles to go.
I had to round Landsend Point, on the south bank of the Crouch, and get into Easter Reach.
Then, about halfway to Black Point, I'd snug down in the anchorage of Bridgemarsh on the north bank.
I had a glorious sense of freedom.
It was late in the year for late evening sailing, and anyway, there was no wind.
There was nothing else moving on the river.
To the north, the land rose slowly from the marshes to Althorne ridge about a mile and a half inland; to the south there seemed nothing at all, only a grey-green, indeterminate merging of water, land and sky, beginningless and endless.
It was certainly going to be misty, though.
When the lights of Canewdon village began  to spring up on their hill they looked like lights through frosted glass.
After two rashers of bacon, two eggs, and a couple of potatoes boiled in their skins, I surveyed the little private world of Joanna's cuddy with deep contentment.
It was lit only by a hurricane lamp — I had no mod cons — but the gentle light was reliable, and made no noise.
I could hear only the little lap of water slipping past Joanna's planks as she lay at anchor.
Before getting into my sleeping-bag I made myself a cup of cocoa, without milk, which I don't much like, and with a generous lacing of whisky, which I do.
The hurricane lamp swung within reach — I could turn it out when I wanted to.
Warm in the sleeping-bag, I leaned back against the after-wall of Joanna's cuddy, drinking my cocoa before settling down to sleep.
Comfortable as I was, I couldn't help thinking.
I ought to be on holiday, but I wasn't: this was merely a brief interlude before I had to report to that wretched banker and enmesh myself in a host of false relationships in the Ingard office, to try to discover — what?
Whether anyone knew where Andrew Stavanger was — well, yes.
And if they didn't?
It's  not a crime for anyone, even the managing director of a shipping company, to go off without saying where.
Unusual, perhaps, tiresome to his office — but if the strange behaviour at which his daughter had hinted was really a sort of battiness, the office would have made its own arrangements to get by.
Battiness — premature senility of some sort — seemed the most probable explanation of the whole affair.
It would explain the extraordinary letter about the cheque — an act of ludicrous personal generosity to help Ingard out of a hole, or, perhaps, more sanely, to try to preserve the shipping company from going down if the rest of the empire crashed.
And outside Stavanger himself, and perhaps — his daughter, what did it really matter to anyone?
Maybe it didn't matter all that much even to the daughter.
Vivian Carolan was a rich man, Eton and Oxford and all the rest of it, with an anti-his-own-class mania for ultra-Marxist tub-thumping.
Well, one could understand the sons of some rich men finding the face of capitalism repulsive.
Not that that seemed to apply in Carolan's case — his background was rich landowning, fox-hunting squires, dull, perhaps, and rigidly class-conscious, but, at any rate in recent generations, apparently  quite decent sorts — Colonel Blimps rather than slick financiers or face-grinding industrialists.
I knew about Vivian Carolan because one couldn't help knowing about him — he was Public Enemy No 1 to the ultra-Tory press, and equally the darling of the extreme left, or some of it, because he combined ultra-Socialism with a weird branch of English Nationalism, and a peculiar hatred of the Welsh and Scots, whom he dismissed as "Celts" .
Every other paper one picked up had something either about his ancestors or his own latest piece of rabble-rousing — It was a stroke of genius by the Prime Minister to make him Minister of Fine Arts, where he could shout his head off and do little real harm.
 "Pictures for the People" was a grand slogan, and if it extracted some national treasures from London for display in Middlesbrough and Huddersfield, it might even do some good.
And Carolan was not negligible as an expert on painting in his own right.
He had a good degree in art history, and had he not gone in for politics he might have made a name for himself as an art historian.
He didn't seem to come into it, anyway, except that his own wealth would  cushion whatever blow Stavanger's daughter might suffer from her father's odd behaviour.
But there was more to it than Stavanger.
Where did the weird story of the ex-army land in the Thames estuary fit in?
Damn Sir Edmund Pusey — he probably knew more about it than he had let on, regarding it as better for my soul or something to find out for myself.
On the other hand, he might not.
And what good was the land, anyway?
If the Ministry of Defence had any use for it, it wouldn't have been sold.
And if Ingard was going bust, he'd naturally try to flog the land to anyone he could.
If whoever bought it had an unsavoury reputation it wouldn't do much harm to the seagulls or Brent geese.
They had articulate and powerful protectors — Ingard's own application to develop the land had been turned down, and the planning authorities were wholly capable of turning down any other application they might not like.
But what would anyone in the world of international big business want the land for?
If Ingard had bought a pup, it seemed wholly improbable that any other shrewd financier would oblige by buying it from him.
Well, I might get some ideas after having a look at  the place tomorrow.
At least it was giving me a weekend on my boat.
I had one of the best nights I'd had for ages, and slept through the rest of the ebb and the whole of the flood.
Breakfast was simple — coffee, and a bacon sandwich.
When I'd washed up, the ebb was going strong again.
That suited me well.
I had only six or seven miles to go to get to Winter Marsh, and I didn't want to spend the whole day there.
Also, although I didn't know the place, I suspected that most of the low-lying shore would dry out, and I wanted to go there on the flood.
So I thought I'd go to sea with the ebb, spend half a day pottering off the fascinating banks of Ray Sand and Dengie Flat, and come back to approach Winter Marsh from seaward.
The weather helped.
The early mist cleared to a fine October day, and there was a little wind from the southwest.
That was enough to keep Joanna sailing.
I got up her big, loose-footed gunter lugsail, and, as always, marvelled at the sturdy simplicity of her rig.
It was not an efficient rig in the modern yachting sense, and even with the headsail set to a bowsprit, it gave her next to no windward performance.
But it suited the generations of North Sea fishermen who had used it — perhaps from the time of their Viking ancestors.
It was simple, strong, and cheap.
And if they wanted to go against the wind, they had men, and they had oars.
The punishment of flogging to windward under sail is a modern form of masochism.
The old seamen worked the sea.
If the wind was unduly foul, they waited until it was fair.
If they couldn't get on, they put in somewhere and waited until they could, their boats designed to take the ground almost anywhere.
Above all, they worked the tides, using those heaven-sent moving roads of water to help them on their way.
Sailing mostly single-handed, and being like the rest of twentieth-century man a prisoner of time, I cheated by having an outboard engine to keep me going when the elements didn't help.
But I used it as little as I could, though if the wind stayed in the south-west I thought I'd probably have to use it for the later part of today's outing.
I did.
I had a grand day at sea, but although the tide helped me to get back the wind didn't, and I used the engine to get back into the Crouch.
It is a dull landscape here, because of the training walls that keep sea and  coast — at least to some extent — apart, but navigation was not difficult.
I had to make for Wallasea Ness, which marks the entrance of the River Roach to the estuary of the Crouch.
Winter Marsh was on the Foulness side of the Roach, marked on my map — a few years out of date— as a restricted area because of the infantry training ground and firing ranges.
On the map it was pretty well blank space, save for the thin blue lines of creeks or marsh drains crisscrossing it.
A mile or so inshore of the Roach there was a road coming up from the south, the road for Great Wakering and Southend that served Foulness.
Near the road, on the edge of Winter Marsh itself, there seemed to be a small hamlet, called Crabtree Wick.
At what I called the Winter Marsh inlet, though it was not called anything on the map, there was a wooden quay in what struck me as remarkably good condition for a structure that presumably had not been used for several years.
Inland were some Nissen huts and low sheds, abandoned, I supposed, when the army left the area.
The whole place seemed totally deserted.
I was tempted to use the quay, but didn't.
There was plenty of water now, and I thought  I'd explore the whole waterfront of Winter Marsh.
Not being sure if the strait, or inlet for the Roach, was actually navigable through to the Crouch, I went back down the Roach, entered the Crouch again by Wallasea Ness, and turned seaward for the Crouch shore of Winter Marsh.
It sounds complicated, but the whole sailing distance was not much more than two miles.
Having made Winter Marsh from the Crouch I anchored off a shallow bay and rowed ashore in the dinghy.
I should have water for some hours yet, but I didn't know how long I'd be ashore, and as the shingle here seemed fairly hard I reckoned I could get the rubber dinghy to the water even at low tide.
I was north, and a bit east, of the abandoned camp.
Instead of making directly for it, I followed a track that seemed to make for the Foulness road, about half a mile beyond the village or hamlet marked as Crabtree Wick.
I'd see what the place was like, I thought, and approach the camp from the south — that is, from the village.
It was pleasant walking in the October afternoon, though the going was rough.
Before the sea-walls were built the place must  have been a true sea-marsh, largely flooded whenever there was a particularly high tide, with islands of sandy soil bound by the tussocky marram grass defeating the sea here and there.
The drains or creeks were tiresome.
The wider ones were bridged by old railway sleepers — good army improvisation!— but the rest one had to jump, and the banks were often mud.
However, I made the road in time, and followed it to Crabtree Wick, enjoying the firm surface after crossing the marsh.
The village, what there was of it, also seemed deserted.
Presumably it had once housed families of civilian workers at the army camp, but before that it might have been the home of some isolated community of wild-fowlers or oyster-dredgers, with smuggling, probably, as their main source of livelihood.
It wasn't even properly on the Foulness road, but a track from the road led to it, and then on to the camp; about a quarter of a mile away.
I walked to the camp.
The wooden buildings badly needed paint.
I saw one forlorn notice saying "Sergeants' Mess" , and was about to explore the rest of the camp when I was stopped by a shout.
"Hey, you!
What the hell are you doing here?"
I turned to face two men, apparently soldiers, for both were wearing the camouflage combat jackets of the army's working dress, and black berets.
One carried a rifle, the other a pick-handle.
"Don't you know this area is restricted?
Can't you read?"said the man with the rifle.
"I'm sorry.
I'm afraid I saw no notice.
I walked up from the road,"I said.
 "Well, you can bloody well walk back again." 
Then he noticed the binoculars slung round my neck.
 "What the hell have you got those glasses for?" 
 "I'm a bird-watcher," I said.
"Peeping Tom, hey!
One of those jokers!
Well there aren't any birds here.
And you can clear off double quick."
 "I didn't mean your sort of bird — I meant birds that fly," I said.
He was momentarily a bit taken aback.
His companion, the man with the pick-handle, had moved round to place himself between me and the building labelled "Sergeants' Mess" .
The rifleman stood to one side of me.
He recovered his rudeness, and said,"I don't care what sort of bloody birds you're after.
Get moving.
Have you got a car on the road?"
 "Yes, a bit beyond the village." 
"Well, get back to it and clear out.
And don't you ever come here again.
Get started.
Run — a bit of running'll do your sort good."
He half-levelled the rifle at me in a menacing way.
The man with the pick-handle moved towards me.
There was nothing to do but go back.
With such dignity as I could manage I began to walk back to the village.
I walked quickly, but at least I didn't run.
I had gone perhaps fifty yards when I felt a bullet sing past my ear and heard the crack of a rifle-shot behind me.
Then another one.
He was firing deliberately a bit wide, I thought, to scare rather than to hit me, for at that sort of range anyone with a rifle — unless he were truly an appalling shot — could scarcely miss.
Instinctively, I reacted as if I'd been hit.
I spun round, threw myself down, and rolled over — rolling, as it happened, off the track into a ditch, more or less marked by tussocks of coarse grass.
I was incredibly lucky, for at the place where I rolled into the ditch a fairly wide drain ran under the track.
There was no sign of it on the surface — the track was probably carried over it on sleepers, long embedded in the mud of years — and the entrance to the drain was completely hidden by long  grass.
I more or less fell into it, and without quite realising what I was doing obeyed a primitive instinct to hide by crawling under the track.
I heard the men run up.
 "Where the hell is the bastard?" the rifleman said.
 "Gone in the ditch," said his companion.
 "I'll soon beat him out." 
He began to climb down into the ditch, hitting at the grass with his pick-handle.
Then he slipped, and caught at the grass to stop himself from going to the bottom.
He was two or three yards on the village side of the entrance to my drain.
"Damn the bastard, it's bloody deep here — there's water at the bottom.
I'm coming up,"he said.
Of course I couldn't see either of them, but I could hear them, and I imagined the rifleman peering into the ditch.
"Sunk without trace — there's maybe two three foot of water down there.
And the bottom'll be soft mud,"he said.
"Funny, I didn't think I'd hit him, but I suppose I must have — must've been the second shot.
Well, he's saved us a bit of trouble, I suppose."
 "What are we going to tell the boss?" 
"That a snooper got what he asked for.
We did all right."
 "What about his car?" 
 "Yes, we'd better do something about that." 
I heard them moving off.
I considered what to do.
The suggestion about the car had come from the rifleman — he'd asked if I had a car, and I'd said yes, because I didn't want them to know that I'd come by boat.
Now I was sorry.
They'd look for the car, and when they couldn't find it, they'd probably come back.
Second thoughts were more comforting.
I'd said "a bit beyond the village" , but I hadn't said which side.
And "a bit" can be a considerable distance.
They'd badly want to find the car to forestall any possible inquiries about an abandoned vehicle, and to remove all evidence of my presence.
They'd have to walk the road in both directions, and it would take them some time.
And then it would get dark, and, since conditions were much as they were last night, there would be mist over the marshes — it was coming up a little on my walk.
I didn't think they could know anything about my boat — she was at least a mile away, on the northern edge of Winter Marsh, and as I'd come from the road on the south they had no reason to search the northern shore.
Nor could they  make an effective search in the mist and the dark, even if they wanted to.
My drain was not comfortable — there was water at the bottom of it, and the rough ledge where I'd managed to crawl was muddy and damp.
But it seemed reasonably safe.
I'd wait till it was properly dark, and then make my way back to Joanna — and a drink!
A sound enough plan in theory, but in practice it turned out to be a devilish job.
To be on the safe side I spent two hours in the drain, shivering for most of the second hour.
I crawled out cold, cramped, and feeling sick — to a world that seemed to have disappeared altogether.
The marsh-mist was far denser than it had been last night, and there was nothing solid to give direction anywhere.
I thanked God for the small wrist compass that I wore as a matter of habit whenever I set out in a boat.
Without it I should have been hopelessly lost.
Even with it, I was three parts lost.
The compass could tell me in which direction I had to go — it couldn't tell me what lay between where I was, and where I wanted to get to.
And that was the trouble, for the marsh, rough going in daylight, was a nightmare of ditches, ankle-catching grass, and muddy hollows in the misty darkness.
My best course would have been to follow the track to the village, strike the road, and then to go along the road until I met the track by which I had come from the shore.
But I was afraid to go back to the village.
I did not know whom I might meet there, and cramped as I as I did not fancy my chances at running away if it came to a straight chase on a hard surface.
So the only thing to do was to strike off cross-country.
I could visualise the map, and the position of the village in relation to the coast where I had come ashore.
I had to go about north-north-east, and if I hit the coast in the wrong place I could go first one way, then the other, until I came to the shingle where I had left the dinghy.
I had about a mile to go, and it was the longest mile I have ever covered in my life.
Time after time I stumbled over some hummock of tough grass, and once I went into a creek up to my shoulders.
I gave up trying to jump ditches, but took them as they came, going sometimes nearly to my knees in mud.
After what seemed an eternity, and was well over two hours, I felt the marsh ground underfoot change to shingle and knew that I had reached the shore.
I was soaking wet, bruised, scratched and trembling with  exhaustion.
I sat — or rather, collapsed — on the beach, and found myself sobbing.
Then I pulled myself together.
I had got to the beach, but I still had to find the dinghy — and Joanna.
I had left the dinghy drawn up on the shingle, with her painter tied to her small Danforth anchor, hooked into the beach.
It was near enough to high water when I landed, which meant that the dinghy would be roughly at the tide-limit, in that no-man's land of weed and wrack brought in by the tide, and left to mark high water.
I should be able to find that, even in the dark, and if I followed it I should stumble over the painter, or the dinghy herself.
But which way to go?
I had no means of knowing what sort of line I had kept on my cross-country stumble, but it had been NNE as near as I could make it.
One advantage of the appalling route was that it offered no temptation to diverge from it — since I could not see where I was going anyway, the only thing to do was to follow the compass, and I had waded ditches as I came to them instead of attempting to find easier crossing places.
Visualising the map again, I reckoned that I had probably hit the shore  a little to the west of where I landed.
So I'd first try going east.
I found what I took to be high water mark with my feet rather than my eyes.
I shuffled down the shingle until I felt the mush of dry seaweed, and then I explored it with my hands — yes, it was just the stuff one would expect, weed, and here and there a bit of wood.
I went east, and I was lucky, for I hadn't gone one hundred yards when I did trip over the painter.
It was like coming home.
All along that awful journey I'd been tortured by the thought that someone might have found and moved the dinghy and that I would be trapped in this hellish marsh.
I kept telling myself that it wasn't likely, that the man who shot at me couldn't have known anything about my boat or he wouldn't have asked about my car, that I'd met no one else on the entire expedition, and that if ever a place could be described as lonely and unvisited, it was Winter Marsh in mid-October.
But all the propaganda I could make couldn't really overcome my fear.
I felt like kissing the dinghy, and I'm not sure that I didn't put my lips to the rough friendly fabric of her snub nose.
It was near low water now, and I had to get the dinghy afloat.
I couldn't carry her, but she dragged easily enough, and at first the shingle was hard enough to walk on.
But then it turned to mud — horrible stuff that sucked at my feet, and stank.
After all the ditches I'd waded through I wasn't going to be defeated now — and only a few yards ahead was the blessed sea.
Somehow I made it, felt water round my legs, and felt the weight of the dinghy go as she became waterborne.
I drew her to me, flung myself over the bow, and lay on the floorboards, gasping.
Thank God I had the sense not to bring the painter in with me: I simply dropped the anchor as I scrambled on board, so that she was safely held at anchor.
That was important, for I couldn't see Joanna.
I knew she wasn't far offshore, but I didn't know anything about the set of currents off Winter Marsh, and if I just rowed into darkness I might miss her altogether, and be carried anywhere.
So I lay in the dinghy for a few minutes, to recover myself, and think.
As far as I could remember I'd rowed ashore in a fairly direct line from Joanna to the beach.
There was no reason why I  shouldn't.
I'd be anchored where I reckoned she'd get a little shelter from the bay in which she lay, but with a gentle south-westerly and no sign of any break in the weather, I wasn't worried about her, and took the easiest line ashore.
Assuming that I'd been able to drag the dinghy in a fairly straight line — though I might have gone astray a bit when I was stumbling in the mud — Joanna should be lying more or less straight ahead, and a good deal nearer than when I'd left, for it was near high water then, and now it was about the last of the ebb.
I doubted if she could be more than fifty yards away, but I wasn't going to risk missing her — once carried past her, it would be pretty well hopeless to try to find her.
Visibility on the water was slightly better than it had been on land — there were no hummocks, and somehow night never seems quite so dark at sea as on land.
The mist was the trouble — it shrouded everything half a dozen yards away.
But I reckoned I could make out Joanna within half a dozen yards.
The thing to do was to get nearer.
I got up the anchor, rowed what I estimated to be about five yards, and then let go the anchor again, and peered ahead.
Nothing.
I repeated the  manoeuvre.
Again I could see nothing.
Again, and again, and again.
After the fifth anchoring I was beginning to despair, when a thought struck me — I was forgetting the scope of the dinghy's painter.
I was using about three fathoms of line — eighteen feet.
It was hard to tell what the tide was doing, for I couldn't see the shore, but each time the anchor held the dinghy would be carried one way or the other to the extent of her scope.
So I wasn't going straight at all, but rather crabwise.
I thought the tide must have turned, so I was probably proceeding in a series of zigzags a little way upstream, and it was no use looking ahead for Joanna, for she'd be lying off our quarter.
I stared into the mist until my eyes hurt, ahead, off both quarters, in case we'd been carried the other way, even astern.
Still nothing.
I rowed on a few yards and anchored for the sixth time.
And then I saw her!
She was lying almost abeam of us, and at first I couldn't see her hull, but only a sort of thickening of the mist that turned out to be her mast.
Having identified her mast, in a moment I could make out her whole shape.
With a prayer of thankfulness I rowed the few yards to her, made fast the dinghy to a cleat on her transom, and climbed on board.
I  stumbled into the cuddy and poured myself half a mugful of whisky.
The next thing was to get out of my soaking clothes.
I didn't dare show a light — though I doubt whether a light could have been seen from the shore through the mist, and there was probably no one to see it — but I knew where things were.
I gave myself a brisk tub down with a towel — when I saw it in daylight it looked as though it had been run over by a lorry on a muddy building site — and changed every stitch of clothing.
While doing so, I meditated what to do.
It would have been sensible to stay where I was until daylight, but that was the one thing I was determined not to do.
The tide was certainly making now, and if I kept to midstream as near as I could judge it, I should be safe enough — if I put Joanna on the mud, the making tide would soon get her off.
I started the engine, got up the anchor, and we were under way.
I had no lights, and nobody could see us.
The noise of the engine was muffled by the mist — and if anybody happened to hear it, what did it matter?
There is plenty of shipping in the Crouch.
With just enough power to give Joanna  steerage way I felt my way slowly upstream.
Then I picked up the lights of Burnham to starboard, and knew roughly where I was.
I decided to anchor off Burnham for the rest of the night, and go home to Fambridge in the morning.
I made Joanna respectable by putting up my anchor lantern, made myself a mug of cocoa, and turned in.
In contrast with the night before, I slept scarcely at all.
I was sticky with mud, and my mind kept going over and over the extraordinary events of the afternoon and evening.
Insomnia, however, suited the tide.
I got up before dawn and made my mooring at Fambridge while there was still water to row ashore.
At that time on an October Sunday morning, there was next to no traffic on the roads and I was in London by nine o'clock.
I went straight to Sir Edmund Pusey's flat, parking with no problem near the top of the Duke of York's Steps.
Sir Edmund and Lady Pusey were having breakfast.
 "Welcome as always, Peter," said Sir Edmund affably,"but you look as if you've come out of the sea.
Have you shipwrecked that crazy boat of yours at last?"
 "No," I said.
"I want to talk to you, and I  want a bath.
Bath first, if possible.
Can I have a bath while you finish breakfast?"
"Of course.
Celia will get you some towels; and what about your own breakfast?
Have you had any?"
"Actually, no.
But that can wait."
"Peter, you're incorrigible.
You're bad enough about lunch, but to miss breakfast is an affront to civilisation.
You can talk while you eat.
Go and have your bath, and there'll be some breakfast ready for you when you come out."
I'd stayed with the Puseys several times, and knew my way about the flat.
That bath was one of the more memorable experiences of my life.
I watched water the colour of the Thames at low tide drain away while I dried myself, and felt the horror of last night drain away with it.
In spite of his earlier suggestion that I should talk as I ate, Sir Edmund refused to listen to me until I'd put away a plate of his favourite devilled kidneys.
Then he poured me a cup of coffee, poured another for himself, and sat back.
 "Now, Peter, what is it?" he said.
Lady Pusey excused herself, saying that she wanted to get ready for Church.
 "As for you, Ted," she said to her husband, "I — suppose you'll have to have a dispensation." 
 "Laborare est orare," he observed sententiously.
I gave him an account of my adventures on Winter Marsh.
 "It's an extraordinary story," he said.
"Winter Marsh is no longer a restricted area.
It hasn't been for three years."
"Of course it doesn't make sense.
Even if it was restricted, an army guard doesn't shoot visitors on sight.
I'd have been taken to a guardroom and asked to explain myself."
 "Yet you say the men who turned you away were wearing my uniform?" 
 "They were wearing army clothes — but you can buy them at any army surplus stores." 
"It's not a bad idea if you want to keep out visitors.
Winter Marsh has been an army training ground since the First World War.
To anyone who didn't know that the place had been given up, soldiers would look as natural there as seagulls.
It's a very serious matter.
What on earth are they trying to hide?"
"Well, I didn't get into the old camp, so I  don't know.
But if they're ready to murder a chance visitor, it must be something pretty important."
"What do you want us to do?
We can get a search warrant easily enough."
I'd been thinking about this all the way back to London.
"They've had all night, and there's been plenty of time to get anything really incriminating out of the way.
That's one thing.
Another is, who are they?
I heard one of them talk about "the boss" .
We don't know who he is, and almost certainly he doesn't live there.
We might run in the chaps I saw, and perhaps a few others, if they maintain a twenty-four hour guard on the place.
But if they won't talk — or perhaps don't even know precisely what goes on — we've shown our hand, and got no tricks.
As things are they think I'm dead.
They've no reason to be particularly scared.
There's no reason why they shouldn't carry on with whatever it is they're doing.
What we've got to do is to find out."
"What about your car that they couldn't find?
They're bound to be suspicious about that."
"I was wondering if it could, perhaps, be stolen.
If Southend police could run in some  young man who picked up the car on the Foulness road yesterday afternoon.
They could run him in after a police chase, or something, which would get into the papers, and on the radio news tomorrow morning."
 "It still leaves you unexplained." 
"I'm dead.
And it could turn out that the car I left on the Foulness road was stolen from a car park in Colchester or somewhere.
They haven't seen the car, remember.
Make it a nice Jaguar.
Then I'm the sort of person who goes around picking up Jaguars that don't belong to him.
I don't want to come forward, anyway.
And since I'm dead, no one is going to be able to find me."
Sir Edmund considered this for a bit.
Then he said,"As I think I've mentioned to you before, Peter, it's a good thing you're on our side of the law.
You have an oblique mind — and sometimes it is a very useful mind.
I'll talk to Seddon — and then you can go and talk to him, and give him all the details he'll need to make your crime look authentic.
I'll have a word with the Chief Constable as well.
And we have ways of making sure that the escapade of that silly young man at Southend gets widely reported.
Meanwhile, of course, we must keep an eye on Winter Marsh."
"That's easier said than done.
There's no cover, and — as happened to me — any stranger sticks out like a sore thumb.
I've been thinking about this, too.
And I've been wondering if something could go wrong with the telephone system of Foulness."
 "What on earth do you mean?" 
"It doesn't actually have to go wrong.
And people do live in other parts of the area, and they need telephones — from what I've seen of the place they'll be about the main link with the outside world.
But the road is a public road, and I don't see why men with a nice yellow telephone van shouldn't dig a hole in it — they're always digging holes in roads, to mend faults, or put in new lines, or something.
And you know these telephone-holes — when they've dug a good hole they put a sort of canvas tent on top, so that they can work in comfort underneath.
Now if you choose the right site for your hole on that road, you have a good view through field glasses of the camp — and no one 's going to notice a small slit in the canvas cover of a telephone-hole.
You can put red lamps round  it at night, and have the place manned all the time."
"It had better be new lines, I think, Peter — work that is liable to take some time.
And when the hole has been there for a couple of days, they can dig another if necessary.
Another job for Seddon and the Yard — and it will need a bit of cooperation from the G.P.O. That can be arranged without much difficulty.
We'll have a telephone van and a small team of good C.I.D.
men there in the morning.
Now we shall have to use that telephone system that you seem so anxious to sabotage."
 "Improve," I corrected.
Seddon offered me lunch at his home.
I didn't try to go into details on the phone, but said that we were going to need some police observation.
He arranged to have Detective Inspector Balfour at his house to meet me.
I told him the maps we should need, and he promised to have all the necessary Ordnance map sheets ready.
4 At Ingard House
ON the eight o'clock radio news that Monday morning there was a substantial piece about an exciting police chase in Essex — understandably, on a rather lonely road.
At times the police car had had to go at over 100 mph.
The other car was ultimately forced to stop, and a young man ran off into a field.
He was pursued and caught, and would appear at Southend Magistrates' Court charged with taking and driving away a Jaguar car without the owner's consent from the Foulness road on Saturday afternoon.
It was understood that the car was one reported to have been stolen some days earlier from a car park in Colchester.
Later Seddon telephoned to tell me that a young man — actually a volunteer from the Metropolitan police — had duly appeared at Southend, and had been remanded for a week.
The Essex police had opposed bail, and he had been remanded in custody.
He did  not, however, have to stay in prison for long, for, without any publicity, a judge in chambers granted bail, and he slipped off home.
Seddon also told me that a team of telephone engineers had already started work to improve the service to Foulness.
There was a real engineer among them, and my suggestion about telephone work had paid a bonus, for he had installed a phone in the hole, and the watchers now had a direct link with New Scotland Yard.
I had nothing much to do before reporting to the banker at four o'clock.
I used the time by moving from the Temple to Peel Square — not a formidable job, for it required only a suitcase and a taxi.
I thought I'd try the service lunch, and had an omelette and a half bottle of a creditable claret sent up to my room.
Visitors to Sir Geoffrey Gillington were well looked after.
I reported promptly, and his secretary appeared almost at once to conduct me to the presence.
The banker sat at an enormous desk surrounded by acres of carpet, in a room hung with what looked like Dutch Old Masters, though I suppose they may have been reproductions.
There was another man with Sir Geoffrey, and he introduced him as Mr. James Henniker, of Pooley, Handyside and Henniker, the accountants.
 "Mr. Henniker is now the senior partner," he said.
"With Sir Edmund Pusey's agreement I have taken him into our confidence.
You, Mr. Mottram, are one of our Assistant General Managers, concerned with internal auditing.
I wrote to Mr. Desmond Ingard as we arranged, and I met him and another member of his board this morning.
In the circumstances they could hardly refuse our request for a special audit — indeed, they appeared to welcome it, saying that although they were going through a difficult time they had nothing to hide, and were confident that the bank would wish to continue its support."
 "I had a long talk with Sir Geoffrey before you came," said Mr. Henniker.
"From what he tells me there is abundant reason for a special audit, and my own work will be perfectly genuine.
I shall wish to see records of all dealings since the last formal audit, to ascertain the group's cash position and to form an opinion of its prospects of meeting its debt to the bank within reasonable time.
I shall have with me two clerks, and, of course, yourself.
Sir Geoffrey has arranged for us to  be provided with two rooms in the Ingard offices — and I suggest that I and my clerks occupy one room, and you the other.
I shall not tell my clerks that there is anything out of the ordinary about this audit, and they will accept you quite naturally as the special representative of the bank.
From time to time I shall send one or other of them to you with documents to examine, and it would be helpful, I think, if you looked in periodically to study our work in progress."
 "I have explained to Mr. Ingard that you may need to discuss various matters with departmental heads in the group," Sir Geoffrey added.
 "That will give you, I hope, all the freedom of action you need." 
 "You have both done admirably," I said.
"For reasons which I won't go into now, I think we may be specially interested in all matters relating to the Ingard group's  involvement with Winter Marsh — the ex-Ministry of Defence land which you mentioned, Sir Geoffrey, the other day.
Perhaps Mr. Henniker would bear that particularly in mind."
 "I shall do that in any case," Mr. Henniker said.
 "From what I know of the previous accounts the Winter Marsh investment — or  error of judgment — is one of the main causes of the group's present financial difficulties." 
Sir Geoffrey rang through to his secretary to ask her to bring in tea, and we chatted over tea for a few minutes.
I found myself liking Henniker — he was a few years older than I am, and had served in the war as an AA gunner.
He had a dryness of manner which concealed a pleasant sense of humour, and he would be, I thought, exceptionally shrewd.
 "Mr. Ingard is expecting us at nine-thirty in the morning," he said as we got up to go.
 "I suggest that we meet here at nine and go along to Ingard House together." 
 "That seems fine," I said.
We reported to the reception desk at Ingard House and the girl there rang through to Mr. Ingard.
There were four of us in our party — Henniker and I, a young man introduced to me as Tom Spalding, and a girl of about twenty-two also an articled clerk — called Diana Robinson.
Ingard kept us waiting for nearly ten minutes — pompous ass, I thought.
Then his instructions came through.
Henniker and I were to be taken up to Mr. Ingard's room, Spalding and Miss Robinson were to go to the offices allotted to  us on the second floor.
A girl appeared to take Henniker and me in tow.
Spalding and Miss Robinson were sent to the lift, told to get out at the second floor, turn right, and go to the rooms numbered 207 and 208.
We did not go up in the same lift, but were taken to another one, apparently for the use of directors only.
The protocol at Ingard House was far more elaborate than at the head office of the bank.
Sir Geoffrey Gillington's office had suggested dignified good taste.
Ingard's room was lavish.
There was a carpet into which you seemed to sink several inches, an ornate desk in the style of the French Empire, a huge couch, upholstered in grey and scarlet, and a number of big soft armchairs in the same pattern.
A cocktail bar, with two or three bar stools in front of it, took up the whole of one corner.
Ingard was affability itself.
 "I'm so sorry to have kept you waiting, gentlemen," he said, "but I had an important telephone call from Geneva highly profitable call, I might add." 
He laughed.
 "In the circumstances I felt that you would prefer me to make some money." 
He was a big man, probably not yet fifty, though going a little to seed.
He was not  actually wearing morning dress, but gave the impression that he was, with impeccably creased trousers, a jacket cut rather long, and a dark red carnation in his buttonhole.
His hair was almost black, without a trace of grey, and he had one of those smooth, delicately bluish chins, which suggest the use of expensive after-shave preparations on a virile male skin.
"Mr. Henniker, of course, everyone in the City knows.
And I believe we met once at a Stock Exchange luncheon."
He bowed.
 "Mr. — er — Mottram, is it?" 
He glanced at a piece of paper.
"I'm afraid I don't know.
Are you one of those horrid men who bounce cheques?"
He laughed at his own pleasantry.
 "Not really," I said, "though doubtless it could happen on my recommendation." 
Henniker came to my rescue.
 "Mr. Mottram is among the ablest of the bank's internal auditors," he said.
 "It is not a job that brings him into the public eye, but, believe me, he is one of the most trusted officers of the bank." 
 "Gentlemen — please You must forgive my little joke." 
Ingard sensed that he had struck a wrong note.
"You will understand that this is not the happiest of occasions for me.
My  group has nothing to be ashamed of, but, like everybody else nowadays, we suffer from a general shortage of cash.
I'll be absolutely open with you — we do have difficulties over cash, but when you see the business we've got lined up…well, this time next year I'll expect the bank to be standing me a slap-up lunch!
Oysters, gentlemen — I'll provide the oysters, and it'll be the oysters that pay off the overdraft."
 "Oysters?" 
I said, puzzled.
"Yes, oysters — going back to Roman times.
You know that land I bought off the Ministry of Defence?
Winter Marsh, it's called, near Foulness.
Well, I daresay you thought I'd come unstuck, when the new airport wasn't built.
Not to my way, gentlemen Those creeks on Winter Marsh are about the best oyster grounds in Europe!
I'm telling you this in confidence, but you'd find out about it when you go through the books.
We're going to make so much money out of oysters that the 5 million or so you've got against me will look like chicken feed.
That's why I'm not frightened of your report."
 "I don't doubt your business ability," Henniker said tactfully,"and it may well be as you say.
But you will appreciate — I think you  do appreciate — that the bank is concerned about the immediate financial position."
 "We have a responsibility to our shareholders, and to our depositors," I said.
"Of course, we also feel a high degree of responsibility to our customers — that is why we are here.
The bank has no wish to call in its loans, but we must satisfy our board that your present trading justifies the considerable sum involved.
We shall conduct our audit as quickly, and as unobtrusively, as possible."
 "I've instructed my Chief Accountant to have everything ready for you." 
Ingard was still remarkably good humoured.
"If you have other inquiries you wish to make I'm sure that he or I can satisfy you.
I have another important foreign call coming through in a few minutes, so, if you'll excuse me, I'll hand you over to the Chief Accountant now."
He lifted a telephone on his desk.
 "There's just one more thing, Mr. Ingard," I said.
"From my own examination of your account with us it would appear that the shipping company in your group — the T. and T. line is the major provider of cash for your present business.
I should like to discuss one or two things with the managing director of the shipping company."
"You can't see Andrew Stavanger, because he's away at the moment.
He's getting on, you know, and — gentlemen of your age will understand he had a bad war, Arctic convoys and all that.
Lost his only brother, too."
He bowed his head slightly, as if in silent prayer.
"He is, of course, a director of the group, and we feel that he is entitled to every consideration.
I am afraid that he has been far from well for several months.
His deputy, Oscar Lennis, has in fact been largely running the business for the past year.
He will certainly be able to tell you anything you need to know.
When you wish to see Lennis, will you please telephone my secretary?
I'm afraid I shall be very much tied up for the rest of today.
And now, if you will permit me, I'll ask Marshall, my Chief Accountant, to look after you.
Please make yourselves at home.
If you would care to lunch in the directors' dining room, just let my secretary know."
He spoke into the telephone, and a moment later an elderly man, wearing thick glasses, came into the room.
This was Marshall, the Chief Accountant.
Ingard introduced us, and we went with the accountant to his own office.
Mr. Marshall's office was very different from  Ingard's.
Far from being luxurious, it was almost poky, with dark green linoleum instead of carpeting, and the walls lined with steel filing cabinets instead of a cocktail bar.
And Mr. Marshall was very different from Ingard — where Ingard had been expansive, he was withdrawn, and where Ingard had been cocksure and flamboyant, he seemed almost nervous.
I glanced at my watch.
 "Look," I said to Henniker,"I'd rather like to have a word with Mr. Lennis before lunch.
Could you carry on here while I look into the shipping side of things?"
 "That seems sensible — we don't want merely to duplicate each other 's work," Henniker said.
 "Where can I find Mr. Lennis?" 
I asked the Chief Accountant.
"It's quite easy — they're on the next floor down.
You can use the lift, of course, but I think it's really quicker to walk.
I'll ring through and tell him that you're coming."
 "That's very good of you." 
And to Henniker I said, "Shall I collect you here?" 
Henniker looked at the filing cabinets, and at a huge pile of folders on Mr. Marshall's desk.
 "If you don't mind," he said.
"I think it would be better if I worked through for the  rest of today.
Mr. Marshall will have most of the information I want, and I'll put Miss Robinson and young Spalding on the job of checking things.
If Mr. Marshall will excuse me, I don't think I'll bother with lunch.
Suppose we meet in the offices downstairs at, say, five o'clock?"
 "That'll be fine," I said.
 "Won't you be having lunch in the directors' room?" 
Mr. Marshall asked, a little plaintively.
 "It's awfully good of you, but I think I'd better not," I said.
"I may have to go back to the bank for an hour or so — there'll be all sorts of things piling up on my desk.
And I can't help realising what a strain we must be on you."
I found Lennis's room quite easily.
The shipping company seemed to have most of the floor below that occupied by Ingard, Marshall and the board.
It had its own inquiry desk, and a girl took me to Lennis at once.
He was in a room labelled "Managing Director" , and I wondered where Andrew Stavanger worked.
Lennis was more Ingard than Marshall — fortyish, well-groomed, and smooth.
He  pressed a button on his desk, and an exceedingly attractive girl came in with two cups of coffee.
 "I generally have one about now," he said, "and I thought, perhaps, you'd join me." 
To the girl he said, "Don't put any calls through till I tell you, Inez." 
He motioned me to a big armchair in front of his desk.
 "Bad business?" he asked.
 "Not necessarily," I said.
"Banks have to do this all the time.
You've got a fair bit of our money tied up at the moment, and naturally we've got to see that it's all right.
But you know as well as I do how banks hate having to call in loans — we're much happier to keep our customers in business.
I don't know how familiar you are with the accounts of the group as a whole."
 "Not all that familiar," he said.
 "The shipping business is rather separate from the rest of the group, and it's a whole-time job, believe you me." 
"I don't doubt it.
I'm particularly interested in the shipping side because it seems to provide most of the group's cash flow at the moment."
"We don't do so badly.
Even when there's precious little money about people still have to eat, and our ships do a steady bread and  butter trade in produce from the Continent.
And we go to the Mediterranean and North Africa.
Recently I've begun to develop trade with West Africa, too.
I've a lot of hopes there."
"Do you run the shipping business, Mr. Lennis?
We have, of course, a list of all the directors of the various companies in the group in our records, and a Mr. Andrew Stavanger is listed as managing director of the shipping company."
Lennis hesitated a bit.
 "Well, he is and he isn't," he said.
"Andrew Stavanger is a fine shipping man — his family owned the fleet before he sold out to the group.
We certainly owe a lot to him.
But — between you and me — he's really past it.
He's liable to behave very strangely, too.
There's a history of drink, you know — he lives alone since he lost his wife, there's a daughter, but she's married and they don't have much to do with each other.
Andrew is really a seaman — his heart's at sea, not in a shipping office.
He's a master mariner in his own right, and he's always been well thought of in the fleet.
He goes off in one or other of the ships whenever he feels like it, which is pretty well all the time, nowadays.
He's away now — let me see — "he  consulted a big diary on his desk" — yes, he sailed on the Josephine T. at the end of last week, on a voyage to the Canaries."
There was a knock on the door, and an elderly woman — at least, elderly by the standards of the other women in the office, though she was probably not much over fifty — came in with a letter.
 "Oh, I'm sorry, Mr. Lennis," she said, noticing me.
 "But you said you wanted this letter to go off this morning, so I've brought it for you to sign." 
 "Can't you see I'm busy?" 
He spoke roughly.
"Oh, all right, if you've done it I might as well sign it.
Give it to me."
He read the typescript quickly, signed it, and gave it back to her.
 "Now keep out until I send for you," he said.
 "Sorry about that silly interruption," he said to me when she'd gone.
 "You were asking about Andrew Stavanger?" 
"Yes.
It's not just idle curiosity.
You will understand that one of the most important things to a bank in determining its loan policy is the continuity of management in a firm.
We have a special shipping section, and I was talking to them before I came here.
They tell me that Mr. Stavanger has a magnificent  record, and is very highly thought of in shipping circles — indeed, they went so far as to say that they'd recommend the bank's board to support him through thick and thin.
Now you tell me that he no longer plays much part in the business.
We didn't know that, and it could be a material factor in deciding our policy towards the Ingard group."
He didn't much like this.
 "That's a bit hard," he said indignantly.
"People don't go on for ever— not even in banks!
I'd be the last person to say anything against old Stavanger — he brought me into the company, and I owe a lot to him.
But I've been virtually managing the fleet for some time now, and we show a consistent record of profitable operation.
In fact, we're more profitable now than we were in Andrew's day, because of that new trade with West Africa I've worked up."
"Forgive my asking, Mr. Lennis, but what is your own background?
Have you been in shipping all your life?"
"No — but don't hold that against me.
One of the things that's wrong with British shipping is that too much of it is in the hands of ancient mariners, dyed-in-the-wool shipping families that haven't had a new idea since the  days of sail.
I was in the air-freight business before Stavanger brought me here — had my own small charter company.
I met Stavanger before he joined up with Ingard.
He'd had trouble over a dock strike in France, and had some perishable cargoes which he couldn't deliver.
I was able to help him out.
When he joined Ingard and wanted a number two he thought of me and asked me to come in with him.
My own business was all right, but I had the usual trouble of small charter companies — not enough capital.
I was able to sell out quite profitably to one of the bigger air-freight operators.
Stavanger offered generous terms, so I came across.
I haven't regretted it — nor has he.
I've held his hand gently and tactfully from the start."
"It can't be a very satisfactory situation.
Why doesn't Mr. Stavanger retire?"
"I wish he would.
But he's got nothing to retire to — except the whisky bottle.
He's got no family except the daughter and he doesn't get on with her.
And he's got quite a big holding in the group — he sold out in return for stock.
No, I'm afraid we've got to go on carrying him.
Fortunately he doesn't turn up very often these days.
It doesn't cost much for  the ships to take him as a passenger, and it keeps him happy."
I didn't think I could learn much more for the moment.
So I thanked Mr. Lennis for his frankness, explained that I had to go back to the bank to deal with some work, and departed.
There seemed nothing I could usefully add to whatever Henniker might be doing, and as it was getting on for half past twelve I decided to find a pub and a sandwich.
I was careful to find them some distance from Upper Thames Street.
After my sandwich and a drink, I got a cab to my own office in Whitehall, and rang Seddon.
He'd just spoken to Detective Inspector Balfour in his hole on the Foulness road, but there wasn't much news on that front.
Two men in army clothes — possibly my two — could be seen about the camp from time to time, and Balfour thought that there might also be a third.
There were no rifles in evidence.
He couldn't see what the men were doing most of the time, because they were either inside or hidden by buildings.
They'd spent part of the morning carrying boxes of some sort from one hut to another, apparently fairly heavy boxes, because it took both men to carry them.
Short of raiding the place, there was no way of finding out what the boxes contained.
 "Dull for the telephone men, I'm afraid," I said,"but try to keep them in good heart.
We want that place kept under constant observation.
Ask them to look out particularly for any signs of dredging for oysters, in the creeks, or just offshore."
 "Did you say" oysters "?" 
Seddon asked.
"Yes — the things you eat with brown bread and stout.
Can't explain now, but they may turn out to be important.
Two more things — will you find out everything you can about a man called Oscar Lennis, Assistant Managing Director of the T. and T. shipping company, and formerly in the air-freight business on his own account?
And can you join me for a bit of breaking and entering some time this evening?"
"Lennis — can do, certainly.
Breaking and entering — well, Peter, I've still got three years to go before my pension, and I'd like to keep it."
"You can get a search warrant if you like, as long as you do it discreetly and nobody else knows about it.
I want to look over Andrew Stavanger's flat in Stepney.
And I'd like you to be there, too — because of your experience, you know."
"Come off it, Peter.
O.K., what time do you want?"
"I thought about eight o'clock.
Say we meet around seven, we could have some sort of meal."
"Stavanger's flat is in Yardarm Square.
There's a nice little pub called the Eight Bells in Yardarm Street, running into the square.
I can be there by seven."
"Fine — see you in the bar of the Eight Bells, then.
And remember to bring a jemmy."
I got back to Ingard House a bit after four o'clock, and went up to rooms 207–8, the offices allotted to us for the purposes of our audit.
I found Henniker and the two clerks together in 207, and Henniker said that they'd left 208 for me.
 "That's handsome of you, but considering our relative workloads it scarcely seems fair," I said.
"Anyway, if you can tear yourself away, could we both go in 208?
There are several things on which I need your advice."
After a word with his clerks, Henniker came with me into the other room.
 "How have you got on?" 
I asked.
 "On the whole, badly," he said.
"I suspect  that the whole concern is insolvent, but the group accounts are in a fearful muddle.
I'm sorry for the Chief Accountant the job seems quite beyond him, but it's not altogether his fault.
There seem to be two boards — like the "dignified" and "efficient" parts of Bagehot's English constitution.
There's a main board, with various part-time notables to give it respectability, and an Executive Committee of Directors, consisting of Ingard and one or two of his pals, who actually deal with what goes on.
The committee is supposed to prepare reports for the board, but the reports read more like glowing company prospectuses, and there are various discrepancies between what they say and what seems actually to have happened.
There's a portfolio of properties at the high values of a couple of years ago.
There's been no recent valuation, and if there were the shares would collapse overnight."
 "What about the oysters?" 
"Yes, there's something in the oyster story, but it's hard to make out what.
There's a glowing prospectus about using Winter Marsh for oyster farming, and a Declaration of Intent by a group called Varsov International to put up £5 million in cash for a half  share in yet another company called Ingard Oyster Farms.
But there's no evidence that a penny has been actually paid — or that Varsov International, whose headquarters appear to be somewhere in the Caribbean, even possesses £5 million."
 "Have you been able to find out what that £300,000 cheque to Irwin Osnafeld was for?" 
 "Well, it's entered in the accounts as" commission", but I'm still trying to find out what it was commission for.
Marshall seems to think it relates to the oyster farm negotiations, but as no money, has yet been received on that account I don t see why commission had to be paid in advance, particularly at a time when the group is pressed for cash.
That's one of the troubles.
Marshall is called Chief Accountant, but half the time he doesn't really know what's happening.
Ingard just gives him instructions, and he does what he's told without any explanations.
Then he tries to work out what this or that payment actually relates to, and since he doesn't know the accounts get into a muddle."
 "Can't he ask Ingard?" 
"I put the same point to him.
He was quite shocked.
Apparently you just don't ask Desmond Ingard about anything."
There was a knock on the door, and when I said "Come in" the middle-aged woman who'd been treated so rudely by Lennis in the morning appeared hesitantly.
 "Mr. Mottram?" she asked in not much more than a whisper.
"Yes, and this is Mr. Henniker.
We are just auditors."
She made sure that the door was properly shut, and then said, still speaking in a whisper,"There have been a lot of rumours in the office.
I'm sure it's very wrong of me to trouble you, but I am so worried, and I don't know what else to do.
Mr. Lennis and his secretary have gone home.
Nobody knows I've come here.
I hope you won't mind."
 "You haven't told us your name," I said, as gently as I could.
"Oh, me — I'm Susan Macdonald.
I am, or I was, for really I don't know, Mr. Stavanger's secretary.
That's what I'm so worried about."
I had a vivid recollection of the incident that morning.
 "You mean, you think that Mr. Lennis may be trying to get rid of you?" 
"Oh, that — no I'm not worried about that.
I don't want to stay here, and if it weren't for Mr. Stavanger I'd have gone long ago.
You see, I was with him in the old days, before our  ships were taken over by this horrible group.
I don't know why he let them — at least, I do, because of his daughter."
 "How does she come into it?" 
"Kate?
Well, it's because he was so fond of her.
Please, may I sit down?"
 "Forgive me." 
Henniker moved a chair for her, and she sat on the extreme edge of it.
She went on, as if talking to herself as much as to us,"My father was a ship's master, for old Mr. Stavanger.
His ship was turned into a minesweeper in the war, and he went down with her off the east coast.
It was old Mr. Stavanger who paid for me to have a good secretarial course, and when I'd qualified he gave me a job in the shipping office.
He was like that — so was Mr. Andrew — thought of the fleet as part of his family.
When Mr. Andrew came back from the war old Mr. Stavanger was dead.
There was a lot to do, and Mr. Andrew made me his secretary.
It was a happy time.
We worked hard and there was a lot to worry about, but the fleet was still a family.
There was the Masters' Room on the ground floor — they took it out to put in a new directors' lift — and whenever one of our ships docked in London her master would  come for a drink and a chat with Mr.Andrew — like a sort of club, it was.
"Then Kate got working on her father.
She was the only child, you see — he'd no son — and she married Mr. Carolan and moved in high society.
Mr. Ingard was a friend of hers.
She kept telling her father that there was no future for an independent shipping company, there'd be no one to run it after he'd gone, and that the modern thing was to bring the company into a big group.
That way — or so she said — it would be protected in a way it couldn't be on its own, because the group had so many different irons in the fire.
"Mr. Andrew didn't like it — he used to talk to me about it, and say how unhappy he was.
But she was his child, and after her mother died he felt she was all he had.
What about the ships, I used to say — they were his children, too.
But he couldn't see it like that.
If Kate wanted something, she had to have it.
So Kate won, and Mr. Ingard got the ships.
He got a lot of Mr. Andrew's money, too — I know a lot more than people think I do — and instead of being put aside for new ships it went into silly things like this grand building and I daresay for fat salaries for some people.
"It wasn't so bad at first.
Mr. Andrew still ran the ships, and everybody loved him.
But then Mr. Lennis was brought in, he kept saying that all our ways were old-fashioned, and when he wanted something done he could get round Mr. Andrew by going straight to Mr. Ingard.
Then old Captain Bowman, the senior master in the fleet, had a row with Mr. Lennis.
Mr. Andrew supported Captain Bowman, but he was overruled by Mr. Ingard and Captain Bowman had to go.
Then three more of our old masters went — now there are only two, Captain Lomax and Captain Illingworth, left.
The others are all Mr. Lennis's men.
"And then, about four months ago, Mr. Andrew stopped coming to the office.
He didn't say a word to me, which was quite unlike him.
Mr. Lennis sent for me and said that Mr. Andrew was feeling run down, and had gone for a cruise in one of the ships, the Emily T. I kept expecting a letter or a postcard from him, but nothing came.
Well, I knew the movements of the ships, and the Emily was Captain Illingworth's ship, and of course I knew him.
So I went to meet her when she docked, and Captain Illingworth said he knew nothing of Mr. Andrew.
I asked  Mr. Lennis about this and he was quite cross.
Said he must have made a mistake and it was the Cynthia T. The Cynthia had one of the new masters whom I didn't know, so I couldn't do anything.
But of course I knew where she was, and that she was calling at Genoa.
I wrote to Mr. Andrew there, but I don't know if he ever got the letter, for I never had any answer.
"So it's gone on — always on one ship or another, and when one comes home without him, he's transhipped somewhere abroad.
"Now Mr. Andrew was always very close to Kate.
He used to call at her home most evenings and if she was out of London he'd always telephone.
I've known Kate since she was a child, and about a month ago I went to see her.
She was quite nice to me, gave me a cup of tea, and said she knew about her father, that he was all right, and that I mustn't worry.
She said that it was partly because of drink — that all the Stavangers drank, and that her father knew he was drinking too much, but that he never drank at sea.
So by keeping out of the way and staying at sea he hoped to put himself right.
"But Mr. Mottram, it isn't true!
Old Mr. Stavanger and Mr. Andrew both liked a glass  in the Masters' Room, but neither of them ever took a drop too much.
If you'd known them, you'd know this.
Please, you must believe me!
I know I'm doing wrong to bother you, but I'm so worried I don't know what else to do.
Please, can you find out from someone just where Mr. Andrew is?"
Her fingers worked at a small lace handkerchief, twisting and untwisting it in an extremity of nervous tension.
 "Of course you've done nothing wrong," I said.
"Mr. Andrew would be grateful for your loyalty.
I'm afraid we can't help you at the moment — we've been told simply that Mr. Andrew is away from the office.
But we'll do our best to find out, and I'll let you know as soon as I do.
It might, perhaps, be easier to get in touch with you outside the office.
Could you let me have your home address and telephone number?"
"I have a little flat in Earls Court-31c Duke of Clarence Gardens.
The phone is 693 1871."
"Thank you.
And don't be in the least distressed about coming to us.
We'll do everything we can to help."
"You are being very kind.
I suppose I'm turning into a foolish old woman.
If I knew  that Mr. Andrew wasn't coming back, I'd give in my notice tomorrow.
I've lived carefully, and I've got some savings — and old Mr. Stavanger left me £2,000 in his will — because of my father, you see.
I've never touched a penny of that.
I'd go back to Scotland, I think.
My father came from the Clyde, and I've still got some cousins near Dunoon.
It's tunny how things happen.
It all seems to go back to that morning when Mrs. Millings got such a dreadful shock."
She was chattering nervously, but now at least with relief.
I saw Henniker glance at his watch, and I could sympathise with him.
But it was hard to turn this very unhappy woman out.
 "Who is Mrs. Millings?" 
I asked politely.
 "She's one of the office cleaners," Miss Macdonald said.
"Normally they're gone when we get to the office, but sometimes they're still here, and sometimes we meet them in the evenings, if we're working late.
On that morning Mrs. Millings was late because she'd seen a body in the Thames while crossing Southwark Bridge.
She'd called the police, and had to wait while they took statements, and things.
It was quite an excitement in the office.
I remember that day  very well because it was the first day that Mr. Andrew didn't come."
 "My father was a doctor,?" 
I said,"and I remember the day he got his Fellowship of the Royal College of Physicians.
He telephoned to tell my mother, and she told me.
Now I remember all that because it was the day I had a tooth knocked oui by a cricket ball."
Miss Macdonald was clearly pleased to have found someone ready to share reminiscences.
She was much happier.
The handkerchief had gone back into her handbag.
She got up, we shook hands, and I escorted her to the door.
 "I thought that woman would never go," Henniker said.
5 A Vist To Stepney
THE Eight Bells seemed to be one of those pubs that do most of their trade in the late evenings, for at seven o'clock the saloon bar was deserted.
I got there first, ordered a Scotch, and opened the evening paper that I'd bought on the way.
The main news was about home-going commuters being delayed by a lightning railway strike.
They had my sympathy, but I could not be greatly interested.
I looked as if I was reading the paper, but my mind was going over the events at Ingard House, and the curious discrepancy in the stories about Andrew Stavanger.
Lennis had stressed the emptiness of his life in having a daughter who had little to do with him, an account apparently borne out by the daughter herself in her interview with the banker.
Then she had said that she and her father were not particularly close to one another.
Miss Macdonald, who had known the Stavanger family  for most of her life, said that Andrew was devoted to his daughter and would do anything for her.
There was discrepancy, too, in the stories about drink.
Lennis, again apparently confirmed by Mrs. Carolan, had suggested that much of Andrew's present trouble, whatever it was, was brought about by drink.
Miss Macdonald insisted that he was the most temperate of men.
There need not, I reflected, be much in this, for Miss Macdonald was patently the soul of loyalty, and in her eyes no Stavanger — no male Stavanger, at any rate — could do anything wrong.
But the difference of opinion — more than a difference of opinion, for it was a sharp conflict of statements of fact — about his relations with his daughter was certainly puzzling.
My mind had found no solution to the puzzle when Seddon came in.
The bar was still empty, and we found a table in a corner where we could talk without much risk of being overheard.
The pub offered snacks at the bar, and as my lunch had been a sandwich I was quite hungry.
Seddon wasn't, saying that he had had a late tea.
I got myself a couple of sausages on sticks, a hunk of crusty  bread, and another Scotch, and I took over a pint of bitter for Seddon.
 "I've got a bit of news for you," he said.
"Your pal at the shipping office wasn't hard to check on, because he's been in our hands — no charge in the end, but he was detained for twenty-four hours while inquiries were made.
It was a few years back.
He certainly had an air-freight business, but he was suspected of freighting illegal immigrants from Belgium into Britain.
I think he was certainly mixed up in the beastly business of getting into England some of those unhappy Asians who pay through the nose either because they're desperate to join relatives, or because they think they can find work here.
We suspect that he was flying in light aircraft to lonely fields in Essex or Suffolk, but the time he was nearly caught his passengers got away and we couldn't prove anything.
He had a story of engine trouble to explain his own unauthorised landing, and we had to let him go.
We went on keeping a watch on his activities, but not for long, because he went out of business.
He got into trouble in Holland for exporting arms to a bunch of rebels in one of the new African states, and that seems to have been the end of  his freight business.
He was living either in Holland or in Belgium then, and we lost touch with him.
Your chap sounds like the same man.
Funny he didn't give himself a new name, but maybe he felt there was no reason why he should.
He was never convicted of anything in this country.
Part of his freight business was probably reputable enough, and maybe he needed to trade on that to get a job."
 "Could be," I said.
"He's a smooth customer, and he seems to have worked his way pretty effectively into Andrew Stavanger's job.
Where the hell Andrew Stavanger is, I'm no nearer finding out.
I think it was you who said it was "like digging in treacle" .
That's why I think it's time we had a look at his flat."
"I'm inclined to agree with you — anyway, I've got a search warrant.
If we find everything in order, there's no harm done.
To make sure that he hasn't just come home I telephoned twice this afternoon, and again just before I left to come here.
There was no reply any time.
The phone rings, though, so it looks as if somebody pays the phone bills.
Well, Peter, are you fit?
We'd better be getting along."
Yardarm Street was a turning off Commercial Road and the pub was near the Commercial Road corner.
Away from that pulsing artery of East London it suddenly became quiet.
The street ran between rows of dingy terraced houses, not yet "gentrified" , as the planners say.
Then it met a Wren church and entered Yardarm Square.
Here the social reagents of post-war London life had got to work.
Along one side of the square, more or less blown to pieces in the blitz, were neat blocks of council flats.
The remaining three sides of the square still had their original superior tradesmen's villas, built around 1840.
One or two were down at heel, eroded by the tides of later nineteenth century London life.
The rest were bright with new paint over their worn stucco, gleaming where the light from a street lamp fell on it.
The Stavanger house was on the south side of the square, nearest the river, and an alleyway beside the house probably led down to the docks.
There were three bells at the front door — the top marked Stavanger.
We rang and waited a few minutes, but no one came.
The door was unlocked, so we opened it and went in.
It led to a hallway, with stairs going up on the left.
To the right was the  door to the ground-floor flat.
The hallway was repeated on the first floor, with the entrance to the next flat, and the stairs went on, to stop at a narrow landing, with another door opening from it.
This had a brass plate labelled "Stavanger" , and was locked.
We knocked, but there was no sound of movement inside the flat.
Seddon produced a bunch of skeleton keys.
 "Unless it's bolted on the inside we ought to be able to get in with these," he said.
He fiddled for a moment or two, listening to the tumblers in the lock.
Then he had it open, and we went in.
I don't know what I'd expected to find.
What we did find was nothing "Funny," Seddon said.
 "If a flat's been unoccupied for some time, you'd expect a pile of letters inside the door." 
He had a torch, and shone it round the little entrance hall.
There was a light switch by the door.
Closing the door quietly, he tried the switch.
The light came on.
There were three doors opening from the little hall.
None was locked.
One opened to the kitchen, one to a sitting room, and the third to a bedroom.
The sitting room was a big room, with bookcases all along one wall.
A door in the opposite wall led to the kitchen, and in the window on this side of the room was a dining table.
Opening from the bedroom was a bathroom and lavatory — the flat was entirely self-contained.
 "Draw the curtains before we turn on the lights," Seddon said.
We started with the bedroom, which was neat and scrupulously tidy.
The bed was made, but didn't seem to have been slept in for some time, although there was a folded pair of pyjamas under the pillow.
There was a fitted wardrobe, with a row of suits hanging in it, and drawers containing shirts, pyjamas, socks, handkerchiefs and underclothes — everything clean and ready, but giving a curious impression of not being in use.
The adjoining bathroom was equally clean and ready for use, with towels on a rail, and razor and shaving brush on a shelf over the basin.
Next we had a look at the kitchen, a good sized room, with fitted cupboards, a gas stove, a big refrigerator, and a sink unit under the window.
Over the sink was a small hatch.
 "Leads to an attic, I suppose," Seddon said.
There was a stool nearby, and, climbing on this, Seddon got on to the firm edge of the sink where it met the draining board and  reached up to the hatch.
The square hatch cover could be pushed up simply.
He could see inside by standing on his toes, and he shone his torch round the place.
 "Small storage attic," he said.
"Couple of trunks and suitcases, all quite tidy.
Nothing that seems of much interest."
He got down, and we had a quick look round the kitchen.
There were a few tins in one of the cupboards, a glass jar of rice, and some jars of preserves, but no vegetables, and no perishable foods.
He opened the refrigerator — it was empty.
Then we glanced round the sitting room.
In a way, it was two rooms, an eating half — but less than half the room, perhaps about one-third — next to the kitchen, and the sitting part.
This had two deep leather armchairs, a big desk with a telephone on it, and books.
I looked at the books.
They seemed to be mostly marine literature, and a fine collection.
Near the desk was a whole shelf of Admiralty Pilots, covering all the coasts of the United Kingdom, and of the Near Continent.
The shelf was full, except for a small gap, where it looked as if a book had been taken out.
Volume I of the North Sea Pilot — dealing with the Faeroes, Shetlands and  Orkneys — was there, and next to it Volume II, covering Cape Wrath to Berwick.
Volume III was missing.
Then we heard someone on the stairs.
 "Quick," Seddon said,"the attic!
But first the lights and the curtains."
I switched off the lights and Seddon hurriedly drew back the curtains.
Then we slipped into the kitchen, got up on the sink, and hauled ourselves into the little attic.
As we closed the hatch after us we heard a key turning in the lock of the door to the flat.
It was pitch dark inside the attic.
By moving the hatch a fraction of an inch we could hear what went on below, but we could see nothing.
Someone came into the kitchen from the door to the hallway, switched on the light, apparently glanced round, and then went into the sitting room, leaving the door to the kitchen open.
Mercifully we had shut the refrigerator and the cupboards after looking in them, and there was nothing to indicate that the visitor had noticed anything amiss.
There was no sound of a light's being switched on in the sitting room, but we might not have been able to hear it.
I think, though, that the visitor didn't turn on the light, for there was no sound of drawing the sitting room  curtains.
Presumably that was why the kitchen door been left open — to get enough light from the kitchen.
The sitting room overlooked the square, where lighted windows might be noticed, whereas the kitchen was at the back of the house.
Next we heard a slight "ting" as the receiver of the telephone was lifted, and the whirring sound of someone dialling.
There was a pause — presumably the phone was ringing at the other end.
Then a woman's voice at the telephone in the flat.
 "Was it hot in Rome?" 
Then what sounded like a queer sort of telephone number.
 "One-x-nine-two-four." 
Another pause, then "O.K. Rome, go ahead." 
There was a longish silence, probably while the woman was listening to whoever it was at the other end.
Then she spoke again.
"Are you sure that nothing has happened since the weekend?
Well, he seems to have been a bad lot, and maybe nobody will miss him, but I don't like it.
We're postponing things for a week.
Tomorrow's big delivery will now be tomorrow week, that is, on Wednesday next week.
Yes, she'll be loaded now, but we can hold her in Bilbao.
I don't want to come here too often, but I'll expect messages from you  in the usual way.
Yes, anything — you must report anything at all out of the ordinary at once.
In a real emergency you know what to do, but don't use it unless it is a real emergency.
I repeat, one-x-nine-two-four."
There was a "ting" as she put down the receiver.
Almost at once she came back into the kitchen, turned out the light, and left the flat.
We heard the lock of the front door click as she shut it behind her.
We waited a full five minutes without saying a word.
There was no further sound from the flat, and at last Seddon said,"Seems to be all clear now.
We'll have a quick look through the drawers in the desk, and then I reckon we'd better go."
It was unlikely that there was anything of importance in the desk, for none of the drawers was locked.
And there wasn't much in them.
One had writing paper and envelopes, and one three tins of pipe tobacco and an unopened pack of a dozen boxes of matches.
The others held a mixed collection of the minor paperwork of life, some library tickets, the catalogue of a sale of marine painting that had taken place a year ago, the election address of his son-in-law, Vivian Carolan, at the last election, and a few letters, none very recent.
One was from a retired ship's captain, now living at Fowey in Cornwall, giving news of his house and garden; the others were impersonal, acknowledgments of subscriptions to various charities, and some business letters from the estate agent who dealt with the letting of the two other flats.
In the bottom drawer was a folder of receipted bills, the uppermost being for gas, electricity and the telephone, all paid within the past month.
Everything was tidy and shipshape.
Mr. Stavanger was clearly a man with an orderly mind.
We both wanted to get out of the place.
The flat was certainly unoccupied, but, equally certainly, it was not unvisited, and we had no idea who might come in next.
After a quick look round to make sure that weed left no obvious signs of our own visit, we left.
We waited on the top-floor landing for a minute or two, but there seemed no coming or going from the other flats.
We slipped downstairs quickly and quietly.
There was the sound of a T.V. programme as we passed the entrance to the first-floor flat; on the ground floor all was quiet.
We walked out into the square and on towards Yardarm Street and Commercial Road without looking back.
I wanted a drink, but I didn't want to go to a pub at that time of the evening, when the rush would be on, and the serious drinkers getting down to it.
I also wanted to talk to Seddon, but I couldn't hope to talk in a pub now.
An empty taxi came along soon after we'd turned into the Commercial Road.
I stopped it, and asked the man to take us to Peel Square.
 "It's a service place, and we can get a meal and a drink sent up," I said to Seddon.
"Besides, you ought to see the luxury the department lets me live in now.
And it's more or less on the way to your place at Kew."
My sausages hadn't been all that satisfying, and I was feeling hungry again.
Seddon was now ready for a meal, too.
Room service at Peel Square offered a variety of suppers, and we settled for lamb chops followed by a nice piece of Stilton When the waiter took away the supper I ordered a quarter bottle of cognac.
 "Well," I said, "I don't know that thought helps digestion, but we've certainly got a hell of a lot to think about." 
 "She couldn't have been talking to Rome," Seddon said.
 "I could hear the dialling pretty  well, and there weren't enough digits for a Continental call." 
"No, and it was an odd beginning to a conversation.
I remember it clearly — "Was it hot in Rome?" 
That must have been some key phrase to establish identity.
And the thing that sounded like a telephone number — I wrote it down as soon as we got out of the attic — "One-x-nine-two-four" …
I think that, too, must have been part of an identity check, particularly as she repeated it again at the end."
"I'm with you there — Rome as such doesn't make much sense.
But something is going to be delivered somewhere — that could be Rome, I suppose."
"It could, but it's going to be something delivered by ship.
That doesn't sound like Rome.
And the ship is either in, or going to, Bilbao.
If it's a T. and T. line ship, we might be able to find out who she is."
 "If…we haven't any evidence to relate to the shipping company." 
"Well, it is, or was, Stavanger's own company, and it was Stavanger's flat.
We can work on the assumption, anyway, and I'll make discreet inquiries when I get to the  office tomorrow.
What on earth do you think she meant by the incident she didn't like at the weekend?"
"The only incident we know about that may relate to the rest of the set-up is your performance at Winter Marsh.
And the connection is pretty slim."
"Yes and no.
The Ingard group owns Winter Marsh — if it's paid for it.
At any rate it's in possession."
"Could whatever is going to be delivered be some sort of equipment for an oyster farm?
Could a ship of any size — I mean, a ship capable of being in Bilbao now — get to the place?"
I considered this.
 "At the right state of the tide, probably yes," I said.
"There's quite a good wooden quay, and I should imagine the army used to have heavy stores sent by water sometimes — certainly in the earlier days of the training establishment, before the motor lorry was as big as it is now.
You'd have to know the pilotage, and be very careful about taking in a vessel of any size.
But yes, I think it could be done."
"We can go on watching the place — obviously we've got to.
I wish we knew more about it, though."
 "We've got a week — a hell of a lot can happen in a week." 
"If it's oyster farm equipment nothing will happen.
There's no reason why they shouldn't have stuff sent by sea."
"I don't believe it.
Yes, there are oysters in the Crouch, and yes, as Ingard said, the Romans knew and ate them.
Most of their oysters, though, came from the Colne, round Mersea Island, and they were supplied to the big Roman garrison at Colchester.
Oyster farming is certainly possible, and it's been done successfully in a number of places.
But I didn't see any sign of it at Winter Marsh — the place just looked down-at-heel.
Besides, assume that the plans for oyster farming are all above board — do you go, or send your secretary, at eight o'clock in the evening to an unoccupied flat to make a telephone call about it?
And do you need code-names to establish your identity?"
"Might be trying to dodge Customs…but no, Peter, I agree it doesn't make sense.
But nothing seems to make sense."
 "Who on earth is the woman, do you suppose?" 
"Great pity we couldn't even get a glimpse  of her.
I'd recognise her voice, I think.
Fat lot of use that is, though."
"Might be important.
She had a fairly distinctive voice — certainly none of the women I met around the office today.
But I've only been there one day — half a day, really, since I took a good bit of time off this afternoon to talk to you.
It's early days yet, Paul.
Maybe we'll have some brilliant ideas in the morning."
"Well, you may, Peter.
Can't say I feel brilliant.
The only thing I can do is straightforward police work."
"Pays dividends ninety-nine times out of a hundred.
Can you get someone to keep an eye on the flat?"
"Of course.
And I'll have a word with the powers that be about monitoring the telephone.
They don't much like it — unfair to the criminal, or something.
But they can be persuaded.
Pusey can probably help here."
"I'm sure he will.
Well, Paul, as a respectable married man it's high time you went home.
Don't know what our police are coming to — gallivanting with unknown women in unoccupied flats!
Have another brandy."
"A very small one, then.
I suppose I can get a cab home."
 "I'Il ring down and tell them to get one for you." 
It was lateish when Paul Seddon had gone, nearly eleven o'clock, but I wanted to have a word with Miss Macdonald.
It was too late to go round to her flat, but not quite too late for a telephone call.
I rang the number she'd given me and she answered almost at once— whether she was up and reading, or whether the phone was beside her bed I didn't know.
"Peter Mottram here.
I'm awfully sorry to bother you so late,"I began.
 "Oh, Mr. Mottram, how kind of you!" 
She seemed to purr into the telephone "Have you got any news?" 
I hated to disappoint her, but I had to say I hadn't.
 "On the other hand," I went on,"I have come across something that may lead to some news of Mr. Stavanger — It might be difficult to talk to you in your office — that's why I'm ringing now.
Have you any means of finding out whether any T. and T. line ships are likely to be in Bilbao over the next few days?"
 "I can tell you now, I have it all in my head," she answered unexpectedly.
"I keep  the position-register for all our ships — it's about the only thing I'm allowed to do nowadays, since all the secretarial work goes to Mr. Lennis's bright young things.
But keeping the position-register needs experience.
I've done it for years, and if I may say it myself, I'm quite good at it.
Bilbao did you say?"
 "Yes." 
"Then it will be the Agnes T. She loaded dates in North Africa, and she is on her way to Tilbury.
But I sent a signal to her master today telling him to put into Bilbao for orders — those were Mr. Lennis's instructions, of course."
 "Do you know the master of the Agnes?" 
"No, he's one of the new men.
And she's been away a long time for one of our ships — ever since June.
Our ships may be small, Mr. Mottram, but in the old days they were liners — that is, they made regular, scheduled runs from various ports on the Continent to the United Kingdom.
Now Mr. Lennis is turning them all into tramps, sending them all over the place wherever he can pick up a cargo.
I suppose it's modern and efficient — but I don't like it.
The Stavangers always managed to run the ships as liners, and I don't see why Mr. Lennis can't.
But you don't want an old woman's gossip.
The Agnes has been picking up various cargoes from North African and some West African ports.
As I say, she was on her way home, but what she will do after calling at Bilbao, I don't know."
 "No other T. line ships in Bilbao?" 
 "No, and there haven't been for some time." 
"Well, thank you very much indeed, Miss Macdonald.
I'll keep in touch with you by ringing you at home, if I may."
"If you can give me any news of Mr. Andrew, please ring at four o'clock in the morning.
I'd be only too thankful to answer the phone."
Poor loyal old soul, I thought.
There might indeed be news of her beloved Mr. Andrew, but it might not be good news.
Where the hell was Andrew Stavanger?
I went to bed, but my mind was far too occupied to sleep.
In so far as the flat told us anything at all, it told two conflicting stories.
It had not been lived in recently it had none of that slight warmth of humanity you find in a dwelling whose inhabitant has gone out for  the day.
But it was not deserted.
The empty refrigerator and the absence of perishable food like bread and milk suggested that Stavanger had left expecting to be away for some time, but that conflicted with the pyjamas under the pillow in the bedroom, and the razor in the bathroom.
Of course, a man may have more than one razor, and in tidying up for departure he may forget that he has left pyjamas under his pillow, but the impression of the bedroom and the bathroom conflicted with the kitchen.
And if Stavanger had left intending to be away for months he had taken remarkably little with him in the way of clothes.
And if he had been away ever since he last turned up in the office, who was dealing with his post, and paying the quarterly bills?
Conceivably letters were being forwarded to him and he was paying his bills by post, but, if so, who had put receipts in the drawer of his desk?
It was as if the flat was meant to satisfy inquiries provoked by Stavanger's long absence by suggesting that even if he was not living there, he was still around and capable of dealing with his affairs.
That would cover the period of his letter to the bank about the £300,000 cheque.
But letters could be dealt with and bills paid by anyone who had access to the flat, and we knew that at least one other person had a key.
Who she was, and how often she went there, we didn't know, but that she did go, if only to use the telephone, we had incontestable proof.
That led to another line of thought.
You don't let yourself into someone else's flat to use the telephone unless you are quite certain that he won't be coming back while you're there, and that means that you know he is far enough away for you to be safe.
If the flat was used to telephone, could it not also be used for receiving letters?
Could the person who was dealing with Stavanger's post be using the address also for himself — or herself?
Could this be with Stavanger's knowledge?
Well, yes, of course it could, but it seemed an odd way of going about things.
People do act out of character, but not often wholly out of character and everything we knew about Stavanger suggested that he was considerate, responsible, and with a shipmaster's sense of discipline and orderliness.
Why had he left without a word to Miss Macdonald?
It was unclear to what extent he had told his daughter anything about his movements.
Apparently she knew enough to tell other people not to worry, but that might mean no more than that she was trying to put a brave face on things.
One inconclusive thought led to another, and I found myself wondering about Miss Macdonald's story of the office cleaner.
It was an odd coincidence that a man should be found dead in the Thames near Stavanger's office on the day that Stavanger had apparently disappeared, but that was now over four months ago, and in any case the police knew all about it, because the office cleaner had called the police.
The body had not been identified as Stavanger's — though, when I came to think of it, there was no reason why it should be, because he had not been reported missing.
It didn't seem at all likely that it could have anything to do with Stavanger, and corpses in the Thames, alas, are not all that infrequent.
Still, it would be easy enough to find out what the police had done about it, and it would be tidier to do so.
Another thought came into my mind about the flat, but I dozed off without identifying clearly what it was.
6 Miss Macdonald's Story
THE morning papers were full of Vivian Carolan's latest speech.
I'd never met him, but I'd heard him speak once, and there was no doubt that he could move people.
Whether he moved them healthily or unhealthily is another matter.
His theme was the fairly standard one for left-wing politicians of the need to abolish capital in private hands, but he added a strange brand of the narrowest form of nationalism, urging "Socialism for England now" .
He didn't approve of Celtic influence on what he called "the pure springs of Anglo-Saxon democracy" , holding that most of what had gone wrong with Britain over the past thousand years or so was the fault of "Celtic individualism" .
He was all for England's democracy and against any form of union with Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man, for which he seemed to have a particular dislike as "a nucleus of Celtic  imagery" .
His extreme Little-Englandism, however, was linked to World Socialism, and he argued that a truly Socialist independent England would lead the way to a truly Socialist world, independent alike of capitalism and Celtic individualism.
Since he disapproved of any English links with Europe as much as he disapproved of links with Wales or Scotland, his world view seemed somewhat restricted.
But woolly as his arguments were, they went down well with discontented people, and particularly with certain sections of the unemployed.
That was what gave him his undoubted power in politics, and his loose organisation called the "Left is Right Group" — kept carefully informal so that it could not be proscribed by any of the major parties — commanded the allegiance of a handful of M.P.
's capable of being a thorn in the flesh to the Coalition Government if they were not placated.
Obviously there was not much that any Government concerned in governing the United Kingdom could do to meet the wilder demands of the "Left is Right Group" , but, since it was never clear whether these were immediate demands or merely long-term hopes, Cabinet office for Carolan and  Under — Secretaryships for one or two of his more articulate followers contrived to keep the group within the Parliamentary fold.
Carolan's appointment as Minister of Fine Arts was considered a good one, diverting his energies to extolling the peculiar merits of English painting, and to bringing "Pictures to the People" in the form of travelling exhibitions.
These were extremely well managed and arranged, for Carolan knew his subject, and if his reading of English Political history was weird his enthusiasm for English painting was real.
Nevertheless, there had been some ugly incidents.
Opening his travelling exhibitions gave Carolan plenty of opportunities to speak, and the "Left is Right Group" ensured that he spoke to enthusiastic audiences of his followers.
They wore no uniform, of course, but maintained a corps of stewards who could be exceedingly rough to anyone who dared to voice dissent at one of Carolan's meetings.
And the stewards did not perform only when Carolan was speaking.
Parties of twenty or thirty of them were liable to turn up at any Political gathering of which they disapproved, and their chant of "Left-is-right" , added to their readiness  to fight anyone who tried to restore order, broke up meeting after meeting.
Once or twice Carolan himself had hinted at the moral justification of force to secure the people's just demands, but he was careful to remain within the law, and when challenged in Parliament would observe loftily that he spoke philosophically, and that he could trust the good sense of the English people to interpret his views correctly.
His latest speech seemed to go further than he had ever gone before in advocating force to achieve the kind of England he wanted.
"A day may come — I do not say it will come, but that it may — when bands of Englishmen from the Tweed to the Tamar, sickened by the  prevarications of the capitalists and by the continued infiltration of Celtic elements into English life, will arise with guns in their hands.
And should that day come — bear in mind that I say "should it come" , not "when it comes" — who shall blame them?
A disciplined band of anti-capitalist men in every town, animated by the faith of Cromwell's soldiers, could sweep away the rottenness that besets our country.
So I say "Beware!" 
Patience is not inexhaustible, and the clean gun may yet  need to be brought in to redress the corruption of our so-called democratic system."
The leader writers and political correspondents went to town on this.
Some of them said that Carolan was a kind of licensed political buffoon, not to be taken seriously, and that in some ways his wild oratory was a useful escape valve in a complex society.
Others argued, however, that the man was straining political toleration too far, and that his nominal adherence to the Government was becoming absurd.
 "Is there no law that can disband a private army before it gets into uniform" one leader writer thundered.
All this made interesting reading over breakfast, but it didn't seem to advance the hunt for Andrew Stavanger.
There was a connection of sorts — Carolan was Stavanger's son-in-law, but fathers are not responsible for the political views of the husbands of their daughters, and there was no evidence — apart from the election address in his desk — that Stavanger took much interest in the political life of the Carolans.
How did Kate fit into the picture?
She and Carolan had no children, but that was neither here nor there as  an indication of matrimonial harmony nowadays.
The Carolans were subject to much exposure in the Press, and as far as I knew there had never been any newspaper gossip which even hinted at any sort of rift between them.
Yet it seemed an odd relationship.
Kate did not seem to play a great part in her husband's political life: she appeared on platforms with him from time to time, but she was by no means an automatic member of his entourage.
Carolan could hardly approve of the Ingard empire, and of her father's involvement in it.
According to Miss Macdonald it was at Kate's insistence that her father had become involved with Ingard — but Miss Macdonald's views on Kate were not necessarily accurate.
I didn't know enough about any of the personalities concerned to form any views of my own.
Andrew stavanger was beginning to emerge in my mind with a shadowy personality — as the vest sort of successor to a family business, with a high sense of responsibility reinforced by his disciplined training at sea.
Everything that I had so far learned about him — except the conflicting stories of his drinking habits — seemed diametrically opposed to the slick business morality of Ingard and his associates and to  the way-out politics of his daughter's husband.
Perhaps drink was the true explanation of his so far inexplicable behaviour.
It was certainly the simplest.
I couldn't go on speculating on the might have-beens of Stavanger's life, for there was work to do.
I had to show up again at Ingard House, and I also wanted to tidy up the loose ends of Miss Macdonald's story of the dead man in the Thames.
I rang Seddon at home before he left for New Scotland Yard and asked him to find out for me the names of the officers who had dealt with the Southwark Bridge case.
He said he could do that in a few minutes after getting to his office, and I arranged to ring him later in the morning.
I got to Ingard House at nine.thirty, to find Henniker and his clerks already at work.
 "I don't think I need to stay here much longer," Henniker said.
"I've seen enough to convince me that the only recommendation I can make to the bank is that they should withdraw all financial facilities to the Ingard group forthwith.
The accounts are in an appalling state."
 "Your report will mean an immediate crisis on the Stock Exchange," I said.
"I can't help that.
I am an accountant, I have been called in by the bank, and my duty  is to the bank.
Speaking personally, my own view is that reputable City institutions are far too ready to temper the wind to slick operators like Ingard.
They really do present "the unacceptable face of capitalism" .
But this is a personal view.
What the bank does when I present my report is, of course, the bank's business."
"The bank will act on it — there can be no doubt about that.
And, also speaking personally, I agree with your view.
But, as I think Sir Geoffrey Gillington explained, there are other matters concerning the Ingard empire which we haven't yet got to the bottom of.
I'll have a word with Sir Geoffrey this morning.
I'd like, if I may, to report your provisional findings, and to ask him to delay action on them for a week.
It would help if, perhaps, you could take a few days longer to prepare a considered report."
"I could certainly do that — in any set of accounts as involved as these there is masses of formal work that could be undertaken.
My doubt is whether any further delay is fair to the bank.
As I see it, my duty is to report the state of things at once."
"If I report informally for you, you will have fulfilled that duty.
And, as you say, what happens then is a matter for the bank.
If Sir Geoffrey were to ask you to carry on for a bit longer, would you be willing to do so?"
"Put like that, yes.
But — with respect to you — I should need direct instructions from Sir Geoffrey."
"I shall ask him to provide them.
I don't want him to telephone here.
If he sends a note by hand addressed to you at your own office, would that do?"
 "I'd much rather have written instructions than a telephone call." 
"Good.
I'll go and talk to Sir Geoffrey now."
The banker saw me straight away.
I wasn't at all sure that I had any right to make the request that I proposed to make.
Ingard shares were still quoted on the Stock Exchange, and we had evidence that they were more or less worthless.
Was it fair to anybody to delay action which might hurt innocent investors?
I decided that the only thing to do was to put my thoughts frankly to Sir Geoffrey.
 "We've made no headway towards finding out whether your suspicions of Mr. Andrew Stavanger's letter are justified We don't yet  know where Mr. Stavanger is, and such evidence as we've been able to discover so far is inconclusive," I said.
"On the other hand, there is evidence to suggest that some very strange things — possibly criminal — are happening within the Ingard group.
We don't yet know what these are, but for reasons which it wouldn't be proper for me to go into we believe that we may know more about them in about a week.
Mr. Henniker is very unhappy.
He doesn't know of the possibly criminal activities which may be going on under the cover of the Ingard group — and I can t at present discuss such matters with him.
He does know from his preliminary investigation of the accounts that the group is virtually insolvent — and I have his permission to convey his findings to you.
His own view is that the bank should withdraw all financial facilities to Ingard forthwith, which, of course, would provoke an immediate crisis in the group's affairs.
If this were to happen, our other inquiries would be severely prejudiced.
Therefore, if it is at all possible, I should prefer nothing which would upset the group to emerge for another week."
Sir Geoffrey nodded.
 "I understand the position, and it is clearly a very difficult  one," he said.
"I have, of course, contributed to the difficulty by taking my suspicions to the police — I can't blame you for wanting to get to the bottom of things.
Can you give me any indication of the gravity of the investigation which, in your view, might justify me in deliberately withholding from the board information of direct importance to the bank's shareholders?"
"No.
I can ask you to accept that I shouldn't have come to you like this if I did not believe that the matter may turn out to be very grave indeed.
I can't tell you what it is, because we don't yet know.
Should there be an upheaval in the Ingard group now, I fear that we may never know."
 "Can you say that there is a Prima facie case for continued investigation?" 
"Most certainly.
The mysterious disappearance of Mr. Stavanger alone is something that needs to be cleared up.
Looking at things squarely, I should say that most of the £5 million you have advanced to Ingard will have to be written off — and it doesn't seem to me to make much difference to the bank whether this becomes open knowledge now, or in a week or so.
A more serious consideration to my mind is the continued quotation of  Ingard shares on the Stock Exchange.
By any real assessment they must be largely worthless."
The banker considered this for a moment.
"Theoretically, you're quite right — it is indeed improper to withhold such information from the Stock Exchange.
In practice — I doubt if it makes much difference.
It's common knowledge that Ingard — in company with other speculators — is having difficulties, and his shares have been severely written down.
There is very little market in them — existing holders can sell only at a heavy loss.
It could be argued, I suppose, that by not forcing the issue until your investigations are complete we might actually be helping Ingard shareholders — by clearing up uncertainties which might otherwise damage their interests."
"You could argue that.
In the circumstances, the argument wouldn't impress me if I were a stockbroker."
Sir Geoffrey laughed.
"Nevertheless, it is an argument that could be used.
Anyway, Colonel Blair, I'm going to trust you — never say that banks haven't got a social conscience towards the whole community!
What, exactly, do you want me to do?"
I explained about the note I wanted him to write to Henniker.
 "Don't give any reasons," I said.
"Just say that you are writing to confirm that you want a detailed report because the matter is of such importance to so many people, and are prepared to wait for it.
He'll understand."
"Very well, Colonel, it shall be as you wish.
I feel a little as I felt when the only racehorse I've ever owned ran at Lincoln."
 "I hope it did well." 
"Actually, it won.
But that was its first race.
It did so badly afterwards that I decided racing was not for me.
The first principle of success in any walk of life is to know when to cut your losses."
I wasn't at all sure what he meant.
Feeling remanded on bail rather than acquitted, I found a call box and rang Seddon.
 "I've got everything you want," I think,"he said.
The man in charge of your case was Detective Inspector Ian Redpath, of the City Division.
I've had a word with him on the phone, and told him to expect a call from you.
It seems a very curious case — but Redpath will tell you all about it."
Being already in the City I wasn't far from  the divisional H.Q., and I went along in the hope of finding Redpath there.
He was.
I had to wait about ten minutes while he was interviewing someone in connection with a current case, and then I was taken to his room.
 "Assistant Commissioner Seddon told me to expect you," he said.
"I'm sorry to have kept you waiting, but I had to finish with the man I had with me.
It was about the theft of registered mail — I think we've got it sewn up.
The Assistant Commissioner didn't go into details.
He said you were from the Home Office.
What can I do for you?"
 "I understand that you were in charge of a case involving a man found dead in the Thames in June." 
"The Southwark Bridge case!
Unhappily, yes.
It was a rotten case — we never got anywhere with it.
I worked in conjunction with the River Police."
 "I'd like you to tell me everything you can about it." 
Redpath looked troubled.
"You'll excuse me, sir, I know, but I'd like to be sure exactly who I'm talking to.
You haven't got a police rank.
I'm an ordinary detective-inspector, and I don't as a rule have direct dealings with the Home Office.
Please understand — it's not  that I'm doubting you in any way.
But don't you think you should see my Superintendent?"
 "I'll gladly see your Superintendent if you think it necessary," I said.
"But you are all busy people, and I really do want to talk to you because you dealt with all the details.
I'm not exactly a policeman, but I do belong to the Police Liaison Group under Sir Edmund Pusey, and I'm very much concerned with police work.
Assistant Commissioner Seddon is my group's special representative at New Scotland Yard.
Why not ring Seddon now?
Tell him that I'm with you, but that you're not quite sure how much you ought to tell me.
If you ring him you can be certain that your call really is to the Yard.
When somebody rings you, there is always a slight element of doubt about precisely who he is."
 "Really, sir, I don't think I quite need to do that." 
"But I want you to!
I very much respect your instincts, and I want you to be able to talk freely."
Somewhat reluctantly he lifted the phone, and asked the operator to get him Assistant Commissioner Seddon at New Scotland Yard.
The call was a few minutes in coming  through — probably they had to look for Seddon at the other end.
While waiting, I asked if he had many riverside cases.
 "Quite a few," he said.
"The river's part of my manor, but of course it also belongs to the River Police.
You could say roughly that I deal with the bank, and they look after the stream."
 "And this was a case of a man's being found on the mud?" 
"Yes, it had some problems.
But I like the River men.
We get on all right."
Then the phone rang.
In a rather embarrassed way he told Seddon that I was in his office, and asked for instructions.
When he put down the phone, he said, "Really, sir, you make me feel that I'm behaving like a suspect." 
"Nonsense.
What did he say?"
"He could have given me a ticking off, considering that he'd gone to the trouble of telling me that you were coming.
But he didn't.
He was very nice.
Said you were top brass and that I could talk to you as if you were the Commissioner himself."
"That was handsome of him!
I'll have to buy him a drink.
Happier now?"
"Of course, sir.
Where do you want to begin?"
"I'd better begin by telling you just why I've come to see you.
A very odd case has come to my department — we always seem to get the odd ones — concerning the disappearance of the managing director of a shipping company.
He's a man called Andrew Stavanger, and his office is in Upper Thames Street — the very building, in fact, where the office cleaner who, I understand, discovered the body in your case worked.
Now I don't see that there's likely to be any connection, but since we're up against a brick wall in the Stavanger case, I've come to pick your brains."
 "Stavanger's not on the list of any missing persons that's come to me." 
"He wouldn't be, because he's not officially missing.
I told you it was an odd case.
He's disappeared, we don't know whether voluntarily or not.
He seems to have gone missing at about the time your body was discovered."
"You say you're up against a brick wall — well, that's just where we got to in the Southwark Bridge case.
We don't know who the man was, let alone how he came to be in the river.
How much do you already know about it?"
"Next to nothing, except that the body was found, and that you handled the case.
I haven't seen any papers."
"Well, you can have the file.
It's a fat one, and just about absolutely futile.
There's one matter that's in the file, but which didn't come out at the inquest.
The inquest was only opened, of course— it had to be adjourned because we didn't know the man's identity.
The coroner took evidence only of the discovery of the body and of the cause of death — apparently a blow on the head.
The matter which didn't come out was that the deceased's pockets were full of live ammunition — standard army rifle bullets."
I looked at the file — a painstaking record of hundreds of hours of police work, inquiries, interviews, medical and forensic reports, all getting nowhere.
 "Well, no one can say you haven't tried," I said.
"I'm particularly impressed by your study of tides, and estimates of where the body may have gone in the river.
That seems to me outstanding work."
He was pleased, and, I felt, thawed a little.
I could understand his unease.
Here was a case which had taken up an inordinate amount of time for no result, and here was I, some remote big-wig from the Home Office coming to cross.examine him about it.
No wonder he was inclined to be defensive.
 "Tell me about the cartridges," I went on.
 "I think you were wise to make no public mention of them." 
 "Well, that wasn't really my decision," he said frankly,"but the outcome of a C.I.D.
conference.
It could be argued that they might help to identify him, but it was felt that they might relate to another crime and that if we started talking about them it might put whoever was responsible on his guard.
I agreed with the decision at the time, though since we haven't managed to identify him I'm beginning to wonder if it was right.
You'll find a technical description of the cartridges in the file, but they seem to be quite ordinary army ammunition."
I glanced at the file again.
 "They don't seem to have come from the British Army." 
"No.
That's what makes me think that the man may have been a foreigner perhaps even killed on the other side of the channel."
"Possibly — though if the medical evidence about the time of death is right it's hard to see how he could have got to where he was in the time.
Where is the body now?"
"When it was clear that identifying him was going to be a long job — if, indeed, he could ever be identified — the coroner issued a burial certificate.
We have, of course, a very full description, and photographs.
And we took a plaster cast of the teeth."
"That was an excellent idea.
Has it been shown to any dentists?"
"The cast itself, no.
The people in the forensic medical laboratory got out a technical description of the dental work on his teeth, and this was circulated.
It didn't produce anything.
It was hardly practical to take the case to every dentist in the country."
"Of course not.
It's more likely to be valuable as a check on identity, if we ever find anyone whose teeth they might have been.
If I can find out who is Stavanger's dentist, perhaps he could be shown the cast."
"I'd take it myself — I'd be thankful to make any sort of progress in the case.
Do you seriously think there is a chance that the body might be your Mr. Stavanger's?"
"I just don't know.
Age and general description seem about right — but they could apply to tens of thousands of men in their late fifties or early sixties.
I haven't got a photograph of Stavanger yet — as I explained, he's not officially missing.
It's a delicate business."
 "Are you at liberty to tell me anything about your case, sir?" 
"Certainly.
You will understand that because of the big financial interests involved it's important that rumours shouldn't start flying about, but I'd be grateful for your views."
I gave him a slightly edited account of the banker's concern about Andrew Stavanger's sudden transfer of his large personal deposit, and of his mysterious non-attendance at his office for over four months.
I did not mention my own strange adventure on Winter Marsh, but I did describe Seddon's and my experience at the flat in Yardarm Square.
Redpath listened closely to every word.
Then he said,"The Boxing and Coxing on the ships would only be possible for someone who controlled a shipping line.
If he's doing it himself there seems no reasonable explanation for it — unless the hints that he is slightly batty are true.
If he's dead, then someone is playing a dangerous game, and one that can't go on forever.
But there isn't any evidence that he is dead, so one can only say "if" .
Using that as a working theory, I'd say there was some sort of time limit  involved — I mean, a time during which it is imperative for people not to know that he's dead, but a time that comes to an end, after which it doesn't matter so much."
"That's a very good point.
And it's possible that the curious telephone conversation in the flat, with its reference to postponing something for a week, related to your time limit.
The trouble is that we don't know what that something is.
And we're back where we started in not knowing whether the man is dead or alive."
 "If you can find out his dentist, at least we could settle whether he was the man in the Thames." 
"I think I can do that.
But probably not until this evening.
Can you let me have a phone number where I could get you this evening?"
He gave me his number, and said that he'd be in from eight o'clock onwards.
I thanked him and left, taking with me copies of the statements in the Southwark Bridge case file.
Miss Macdonald, I thought, would probably know about Andrew Stavanger's dentist — she might well have made appointments for him in the past.
But I didn't want to be seen talking  to her in the office, so I should have to wait until she got home.
I filled in the rest of that day by pretending to be busy with the audit.
I didn't have to pretend much — going through some of the accounts with Henniker, and listening to his shrewd comments, was remarkably interesting.
He had got Sir Geoffrey's note when he'd looked into his own office at lunchtime.
He didn't refer to it directly, but he did observe mildly,"You seem to be a power in the City.
I hope you're right."
I thought of telephoning Miss Macdonald, but decided instead to call on her.
The staff left Ingard House at five.thirty, and I reckoned she would be home soon after six.
Allowing for the inevitable delays of London traffic I rang the bell of her flat at six-thirty.
She lived in one of those streets running from the Old Brompton Road more or less parallel with the edge of Brompton Cemetery, a territory that seems more or less taken over by typists' collectives, where groups of girls band together to share flats whose rents none of them could afford individually.
Somehow I didn't see Miss Macdonald as Fourth Girl in a collective flat, and my  instinct was right.
Her own flat was a little three-roomed affair on the top floor of an old West London house, in what had once been servants' bedrooms.
She had made it an attractive place, beautifully decorated with light paint, and furnished with old pieces picked up at auctions with taste and considerable knowledge of antiques.
She was surprised to see me, but also, I thought, rather excited.
 "Have you got news at last?" she asked eagerly.
 "I'm sorry, Miss Macdonald, but I'm afraid I haven't," I said.
"But I want, if I may, to take you into my confidence.
If we are to find Mr. Stavanger we shall need your help."
"I would do anything in the world to help Mr. Andrew.
But what can I do?"she said.
She was obviously puzzled, but she invited me to sit down, and offered me a glass of sherry.
I accepted the sherry and said, "You have a remarkably nice flat, and I admire your taste in furniture." 
 "I couldn't possibly afford the flat if I were renting it now, but I got it on a long lease just after the war, when rents were much less than they are today," she said.
"The furniture well, it has been my hobby for many years.
Again, I could not afford much of it if I were buying it now.
But what has this to do with Mr. Andrew?"
 "Nothing," I said.
 "I am simply making conversation while I decide whether to risk my job by telling you things that I certainly ought not to tell you." 
 "Don't then," she said.
There was still a pleasant Scots lilt to her Voice.
"But I have to take calculated risks sometimes.
And I have calculated that you would be on Mr. Stavanger's side through thick and thin.
You see, I am not an accountant.
I am a policeman.
Her reaction surprised me.
 "Thank God," she said.
 "Why do you say that?" 
"Because we need the Police in that office!
I owe nothing to Mr. Ingard or Mr. Lennis — I owe a very great deal to Mr. Andrew, and his father.
I have said nothing to anyone so far because I have never been quite sure how much it might affect Mr. Andrew.
Oh, I know that he would never have touched anything in the least underhand, but he is a director of the company, and he might be held responsible for things that were done without his knowledge.
They think that I'm  just a mousy old woman, and couldn't possibly know what goes on — they've taken away all confidential work from me and Mr. Lennis treats me as if I were a half-wit.
But you can t spend a lifetime in a shipping office without learning something about ships.
Why have we changed from being liners to being tramps?
What are the cargoes we pick up at short notice and deliver to out-of-the-way ports in Africa?
What do we bring back to England?
You tell me that, Mr. Mottram!"
 "I can't tell you because I don't know," I said.
"That's what I'm trying to find out.
What do you think the cargoes are?"
 "I don't know either," she said unhappily,"but they must be something illegal because of the bills of lading.
This is what they think I don't understand, but I do.
Every ship must have a manifest for each port she calls at.
In the old days it was quite simple.
We would have a ship making scheduled passages from Rotterdam, Say, to London.
In Rotterdam she would be loaded with so many cases of Dutch cheese, or Dutch tomatoes, or those round white Dutch cabbages.
Mr. Andrew knew all the shipping agents, and he tried to ensure that every ship had a profitable cargo before she sailed.
On scheduled passages, of course, you can't always do this, but Mr. Andrew and his father before him knew the trade so well that they generally managed it.
From London we would carry general merchandise back to Rotterdam — Every ship has a ledger to herself, and the manifest for every voyage has to be entered in it, so that you know precisely what the returns from each voyage are.
Or rather, that's the way we used to do it.
I'm not supposed to look after the ledgers now, but I do still keep the PoSition record for the ships, and sometimes I have to get a ledger to check a sailing date.
And I can't help seeing the manifests — in any case, I've always been interested in them.
Mr. Mottram, our ships could not Possibly be run on their Present manifests!
"Yes, I know that Mr. Lennis has altered the system.
It's much sloppier than it used to be, and the ladings are not all priced as we used to price them.
But I know roughly what the freight for so many tons, say, of bananas from the Canaries is worth, and we're not getting enough trade to keep going.
But we do keep going the wages for the crews are paid, the ships go for their refits, and in the Ingard group's annual report the ships are shown as making quite a lot of money — more than we  used to make in the old days.
The ships are keeping the group, Mr. Mottram.
How?"
Her quiet, controlled anger was impressive.
 "That's what we're trying to find out," I said.
 "I don't want you to do anything that might attract the least sort of suspicion to yourself, but could you, in the normal course of your work, make out a list of the voyages of your ships over the past year — just name of ship and masters, ports of call, and dates?" 
 "Easily," she said.
"I have it all in my Daily Position Report.
There's a file of that, of course, but I make it up from my working diary, and nobody will know if I make some extracts from the diary."
 "How many ships are there?" 
"Before the war we had eleven, but we lost several in the war.
In the rebuilding programme after the war we reduced the fleet to seven, but they were larger ships.
Two were sold after the Ingard takeover, and now there are five — Charlotte, Josephine, Cynthia, Agnes and Susan.
They all have the family name T. — Charlotte T., Josephine T., and so on.
Susan T. is the oldest and smallest — she was actually called after me.
There was a  Katherine T. after Mr. Andrew's daughter, but she was one of the ones they sold."
 "Do they all make the same sort of voyages?" 
"Not exactly.
Susan is the oldest, and she still has her old master, Captain Lomax.
They keep her more or less on her old run, a regular freight Service from Holland to London, with occasional trips to the Baltic.
Charlotte has her old master, too, and she keeps fairly regularly to Bordeaux for wine, though at different times of the year she may go to Spain for oranges, or to the Canaries for new potatoes or bananas.
"Agnes, Josephine and Cynthia are the real tramps.
They have no regular runs and may go anywhere, often at short notice.
They've all got masters appointed since the takeover.
Agnes has the newest, Captain Lemming.
He took over when she left London in June, on her present voyage.
She's not been home since, though she is due back soon.
She's the one you asked me about, the one now in Bilbao."
 "Would a master know precisely what his ship was carrying?" 
"He'd know what was on the bills of lading.
He wouldn't necessarily know what was actually in all the crates.
He couldn't."
I changed the subject slightly.
 "I'm also very much concerned with Mr. Stavanger," I said.
 "Where do you think he is?" 
Her quick, alert interest in the ships turned to distress.
 "I know only what I've been told — that he is on one of the ships," she said unhappily.
 "I don't believe it." 
 "Why?" 
"It's so unlike him.
It was unlike him to stay away from the office at all without telling me, though if something unexpected happened, I could understand that.
But he wouldn't have gone abroad without writing.
He is the most considerate of men, and he'd know that I would be worried about him."
 "His daughter doesn't seem particularly worried." 
"Oh, her!
Mr. Andrew has always been devoted to Kate, Mr. Mottram, but I couldn't say the same about her.
It's not my place to talk about her, anyway, but she is wrapped up in her own life, and her husband's politics — she met him when she belonged to some very radical student group at Oxford.
Yes, she had all the chances, but she didn't even take a degree — threw herself into left-wing politics, and then got married.
I can't bring myself to say she doesn't care  about her father, but she doesn't act as if she cared for him very much."
 "But what can have happened to Mr. Stavanger?" 
 "I wonder, sometimes, if perhaps he's dead." 
The handkerchief that she'd been twisting and untwisting at our first interview came out again, this time to her eyes.
I could offer little comfort.
"Mr. Stavanger — Captain stavanger, I should really say had been in the Royal Navy.
If we must only think "if" he met some accident while trying to investigate something he didn't like on one of the ships, he will have died while doing what he felt to be his duty,"I said.
 "Mr. Andrew is a master mariner, of course," she said.
"So was his father.
But when they took over the firm they were always called "Mister" to distinguish them from the other captains, perhaps.
I don't know.
It was just part of our tradition."
She paused.
 "I must face the Possibility that Mr. Andrew may be dead, but I can't think of him as being dead." 
"You are a brave woman.
There's one small piece of information you may be able to  give.
Do you know who was Mr. Stavanger's dentist?"
 "Does that mean you have found a body and are trying to identify it?" 
Miss Macdonald had a sharp, quick mind.
 "No," I said,"but unidentified bodies are sometimes found.
Teeth are an almost certain identification if any dental work has been done, and if the dentist concerned can be found.
If I know the name of Mr. Stavanger's dentist the police can check quickly whether he has been the victim of any unexplained death."
"I understand — though I don't like the implications of what you say.
Yes, in the old days I always made his appointments for him."
She gave me the name of a dentist in Wimpole Street, and I wrote it down.
I got up to go.
 "You have not asked me questions, and I appreciate your trust very much," I said.
"It would be wrong for me to pretend that these problems can be solved quickly — if they can be solved at all.
But, thanks to you, I feel that we are a good deal nearer solving them than we were yesterday.
Justice is not always swift, but in ways we often cannot see in advance it is generally  sure.
I can Promise you that the police will do everything they can to find Mr. Stavanger, and to clear up the other matters we have been discussing."
 "I can get that list of voyages you asked for tomorrow morning," she said.
 "How shall I get it to you?" 
 "Do you go out to lunch?" 
"Not always.
It is very expensive, and I often take sandwiches to the office.
But I can go out to lunch, of course."
 "Could you go to the Upper Thames Street branch of the London Metropolitan Bank without it seeming unusual?" 
 "Yes — I have my own personal account there, and I go there when I want to cash a cheque." 
"Could you put the list in an envelope, address it to Mr. Peter Mottram, c/o The Manager, and give it to the manager?
I can arrange for him to see you at once when you ask for him."
 "It shall be there by twelve-thirty tomorrow." 
7 A Matter of Teeth
I RANG Inspector Redpath at his home, and gave him the name and address of Stavanger's dentist.
He promised to take the cast to him in the morning, and I arranged to call at his office at noon to learn what he had discovered from the dentist.
Then I rang Pusey: it was time, I felt, that we had a conference, and I asked him to get hold of Seddon and, if possible, someone from his old acquaintances at the Foreign Office who would know about current politics in North and West Africa.
Pusey suggested that we should meet at his flat at six o'clock and that suited me well, for with luck I should know the outcome of Redpath's interview with the dentist, and have Miss Macdonald's list.
Waiting is the most wearisome of all activities — if, indeed, it can be called an activity.
I had one job to do first thing in the morning — to ring Sir Geoffrey Gillington and ask  him to arrange for the manager of the Upper Thames Street branch of the bank to receive Miss Macdonald when she called, and to keep her letter for me.
I would try to collect it, I said, about two o'clock in the afternoon.
Then I had nothing to do until my call on Inspector Redpath at noon.
I put in an appearance at Ingard House to show that I was still busy about the audit, and had a word with Henniker.
He was gloomier than ever, and inclined to be angry with me as well.
 "However you look at it, the whole thing is no better than a bucket shop," he said.
"I'm not saying that it started off to be one, but in my view it became fraudulent pretty Soon.
When the property market was rising every day a slick operator could buy and sell again without much risk.
But Ingard didn't do that — he bought and sold to himself, setting up company after company in the group to buy properties from one another.
The result was enormous paper profits for the parent company — Ingard Holdings — which he used to attract investors, and to impress the bank.
He paid dividends, of course when he paid any — out of fresh investment.
There was never any real cover for dividends, and the property values now don't cover one-fifth of  his borrowings — from a couple of pension funds and various other institutions as well as from the bank.
The shares are worthless, and it goes against the grain to see them still quoted, written down as they are."
 "What about the oyster enterprise?" 
I asked.
"What about it?
There's a worthless piece of paper saying that there is supposed to be an oyster enterprise, but there's no evidence that anyone has ever caught a single oyster."
 "You don't catch oysters," I said, "you dredge them." 
"Well, dredge if you like, but there isn't any dredging.
How long are you going to go on with the farce of keeping this bloody lot in business?"
"I don't know.
I can understand your feelings, and I'm wholly with you.
But there are national interests which may override even City interests, for a time, at any rate.
You've been very good, and I wish I could explain things, but I must ask you to accept that I can't.
Have you been able to study the shipping company in any detail?"
"It's a funny thing, but as far as I can see the shipping company is the only reputable part of the whole business.
The ships are  worth Something, and they're about the only hope of securing creditors about 5p in the pound.
Conceivably, the shipping company could be sold off as a going concern that might bring it up to about 1Op in the Pound."
 "I said" in detail".
What I meant was, have you seen any detailed accounts of the revenue from the Ships — how it arises, and how it's paid?"
"No.
But that isn't really my job — not at the moment, anyway.
I have to report on whether the group as a whole has any prospect of Paying its debts.
The ships come into it because they Produce profits for the group — the only subsidiary company which does.
I have documentary evidence of regular payments from the shipping company to the group, but I haven't had time to go into how the money is made.
Nor do I think that it is necessary at this stage.
Presumably the ships earn money by carrying cargoes, doing the ordinary business of shipping."
"Could you dig into the shipping accounts a bit more deeply?
It might be very important."
 "What exactly, do you want to know?" 
 "I have some evidence — it doesn't strictly concern the audit, because, as you say, we're  here officially to find out if the group has any money, not precisely how it's made — to suggest that the ships can" I be making a profit by legitimate trade.
Yet they do appear to be making money.
I was wondering whether you could find out where it's coming from."
"Well, I'm not a detective, but I am on the side of the law.
As I understand my terms of reference, I can call for such accounts as I wish.
I don't know that I can learn much other than the general profit-and-loss position — it would be an enormous job to go through bills of lading and check each individual consignment."
"It may come to that, but you'd need time, and probably wider terms of reference — I can see that.
But, without trying to flatter you, you're one of the ablest accountants in the City.
And an accountant is a sort of detective.
What I'm asking is that you should look at the accounts with your detective instincts on the alert and see if there's anything that strikes you as odd about them."
Henniker smiled.
"You should have joined the diplomatic service!
You've certainly got me interested, and the shipping accounts may take my mind off being cross with you.
I'll  have a go — but I can't promise much in the way of results."
"You're a good chap, Henniker.
How you must hate this whole business!
It probably wouldn't surprise you to know that I do, too.
One day I hope you'll let me buy you a slap.
up dinner — that is, if I don't get sacked as a result of all this hellishness first.
There's one more thing, though it's scarcely necessary to mention it.
No one in the shipping office must be given the slightest idea that we suspect anything out of the ordinary at all."
"Next to diplomats, perhaps, accountants are the most reserved people in the world.
They have even been known to depart from the Stricter paths of truth Sometimes — in a good cause, of course."
It was just on opening time, and I stood myself a drink in a City pub that didn't really want me — a woman was still vacuuming the bar.
I can't say that alcohol did anything to lift my spirits, but at least it filled in the time before my date with Detective Inspector Redpath.
I was thankful when the time came to go to the City Division H.Q.
Redpath gave me his news at once.
 "No good, Colonel," he said,"The Southwark  Bridge body couldn't possibly be your man.
The dentist was very decent, looked up his records although he didn't need to, because he'd treated Mr. Stavanger for years and knew him quite well.
The cast couldn't have come from Stavanger's teeth: he was wounded in the mouth by a piece of shrapnel during the war, and lost a good many teeth, with the result that he wore a plate with artificial teeth in both upper and lower jaws.
The cast had one or two teeth missing from extractions and Some fillings, but on the whole the teeth were in good condition."
I don't know what I'd been expecting.
If the body had turned out to be Stavanger's it would have been progress in the case, though we'd have been no nearer knowing where he had been killed, or who had killed him.
Redpath had acted at once on the very slenderest of chances — apart from the date, and the fact that Stavanger was missing, there wasn't a scrap of evidence to link him with the body found on the Thames foreshore at low tide.
I felt like apologising to Redpath for putting him to a lot of trouble for scant reason.
 "You've done very well to get the thing cleared up so quickly," I said.
 "I'm sorry to have given you so much bother for nothing." 
 "Well, not quite for nothing," he said.
"I'm as anxious to get my man identified as you are to find yours.
Negative information is not very satisfying, but it's information all the same.
At least we know one man who can't be the Southwark Bridge body.
And the dentist told me something else.
He can't say for sure, but he thinks that one of the fillings looks like Continental work, using a technique that's not widely practised in Britain.
Again, that doesn't get us anywhere at the moment, but it does slightly bear out the possibility that the man was a foreigner which would explain our total failure so far to get him identified."
 "It's nice of you to be so philosophical about it." 
"I'm not a philosopher, I'm a policeman.
When you have an unidentified body and a missing man it's straightforward police work to put them together and see if they fit.
In this case they don't, but that's neither here nor there.
It was my job to go into it, and I simply did my job.
If you have any more ideas, Colonel, I'll go into them, too."
I didn't have any more ideas.
I had a sandwich in a crowded City pub, and then went to  the bank to collect Miss Macdonald's letter.
Sir Geoffrey's intervention worked wonders.
I gave my name to a clerk and I was taken to the manager's room at once.
He handed me a big brown envelope, and although he was obviously curious his training kept back any questions.
I felt rather mean at not staying to chat with him, but there was nothing I could say and I wanted to get away somewhere by myself to study movements of ships.
So I just thanked him and left.
I could have gone to my own office in Whitehall, but I was due to see Sir Edmund Pusey in the evening, and I didn't want to risk running into him before I'd managed to clear my own mind a bit.
I was lucky in meeting a cab as I left the bank, and I went back to my anonymous room in Peel Square.
Miss Macdonald had done me proud.
She gave a separate sheet of paper to each ship, and on it, in neat, small writing, she had listed every voyage, with any intermediate ports of call, over the past twelve months.
The pattern was much as she had described it.
Susan shuttled to and fro between Rotterdam and London, occasionally going to Felixstowe instead of London, and making two voyages during the year between London and  Stockholm.
Charlotte had a more or less regular trade with Bordeaux, but had been once to Lisbon, and twice to Las Palmas.
Josephine, Cynthia, and Agnes had been all over the place.
They were fairly frequent Visitors to Antwerp, but from there showed no obvious pattern in their voyages.
There were passages to Italy and Greece, various trips to Tunis and Algiers, with calls at a number of smaller North African ports, and there were a number of voyages considerably farther afield to West African ports, mostly small, as far South as the Gulf of Guinea.
Agnes was the longest away from home.
She had left London on June 6, a date that had cropped up twice before, though with no apparent connection with anything else — it was the day after Andrew Stavanger's last known appearance at the office, and the day on which the body of the still unidentified man had been found by Southwark Bridge.
She had cleared for Antwerp, where she spent a couple of days, and had then gone to West Africa, calling at several ports before returning to Antwerp.
From Antwerp she had gone to Santander, where she had been due to return to London, but had been diverted to Bilbao instead.
For all Miss Macdonald's painstaking work, I could not get really interested in these itineraries.
My mind kept going back to the case that was nothing to do with me, the unsolved mystery of the man with a load of live ammunition in his pockets found dead on the Thames mud.
I got out the file that Inspector Redpath had given me, and studied it.
Hundreds of man-hours had gone into its compilation — all for nothing.
I read the reports of interviews the police had had with people who had been near the river at Chiswick, Barnes, and Hammersmith, on the night of June 5 — nobody had seen a drunk being assisted from a car, or a heavy bundle being carried towards a boat.
Suddenly it struck me that there was a flaw in the reasoning that had concentrated police inquiries on this upper part of the tidal Thames — or rather, not so much that there was a flaw in what had been worked out, but that the reasoning was incomplete.
The man had been found near Southwark Bridge at the turn of the tide: he had grounded at low tide, and it had been assumed that he had been carried down river with the ebb.
Starting from the place where he had been found, and working back with calculations on the tidal stream, a probable area of his entry to the water had been deduced.