

Online catalogues: a case for the user
Micheline Hancock-Beaulieu
Introduction
With the vast expansion in library collections over the past 20 years, library professionals have had to deal with an ever increasing burden in the production and maintenance of library catalogues.
The need to control costs and optimize on resources has led to centralized shared cataloguing, largely made possible through the adoption of standards such as the machine readable catalogue (MARC) record and the Anglo-American cataloguing rules.
The old debate about dictionary card catalogues versus divided and classified catalogues was put aside while librarians became preoccupied with automating housekeeping functions to improve processing efficiency.
Although the online catalogue finally emerged incorporating the card catalogue model, it soon became apparent that the new "form" had much more potential than the automated housekeeping tool originally envisaged.
In implementing today's online catalogues, librarians are having to make complex decisions about catalogue user behaviour and needs.
Even apparently simple choices, such as placing a subject search option before an author search option in an opening menu, can have important implications for the user.
Librarians accustomed to the traditional catalogue may find it very difficult to change from that perspective to recognized new needs and opportunities facing users of online catalogues.
The purpose of this paper is to put forward a case for developing the online catalogue's potential as an interactive retrieval tool for the library user.
It is a call to consider the library catalogue first and foremost as a searching aid for information seekers in the wider context of the total library system.
The first section presents a critical review of traditional library catalogue use studies.
It reveals shortcomings in research questions, methodological approach and interpretations of findings.
It would appear that these studies may have provided misleading results  concerning the extent of subject searching, user needs and user searching behaviour.
In the second section, a wholistic approach is advocated for the study of information-seeking activity at the catalogue and at the shelves as an interrelated process.
The focus is placed on the user's information needs and overall searching behaviour in order to build a conceptual framework for qualitative research on the use and evaluation of online catalogues.
What's in a name?
The name commonly adopted for the library automated catalogue, "online public access catalogue" or"OPAC may have acquired a different meaning from what was originally intended.
Public access evolved in two different ways.
Firstly, it meant access to library housekeeping circulation files designed primarily for staff use which could also serve as a rudimentary catalogue for the library user.
The initial interest was not in the bibliographic data, but rather in the circulation data which was being made available to the public, thus enhancing the catalogue's function as a finding tool.
The second route was to give the library user direct access to those machine-readable bibliographic records from which card and computer output microform (COM) catalogues had been produced for more than a decade through shared centralized cataloguing.
Access by the public was in both cases technology driven.
Developments in stand-alone integrated systems made it possible to streamline the library's data processing operations.
This was the prime objective and the closing of the card catalogue was a consequence.
Any benefits to the library user was a secondary consideration.
The online catalogue was a spin-off which did not stem from any desire to serve the user better.
The Council on Library Resources (CLR) survey of the response to the online catalogue and subsequent studies have revealed that users had other expectations from "public access!" 
The demand for subject access may have come as a shock to the library profession but, more importantly, it raised a very fundamental issue: that is, the role of the catalogue in providing access to the library collection.
The user and the traditional catalogue
The survey sponsored by the CLR was a market survey testing the library consumer's response to a product in a new package.
The concern about the acceptability of the online catalogue to the library user was coupled with an underlying unease about the performance of the old product itself.
There has been a wealth of studies on the use of the traditional  catalogue, over 50 in as many years, yet in spite of the evidence it would appear that little is really known about the users for whom it was intended.
The findings
An analysis and assessment of the findings of previous catalogue use studies may shed some light on the users' apparent change of heart towards the library catalogue since the advent of online systems.
The overall results have been brought together in three major reviews by Krikelas, Hafter and Markey.
These studies indicate that:
(a) 25% to 50% of library users use the catalogue;(b) students account for the greatest proportion of the user population;(c) the catalogue is used predominantly for known-item searching and use increases with users' educational level;(d) public library users do more subject searching than academic library users.
Low usage
Repeated studies have shown low use but little effort has been made to find out why.
Only two studies have sought to find out from library patrons themselves the reasons for not using the catalogue.56 Three common reasons given by non-users were as follows:
(a) I can manage without it.
(h) I prefer to ask the staff.
(c) It is difficult to understand.
Non-use has essentially been considered as a negative response to the catalogue and the library user has been held responsible for his own shortcomings.
Non-users are saying that they need to seek information but the catalogue does not contribute to fulfilling that need.
The UK Catalogue Use Study attempted to show that library instruction seems to make a significant difference to the extent of catalogue use.
However, this causal relationship between catalogue use/non-use and instruction in catalogue use has not been substantiated.
Cronin's study of catalogue non-users sought to determine the characteristics and attitudes of non-users and found that,"Non-use does not appear to be a function of personal dissatisfaction with any aspect of the library services or staff.
The library and its catalogue do not warrant high priority rating simply because they are not central to the day-to-day survival of the non user".
It is not clear from the evidence how catalogue usage could be increased.
On the one hand, the limitations of the catalogue had been recognized.
The major investigations of the early 1970s were all carried out with the hope of providing some suggestions for improvements to be applied in automated catalogues.
It appears that changes in the card catalogues were considered to be too difficult and costly to implement.
On the other hand, there was also some complacency in accepting the status quo and in the rationalization that the performance of the traditional catalogue was acceptable after all.
As Hafter states,"The major conclusion that emerges from these studies is that the card catalog works.
Even more importantly users are skillful at manipulating it for their own purpose."
It would thus appear that low usage was not problematic and that rather than seeking to make improvements, user instruction was the best alternative.
Lipetz explains the position as follows, "The modification or expansion of catalog entries in the existing catalog apparently has the least potential of all three possible approaches to improvement of catalog service (i.e. coverage, user education and modification)." 
Known item versus subject searches
The major result of the large-scale catalogue use studies was to confirm the dominance of known-item searching and the role of the catalogue as a finding tool.
How can we then account for the high occurrence of subject searches on online catalogues?
There are two possible explanations: the online environment either created a new demand or stimulated an existing inherent need.
Markey's detailed analysis of subject searching in traditional catalogue use studies reveals that subject searching accounted for between 10% and 62% of searches.
In half of those studies subject searches equalled or exceeded 40%.
Nevertheless, it would seem that this was not considered to be a significant proportion.
The problem of identifying true subject searches is also of particular interest.
The Yale and Michigan studies found that some searches initiated as known-item searches could in fact be subject searches or could develop into subject searches.
The use of a citation as a means of undertaking a subject search is an established approach.
Alter all, citation indexes are based on that principle.
The significance of the user applying a similar strategy to library catalogues has not been realized.
It is possible that in many studies such hybrid searches have remained undetected, particularly if users were questioned prior to the catalogue consultation.
Users looking for information on a particular subject did not restrict their consultation to the subject portion of the catalogue.
Title searches, for instance, are not  necessarily specific item searches and could well be subject searches.
The tool tailors the task
It may also be argued that the user's strategy adopted for subject searching is a response to the very design of the card dictionary catalogue.
Tagliacozzo found that catalogue searchers were, "inclined to use proper names rather than other types of entry, even when the latter may be considered a better choice." 
Using a proper name for a subject search may be easier for the user than attempting to guess at an appropriate subject heading, particularly if the object is to extract a class number to pursue subject searching at the shelves.
Moreover, users have been reluctant to experiment with subject headings, as shown by the fact that over 50% of catalogue users consult a single subject heading only.
The difficulties in matching Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) have been highlighted by Bates.
In addition, divided catalogues or separate classified catalogues could also have acted as a deterrent to subject searching.
The UK Catalogue Use Study reports on the negligible use of the classified catalogue, a finding which is also supported by a recent study by Hancock.
It seems that the catalogue's limited subject access could well have reinforced the user's apparent preference for known-item searching and consequently may also partly account for the apparent increase in known-item searching as the user's educational level rises.
By contrast, the difference in the very structure and, perhaps more importantly, the presentation of the online catalogue has undoubtedly had an impact on its users.
In the online environment, the ease with which the user can combine search strategies switching from authors, titles and subject headings, particularly through keyword access, seems to have encouraged an inherent need for subject searching.
Thus the ability to manipulate the different elements at will has in effect altered the task.
Research methodology
The many investigations of the traditional library catalogues have all had a common objective, that is, to examine catalogue use.
With a few exceptions the survey has been the dominant methodology adopted.
All of the reviewers of the studies make a distinction between those studies which are scientifically sound and those which are not.
Particular attention is given to the techniques applied for sampling, interviewing and drawing up questionnaires.
The large-scale surveys of the early 1970s marked a turning-point in research approach and yielded significant results.
Sampling
The Yale study was designed to obtain reliable statistical data, based on a carefully constructed random sample (2,134 cases), representative of the user population of a large library It was hailed as a standard model and projects with very large sample groups, numbering into the thousands, followed; i.e., Palmer, 5,062, and Tagliacozzo, 2,681.
By their very scale these studies aimed to gather quantitative data on use.
In spite of the breadth of the sample, in-depth qualitative analysis of user activity was limited.
User elicitations
In addition to sample size, the method of eliciting information from the user was problematic.
In the Yale study subjects were interviewed before and after a search, unlike previous surveys where subjects may have been asked to recall or generalize on their use of the catalogue after the event.
The aim was to get as close as possible to the real time setting while falling short of the search itself.
The picture obtained may be compared with an event being filmed from a distance as a series of still shots with some blank shots in between and no close-ups.
Tagliacozzo, however, observed the entire search and questioned users at each step.
The approach may have risked inhibiting the searcher's behaviour but it offered continuity and some close-ups of individual steps of the search.
Markey went even further; instead of stopping the searchers in their tracks, she had the subjects talk or think aloud throughout the search.
The entire proceedings, including questions which the data collector may have asked for clarification during the search, were recorded on a sound recorder.
A picture of the catalogue consultation as a varied and developing process thus slowly started to emerge.
Research objectives and methodological shortcomings
The problems arising from the findings — as discussed in the previous section, i.e., the low usage and apparent discrepancy between known-item and subject searching — stem not only from methodological shortcomings but also from the research questions which were being addressed.
The object was to concentrate on the use of the tool as opposed to the user's task.
The distinction between the study of catalogue use and of the catalogue user is subtle but fundamental.
To observe use by simply recording user activity does not provide explanations for user behaviour.
In the 1930s Randall had advocated that the improvement of the catalogue could not be done any study of the catalogs themselves' but by making "an intelligent study of the patrons themselves, their mental equipment  and their needs" , Alter more than 50 years this holds true more than ever before.
Information-seeking behaviour
Information seeking in the library context can be divided between the catalogue user and the non-user, but the catalogue user also searches beyond the catalogue.
Both user and non-user end up searching at the shelves.
The latter initiates the search at the shelves and the former completes the search at the shelves.
There may be some value in examining not only the differences between the two approaches but also the common ground since each is part of one and the same process.
The catalogue is a tool or an aid to searching.
To observe searching behaviour solely at the catalogue may provide a distorted picture of the task in hand.
Searching behaviour at the shelves may be influenced by the use or non-use of the catalogue.
Information seeking is a process consisting of a series of events and the seeker's pattern of behaviour depends on what comes before or after the different stages.
To isolate one stage, i.e., the catalogue consultation, without reference to searching at the shelves can mislead and confuse the means with the end.
The links between each step of the searching process are just as much an integral part of the search as the individual steps.
Moreover, to apply performance measures to the catalogue separately from the user's objective can only produce limited results, as manifested by the findings of traditional catalogue use studies.
Subgoals may be met but these should be assessed in relation to the overall goal.
The wholistic model in Figure 2.1 represents the information retrieval (IR) task in relation to the catalogue user and non-user.
It is a macrosystem which divides into two alternative subsystems A and B.
The focus is on the user and the choice of action or strategy adopted.
Research so far has been concerned with one segment of A, catalogue use.
Little empirical data is available on the searching behaviour in B, the direct shelf approach.
Direct shelf approach and open access
Users' apparent preference for the direct shelf approach in subject searching can be considered either as a negative response to the catalogue or as a positive response to the shelves.
Even if subject searches are initiated at the catalogue, it has been found that users look for a shelf number location and proceed to the shelves to continue their subject search.1536 The inadequacies of library catalogues in supporting subject access have thus been tolerable because of the open-access tradition of Anglo-American libraries, which encourages the direct shelf approach for subject searching.
Users' freedom to browse in a library collection has not only been desirable but would also appear to be linked with the right of access to information itself.
In spite of pressures in providing space for ever-growing collections and discussions of relegating stock to closed access stores, the value of open access has continued to be defended.
However, the acknowledgement of the users' need for direct access or browsing has not been coupled with any analysis of searching behaviour at the shelves or evaluation of the approach.
The few studies that have been undertaken have been carried out from a management perspective in terms of stock management or to quantity overall use of library, materials apart from items recorded in circulation statistics.
Browsing: a definition
Various attempts at defining the nature of browsing have been made.
Apted distinguishes between three types of browsing: general browsing, general purposive browsing and specific browsing.
General browsing is associated with public library users "who look over books in order to decide which to borrow or read." 
Their purpose is to seek material to read for pleasure.
By contrast, general purposive browsing describes the academic researcher who indulges in a similar activity of looking over books but with a serious purpose in mind, such as keeping up to date in his field or looking for new ideas.
Specific browsing is applied to a more structured form of seeking library materials whereby a user makes use of a tool, such as a library catalogue or bibliography, to locate items on a specific topic.
General and general purposive browsing differ from specific browsing in two ways.
The former are haphazard non-deliberate  operations conducted at the shelves and the latter is a structured intentional activity carried out with the assistance of a bibliographic tool.
Apted's definitions do not seem to take into account the student who goes directly to the shelves and looks for a book for an essay topic.
The student's purpose is specific, yet his method could be described as haphazard.
Apted also differentiates browsing habits according to the different disciplines and points to its prominence for scholars in the humanities.
Hyman, on the other hand, gives a functional definition of browsing: "Browsing is the activity subsumed in the direct shelf approach whereby materials arranged for use in a library are bed in the reasonable expectation that desired or valuable items or information might be found among those materials as arranged on the shelves!" 
He seems to ignore the possibility of browsing at the catalogue and makes no distinction between types of users or their purpose.
With automated bibliographic files and online catalogues, browsing has also been applied to searching in computer systems.
Apted places computer browsing in the category of specific browsing in that it must start "with a definition of requirements" and is systematic.
Hildreth goes further and discusses mechanisms in online catalogues to support browsing, such as features for term selection and result manipulation and displays.
Part of the problem in arriving at a satisfactory definition seems to stem from the segmented approach of assessing browsing within the context of the catalogue, separate from the direct shelf approach.
In view of the extent of what Markey calls a "browse search" at the catalogue, i.e., browsing for a shelf number, it may be more valuable to examine the browsing activity in relation to both the retrieval tool and the shelves within the single context of subject searching as a whole.
The behavioural aspect of browsing as part of the information-seeking activity is far from understood.
Studies undertaken to observe browsing in the shelf consultation show that the user handles a limited number of items in the process and ultimately selects but a few.
Slater and Fisher found that 4.1 items were consulted and 2.4 were considered useful.
Fussler and Simon estimated that three to nine books were consulted for every one selected.
Hancock recorded six items examined and two selected.
The searcher who depends solely on browsing at the shelves can miss other related items scattered elsewhere in the collection.
Shelf consultation seems to produce not only low recall but also low precision.
It would seem that perhaps browsing at the shelves should not be considered as an alternative to catalogue use; instead browsing  support at the catalogue could bee seen as perhaps improving retrieval effectiveness at the shelves by providing direction or orientation through navigational aids.
Online catalogues as IR systems
In bringing to light the user's primary need for subject searching, online catalogues have begun to be considered as true IR systems akin to commercial online services.
Those who initially questioned whether or not the online catalogues were in fact catalogues may have recognized the difference in essence.
The development from first — to second-generation OPAC's particularly in the provision of keyword access and Boolean operators, is evidence of the growing similarity between online catalogues and traditional IR systems.
In comparing and contrasting the different features of each, however, the extent to which traditional IR systems are suitable models to be emulated must be borne in mind.
IR systems have not been designed for end-users and require the skills of an intermediary.
Difficulties arise not only in the user-intermediary interaction and the man-machine interface but also in the retrieval effectiveness of the systems.
As for online catalogues, subject access is limited by the structure of the MARC record and the way it is indexed and searched.
Subject searching is dependent on titles and subject headings which provide few searchable terms compared with the abstracts and subject descriptors of IR systems.
The combination of pre-coordinate indexing of subject headings and the post-coordinate indexing of keywords can cause much confusion for the searcher.
In addition, concern about the ability or more importantly, the need for library patrons to handle Boolean logic has also been expressed.
It would seem that any future developments of OPACs cannot be divorced from developments in IR systems and vice versa.
Commercial search services such as BRS After Dark have recognized that end-users want to access bibliographic databases directly, without the aid of an intermediary, on a self-help basis.
However, if the idea of an extended OPAC whereby the user can access other online databases via the online catalogue is to be realized, it would appear that we are a long way away from presenting an acceptable interface for the user.
Before any system redesign is undertaken, we must first of all address the conceptual issues common to the different IR systems and focus on the user's information needs and searching behaviour.
Information needs: the system perspective
Studies of traditional library catalogues have provided little insight  into user information needs.
Needs have been defined strictly within the context of the catalogue system itself.
The observation of user information-seeking behaviour in the catalogue consultation has been interpreted as being indicative of user needs.
Hence it has been assumed that because the user carries out known-item searches, known items do meet the user's information needs.
The user presents a specific request to the system to which the system responds with a specific document.
This model not only represents the simplest type of search but it would appear to have become the basis for subject searches as well, over-simplifying what is in fact a very complex process.
In order to get a response in subject searching, the user has had not only to specify his needs but also to specify them in a way that "matches" the system.
Unlike users of reference services or online services, where search negotiations are carried out by the librarian or intermediary, users have had to know what they wanted.
In the subject searching studies at traditional catalogues, users have expressed their apparent information need in a concise manner, on average in 2.5 words.
This is much more akin to a controlled language"than to a natural language.
The catalogue user would seem to have been conditioned to seek information solely in terms of the system's own requirements, which are dependent on the title descriptions of documents.
The user may find a book on a subject but it may not be what he really requires or may only partially satisfy his needs.
The inference of user information needs from user information-seeking behaviour has led to much confusion.
It may be more useful to try to consider behaviour, on the one hand, as a response to factors within the system and, on the other, as a response to factors outside the system — i.e., from the user's perspective.
Behaviour within the system's context may be more easily observable and may account for the many user studies which persist in observing users in terms of the information system and not in terms of the user.
Information needs: the user perspective
Attempts to resolve the relationship between information needs and information-seeking behaviour have been made by several authors.
Taylor was the first to adopt a cognitive approach to the study of information behaviour by analysing the user's internal psychological process which leads to the accessing of a formal information system.
He categorizes the transformation of the inexpressible "visceral" need through four stages, ending up with a "compromised" need which requires extensive negotiation with the assistance of a librarian to come close to fulfilling the original visceral need.
He describes the four levels of question formulation as follows:
Q1 The actual but unexpressed need for information (the visceral need).
Q2 The conscious, within brain description of the need (the conscious need).
Q3 The formal statement of the need (the formalized need).
Q4 The question as presented to the information system (the compromised need).
Taylor differentiates between question negotiation through a human intermediary and the self-help situation whereby the user interacts directly with the library or catalogue system.
It is the latter which is of particular interest to us here, but there is some common ground and the former should provide some insight into the latter.
What must be accepted at the very basis of any enquiry is that it is not, as Taylor puts it, "a command, as in conventional search strategy, but rather as a description of an area of doubt in which the question is open-ended, negotiable and dynamic." 
The online catalogue, unlike its predecessor should provide the user with the opportunity for search negotiation; i.e., the system should assist in the formulation of the compromised need (Q4) so that the system can be searched not only more efficiently but also so that the compromised need satisfies the visceral need (Q1).
In other words, the query put to the system should not be automatically taken at face value.
The concept of an unspecified information need is further developed by Wersig, who looks at a need situation as a problem situation and states that, "the notion of problem treatment process enables us to look at the stages which play an important role within the organism before any behaviour can be observed." 
He adds, "To help people in treating their problems may mean even to help them define their problem and select a strategy at stages where so far they are left alone by formalized services which require as a starting point a rather late stage of the process where the person in the need state consciously takes an action." 
Belkin et al.attempt to define what Wersig calls the "problem situation" and consider information need as arising from "a recognized anomaly in the user's state of knowledge concerning some topic or situation and that in general, the user is unable to specify precisely what is needed to resolve that anomaly." 
An IR system based on ASKs would not depend on a user's query formulation but would attempt to describe the ASK and thus "construct" an image of user needs.
It is gradually becoming clearer that information needs defined strictly in terms of documents are not an adequate basis for future developments in the design of online catalogues.
As Wilson suggests, it might be advisable to remove the term "information need" from  our professional vocabulary and speak instead of"information seeking towards the satisfaction of need which implies a greater element of interaction between system and users.
The online catalogue as an interactive system
The online catalogue has been described as interactive; however, it would seem that this attribute has been described more in relation to its predecessor than as a fully developed feature.
Hildreth states that, "As an interactive system the online catalog can dynamically communicate with its user; it can be responsive and informative at a given time to a given need" all of which was not possible in previous catalogues.
In present systems the level of communication is, nevertheless, limited and superficial.
It may also be more accurate to say that the user responds to the system rather than the other way around.
The search process is system driven and not user driven.
It is dependent on the bibliographic record structure and the system's indexing procedures for those records.
The system only interacts with the user in order to try to overcome the complexities or limitations of its own mechanisms.
As a result of the difficulties often encountered by users, a differentiation is being made between naive and experienced users of online catalogues.
The experience or lack of experience, of course, refers to the usage of the system itself.
In fact it could be said that there is no such thing as a naive or experienced searcher per se.
Each query that a user puts to a system should be considered independently from the user's knowledge of the use of the system.
The real challenge is not whether or not the online catalogue can cater for first-time users but whether or not it can easily be used by any user for any type of query.
Ease of use refers not only to the man-machine interface level but, more importantly, to the search task itself.
Concentration on user characteristics may deviate our efforts on the more central issue of effective retrieval for all the various types of searches.
The online catalogue has exposed obstacles to effective retrieval which library and catalogue users have faced all along in previous manual systems.
The mysteries of added entries, subject headings, etc. and their role in the search process will not be solved by adding layers of online instructions and explanations.
It is essential to explore how user-system interaction through the retrieval task itself could be developed.
Query expansion and user feedback during the search process appear to be the most promising routes to follow.
Query expansion: the matching approach
Searchers not only express their subject needs in brief and concise terms but also tend to use a broad search formulation to access the bibliographic tool, i.e., broader than their expressed topic.
In doing so they adapt their search requirement to the system in the hope of matching the system's language.
If the search is unsuccessful the onus is then on the user to generate new terms.
Even if the query matches the system's language, high positionings may occur and again the user is left to adopt an alternative strategy and narrow the search with a new specification.
The initial access to the system and the system's initial response to the user is most crucial.
Expansion or reformulation should be possible whether or not the first result is positive or negative.
At present the only means of query expansion is limited to matching terms wherever these may occur in the bibliographic record.
Whether generated by the user, guide ed by the system or automatically performed by the system, the principle of extending matching terms does not appear to be an entirely satisfactory approach.
If the user wants something slightly different or related, the system is then at a loss to provide the necessary links.
As long as information systems continue to be exclusively document orientated, retrieval will be dependent on the matching principle and all the limitations and this entails.
No matter what fancy algorithms or search mechanisms are introduced, the principle remains the same: retrieval is reduced to term matching and the system becomes mealy a super matching machine out of the user's control.
Query expansion: the contextual approach
In adopting a broad search formulation strategy to access the library catalogue, the searcher not only attempts to "match" the system's language but also places his expressed need in a broader context.
The duality of the matching and contextual approaches requires further investigation.
A recent study of the use of a printed PRECIS (PREserved Context Indexing System) index for subject searching reveals that searchers who adopted a broad search formulation strategy where more successful than those who took an exact matching approach in accessing the index.
Half the subjects were able to narrow their search during the PRECIS consultation, whereas those with an exact search formulation had to broaden it.
The opportunity for experimentation in comparing, selecting and rejecting terms in the PRECIS consultation was an important feature of the search process.
However, the manual system lacked a direct link with a title listing, i.e., the end result of the consultation was a classification number and not specific titles from which further refinement could have been made.
Another study, analysing search negotiations between librarians and users and the subsequent search process, shows that certain parallels can be drawn between the matching and contextual approaches adopted by the users of the PRECIS index.
Ingwersen has characterized three types of searches: the open search, the fixed search and the semi-fixed search.
In the open search the librarian starts by drawing on knowledge concepts which extend beyond the query formulated by the user and are "open to new information." 
By contrast, in the fixed search the librarian searches for a direct solution to the query by trying to find "the document that included the answer immediately." 
The semi-fixed search starts as a fixed search but then progresses to a more open mode.
Similarly, the catalogue user who specifies his query to correspond with a document title could be adopting a fixed or matching search approach, whereas a less defined query could lead to an open or contextual search approach.
Online catalogue systems at present do not offer any opportunity for a contextual or open approach to searching.
There is no means of negotiation or experimentation whereby the user can define his query, drawing from a wider knowledge base of the system, before following specific paths.
Although browsing may be considered as an alternative to the matching approach provided by keyword searching, in the online context it is equivalent to browsing the system's indexes and as such it is of limited value.
Alphabetical listings of LCSH do not offer an overview of related subjects and looking through records in class number sequence does not give the user the structure of the classification scheme.
More often than not, browsing is presented to the user by default when the system fails to provide an exact match.
It is very much a system's search mechanism as opposed to a search strategy initiated or purposefully carried out by the user.
Various attempts are being made to extend the subject searching capability beyond the matching principle.
The Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) online project uses beth the Schedules and the Relative Index of the Dewey classification to provide new terms as well as meanings for classification numbers.
By displaying the hierarchical and relative structure of the classification the user can search at a subject level over and above the strict document level.
The use of PRECIS indexing strings is also being explored to serve as an automated structured subject authority file and facilitate the cross-referencing of related records.
Machine-readable dictionaries  are being considered as another means of query expansion.
Definitions and meanings could not only extend the matching of terms but, more importantly, these could provide a contextual approach as well.
If users are to be assisted in formulating in their search, a greater correlation between the various elements within the searching process must be achieved so that document titles, indexing language and classification can be searched interactively, thus combining the dual matching and contextual approaches to information seeking.
User feedback: the key to interaction
In attempting to help users in searching automated catalogues, it is perhaps too easy to assume that the machine must do it all and that the burden must be removed entirely from the user.
The difficulty arises partly in differentiating between what the user needs to know about the workings of the system, i.e., how transparent the system should be so that the task can be performed effectively and efficiently.
There are, in fact, two tasks in hand: using the computerized system and the information-seeking task itself.
In document-based information systems, user input is minimized with the emphasis firmly placed on the retrieval of documents as opposed to users seeking to satisfy subjective needs.
Although the user cannot be ignored and the need for user feedback in the design process has been advocated, in practice we have had little evidence of any move towards user behaviour monitoring and evaluation procedures being adopted by commercial suppliers of online catalogue systems.
Moreover, feedback, defined as, "monitoring user activity on an online catalog and giving real-time feedback to the user during the actual search session to assist in the formulation of the query or interpretation of search results" , is still very much system orientated.
This implies influencing user behaviour to suit what is best for the system.
The reverse should also be considered; that is, why shouldn't the user feed back into the system so that the system performs in a way that is best for the user?
In tailoring user behaviour to fit the system, there is the danger of falling into the same trap as the conventional catalogue, where the tool tailors the task.
Interaction through feedback should be a two-way process, i.e., a dialogue.
What seem to have been overlooked is the possibility that user feedback during the search process may be a crucial element which so far has been underestimated.
Evaluation and the user
Measuring the performance of information systems continues to be  a major problem.
Traditional catalogue studies considered success and failure of a catalogue consultation in terms of whether or not an item was in the catalogue and, if it was, whether or not the user managed to find it.
If both systems and user are taken into account, success and failure are far from clear cut.
In addition, such measures are also geared to the assessment of the catalogue as a finding tool for known-item searches.
In the case of subject searches, the criterion as applied to traditional IR systems has been that of retrieval effectiveness, based on the concept of relevance and the measures of recall and precision.
Testing retrieval effectiveness in an operational environment such as a library catalogue proves to be problematic.
Not only are there problems in making relevance judgments on surrogate documents, i.e., titles of books; but also the interactive nature of the search process whereby the query may be reformulated makes it very difficult to see how recall can be applied.
It may be questioned whether or not the user needs to retrieve all of the possible relevant documents for a specific query at any one point in time.
Perhaps more importantly, in the search process the searcher may need to retrieve a wider range of documents in order to make a relevance judgement in the first place.
In the library context it should be possible to go further than the catalogue to establish relevance, i.e., to go beyond the question put to the catalogue and include the user's relevance judgements after examining the actual documents on the shelves.
A further step could possibly include the use of those documents selected.
Retrieval effectiveness has been a restrictive measure based on system performance formulated strictly in terms of the system.
A wholistic approach to catalogue performance evaluation would also include how the user himself evaluates the system.
The very nature if the interaction would need to be taken into account in all of its complexities.
Other criteria for evaluation have been put forward.
Cooper argues that utility may be a better approach; that is, to measure the utility to the user of the documents with which he is brought into contract by the system.
Thus unexamined documents would not have to be taken into account in the retrieval evaluation nor would performance be based on the retrieval of the "best document" .
Cooper questions whether there is a "critical document or documents whose omission from the examined set has disastrous results" .
Indeed, the library user seeking monographic documents appears to be very flexible.
The utility measure based on user evaluation of documents may be a better way of accommodating the interactive nature of the information-seeking process.
User satisfaction is another criterion which may provide a more global measure to evaluate interactive online catalogues.
By encompassing the user's requirements, expectations and compromises at the different stages of the search process, it may be possible to analyse the interrelationship between user documents and system and arrive at a more realistic performance evaluation.
Clearly much more work is required on the development of techniques to observe the user during the search activity in order to make the necessary assessments.
This may result in a number of different criteria being applied at different stages of the search activity.
Conclusion
There is much room for improvement and development in online catalogues and librarians have an essential role to play in that development.
It is the library professionals who must take the initiative and lead the systems vendors in providing better systems for end-users.
Progress depends first of all on acquiring a better understanding of users and of information-seeking behaviour through user-oriented qualitative research.
Figure 2.2 represents a model of the information-seeking activity in a library and provides a conceptual framework for observing user behaviour.
The query formulation is central to a successful outcome.
Hence we concentrate on the user-catalogue interaction and on the interactive dialogue in particular with user and catalogue system inputs having equal importance.
Limited attention has been paid to the user's input in the context of the library catalogue.
Although the user query as it is expressed may be considered as the start of the information-seeking activity, it stems from a more complex background.
The form it takes depends, on the one hand, on the user's state of knowledge and the ability to identify and define the gap in that knowledge and, on the other hand, on the extent to which the user adapts to the bibliographic tools and documents available.
These cognitive factors have a direct influence on the query formulation and thus need to be investigated as an integral part of the information-seeking process.
Users in the past have shown a preference for the direct shelf approach.
However, support mechanisms for information seeking in the online environment, such as shelf browsing and more sophisticated contextual subject access features, could encourage the searcher to use the catalogue and ultimately lead to more effective searching at the shelves.
Finally, the evaluation of catalogue performance should be undertaken in the context of the whole information system, taking into account measures from all three components of the system: the user the catalogue and the documents.
The Okapi online catalogue research projects
Stephen Walker
Introduction
Online catalogue research at the Polytechnic of Central London (PCL) has now been going on, mainly funded by the British Library Research and Development Department, for about five years.
This article contains a historical survey of the projects from 1982 up to December 1987, a summary of the results of some of the more recent work and a brief discussion of some specific aspects of online catalogue research and design.
The research has given rise to a series of more or less operational online catalogues, three fairly lengthy reports and a number of articles and published and unpublished talks.
1–8 (The name "Okapi" is not, strictly, an acronym, but see Mitev, "Designing an online public access catalogue" , p.5.
The okapi, according to Gill Venner, is shy and elusive and has a long gestation period.)
All the research has consisted of work towards the design and production of catalogue systems which satisfy the following criteria: they must be usable at sight without any appreciable need for learning or relearning, and this must be achieved without sacrificing effectiveness and without making them tedious for experienced users.
Much online catalogue research has been carried out on outdated, first-generation systems, or on specially developed "toy" systems which do not access real files and are in no way suitable for live use in a library.
While such research can be of value, there is much work which can only be done on "live" systems.
All the Okapi work has been done on systems which have been developed at least to a point where they are reliable and complete enough to be installed in a library unattended.
Hence, as with CITE at the National Library of Medicine, or the catalogues produced during the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) online project, a large proportion of the Okapi work consists of design and programming.
The purpose of the Okapi research is to test the applicability, in the online catalogue context, of findings from research in interactive  computer systems, cognitive psychology and information retrieval (IR).
In a sense, our results are the systems which we produce.
Formal system evaluation and comparison is done by observation and interviewing, and by study and repetition by experimenters of searches performed under natural conditions by (mainly undergraduate) PCL library users.
Two of the catalogue systems have undergone extended live use in one of PCL's site libraries, and a considerable amount of transaction log data have been collected.
The Okapi projects arose from a research proposal entitled"Micro-computer networking in libraries!
The proposers, Neil McLean and Mel Collier, head and deputy head of library services at PCL, wanted to see what could usefully be done in the way of library automation using networked microcomputers rather than the conventional multi-user access to a mainframe or large mini.
They suggested that a public access catalogue would be a suitably demanding trial application.
Because of the interests of the researchers who were appointed, the "networking" aspect soon became subsidiary to the main aim of working towards effective JR systems for untrained, non-dedicated users.
Okapi"84
Okapi"84 was the prototype system developed during the original project in 1983 and 1984.
This system was demonstrated at the conference and exhibition"Public access to library files' at the Centre for Catalogue Research, Bath University, in September 1984.
It is described by Mitev.
Features of Okapi '84 included the following:
There were only two types of search — "Books about something" or "Specific books" (Figure 5.1).
For a subject search, the words of the user's search were looked up in an index containing words from title-like fields and subject headings, and from corporate names.
The system would first perform an implicit AND on the search words.
If this failed, words were assigned weights on an inverse term frequency basis (uncommon words are worth more than common words), and the system would look for records containing just some of the words of the search.
For example, a search for "women and their fight in society" would lead to a message to the effect that there is no book described by all the words of the search, but the system would nevertheless retrieve four items (in the PCL catalogue), the first of which is titled Hidden from history: 300 years of women's oppression and the fight against it.
Records were given a score equal to the sum of the weights of the words by which they were indexed, and would be output in decreasing score order.
For specific item searches, Okapi presented the user with a form-filling type of screen on which could be entered a title and/or an author's name.
The system would follow different paths (search trees) according to the data elements which the user had entered and the results of initial searches.
(Figure 5.2 gives a view of one possible configuration of this screen.)
In a title search, for example, a search for an incomplete or garbled title would lead to the choice of a title index display or a search for titles   containing the words of the search, and thenceforth behave rather as if it were doing a subject search.
There is no title "Banking and industrialization" but such a search could lead to "Banking and industrialization in Europe" or "Banking in the early stages of industrialization" and a number of other titles.
All commands, or menu selections (there is no clear distinction between command and selection) were performed by a single keystroke.
There were six coloured "function" keys.
Single digits and occasionally letters were also used for selection.
Record displays were either single line, six to a screen, with column headings AUTHOR, TITLE, etc., or "full" .
Full records contained up to five elements: AUTHOR (which includes any added names, personal or corporate), TITLE (including any subtitle, series title, part title), PUBLICATION (publisher(s), edition, date), SUBJECT (Library of Congress and/or Preserved Context Indexing System headings) and location information (including classmark).
Full records were selected by line number from a brief display screen.
When only a few records were retrieved the default display would be full.
(Okapi '84 record displays were similar to the screens shown in Figures 5.6 and 5.7.
The red key took the user back from a brief display to the input screen, and there was no "See books classified near this one" option.)
It is difficult to know how well Okapi '84 succeeded in meeting the goal of combining effectiveness with ease of learning and use.
A certain amount of fairly informal evaluation was carried out late in 1984, and is described by Mitev.
Okapi was certainly easy to use and most people found that it needed minimal learning and relearning.
Later, Richard Jones did a study of samples of specific item and subject searches from Okapi '84 transaction logs.
He estimated that 25% of subject searches and 18% of author/title searches failed at the first attempt.
The session failure rate would have been considerably lower, but it is very difficult to estimate this from log data alone.
Note that failure does not include collection failure — the absence of the sought item or topic from the collection; one of the functions of a good catalogue is to inform users as quickly as possible that the library does not hold what they are looking for.
The subject search, which is extremely simple, was probably relatively successful given the intrinsic difficulty of subject searching in files of records with inadequate subject description.
For various reasons the specific item search, into which the designers had put a good deal of effort, was less successful.
It was somewhat over-elaborate, or, rather, the complications were in the wrong places.
In particular, the designers did not realize that in a relatively small  collection (PCL's catalogue contained about 90,000 titles) by far the most frequent cause of a specific item search "failure" is collection failure.
The catalogue of a small library should not encourage its users to be too persistent without warning them that the library may hold nothing relevant.
(The effects of collection size have been little mentioned by writers on online catalogues, perhaps because many of the writers are from North America and are used to university libraries which are larger than many national collections.)
Okapi '84 was used for almost two years at one of PCL's site libraries.
Most user and system activity was captured and stored in machine-readable log files.
Because of storage limitations these transaction logs do not directly identify the records which were displayed.
These can only be identified with certainty by "replaying" the search with the same programs and files.
Unfortunately this will not be possible for much longer, because the original hardware is no longer being maintained.
However, it is hoped that the logs themselves, which contain a wealth of information about user activity, will continue to be available in hard copy or in unix tar format on ¼in.
cartridge tape.
Improving subject retrieval: Okapi '86
Despite the fact that Okapi '84's specific item search was probably relatively less effective than its subject search, recent work has concentrated on subject retrieval.
Subject searching is generally, and probably correctly, seen as a richer and more important research area than investigation of author and other known-item search activity.
Some interesting and useful things can be done in the way of improving specific item search systems, but only if the catalogue has considerable "knowledge" of bibliographical items (for example, one can envisage a catalogue which could say, "We haven't got Joseph Matthews on online catalogue screen displays, but there is an article in Library trends which might be of some interest" ).
Such a catalogue would "know" a large number of titles and names even if the library being searched did not possess them.
It would be prepared to "flip" name-words and it would have access to useful cross-reference files derived from the forms of names and titles which people actually search for.
Okapi '86 is a subject-only system, using the same hardware as Okapi '84.
The file structures, much of the code and the general appearance of the screens are similar to Okapi '84.
All searches are processed on a combinatorial, best-match basis.
This means that a search may retrieve items which are indexed under only some of the terms in the search, although any records containing all the terms are output first and described as "matching  your search closely." 
Each term in the search is given a "weight" which is determined by its relative frequency in the file being searched.
This results in a common word like "History" being assigned a weight which is very low compared with that assigned to a rare word such as "swords" .
A search for "history of swords" will output anything under both words first, followed by everything under "swords" only.
Items indexed under "history" but not "swords" will not be retrieved.
The cut-off rules which determine which records will be retrieved, and what weight a record has to achieve for it to be counted as a possible match, are fairly complex and purely pragmatic, being based on experience from repetition of real searches.
The aim is to achieve a reasonable balance between exhaustiveness and accuracy, between "recall" and "precision" .
Since there are few books indexed under "swords" , the "history of swords" searcher may well be prepared to look through them all; there are thousands of books under "history" , and only a minute proportion will contain anything of relevance to this searcher.
Okapi '86 underwent live evaluation in PCL's Riding House Street site library late in 1986.
It incorporated three devices aimed at automatically or semi-automatically improving retrieval.
These are:
automatic stemming of search terms, automatic cross-referencing, semi-automatic spelling correction.
Stemming
Neither Okapi '84 nor any commercially available online catalogue will find any books in PCL libraries in response to the reasonable subject searches "accounts dictionary" or "terminal illness" , although there are at least half a dozen books on each subject.
Library of  Congress uses "accounting-dictionaries" , and "terminal care" .
There are PREserved Context Indexing System (PRECIS) headings "accountancy" and "patients with terminal illnesses." 
A persistent searcher might find some records by browsing subject headings, but one would thing that any subject catalogue worthy of the name could go straight to the records described by the above headings.
Stemming procedures have been in use for many years, mainly as a relatively cheap way of conflating terms which are morphologically similar in the hope that they are also semantically similar.
Most of them use small sets of rules about what constitutes an affix which can safely be removed, and any stem "normalization" which may thereafter be needed to achieve conflation (e.g., "absorption" — "absorb"  "travelling" — "travel" ).
There has been research which suggests that moderately strong automatic stemming can be applied in specialized online reference retrieval searching.
The National Library of Medicine's CITE catalogue uses a stemming procedure designed for medical terminology (it knows about "…it is" and "…ectomy" ).
It seems almost self-evident that a subject catalogue should at least conflate singular and plural noun forms, and remove possessive endings and the English "ing" suffix.
We refer to this as "weak" stemming.
Weak stemming is defined to be any stemming which can be done almost unconditionally without making an appreciable difference to the meaning of the stemmed words (within the language of subject searches).
On the other hand, it is fairly obvious that "strong" stemming — the removal of longer and more "meaningful" suffixes such as "ization"  "ism" and ability "often cannot be done without drastically altering the sense of a search (consider" organ "" organic "" organism "and" organization").
The converse also holds.
At least outside the hard sciences, words which are closely related in meaning in the context of a subject search are often morphologically and etymologically unrelated ( "alcoholism" and "drunkenness" , "communism" and "marxism" ).
If strong stemming does not seem to introduce too much noise in reference retrieval searching this is probably because typical searches include, explicitly or implicitly, at least three words and often more.
In online catalogue searching, the mean number of significant words is usually a little over two and few searches contain more than three words.
We decided to use both weak and strong stemming.
Records retrieved only under strong stems would not be given high weight.
A search for "industrialization" must retrieve the 98 books indexed under "industrialisation" or "industrialization" before offering to show the 2,000 books under "industry" The stemming procedure used is substantially that of Martin Porter, split into weak and strong  phases and with the addition of a certain amount of spelling standardization at the weak level.
Weak stemming removes regular English plurals and possessives, and the "ing" and "ed" suffixes.
The associated spelling standardization is mainly an attempt to cope with the differences between British and American spelling: there are 13 rules, including "iz" — "is" non-terminal "ae" — "e" and terminal "tre —" ter"The spelling rules are given in full by Walker and Jones.
Strong stemming removes the endings given in steps 2 to 5 of Porter's algorithm.
At first we considered the design of a search system in which strong stems would not be introduced at all unless weak-stem searching found little or nothing.
This has several drawbacks, including the fact that even when all the weak stems of the words in a search co-occur, they may do so in only a very few records, and there may be other relevant records retrievable by adding one or more strong stems.
It would often be necessary to go back to the user and ask for guidance on whether to broaden the search.
One could use rules of thumb about thresholds below which the search would be automatically repeated using strong stems.
There is a danger of falling into over-elaboration of the search sequencing as in Okapi '84's specific item search.
The method we used leads to an increase in the computational load but a gain in simplicity.
The search and merge procedure always uses both strong and weak stems, but ensures that records retrieved under weak stems usually come out nearer the top of the list than those retrieved under strong stems.
It is simply necessary to ensure (a) that no strong stem contributes to the score of a record which is indexed under the corresponding weak stem, and (b) that a strong stem, if distinct from the corresponding weak stem, has lower weight than the weak stem.
The algorithm is described by Walker.
Automatic cross-referencing
Alter studying some thousands of searches made by users of PCL's business studies, social sciences and communications library, we constructed a list of several hundred classes of terms which are treated as synonymous.
This was primarily an attempt to deal with synonyms which cannot be conflated by a rule-based stemming procedure.
It is intended to cope with irregular plurals ( "child" — "children" ), other morphological variation which is too context dependent to be handled algorithmically ( "Hebrides' =" Hebridear "), abbreviations (" BBC "=" British Broadcasting Corporation "), words with alternative spellings (" gaol "=" jail ") and near synonyms (" Great Britain "=" United Kingdom "=" Britain "=" UK "=" British Isles").
The list also contains a very few phrases which apparently have no  equivalents ( "soap opera"  "Z cars"  "facts of life" ), but are included on the grounds that their constituent words have no relation to the meaning of the phrase.
These are phrases which behave, and are treated, exactly like words.
The index also contains both strong and weak stems of the individual words of phrases in the cross-reference list, because a search for "broadcasting" may well be satisfied by books about the BBC.
Dealing with words which the system cannot find
Nearly all those keyword-type online catalogues which use an implicit Boolean AND will simply report a failed search (it might display "No entries" or "Nothing found" ) if the search contains a word which they cannot find.
Users often do not notice that they have miskeyed a word, and many systems do not make it clear why they have failed to find anything.
This can lead to the mistaken assumption that the catalogue contains nothing relevant.
Miskeyings (like "Amwerica" ) and misspellings ( "rascism" or its companion "Facism" )— the former are more common among Okapi users — are frequent.
About 10% of searches of Okapi contain at least one dubious spelling.
In searching a small file it is also likely that users will enter a good many words which are correct but which the system does not know.
The only satisfactory way to deal with a word which cannot be found is to negotiate it with the user; such a word can be ignored (i.e., removed from the search) or replaced, or the search can be abandoned on the ground that the word is correct and essential to the success of the search.
The decision must rest with the user.
However, it may be helpful if the system can sometimes suggest a correction for a miskeyed word.
Okapi '86 automatically invokes a procedure which tries to find a likely correction before asking the user for a decision.
This procedure can suggest a replacement for about half the genuine miskeyings it receives, and the replacement is usually right (although it does suggest "teacher" for "Thacher" ).
Some of the dialogue is shin in Figures 5.4 and 5.5 and the matching procedure is described by Walker and Jones.
Evaluation of Okapi '86
Method
Two terminals were installed in PC's Riding House Street site library, one running Okapi '86, as described above, and the other running a system which appeared to be almost identical, but used weak stemming only, no cross-reference table and no semi-automatic spelling correction.
The two systems are referred to as EXP and CTL  respectively.
They were alternated daily between the two terminals.
By each terminal was a prominent notice displaying"OKAPI '86 is an experimental computer catalogue for subject searches…
Please use one of the other catalogues if you have to look up the title or author of a book…
"
The "other catalogues" were terminals to the LIBERTAS system of SWALCAP Library Services Ltd.
There were also one or two microfiche readers.
Some thousands of searches were logged automatically, and about a thousand were studied in some detail.
About 120 users were briefly interviewed as they left one of the terminals.
These users were asked whether they had used the catalogue before, whether they found what they were looking for and whether they had any particular problems or would like to make any suggestions for improving the catalogue.
The times were recorded so that session boundaries could be marked in the machine logs and the log data correlated with the interview results.
A set of 255 of the logged searches — those which were almost certainly the first search in a session or which bore no apparent relationship to the Previous search — were repeated by the experimenters on EXP CTL and a third system (OSTEM) which did no stemming at all.
Interview results
There was no significant correlation between perceived success and system (EXP or CTL).
The overall perceived session success rate was very high (86%).
More than half the users interviewed felt unable to make any comments or suggestions.
There were about 30 comments of the type, "Very easy to use" , "No problems" and "Straightforward" .
In addition there were about 20 interesting and enlightening comments ranging from, "You can search on what you want with this if you just type in some buzz-words" to "It only looks for keywords — doesn't analyse the search" The comments are given in full by Walker and Jones.
As will be seen below in the section on search repetition results, the objective difference between the two systems was not great, and it is not at all surprising that users did not seem to find any difference.
(It is most unlikely that any user noticed that there were two systems the terminals were labelled identically and the screen layouts were the same.
For a discussion of a controlled comparison of two explicitly different catalogue systems, see below under "Comparative evaluation of two catalogues" ).
In the section "Relevance feedback, query expansion and adaptive systems" there is further discussion of users' catalogue needs and expectations.
Search repetition results
A hundred of the 255 searches did quite well (or too well), even on the system which did no stemming at all(OSTEM), finding more than 20 records.
Of the remaining 155,74(48%) found more records on the weak-stemming (CTL) system than on OSTEM.
Precision was not markedly decreased: in four of the searches the extra records were all false drops (e.g., "skiing" and "sky" become conflated), and in another six there were some false drops.
There were very few searches of the "accounts dictionary" type in which stemming makes the difference between success and total failure.
The difference between EXP (the system with both strong and weak stemming and automatic cross-referencing) and CTL was less marked.
Fifty-three (34%) of the 155 searches found more records.
Of these 53,37 were affected by the strong stemming and 23 by cross-referencing.
In 15 of the 37 cases, strong stemming decreased precision, but the cross-referencing was never detrimental.
We concluded that weak stemming is almost entirely beneficial in a subject search system.
The Okapi '86 procedure would be improved by the use of an exception list containing words which cannot safely be made singular or have an "ing" ending removed ( "rights"  "housing"  "painting" ).
 "Ed" endings are rare in catalogue searching and there is no point in removing them at the "weak" level.
Strong stemming is more contentious.
Words for strong stemming might be filtered through a table of exceptions which are not to be stemmed ( "organism" , "organist" etc) Strong stemming is an economical but crude way of automatically bringing in some of the halo of see also terms which surround many search words.
For words which occur frequently in searches, this may be better done by using a thesaurus-like structure, prepared using a ranked list of words actually used in searches, with their contexts.
This would be an extension of the automatic cross-reference list of classes of words to be treated as synonymous with each other which we have used in Okapi '86.
More generally, it is quite difficult to find sensible ways of combining phrase searching with word searching.
Users who have commented that, "It should look for phrases" or "Why does it do it word by word?" can only be answered by saying that phrase searching often does not work very well because many books are not described in the catalogue by the phrases which searchers use.
It is likely that a procedure in which search statements were split into portions which match subject heading subfields as well as into (weak-stemmed) words would be something of an improvement.
However, informal repetition experiments suggest that no more than  about 30% of searches contain a close match with any subject heading more than one word long.
Spelling correction
Using the machine logs of searches on EXP and CTL, we classified responses to the situation where the system cannot find a word into "good" or "bad" .
A "good" response is one where the user enters an appropriate replacement (corrects a misspelling or enters a synonym), accepts a correct suggestion (EXP system), or aborts the search when the word is correct and essential to the meaning of the search.
Any other case is "bad" .
On the CTL system 23 of 36(64%) of responses were good and on EXP 41 of 57(78%).
These results may be due to chance, but the figures suggest that it is worth trying to do semi-automatic correction.
The Okapi '86 word-matching procedures do not require much storage and the look-up is quick and efficient, and they could readily be implemented in commercial library systems.
There are signs that users may come to expect a reasonable tolerance of miskeyings from any interactive computer system.
Many catalogue users will by now have had experience of word-processing systems with instant spelling verification.
One user interviewed by Richard Jones said (of spelling correction) that he "thought computers did that anyway" .
Cross-referencing
About 25% of the searches studied contained a member of the cross-reference list.
This is not surprising, since it was derived from a study of past searches by users of the same library.
In almost all cases this led to an increase in recall (the ratio of the number of relevant records retrieved to the total number of relevant records in the catalogue) without decrease in precision (the proportion of relevant records in the retrieved set).
Again, we found no search where this made the difference between success and total failure, nor is there any evidence that users were better satisfied.
Since the Okapi "86 experiments, the simple database of classes of approximate synonyms (" child "=" children "), go phrases (" french chalk") and stop words has been extended somewhat.
A "universal thesaurus" is indeed an impossibility, but it is not particularly difficult to construct a fairly substantial network of simple facts about relationships between words and phrases.
Relationships include those of the see also type ( "butterflies" , "entomology" ) and that of homography ( "IT" , "aids" , "china" ).
Some kind of context must often be known ( "china-ceramics" or "china-Beijing" ).
There is a rather easy way of making use of a generalized see also relationship between terms.
Conventional thesauri are often arranged hierarchically, so that of two terms one may be "broader" or "narrower" than the other.
Users do not need to be informed that "rat" is (in one sense) more specific than "rodent" .
This is part of their knowledge of the language.
In a search system like Okapi, which ranks records by weighting terms, the system also does not need to know anything about the nature of the relationship.
It can treat classes of related terms in the same way as it treats strong and weak stems: include them all, but ensure that co-occurrences of related terms in a record do not contribute multiply to the weight of the record.
If the user is searching for "rats" , records indexed under "rat(s)" should come out first.
A title "Rodent control:rats and mice" must not be assigned a higher weight than "Rats in the European Economic Community" , although the first contains two additional terms linked to the sought term in a see also relationship.
Nevertheless, this searcher may well be interested in titles like "The ecology of the smaller rodents" , but these should be ranked lower than the first two.
Conversely, the searcher for "rodents" retrieves the same set of books, but the "rodent" records appear first.
This is achieved by assigning a higher weight to the actual terms in the search than to any see also terms, regardless of the direction of the relation.
In practice, a notion of the "distance" between related terms is helpful: the system should not expect the person who searches for "cryogenics" to be particularly satisfied with general works on "physics" .
A ranked output IR system such as Okapi can also use several other kinds of knowledge about words to modify the way in which weights are assigned to them in an individual search.
Conjunctions like "and" and "or" and prepositions, can sometimes be used with reasonable accuracy to separate a search query into "concepts" .
 "And" is by no means always used in its Boolean sense (consider "yachting and boating" ), but "or" usually is so intended (people use "or" rather than "and" when they do not see the concepts which it separates as being particularly closely related).
It is generally used in an exclusive rather than an inclusive sense.
The preposition "of" is common in online catalogue subject searches.
There is some evidence that in searches containing a single "of" (like "objectives of common agricultural policy" ) the portion to the left of the preposition should be weighted somewhat lower than the portion to the right.
Finally, there are expressions of scope, form or time, as in "the Russian contribution to international economy since the revolution" or "principles of contestable markets" .
A search system should treat these as dangerous and relatively unimportant.
They are not difficult to  recognize.
They cannot be ignored, but should always be given low weight compared with other terms in the search.
Comparative evaluation of two catalogues
During the spring of 1987 Richard Jones carried out a comparison experiment in the Riding House Street site library of PCL.
The catalogues were a version of Okapi '86 and the SWALCAP LIBERTAS system.
The Okapi system had a subject search which was almost identical with that of the EXP catalogue described above.
It had one important additional feature: the ability to move from a full record display into a sequence of brief records in Dewey number order (Figures 5.6 and 5.7).
To make the comparison more realistic, this version of Okapi (known as Okapi '87) also had a rather rudimentary specific item search, along the lines of that of Okapi '84 but simplified.
The experiment was based on the Siegel and Markey comparison experiments.
Users were intercepted as they approached a terminal to either catalogue and asked to undertake their searches under controlled conditions.
A considerable inducement was offered, but the refusal rate was high.
Subjects were taken, singly, to a room containing a terminal to each system and asked to carry out their search first on one system, then on the other.
The searches were observed and followed by a fairly loosely structured interview.
There was no use of log data, because LIBERTAS produced none.
The experiment obtained data on user preferences and general assessments of the performance of the two catalogues on ease of use and learning, display formats, selection menu design and the ease and speed of navigation and browsing.
Since the sample size was small (about 50 subjects) and the whole experiment was intentionally rather open ended the results are fairly soft.
However, they should prove of considerable interest to researchers and designers.
This may be the first time there has been a broad comparison of two fairly "complete" catalogue systems which are also internally quite similar (the present writer had a hand in the design of both of them) with the same users in the same library.
There follows a taste of the results.
Ease of use and learning
Most of the subjects were more familiar with LIBERTAS than with any version of Okapi.
Almost all of them were familiar with some online catalogue.
There was a measure of agreement that Okapi was easier to learn, particularly by users with little previous experience of computers.
People who were familiar with computers (terminals to the Polytechnic network for example) or with LlBERTAS generally found LlBERTAS easier to use; they often found Okapi's coloured keys more difficult than LIBERTAS's mnemonic commands (LIBERTAS is not what most people would understand by a command-driven system, but most of the choices and options are single letters or words like BACK, and these have to be followed by pressing the RETURN key).
Some of those familiar with LIBERTAS also found the use of coloured keys and the wording of some of Okapi's prompts "…condescending and a bit babyish." 
On the whole, then, users who were mainly familiar with LlBERTAS preferred its general tone and did not perceive it as slower or more tedious to give commands to.
Objectively, it is quicker to give commands to Okapi, but there is a stage in the search procedure (the merge) which is sometimes faster on LIBERTAS.
Performance
Most users thought that Okapi retrieved more useful material in subject searching than LIBERTAS did.
Two factors may have contributed to this: the stemming and cross-reference table, and the fact that in subject searching Okapi always showed "full" records which often contain subject headings and are more easily classifiable into relevant and non-relevant than LIBERTAS's brief (one- or two-line) records or its card-like full record.
Objectively, it is true that Okapi nearly always retrieves as much as or more than LIBERTAS, but LIBERTAS sometimes outputs records in a more sensible order, keeping editions of the same work together and taking word adjacency into account in the weighting procedure (so that records containing the actual search statement come out first).
In specific item searching, LIBERTAS was both subjectively and objectively more successful.
It should be mentioned that the specific item search in Okapi '87 was knocked up rather hastily for this  experiment; the Okapi projects have not been concerned with specific item searching since 1985.
Display formats
There was a clear preference for the Okapi full-record displays.
It does not appear that subjects were specifically asked to compare the brief display formats.
Selection menu design
The LIBERTAS catalogue menu offered a choice of six search modes (author and title, title, subject, etc.).
These are chosen by a single digit (followed by RETURN).
This was uniformly preferred to the Okapi '87 mode selection screen (similar to Figure 5.1).
Some users thought it gave greater "precision" or "tied down their ideas." 
Some thought it meant there were a greater number of search modes.
Objectively, the two catalogues provide almost exactly the same search functions.
Browsing
Some users preferred LIBERTAS's default brief-record display in subject searching because it is quicker to scan than Okapi's full records.
At the same time they wanted "everything on one screen" meaning location information (in LlBERTAS neither brief nor full records include location or a class number).
This poses something of a quandary for the designer.
In Okapi one can browse backwards or forwards at either brief- or full-record level.
If the default display (in a subject search) is brief, there is a real danger of a user missing relevant items with non-indicative titles.
Perhaps the default display should be full with an initially prominent option to move to brief.
Subjects were asked to evaluate the effectiveness of Okapi's "See books classified near this one" option.
Most of them found additional useful material, but found it difficult to understand "their location in relation to the original search" (Figure 5.7).
This again poses a serious problem for the designer of a system which allows users to range widely through a catalogue (see the section below).
However, this feature was new to all the subjects, and it may be that after one or two sessions most people would find it easy to use.
Relevance feedback, query expansion and adaptive systems
It is probably true that in most online catalogue searching both recall and precision are much lower than that which a good intermediary would obtain in reference retrieval searching.
There are three reasons for this.
First, the subject descriptive content of most bibliographic records is slight and of poor quality, using non-current language, descriptors which are too general and not enough of them.
Second, many online catalogues do not provide search functions which are powerful or flexible enough to permit exhaustive or precise searching.
Finally, even if the subject content of the records were to be greatly enhanced and adequate functionality provided in the search systems, a large proportion of end-users would not be able to make use of the functions.
Unless some approach to a standard emerges — something which is extremely unlikely; neither online nor offline training even begins to tackle the problem — most people will use many different catalogues, and even with instruction a substantial proportion will never be able to grasp the principles of Boolean logic and the combination of sets.
At the same time, we are finding very high perceived success rates with simple, transparent catalogues such as the Okapi series.
Many users are not at present very demanding of a catalogue.
Perhaps 80% of subject search sessions are short and successful, the searcher being satisfied by one or two apparently relevant items in the first dozen or so.
If these "successful" sessions are the important ones, and if users' expectations do not increase, it is probably not worth trying to do much more in the way of improving online catalogues.
Most people are satisfied: why bother about the others?
However, if we look at the remaining 20% of sessions we find that they fall into two classes.
There are short sessions which are total failures — there is a total mismatch between the user and the system.
Then there are long sessions, lasting up to an hour and involving the display of hundreds, occasionally thousands, of records.
These users are very strongly motivated and persistent.
More than half the machine time is spent handling sessions of this type.
With the advance of communication and storage technology, and the proven inadequacy of passive, unhelpful search programs — both of the keyword Boolean type and the browsing, phrase-matching type — it seems likely that in the not-far-distant future the old reference retrieval software will fall into disuse, intermediaries will be redeployed and we shall be able to throw away our front-ends to DIALOG.
The same system will be used to access the catalogue of our local library and to search ERIC or MEDLINE (not to mention services which retrieve facts rather than references).
These search systems must still be suitable for casual use by inept or inexperienced users.
But they must also provide powerful facilities to reduce the proportion of total failures and to aid demanding and persistent users.
The guiding principle of the Okapi research is that the system must adapt itself to the user rather than the converse.
The original Okapi team, Mitev, Venner and Walker, were inspired by, among others, Charles Hildreth and Ward Shaw.
Tentative proposals for research towards highly interactive systems which adapt themselves to individual users and uses were put forward in 1984.
The resulting systems would try to incorporate some of the ideas of Hayes and others, adapting to users' needs, aptitude and experience.
In 1986 the then current team started work towards a system which would do automatic or semi-automatic query expansion by using terms extracted from records which the user had seen and judged relevant.
There is, of course, a long history of research into uses of relevance information in In systems, going back to the 1960s, but it only appears to have been used in one online catalogue: CITE, at the National Library of Medicine.
We wrote procedures for extracting words, subject headings and classification numbers from displayed records, and for recombining these in new searches.
Repeating searches from Okapi logs, we found, not surprisingly, that it is often possible to obtain additional relevant records which would not otherwise have been found.
However, interaction problems seemed to be almost insuperable if the system were to remain suitable for casual use.
Richard Jones's comparison experiment, briefly reported above, showed that users felt lost if they moved just one step from their original searches by choosing to "look at books classified near this one" , although the dialogue would appear to be a reasonable compromise between clarity and verbosity (Figures 5.6 and 5.7).
It is probably too intrusive even to unconditionally ask the subject searcher to provide relevance information, and we believe that relevance judgements should only be requested if the system can detect that the user is either in trouble or being fairly persistent.
Having obtained relevance information and performed one or more subsequent searches, the navigation problems multiply.
There will often be a considerable number of courses of action which the system itself will not be able to choose between.
The user is going to be faced with a substantial processing load.
Options might include the following:
Look for other books like this one.
Look for more books like the ones you choose.
See books with subject descriptions similar to this one.
See books classified near this one.
Add this book to the list you told the computer to remember.
Go back to what you were doing before…
Review what you have done.
In addition, there will be the usual semi-constant options, like seeing next or previous book or starting another search.
Currently we are experimenting with the use of windows to  provide context-sensitive advice, search history information and act as "dialogue windows." 
The greatest part of most searches is spent in looking at record displays, so information and dialogue windows would usually overlay a portion of a bibliographic display.
Whatever display and interaction techniques are used, it seems clear that a system which aims to satisfy the widely differing needs of widely differing types of user must already incorporate some degree of adaptivity.
The system must be able to form some picture ( "model" is the currently fashionable word) of the user's needs, competence and experience.
In most cases "advanced" options would not even appear.
It seems that work on the use of relevance feedback cannot help but include an element of research in the design of adaptive systems.
Availability of the Okapi software
All versions of Okapi up to Okapi '87 were written in Z80 assembly language and operated on a network of Apple IIe microcomputers connected to a Nestar PLAN/4000 file server.
This is a historical accident owing to the nature of the original research proposal.
Writing the software was somewhat tedious, but having to work at this level did help the designers to get away from preconceptions about interaction which they might have had if they had been working within the input/output facilities provided by a conventional mini or mainframe operating system (for example, that it needs a RETURN to terminate user input or that the operating system can properly handle the echoing of characters to the terminal).
With Okapi '86 we were already up against hardware constraints, as much due to disk access times as to CPU speed.
It was decided to produce future versions in a form suitable for 32-bit processors and relatively fast disk access.
Currently, the Okapi software is being rewritten in C to run under Unix, and possibly also under VMS on DEC equipment.
The next implementation will operate on ANSI-type terminals (VT100 compatible) connected to Sun workstations or other 32-bit byte addressable machines running BSD Unix.
The source code and minimal documentation will be available to researchers and libraries.
No charging policy has yet been decided, but it is hoped that it would not be priced above the means of researchers and educational establishments.
This public software will not take the form of a turnkey system which can simply be loaded and run.
Apart from anything else Okapi systems do not use machine readable cataloguing (MARC) files, and it is unlikely that a MARC tape conversion program will be supplied.
The file specifications will be documented, and users  wishing to load their own files must convert them into the Okapi format.
Nor is there any way of inputting or editing individual records.
To do anything interesting with the software a good programmer and designer will be needed.
The distribution will consist of indexing and searching utilities, including functions to make use of the database of rather simple knowledge about words and phrases referred to above.
At the time of writing the only categories are see, go, stop and syntax (syntax words are words like "in" , "of" and "and" , which would not be indexed or searched for in a subject search system, but which can possibly be used to modify the weighting of other words in a search request).
There is also a library of functions for record display and for implementing the necessary highly interactive user-system dialogue.