

BA, PA warn of major VAT threat
Rumours that the government will be forced to impose VAT on printed matter and other zero-rated goods to compensate for a shortfall in public finances and to reduce borrowings are being taken very seriously by the main book trade associations.
Fears of a tax on books were fuelled when, during an interview on BBC Television with David Frost on Sunday 3rd January, the Prime Minister refused to give an undertaking that VAT would not be extended in the spring Budget to zero-rated goods and services such as books, newspapers, food and children's clothes.
As a consequence, tax rises are now thought to be inevitable by Whitehall sources.
However, few predict that the government will raise direct taxation: that would be to renege on the fundamental Thatcherite principle of reducing income tax.
It is thought more likely that there will be an increase in VAT from 17.5% to 20%, or an extension of the scope of VAT to incorporate zero-rated goods, which could net the government about £9bn in extra revenue, or both.
It has been estimated that a tax on books and periodicals might add as much as £250m to the Exchequer.
Tim Godfray, chief executive of the Booksellers Association, said this week that a tax on books would be a catastrophe.
‘We have to take these rumours very seriously.
We are too well aware that the government is short of funds and needs additional revenue quickly, principally, I suspect, to fund unemployment benefit.
The government has to get money from somewhere, and it is logical that it should look at the whole area of VAT.
We shall be doing a great deal of work in the coming months to discourage the government from taking a decision which would send book prices soaring and seriously damage the health of the trade.’
The BA intends to write to MPs and peers to express its concern, and will ask members to lobby their local MPs and warn customers of the VAT threat.
The Library Association has also expressed concern.
Chief executive Ross Shimmon said: ‘When we met Peter Brooke in late November he assured us that there was no prospect of VAT being imposed on books, but stories in the national press continually suggest that opposite.
Should they be true, the consequences for book prices would be very grave indeed.’
In the Sunday Telegraph of 3rd January, leading publishers and booksellers revealed their hopes and fears for the coming year.
Significantly, several of them focused on the threat of VAT on books.
Terry Maher, chairman and chief executive of Pentos, said: ‘There is a very real threat of VAT being levied on books in the next budget.
It is absolutely essential that every element within and without the trade cooperate in a campaign to resist this damaging prospect.’
Tom Rosenthal, chairman and managing director of Deutsch, warned that a tax on books could raise prices by 20% and lead to the abolition of the Net Book Agreement.
There were echoes here of 1984, the year in which the main associations of the book world set up a joint committee to run a vigorous campaign to fight the then Thatcher government's rumoured intention of levying a positive rate of VAT on books and learned journals.
Over £100,000 was spent on the campaign, which ran for six months, and culminated in the then Chancellor Nigel Lawson's smug remark, following the Budget in March 1985, that he had never had any intention of imposing a tax on books.
Nor there are signs that another major campaign is beginning to take shape.
The Periodical Publishers Association and Newspaper Society have already set up a working committee to campaign against the imposition of VAT on magazines and newspapers.
And both the organisations were co-signatories of a letter — signed also by leading figures in the book business, including BA president John Hitchin, PA president Paul Scherer and Anthony Sampson, chairman of the Society of Authors — which was sent in December to the Chancellor under the auspices of the National Book Committee's ‘Don't Tax Reading’ campaign.
The strongly worded letter gave the case against VAT on books and publications.
‘We recall the long established principle of the UK Parliament, stretching back to 1860 and before, and reasserted even during the dark days of the Second World War, against taxing knowledge, reading, ideas and the demand for literacy and information.
Any abrogation of this would be seen as the moment when Parliament put temporary economic and financial stringency before sustained principle.’
Should the government put ‘temporary economic and financial stringency before sustained principle’ it would be performing yet another humiliating U-turn.
In a letter to the PA sent during the run-up to the General Election last April, the Conservative Party said that it would not impose VAT on books or periodicals.
Replying on behalf of Chris Patten, the then chairman of the Conservative Party, Geoffrey Finsberg, stated: ‘The Prime Minister has made it very clear that there will be no need to increase VAT in the next government.
In addition to this, the chief secretary to the Treasury has also confirmed that VAT will not be imposed on books, newspapers or periodicals.’
Last May, speaking at the Publishers Association's a.g.m., PA chief executive Clive Bradley described the development as one of ‘our great successes of the past year’.
However, this week Mr Bradley conceded that the Chancellor need not be bound by Mr Finsberg's letter.
‘That letter could easily be disowned by the Chancellor.
In particular, he could say that it is not for the Conservative Party or anybody else to determine the budget options of Parliament.
Yes, it would be a bit dishonest, but a lot of pledges are made before an election that are never honoured.
‘The situation is very worrying, but we have not yet taken a decision on a major campaign.
However, should the press continue to cover the story, the government will increasingly begin to regard it as a runner.’
Archer, Herbert to leave Hodder
In a move that had been the subject of rumours for many months, Jeffrey Archer has gone from Hodder to HarperCollins in a two-book deal.
He is now published by HarperCollins worldwide.
And James Herbert, another of Hodder's biggest selling authors, is rumoured to be going the same way: he is said to be on the point of signing a two-book deal with HarperCollins worth £1.7m.
HC executive chairman and publisher Eddie Bell was previously at Hodder, and was associated with both authors there.
Lord Archer was this week working on his new novel, a thriller due to be published in September.
But a HarperCollins press release reported him as saying, ‘I leave Hodder & Stoughton with much sadness.
We have enjoyed great success together but I feel the chance to be published on both sides of the Atlantic by HarperCollins is an exciting stage in my career.
I am delighted to be once again working with Eddie Bell.’
Hodder has published Lord Archer since Kane and Abel in 1979 — he had previously been published by Cape — and has all his fiction in print in Coronet paperback; contrary to rumour, Coronet retains this backlist.
Michael Attenborough of Hodder commented: ‘For any publisher, losing an author all of whose books have sold over a million copies in their UK editions — and I have no doubt that As the Crow Flies will join them soon — is very regrettable.
‘But it has been an extremely friendly parting, without any acrimony.
We must respect Jeffrey's decision, and we wish him well with HarperCollins.’
As the Crow Flies , paperbacked in June, has sold 815,000 copies.
Hodder's well publicised deals with Lord Archer involved advances of just £1 but high royalties.
Mr Bell described the HarperCollins deal, for a sum that has not been disclosed, as ‘more conventional’.
(In the US, HarperCollins paid a figure reported to be between £14m and £18m for rights outside the UK in As the Crow Flies , the next novel and a volume of short stories.)
‘Jeffrey and I go back an awful long way, and it makes a lot of sense for him to be published by us on both sides of the Atlantic,’ Mr Bell commented.
The rumoured loss of James Herbert will make another substantial dent in Hodder's turnover.
His last paperback Creed , sold over 300,000 copies in its year of publication.
NEWS
Little recognition for books in Honours list
There was little joy for the book world in the Prime Minister's second New Year Honours List.
But this disappointing lack of interest should not detract from the elevation of Chatto's oldest and most faithful author, ‘writer’ Sir Victor Sawdon Pritchett, to the Order of the Companions of Honour, nor from further recognition for bestselling novelist Catherine Cookson OBE: she becomes a Dame of the British Empire for services to charity.
Harriet Harvey Wood, head of literature at the British Council, is awarded an OBE, as is Dorothy Butler in New Zealand for services to children's literature.
There were a number of names familiar to the trade in the lists, though not always for doing what they are most familiar for.
John Cox, director of Blackwells' Periodicals Division and chairman of the Air Transport Users Committee, receives an OBE for services to air transport.
Frank Barlow, to whom Longman, Penguin and Addison-Wesley report as managing director and chief operating officer of Pearson, becomes a CBE for services to the newspaper industry.
And there were a clutch of gongs for people who also write.
Author and broadcaster John Julius Norwich and Antony Jay (author of the book of the ‘Elizabeth R’ television documentary) are both made CVOs — the Royal Victorian Order is the personal gift of the Queen; and Iain Douglas-Hamilton (Battle for the Elephants ) receives an OBE for service to the preservation of the African elephant.
And in the printing industry, chairman and c.e.o.
of Watmoughs, Patrick Walker was awarded an OBE ‘for services to publishing’.
Bomb blast hits Dillons' Trafalgar Square branch
Terrorist action hit central London again this week when a firebomb, thought to have been planted by the IRA, exploded in Dillons, Trafalgar Square, early on Wednesday morning.
The bomb, which was left in the bargain book department on the first floor of the store, destroyed four units.
Dillons' marketing director Julian Rivers said that there was no substantial damage to stock.
‘The police called the shop's manager Jonathan White at 3 o'clock on Wednesday morning to say that the audio alarm had picked up the sound of a bomb going off.
When he arrived at the scene the shop was full of thick, acrid smoke.
Although the bomb caused no significant damage it was an major inconvenience,’ Mr Rivers said.
The substantial 10,500 sq ft shop, which opened in October 1991, was closed for all of Wednesday morning while police and staff searched for further incendiary devices and repairs were carried out.
As The Bookseller went to press the shop was expected to reopen in the afternoon.
A firebomb also went off in the Plaza shopping centre in Oxford Street, London, on Wednesday morning.
BOOKSELLER NEXT WEEK
Off we go again
Buffeted by a year recession, wars, hurricanes, currency fluctuations and more, the travel trade is nevertheless optimistic about 1993, which has to be good for sales of maps and guide books.
Carol Wright tips the most promising and popular destinations for the year, and Douglas Schatz selects series and titles to watch out for.
African Writers
Achebe, Ngugi, Ekwensi, Kwei Armah, Ali Mazrui…30 years ago this month, a new world literature was on the point of emerging.
Alan Hill traces the roots of Heinemann Educational's African Writers Series.
An agent's life
The first in a new series of Bookseller features, in which people in the book business offer readers a flavour of the hurly-burly of their daily lives.
John Pawsey describes a week in the life of a literary agent.
Coming Soon
The moving spirit
How the religious books market has changed as different faiths have expanded or declined in popularity.
Plus a selection of new and forthcoming titles — all coming on 29th January.
Where in the world?
A whistle-stop worldwide tour of markets for British ELT publishers — the good, the promising and the problematic, plus John Walsh's selection of noteworthy new course materials — coming on 5th February.
Coming attractions
Dumpbins, shelf wobblers, serialisations and Heros.
What exciting ideas have publishers got up their sleeves by way of major book promotions this year?
The issue of 5th February sees the start of a new monthly column, entitled ‘Coming Attractions’ and featuring details of their plans for their big titles.
Finding good homes for prized books
Where do all the books submitted for prizes fetch up?
In the case of the 1,800 which Book Trust received for this year's Smarties Prize, they found good homes.
Most went to organisations such as Dr Barnardo's, the Royal Alexandra Hospital for Sick Children in Brighton, the Children's Cancer Unit in Newcastle, and children's wards in Stevenage, Southampton, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Oxford, where they are housed on shelves specially made by Smarties.
PLR results show declining library loans
The tenth annual report on Public Lending Right shows the continuing downward spiral in loans by public libraries.
These now stand at 563m (for the year to February 1992), down from 568m last year and 583m in 1990–91.
When PLR was introduced in 1981, loans were constant at around 650m.
However, Dr James Parker, Registrar of PLR, said that the situation was not as bleak as five years ago.
‘We have been monitoring the downward trend over the last 10 years, and our impression is that the decline is beginning to bottom out: there may have been 5m fewer loans last year, but the drop was 15m in 1991–92.
Also, other figures reveal that more people than ever are using libraries, which reflects the greater variety of services that are now being provided.’
Changes to PLR will also mean authors receiving slightly higher payouts from the scheme.
The rate per loan is being increased from 1.81 pence to 1.86 pence, while the maximum any one author can earn remains £6,000.
Overall, 21,433 writers registered last year, against 20,203 in 1991.
When the first payments were made in 1984 only 7,500 authors had registered.
During this period the number of book issues sampled from library authorities has grown from 3m to 10.6m.
PLR's annual budget will rise in February from £4.75m to £5m.
From this figure, the Registrar will deduct the running costs of PLR, and the remainder will be distributed to authors.
Cats in the belfry
What did publishers want for Christmas?
A few hours of oblivion probably, but failing that, Faber.
Pre-Christmas party gossip was buzzing with speculation that the company was for sale.
Sparked off undoubtedly by the announcement that chairman and m.d.
Matthew Evans was to split his role and that the hunt was on for a new m.d., rumours that Mr Evans was ‘bailing out’ and the company was on the block were fanned by the trade's more supportive friends at Private Eye and pounced on by publishers overexcited at the prospect of getting their hands on, if not the company, then at least some of its authors.
Alas for them, Faber was not in Santa's sack this year, and is unlikely to be for a long while.
It is not unusual for a private company to have rigorous controls governing sale of shares, and this is so in Faber's case, where the shareholdings break down evenly among employees, T S Eliot's widow Valerie and the Faber family.
‘Faber would not be for sale even at the right price,’ commented Matthew Evans a touch wearily — this being by no means the first time he has had to deny such rumours.
So, prospective candidates for the Faber managing directorship can now submit their applications reasonably confident that they won't end up back in the service of their current bosses.
Dillons at the LIBF
Dillons is once again to have a bookstore at the London International Book Fair.
It will be on the ground floor of Olympia 2, will be larger than before — 70 square metres — and will feature an author signing desk.
As the signing session spots for this year's fair will be limited, publishers are asked to submit their suggestions as soon as possible to  at Powerhouse,, or to  at Dillons Marketing on .
Travel catalogue
Copies of the Booksellers Association's travel catalogue are now available for personalised overprinting by bookshops.
Booksellers interested in ordering copies should contact BA Marketing on  as soon as possible.
Michael Palin, top selling Christmas author with Pole to Pole (BBC Books — see Christmas in the Bookshops, page 27), played to a full house and raised nearly £3,000 for the Playhouse in Oxford when he gave a talk about his travels, organised by Blackwells in December.
He is pictured with a member of the Oxford Youth Theatre.
COMPANY NEWS CHEAPSIDE
Pentos shares plummet after profits warning from Maher
Shares in Pentos fell by an alarming 20% last week after the group issued warnings that pretax profits for 1992 would be ‘significantly below’ market expectations and that its final dividend would be reviewed ‘in the light of trading at the time of the preliminary announcement in March’.
The group blamed the profits shortfall on a slump in demand for office furniture in the final quarter, weak sales at Athena (down 3%), and £3.5m in exceptional items covering reorganisation costs and write-downs.
The last-mentioned included provisions against the acquisition of Hatchards, which landed the group with unwanted properties it has so far been unable to sell.
However, Pentos said that both Dillons and Rymans (including Wilding) had performed satisfactorily, achieving like-for-like sales increases of 4% (to £128m) and 1% respectively.
City analysts immediately slashed their profit forecasts from around £15m to around £5m.
In the year to end-December 1991, the group's pretax profits were £15.2m.
Pentos shares were marked down by 14p to 56p on the day of the announcement (Wednesday 30th December), wiping over £19m off the group's market capitalisation.
However, by Tuesday this week, after Monday's overall surge in the stock market, the share price had perked up to 61p.
There are some analysts who now regard Pentos as a recovery stock.
Their view is that if the office furniture division were sold for £23m (the amount of capital employed in the business), the group's borrowings of £49m and gearing of 57% would be nearly halved; that Athena's high operational gearing offers scope for cost cutting; that an expected upturn in the UK small business sector would benefit Ryman; and that Dillons, the group's core business, has performed relatively well, considering that around one-third of its sales are made in the difficult terrain of central London.
Others are more cautious, pointing out that the office furniture division, which will just break even for 1992, is not a wildly attractive selling proposition.
They also argue that, given Pentos' current level of borrowings, it is hard to picture Dillons' expansion keeping up with that of Waterstones, which has the more capacious pockets of W H Smith to support it.
In addition, analysts — like many others — are apprehensive about the prospect of VAT being imposed on books; Pentos itself believes VAT of 5% on books is likely.
‘I would be hesitant about forecasting a recovery for Pentos until we've heard what the Budget brings in March,’ commented William Cullum, retail analyst at Panmure Gordon.
And Lex, the Financial Times columnist, was even glummer.
Pentos, he said on 31st December, was unlikely to find bookselling any easier than it was finding the difficult Athena and office furniture markets.
‘Both Dillons and Waterstones have invested heavily in upmarket stores, soaking up cash.
Yet there remain worries about the likely return on capital employed.
With Waterstones backed by W H Smith, and Pentos’ gearing rising, there can be little doubt who has the deeper pockets to fight a protracted battle.
If the Pentos chairman gets his dearest wish and the net book agreement is abolished, he may just live to regret it.’
Scholastic children's books shine at first half of year
Sales revenues for scholastic Publications Ltd reached £8.96m for the first half of the company's financial year (June to November 1992), representing an increase of 23.5% over the same period in 1991.
The company does not break down divisional figures, but m.d.
David Kewley reported that all five divisions (children's books, educational books, magazines, book clubs and book fairs) produced increases ‘significantly above inflation’.
The biggest increase came through trade sales of children's books, which rose by a remarkable 84%.
This was the result of three or four very good properties, Mr Kewley explained — in particular, the Point Horror series for 10 year olds and upwards, which was published last year, has 18 titles in print and is doing ‘phenomenally well’, and John Cunliffe's pre-school TV tie-in series, Rosie and Jim, with 12 titles in print.
Pretax profits were up by 8.5%, reflecting the heavy cost of investment in the company's growth, he said.
‘We have invested a lot of money in people, offices and warehousing over the last two years; and this will only show through in the company's profits in 1994–95.’
Revenues for Scholastic Corporation, the American parent company, rose 13% for the half year to $256.9m.
Net income rose to $11.2m.
Elsbeth Linder to Weidenfeld
Elsbeth Linder is to join Weidenfeld, part of the Orion Publishing Group, as an editorial director on 25th January.
She was until November publisher of Lime Tree Press, a Reed imprint, and before that Minerva's first editorial director.
A casualty of reorganisation at Reed, she has not been allowed to languish in the cold for very long.
In her new role she will acquire fiction and non-fiction for the Weidenfeld general list with editorial director Allegra Huston, reporting to publishing director Ion Trewin.
All three will be buying across fiction and non-fiction range according to personal tastes and strengths.
‘I value Elsbeth's high standing among authors and agents,’ commented Mr Trewin, ‘and look forward to her contribution not only to Weidenfeld but also to the Orion Group as a whole.’
Books for Students wins television supply contract
Against stiff competition, Warwick-based Books for Students has won the contract to supply schools with books and material supporting Channel 4 schools television programmes.
Books for Students will be working for the Educational Television Company, which has the contract to publish and distribute the material, and the supply service will trade under ETC's name.
About 30,000 schools watch Channel 4 schools programmes and most receive books, pamphlets and software every term.
BfS won the supply contract because of its high level of customer service and familiarity with the schools market.
FSG buys NPP assets
Farrar, Straus & Giroux, which has been distributing the backlist of the closed North Point Press, has acquired all its publishing assets says BP Report .
Pulling together for the Animals of Farthing Wood
Today sees the launch of the animation series of Colin Dann's award-winning novels for children, ‘The Animals of Farthing Wood’.
Financed to the tune of £6m by 20 broadcast services, produced by not one but two animation teams (one French, one English), and transmitted across 16 European countries to an estimated audience of over 60 million, the 26-part series represents a triumph of international co-operation and management.
It also marks the conclusion of an extraordinarily complex process of rights negotiations between a snowballing number of interested parties, and here too, an unusual degree of collaboration — in this case, between normally rival publishers — has been the key to success.
Simple start
All seemed relatively simple at the start, recalls literary agent Alexandra Cann.
This was back in 1988, when Enrico Platter, head of children's and youth programmes for WDR in Germany, proposed a 13-part series to the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), and Ms Cann, then acting on behalf of Heinemann Young Books), publisher of the original Farthing Wood title, drew up a straightforward rights deal with WDR.
But just before the deal was finalised, Ms Cann realised there were four more Animals of Farthing Wood titles of which she had been unaware.
These were published by Hutchinson (now part of Random House Children's Books), whom she now also called upon to represent.
‘It was a nightmare trying to unravel who had which rights,’ she says.
‘Neither publisher had film rights in their titles; both had television rights; Heinemann had merchandising rights, which are important in children's titles, whereas Hutchinson didn't; and it was a moot point whether either of them had video or audio cassette rights, since the original book was published in 1979, and the form of the publishing agreement had not been changed to take account of the new technology.’
Ms Cann accordingly drew up a second deal, which accounted for all the different royalties (television, merchandising and so forth) separately.
At this stage, she says, the project was still conceived of as a relatively modest 13-part series, and neither video nor merchandising seemed a great issue.
This was in early 1989; by the end of the year, after the pilot had been made and the EBU had given the enterprise the go-ahead, Ms Cann entered into negotiations with BBC Enterprises, responsible for distributing the series and for the merchandising rights.
Administrative nightmare
Yet again, the complications mounted and the previous deal came to nought — this time because the BBC wanted to renegotiate what it considered an administrative nightmare and a very hard deal.
For one thing, all concerned had by now realised that the books offered considerably more scope for exploitation.
For another, Ms Cann had withheld the print publication rights (for novelisation of the TV scripts in various formats) from the merchandising rights, because two of her clients were publishers — but this presented a major problem for the EBU and the BBC.
This is, she points out, a very ambiguous area: what constitutes publication, and what constitutes merchandise?
The BBC's proposed solution was that everything should be handled by the BBC and then licensed back to the publishers.
This was not the  latter's view: indeed, Heinemann, which held merchandising rights, was reluctant to renegotiate at all.
Ms Cann believed, however, that an attractive new deal would be in the long term interests of all.
‘I felt it was in our interests to renegotiate the deal.
But it was crucial that it would not just be a good deal financially for my clients [who by this time also included Colin Dann, the author]and the BBC, but also that all parties should feel relatively comfortable with it.
The way I was doing the deal, everyone was going to have to work together for a long time.’
She thanks her lucky stars that none of the parties involved was given to temper tantrums.
Nevertheless, the negotiations between the three publishers jostling for position went on for over a year without reaching a conclusion: ‘It was very difficult to find common ground and make sure that everyone had their fair share.’
Although Reed and Random House discussed the possibility of a publishing joint venture, Ingrid Selberg of Reed and Piet Snyman of RH decided in the end that they wanted to go their separate ways.
Unorthodox solution
Finally Ms Cann proposed an unorthodox and possibly unique solution: publication rights as part of merchandising would be retained by the publishers jointly, to be pooled and then shared out in the most appropriate way.
Thus, while all three publishers will be publishing different novelisation titles based on the series, the publication rights for annuals and calendars (which are more akin to merchandise than books) went to BBC Enterprises.
Now that the deal has been signed, the collaboration between traditional competitors will have to continue, she stresses.
Although the publishers rejected the idea of a joint imprint, they do have to market the books jointly — but in such a way that the public and foreign publishers looking to pick up the foreign rights are not confused.
‘Coordinating the flow of information now is vital,’ she says.
‘If that breaks down, exploitation doesn't happen properly.’
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Shareholders approve merger between Matra and Hachette
The merger of Hachette and Matra was approved with an overwhelming majority by the shareholders of both companies on 29th December.
Hachette's book publishing operations, which include the US based Grolier and Franklin Watts, will become one of nine divisions in the merged Matra-Hachette, alongside aerospace, defence, transport, telecommunications, automotive interests, press, distribution and broadcasting.
There was no opposition to the completion of the merger from Havas, the French media group with a controlling stake in the Groupe de la Cité, which has held over 3% of Hachette's share since it launched a ‘mini-raid’ on the Paris Bourse last October.
The chairman of both Hachette and of Matra, and now of the combined group, Jean-Luc Lagardère, called for a normalisation of relations with Havas in the face of intensified foreign competition from Bertelsmann and other non-French rivals.
Mr Lagardère will have 22% of the voting rights in a new holding company, Lagardère Groupe, which will control 51% of Matra-Hachette.
His position as gérant commandité in a mixed liability company arrangement means that he will be unbudgeable from the head of Matra-Hachette's management for the next six years, though his personal assets will be exposed if the group suffers any setbacks.
His plans to merge Hachette with the cash rich Matra were formulated after Hachette's debacle with the failed television station La Cinq.
The financial benefits of the merger of these two apparently disparate companies were heavily stressed by Mr Lagardère at separate shareholders' meetings on 29th December.
The merged Matra-Hachette should, he said, meet a profit forecast of FFr350m on a turnover of FFr53bn in 1992.
The defence division's order book stands at FFr20bn.
By contrast, sales from Hachette's book publishing, FFr6.76bn in 1991, have been declining.
An 8.4% stake in Hachette held by a Panamanian registered company linked to Iraqi interests allegedly acting for Saddam Hussein will be reduced to 1.8% as a result of the merger.
After the UN freeze on Iraqi assets at the time of the Gulf War, this packet of shares has not benefited from voting rights or dividends.
Any future dealings in the shares must be approved by the French public revenue department, it has been confirmed.
UK scheme to support Russian translations
The British Council, in conjunction with the Publishers Association, has set up a scheme to provide financial assistance enabling Russian publishers wanting to publish translations of UK books to purchase rights from the UK licence holders.
Development of the sizeable potential market in the countries of the former Soviet Union for translations of western academic and serious general books, which exists despite the growing universality of the English language, has been held back by lack of hard currency.
Publishers which are already negotiating in Russia over translation rights will welcome the British Council/Publishers Association scheme — as they will the Russian government's assurance in London last month that it will repay all the former Soviet Union's to UK and other Western publishers.
A spokesman for the joint scheme said: ‘We want to make it easier for British and Russian publishers to do business together by putting some funds into payment for rights.
We do not want to dictate what should be translated or get involved in negotiations between publishers.
There is a crying need in Russia for British books, which we hope our scheme will go some way to answering.
But the scheme is not limitless in its resources and we would expect licence holders to accept modest fees.’
Support will be given primarily to titles of educational value, with preference for books on science, medicine, agriculture, the environment, business and technology.
Books on the social sciences, history and biography will be eligible, though they will rate a lower priority.
Quality contemporary fiction will also be considered, but  it is envisaged that no more than 30% of the available funding will be allocated in this category.
A panel will look at applications individually, taking into account the likely market for the title in Russia, the track record of the Russian publisher, and the relevance of the title in the transition to an open society.
The only categories not eligible for this support scheme are art books, religion, military, children's, poetry, drama, literary criticism, and popular genre fiction.
Further information about the scheme can be obtained from the Book Trade Unit, Libraries, Books and Information Division, British Council,,.
Brad Wiley retires
W Bradford Wiley has retired as chairman of the board of John Wiley & Sons Inc, though he is continuing as director of the company, and has been named chairman emeritus.
His eldest son, Bradford Wiley II, has been elected as his successor.
Mr Wiley, who is 82, is a great-great-grandson of the founder of the company, which started publishing in 1807.
‘I had previously informed the board of my intention to retire,’ he says.
‘The company has been a wonderful part of my life, but I feel the time has come to permit a younger generation to take the reins.’
He joined John Wiley & Sons in 1932 and was elected president and c.e.o.
in 1956.
He became chairman and c.e.o.
in 1971, giving up the title of c.e.o.
in 1979.
A noted figure on the publishing scene, he was the first chairman of the Association of American Publishers, serving a two-year term following the group's founding in 1970.
His public activity in industry affairs has been especially concerned with international publishing and copyright matters.
OUP Australia pulling out of children's books
OUP Australia is closing its children's publishing division, reports Thorpe's Weekly Book Newsletter .
The children's publisher Rita Hart will leave the company on 12th January.
According to OUP's managing director Marek Palka in Melbourne, this ‘major shift of focus’ will enable a direction of resources ‘more fully towards core activities in school, college and reference publishing’.
The list includes such award-winning authors as Max Dann, Terry Denton, Libby Hathorn, Robin Klein, Alison Lester and Eleanor Spence.
Volk & Welt privatised
Volk & Welt, one of the few major publishers of the former East Germany still on the books of the Treuhand, has finally been privatised in a token DM1 buyout led by its managing director Dietrich Simon.
There are plans to make shares available to staff and to a group of sponsors headed by Die Zeit 's literary editor Fritz Raddatz.
Volk & Welt is likely soon to be seeking investors, from abroad as well as Germany.
It will continue to publish foreign titles.
GALC opens Brussels office
GALC, the organisation representing booksellers associations in the European Community, opened a permanent secretariat in Brussels on 2nd January.
The group has appointed a lawyer, Madame Christiane Vuidar, as general secretary, and she will conduct business at GALC's office at .
NEWS
Ontario Premier greets Rushdie
At a PEN Canada benefit event in Toronto last month, Salman Rushdie was cordially embraced by the Ontario Premier Bob Rae, the first government leader to meet him publicly since the Iranian fatwa.
Mr Rushdie also met federal parliamentarians in Ottawa, and although he was not granted time with the Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, he said that his reception by the External Affairs Minister Barbara McDougall encouraged him to believe that Canada was firmly behind the campaign to get the death sentence lifted.
Feminist Book Festival
The Feminist Book Festival, formerly Feminist Book Fortnight, will be held from 1st to 21st June.
The event has been revamped and the children's element expanded, but it will continue to be based on a list of ‘top 20’ titles and a catalogue.
Adult titles will be chosen by a panel which will include a team fro Radio 4's ‘Woman's Hour’, and children's books by the Letterbox Library book club.
There will be p.o.s. for the festival, which will feature events in bookshops, libraries and arts centres celebrating the best of women's writing for adults, young adults and children.
The deadline for submissions of books by publishers for the catalogue is 15th January.
Details of the festival are available from Judith Palmer, Feminist Book Festival Organiser,,.
London rights symposium
The Publishers Association is sponsoring the London International Rights Market symposium, on Saturday 20th March 1993 (the day before the opening of the London International Book Fair), at the Forum Hotel, London.
The cost is £80, including lunch and refreshments.
For members of the International Rights Centre who are also attending the symposium, the cost is £50.
Details are available from the LIBF at ,.
Children's Book Week ‘93
Children's publishers are invited to an open meeting to discuss this year's Children's Book Week with representatives of the Children's Book Foundation and the Daily Telegraph from 12 to 3 p.m. on Friday 29th January at the Publishers Association,,.
Waterstones winners
Waterstones staff took first prize in two recent publisher competitions.
John Wallin in Cheltenham won a two-week holiday in Florida fro two in the prize draw which accompanied the Penguin Month promotion.
He has chosen colleague Jo Lynch to accompany him.
Jane Standing of Waterstones in York won a holiday to the value of £2,000 in the Ordnance Survey Window display competition.
Her entry was centred on a climber constructed from old Ordnance Survey maps mounting a papier-mâché mountain surrounded by artifacts supporting the slogan ‘Climb Every Mountain, Ford Every Stream, Follow Every Highway, With Maps that are Supreme’.
Changing hands in Valbonne
The English Reading Centre in Valbonne, France, changed hands on 6th January.
Margaret Farley, who founded the bookshop in 1989, has sold it to Susan Taylor and Michael Abrahams.
They will run the business under the same name, but will trade as Meridian SARL.
Publishers should cancel dues outstanding as at 30th November.
Catalogue from Bankers Books
Bankers Books Bookshop, which opened in 1987 and is owned by the Chartered Institute of Bankers, has just published its new catalogue, listing all books stocked by the shop.
Details can be had from Jeremy Benson, manager, Bankers Books Bookshop,.
French-speaking writer sought
Berkshire County Council is looking for a writer to spend two months in Vienne, France, and represent the county in the ‘European Writers in Vienne Festival’ in the autumn.
The writer must be able to speak French, and have at least one French-published work.
He or she need not be resident in Berkshire but should have some connection with the county.
All costs and expenses will be met.
Details can be had from Linda Barlow, Arts Officer, Berks County Council, Department of Libraries, Archives and Tourism,,.
Alan Beatt
Alan Beatt, Weidenfeld's representative in Scotland and northern England until his early retirement on health grounds, died on 13th December after a long illness.
He had represented Weidenfeld in the north, and in Ireland, for 12 years.
Bruce Walker
Michael Turner writes
Bruce Walker, former manager of general publishing at Chapman & Hall before the company concentrated entirely on scientific books, and latter sales manager with Associated Book Publishers, died peacefully at the age of 83 at his home in Rutland on 30th November, following a long and valiant battle against lung cancer.
He was a much-loved figure in the book trade among booksellers, his colleagues and his team of representatives, being unfailingly kindly, courteous and efficient, the model of the gentleman-publisher.
During his career at Chapman & Hall he became one of the few close friends of Evelyn Waugh, and in the Second World War took over many jobs in the firm, including that of production manager of the general list.
After his retirement in 1974 he quickly involved himself in local community work in the church and will several charities.
He leaves a widow, Molly, almost as well-known as he at BA Conferences and trade events, and three children and six grandchildren.
BOOKSHOP NEWS
Book Bargains for sale
Book Bargains Ltd, the chain of 10 specialist remainder shops, has been put up for sale by its founder and managing director, Philip Weatherburn.
The upmarket chain, whose shops resemble regular bookshops but sell books at half the regular prices, has carefully selected sites in Oxford, Cambridge, Bristol, Brighton, Reading, Marlow and Ealing, and in London in Covent Garden, Charing Cross Road and King's Road, Chelsea.
Turnover in 1992 was in excess of £2m.
Commenting on his reasons for selling off the chain he founded in 1978, Mr Weatherburn said that last year had been ‘very difficult’, not just because of the stampede into remaindering by other companies (see also Christmas in the Bookshops, page 27).
‘We had the field to ourselves for 14 years, and went through the peak of the market in 1989–90.
Those days are over.
If everyone thinks they can make money out of bargain books, let them.’
By getting out of the bargain books field now, he believed he might well be ‘ahead of the game’, just as he had been when he set up the company.
Nevertheless he was optimistic over the prospects for a sale.
He pointed out that a number of companies, with more money behind them than his own, had recently expressed interest in expanding — notably Volume One, Zachary Kwintner's Discount Book Company, Hammicks and Ottakars — and that the Book Bargains Ltd shops were all in ‘super locations’.
Enquiries should be directed in the first instance to Philip Weatherburn himself, on .
Another closure
The John Keats Corner bookshop, Magdalen Road, London, has closed.
S A Wahid, the owner for the last four and a half years, has asked publishers to cancel all dues and catalogues.
Any outstanding payment will be collected through the Booksellers' Clearing House at the end of January.
Name changes
Blackwell Retail has asked publishers to note that from 18th January Parry Books, Liverpool, will trade as Blackwell's University Bookshop, Liverpool, and York University Bookshop will trade as Blackwell's University Bookshop, York.
The addresses, telephone and fax numbers remain unchanged.
Dillons' charity donation
Dillons has donation £20,000 to Childline, the charity set up by Esther Rantzen.
Dillons passed the cheque onto Childline after its parent Pentos received it from Legal & General Property as a token of thanks after it moved quickly to open branches of Claude Gill Bargain Bookshop and Athena in the Buttermarket Shopping Centre, Ipswich, in time for the centre's first day of trading on 1st October.
Julian Rivers, marketing director of Dillons, said: ‘We have supported Childline in the past and were so impressed that we wanted to help again.’
Botes links up with Unifoyle
Book exporters Unifoyle and Botes Librair have joined forces to form a new company, Botes Unifoyle.
Based at Bexhill-on-Sea and headed by directors David Gould and John Foyle, Botes Unifoyle will handle the total book purchasing and distribution for all its overseas library and school customers.
The new company will constitute a major sales force in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the Middle East and elsewhere, the directors believe.
It says it will also be developing an advanced computer database enabling its overseas offices to access up-to-date information outside UK office hours.
Dillons, Birmingham
Dillons' new premises at 128 New Street, Birmingham, due to open in August, will occupy 20,000 sq ft of retail space, not 12,000 sq ft as reported in The Bookseller of 18th/25th December.
AUTHOR'S CHOICE
John Sandoe, London
Dirk Bogarde's favourite bookshop
I really can't remember when I first went into John Sandoe's shop in those squashed little cottages in Blacklands Terrace.
I only know that it was years ago and that I was not, as I am now, a regular client.
I wandered in from time to time looking, usually, for something which was out of print or which no other bookseller had come around to stocking.
I also went there when I had only the vaguest knowledge of what I wanted.
‘It's got ‘Earth’ in the title, it's not about hunting but there is a fox, and I can't remember the publisher.’
That sort or idiocy.
But I got my copy of Gone to Earth by Mary Webb (that's how long ago it was).
I believe that the shop in those days belonged to a Mr Chatto, who was youngish and obliging and who seemed permanently to by pushing through an avalanche of books.
Just, indeed, as the present owners do today.
I remember first seeing the shop when I was a student up the road at Chelsea Polytechnic.
I was ambling down a calm King's Road to my bus stop outside Peter Jones, almost opposite the flat where Percy Grainger lived, and bought a packet of five Players cigarettes from what was then a seedy little newsagent and tobacconist.
Later, much later, after the war, Mr Chatto was installed, and after him John Sandoe came along, in 1957, and that is when I first really took notice of what was soon to become a ‘singular bookshop’ as opposed to just a bookseller.
There is, as we know today, a marked difference between them.
Living, as I did then, in the country seldom coming into London, I made only rare visits to the crammed and cramped little shop, and sought, as always, something that was out of print, lost, or printed the year before,.
Something, anyway, difficult to get.
Sandoe catered for those oddities wonderfully well, just as today his successors, Rubio, Johnny, Sean, Stewart and the engaging, encyclopedic Perina (whose name I never can remember and in consequence just call ‘Lady’) do with undiminished fervour and flair.
The absolute love of books which this shop engenders is hugely joyous.
One feels that two hours spent in one or other of the jammed little rooms — there are four as far as I remember at this instance, two down, one up, and one in the cellar — will be rewarding, refreshing, and never questioned by the owners.
Indeed, they will often join you in your quest, because, frankly, up in the paperback room the wealth of works, the sliding panels concealing book upon book, the spinning towers stacked with glossy pocket editions, bewilder the most ardent browser.
But the staff seem to know, with uncanny skill, just exactly where Molly Keane, Belloc and Brontë hide, where the erudite tomes on whatever theme are to be found.
A bookshop should be a familiar place, somewhere where one goes for the sheer love of books, for the smell and feel of them, for the companionship of others who share the joy of touching, holding, reading and learning.
In the supermarket booksellers with their dizzying displays, their pyramids of bestsellers, one is intimidated, constantly lost in the wealth of glittering titles, bemused by a request answered by a computer which indicates the number of copies held of the title one has asked for, the price, position on the shelf, shelf position in the shop.
Tills ring, green lights flash, and buying books becomes as simple and as uninvolving as buying a packet of envelopes.
John Sandoe's is not like this at all.
I well remember starting out to learn how to cook, after 60 years of inertia, and asking ‘Lady’ for help.
She instantly strode across the shop and took a book from among thousands and assured me that it contained all I would ever need to know about cooking for ever .
She was right.
I have used it until it has powdered.
She knew instantly, among the bewildering wall of cookery books, the precise one for me.
TRADE NOTES
Moves
John Bond , currently Penguin marketing manager, has been promoted to head of marketing for Penguin.
Simon & Schuster has appointed Jo Frank , previously at Random Century, editorial director, fiction from February.
Scholastic has appointed Victoria Birkett , currently at HarperCollins, to the new position of buying director from March.
Reporting to m.d.
David Kewley , she will set up and manage a new department (made up of the book club and book fair editorial staff) responsible for the selection, acquisition and exploitation of the sales potential of the books and other products bought for sale through the company's book clubs and book fairs.
Sue Baker , core stock manager for Hammicks Bookshops, now deals with all stock and promotions.
She may be contacted on  or at head office on .
Robert Beard , Batsford's sales director, left the company in December.
He may be contacted on  or through Batsford.
Caroline Raphael has joined Pan Macmillan's key accounts department withe special responsibility for St Martin's Press.
She is based in Basingstoke and reports to Martin Neild.
Rochelle Levy , formerly at Collins & Brown, has been appointed Anaya's publicity and promotions manager.
Representatives
Ron Church and John Harbour , both representatives for John Murray, retired from the company in December after a joint 88 years with the firm.
From January Edward Willis becomes joint representative of John Murray (including Abbeville Press) and Robert Hale in central London, and Harriet Boston represents then in south-east England and East Anglia (except Cambridge).
Knockabout Comics now handles its own representation.
Queries should go to Chris Andrew or Joe Toussaint on .
Distribution remains with Bookpoint.
Representation of the Shepheard-Walwyn list has been split into academic and trade.
The academic list will be handled by Drake Marketing,,.
The trade list is represented by the present sales force:Jill Parker (Scotland);Harry Long (northern England and Wales);Trevor Boys (central England);Tom Bailey (the south west and south Wales);Les Hall (southeast England); and Clem Addenbrooke (central London).
Titles from either list may be ordered at the same time from Bailey Distribution.
Daniel Scott has been appointed to represent Phaidon Press in central London, and Johanne Wort to cover the south west, Wales and Merseyside.
Rosie Ilett , until recently Password Book's northern representative, has left the company to take up a post in local government in Glasgow.
She is succeeded by Leandra Holder , who can be contacted through the Password sales office in Manchester on .
Sound and Vision , previously represented in the UK by Chris Lloyd Sales, is now represented in the UK and Europe by Fountain Press.
Orders should go to TBC Distributors, Unit 10,.
Brimax is represented in the UK by the sales force of Reed Consumer Books and distributed by Reed Distribution Services.
Export sales and distribution remain unchanged.
Representation of Heritage House travel guides has moved from Roger Lascelles to Derek Searle Associates ().
Distribution is via Bookpoint ().
Details may be had from Terry Palmer at Heritage House ().
Representation of Mary Ford Publications ' cake-making, decorating and cookery books has moved from Reed Consumer Books to Derek Searle Associates ().
Distribution transfers to Bookpoint ().
Distribution
Orders for books and reports published by Elsevier ‘s Advanced Technology Division in Oxford should now go to Book Orders Department, Elsevier Advanced Technology, Elsevier/Pergamon Fulfilment (UK),().
Returns requests should go to the originating invoicing address.
Books published by Elsevier Applied Science Division continue to be processed from the Book Orders Department in Barking.
New Clarion Press is distributed by Clipper Distribution Services,().
Orders should go to New Clarion Press,,().
Churchill Livingstone takes on exclusive European distribution of selected titles from Paradigm Books from January.
Paradigm is the publishing arm of the US distributor Redwing, which handles US distribution of Churchill Livingstone's own complementary medicine titles.
Viking is recalling all stock of Sex Art and American Culture by Camille Paglia, which was due to be published on 7th January.
Booksellers are asked to return copies, which should be packed separately, to the Penguin warehouse for credit.
Carriage for return will be paid by Penguin.
Corrected stock will be sent out in time for a new publication date.
William & Wilkins handles sales and marketing of Medical Economics Data, publisher of the Physicians, Desk Reference (PDR).
Orders for the PDR should go to Williams & Wilkins Ltd,,().
Addresses
The new head office address of Hammicks Bookshops is Hounslow House,().
Jonathan Bloch is no longer publishing director of International Business Communications.
He is available as a consultant researching acquisitions and markets, and undertaking turnarounds, restructuring and cost cutting assignments.
He can be contacted at  ().
Hotlines
Mosby Year Book Europe offers an Academic Hotline Service until 26th February.
Orders must be for a minimum of 5 copies.
Orders received by noon delivered in two working days.
Telephone  quoting ‘Mosby Hotline’.
Addison-Wesley offers a Hotline until 26th February for Addison-Wesley, Benjamin/Cummings, Richard D Irwin, Business One Irwin and O'Reilly titles.
Minimum order 5 copies; delivery in 72 hours (excluding Ireland).
Telephone  quoting ‘hotline’, when Teleordering state ‘Hotline’ in comments field.
Correction
Bertram Books provided the wrong free phone order line number in Trade Notes of 1st January; it should have read .
The number originally printed is Bertram's free fax number.
Children's books for spring
There will be a special feature on children's books for spring in The Bookseller of 12th March.
This will include a preview of spring 1993 children's titles compiled by Jennifer Taylor, who will cover picture books, anthologies, fiction, non-fiction and information books of popular appeal.
Publishers are invited to send review copies and information on their titles for this preview to Jennifer Taylor,.
The deadline for submissions is Friday 5th February.
Business books
The Bookseller will publish a special feature on new and forthcoming business books in its issue of 26th February.
Publishers should send reading copies or proofs of books appearing in or after March to David Russell at The Bookseller ,(), to arrive no later than Friday 22nd January.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
VAT on books
From Mr Patrick Cavendish
Sir, As The Bookseller has predicted, it now transpires that the government is considering imposing VAT on books, magazines, periodicals and newspapers.
Britain remains the hub of international publishing.
In our own case, if we can wash our face on our UK print run we can expect to make some profit from foreign licences.
Our licences produce 40% of our profits.
Publishing is now an international business.
The bedrock of this international business is directly related to our being able to cover the costs of authors, pictures, typesetting and repro by UK and Commonwealth sales.
I doubt that the public will pay an additional 17.5% (or maybe 20%) on printed material.
May I suggest that your readers lobby their MPs on this subject?
Yours sincerely ,
Patrick Cavendish
Chairman
Eaglemoss Publications
Book tokens and adults
From Mrs Cynthia Reavell
Sir, Such is his eagerness to correct me that Pierre dom Engels (Letters, 18th/25th December) mis-attributes Antonia Fraser's own comment to her aunt, who, as I correctly said, was under the firm impression that Book Tokens were for young children only.
I read carefully all of the somewhat defensive Book Tokens publicity material but, like his reactionary letter, it did nothing to lessen my conviction that a gentle broadening of advertising emphasis from the safely converted — adults buying for children — to embrace the message that tokens also give pleasure to adults could only be beneficial.
Finally, Grandpère dom Engels quite misses the point that my ironical description of these remorselessly improving adverts as ‘quaintly old-fashioned’ refers to their depressingly dated feel rather than to any seductive aura of nostalgia.
A balloon trip, like getting a Book Token, is enormous fun …
Yours sincerely ,
Cynthia Reavell
Martello Bookshop & 
Maastricht Treaty
From Mr Edwin Fleming
Sir, The proper name for the Maastricht Treaty is the ‘Treaty on European Unity’, signed at Maastricht on 7th February 1992; as John Hudson pointed out (6th November) there are English texts from both the EC and UK government — both available from HMSO, but the first is half the price of the second!
However, the Maastricht Treaty must be read with the ‘Treaty establishing the European Economic Community’, known as the Treaty of Rome, signed in Rome on 25th March 1957.
The two issues of Maastricht mentioned above are difficult reading because they are less than half the story.
To put Maastricht in context there are two commendable sources for the integrated texts of the treaties of Maastricht and Rome now known as the ‘European Community Treaty’.
The first is the Official Journal of the European Communities: Information and Notices C224 (volume 35, 31st August 1992, price 24 ECU — less than £20).
The second was published in April by Sweet & Maxwell and is entitled The Treaty of Rome Consolidated and The Treaty of Maastricht (editors Neville March Hunnings and Joe MacDonald Hill, priced £35).
Either of these will make reading Maastricht longer but more rewarding.
Yours faithfully ,
Edwin Fleming
Central Library, Liverpool
Market leaders
From Mr Adrian Soar
Sir, I hesitate to play the league table game, as Macmillan is much more interested in publishing good books than in speculation about who is the biggest.
It is, however, both irritating and laughable to see Routledge proclaim itself (11th December) as the British leader in humanities and social science publishing, ‘outstripping Cambridge University Press and Oxford University Press’.
It is a fact that Macmillan's turnover in this publishing area is larger than the whole of Routledge.
So perhaps we are number one — or perhaps not.
Oxford and Cambridge are pretty close with their figures, so I don't know the answer, and I'm not sure that it matters.
Misleading statements do matter, though.
Yours faithfully ,
Adrian Soar
Managing Director
Macmillan Press Ltd,
Most victimised author?
From Ms Stephanie Wolfe Murray
Sir, I am grateful to the Christmas Critics' Crowner (18th/25th December) for drawing your readers' attention to the fate of W J West, perhaps the most victimised author of 1992, who now awaits sentence on what is poised to become the most controversial book of 1993,The Crisis in Bookselling .
Someone seems to have it in for his most recent book,The Larger Evils .
Seldom have I come across such abusive reviews, typified by the ones highlighted by Quentin Oates from the Sunday Times and Observer .
Any of your readers who caught Bill West in conversation with Melvyn Bragg and Nigella Lawson on ‘Start the Week’, or who read Norman Stone's review of his book in the Times , would have to assume there were two competing books bearing the same imprimatur — one by an articulate and well-informed author, the other by an incoherent eccentric.
Publishers grow thick skins against negative reviewing, but I remain puzzled at the volume of abuse directed at this particular book, by an author who has spent many years working on his subject, opening up new areas of research, and who has arguably contributed more in recent years (viz Orwell: The War Broadcasts ,Orwell: The War Commentaries and The Larger Evils ) to the study of Orwell's work than any other scholar.
Fortunately, Norman Stone gave credit where it was due.
‘West has taken [his]theme and expanded well upon it.
His book…tells you more about this excellent subject than learned tomes five times its size.’
Yours sincerely ,
Stephanie Wolfe Murray
Canongate Press,
Books of the year
From Mr Simon Master
Sir, ‘It's Faber, by a mile’(Critics Crowner, 11th December).
Oh, really?
The connection between lies and statistics is perhaps subject to unduly cynical comment, but I think Quentin Oates does his knowledge of the trade less than justice in an amusing but unscientific presentation of ‘Books of the Year’ research.
In the ‘Total Mentions’ category, Oates records an ‘incredible’71 for Faber, but omits to note that the next three imprints (Chatto, Cape, Hutchinson) are all part of the general books division of Random House and achieved a combined total of 123.
I acknowledge that Faber's is a significant score for a company with a part-time editor-in-chief and a chief executive who wants to split his own job, but at Random House we work harder (or at least differently) and it does produce results.
Yours faithfully ,
Simon Masters
Chairman
General Books Division
Random House UK Ltd
Editing matters
From Ms Penny Phillips
Sir, I see that Susan Lamb of the Orion Group is advertising (27th November) for an editor with ‘a minimum of four years [sic]experience’ to work on ‘the phoenix [sic]and orion [sic]paperbacks’.
How many years' experience does she recommend that an editor clock up before attempting to master the use of apostrophes and capitalisation?
Yours sincerely
Penny Phillips
Bloomsbury Publishing
CHRISTMAS IN THE BOOKSHOPS
Christmas 1992 came late, but it came.
And booksellers were ready for it with pretty much the right books at the right prices to enable them to compete effectively for the consumer's cautiously placed pound.
There were even reports from some respondents of panic buying on an old-fashioned scale.
The Bookseller 's annual survey of Christmas trade
IT WAS NEVER going to be an easy Christmas.
Instead it turned out, in Ainslie Thin's words, to be ‘nearly quite a good one’.
It came late, but at least it came, for most respondents to The Bookseller 's annual survey.
It failed however, to make up for the ravages of a year of unremitting economic gloom, no matter how many green shoots the media and some pundits were determined to see in the crowds of shoppers that hit the stores on bank holiday Monday, 28th December.
As a Marks & Spencer executive observed, ‘Retailing is a marathon, not a sprint’.
But Christmas undoubtedly brought some cheer to the end of 1992.
It saved some bacon here and was a morale booster there — after all, it could have bee a lot worse.
‘There has been something of a buzz around.
I have the impression that consumers would quite like to get back to the good old days when they used to spend money occasionally,’ concluded Ainslie Tim.
December trading accounts for 12 to 25%, sometimes hitting 30%, of the annual turnover of general bookselling in the UK.
Overshadowing December 1992 were three years of recession; unemployment, and the fear of unemployment, as the numbers edged towards three million; and the terrorist activities of the IRA, which succeeded in keeping many people out of city centres.
On the bookselling front, meanwhile, there was increased competition, not so much from discounting as from the continuing proliferation of bargain bookshops.
Set against these factors was a good range of books from publishers — quality titles at all levels offering entertainment and value for money — efficiently supplied by wholesalers.
There were also some very strong local titles.
John Hitchin of Phoenix Bookshops was among several respondents to comment that ‘customers were definitely treating books as gifts’.
And in the general confusion over Sunday opening, there was the opportunity of sneaking a few extra days of trading, and most booksellers who took this up were well rewarded for their efforts.
But there was no nationwide trading pattern, though once again the north tended to fare better than the south.
In Scotland, sales at Thins got off to a good start in December, became tougher, then ended with a gallop.
But special circumstances conspired to ‘wreck three of the best trading days of the year’— the European Community summit in Edinburgh earlier in the month.
‘Edinburgh citizens,’ Mr Thin complained, ‘were advised not to come into the centre of town, and they took this advice very literally.’
The George Street branch did, however, manage to shift 100 copies of Maastricht: Simple Guide ,(The European Movement, £2.95)—‘mostly to the heads of state’.
David Flatman of Bargain Bookshops called it ‘the accused summit’.
‘I did my Christmas shopping in Edinburgh that weekend.
It was like a morgue.
It would have been too depressing to go into my own shops.’
Both Thins and Bargain Bookshops expected to be up a bit ahead of inflation, which was not good enough for David Flatman but ‘a near miss’ for Ainslie Thin.
In Aberdeen Bissets reported an astounding 20% increase in sales, on the back of ‘really good local titles’.
Further south, Sweetens, with shops in Blackburn, Blackpool, Preston and Bolton, was also scoring a bullseye.
‘An excellent Christmas,’ reported David Sweeten.
‘Overall our four shops were about 17% up on last year’, though even with this boost, trading in the calendar year will be down on ‘91.
He was not the only bookseller to benefit from the effect of IRA activities in encouraging affluent suburbanites to shop locally — and not the only one to hate admitting it.
Icing on the cake
Austicks in Leeds with its mix of academic and general bookselling, ‘looks upon Christmas trade as the icing on the cake.
And this year's general trade was looking as if it might not equal last year's, until Monday 21st December, when, with many companies and all the schools having closed, panic buying on an old-fashioned scale happened,’ reported John Lauder.
The sweet ringing of the tills ensured a modest increase, boosted further by ‘substantial’ buying on bank holiday Monday.
This was to become a familiar story among those bookshops that opened along with other stores in city centres on the 28th.
Proceeding further southwards to Chester, and sales for Bookland were ‘extremely good’ at the beginning of November, tailing off until the last week before Christmas and Monday the 21st, ‘the busiest day of the year for us’.
John Elsley spoke for many booksellers up and down the country: ‘Unemployment and the fear of unemployment have been a major adverse factor, during the year and particularly in the period up to Christmas.’
Recession has hit some towns harder than others, and Bookland branches reflected this in sales over the Christmas period ranging from 20% up to declines of 15%l ‘Overall takings will be up by a few points, but volume will be very slightly down.’
Christmas in Abergavenny was simply a continuation of a year of ‘good sales’.
Gwyneth Craze at Wise Owls put it down to ‘a shop with a good reputation for service.
We are taking trade from large multiples where service is poor.’
Christmas outside the bookshops
IRA bombs
London was again a focus of IRA activity.
The bomb blasts and scares were a major irritation for London retailers as streets were cordoned off and buildings evacuated, but there was strong trading in the last few days before Christmas, now an established feature of the London retail scene.
The worst day for bomb scares was the Wednesday before Christmas, when many hours of trading were lost over a wide area of the centre of town.
The London based group Books Etc gave an indication of the kind of impact this had on booksellers.
On a like for like basis, group sales were a solid 10.5% up in December.
‘But we could have been 12 or 13% up had it not been for the bomb scares,’ said John Monk.
‘We were very happy with the results, just a bit frustrated.’
Rich pickings
Four of the shops in the group opened on Monday 28th December and shared in the apparently rich pickings to be had that day.
‘It was a big day.
The weather was cold and dry.
There were a lot of people in town all desperate, I think, to get out of the house after the long Christmas break.’
Otherwise it was the Royal Family's ups and downs (‘mostly downs’) and Madonna that, along with Books Etc's Oxfam promotion, played the major part in Book Etc's Christmas fortunes.
Waterstones and Dillons also reported that their London stores were adversely affected by the bomb scares; as were those of the Phoenix Bookshops, which found trade in London generally poor and ‘a drag on the rest of the business’.
It wouldn't be realistic to expect Christmas to make up for three flat years,’ commented Sue Butterworth at Silver Moon Bookshop on the Charing Cross Road.
‘On the other hand, if Christmas had been bad, it would have been a disaster.’
The shop, now double the size it was a year ago, was ‘very healthily up’, and could now take advantage of the last minute frenzy by being able to accommodate more people inside.
Up the road, and out of the centre, in Kentish Town, Margaret Lally's experience at the Owl Bookshop was that of a ‘local’ bookseller.
‘Christmas was better than I dared expect,’ she concluded.
Though the selling period there follows the pattern of central London, the Owl was ‘bomb free’ and reckoned that this was a plus factor in appealing to people who chose to stay put and shop in Kentish Town.
It also had a secret sales weapon.
‘I'd better own up.
I had more signed copies than normal of Pole to Pole .
Michael Palin lives near by.
He came in three times to sign books.
Basically he's a saint.’
A trend that appeared to be taking hold, indicated by a ‘static sales, units up’ Christmas, was a tendency to trade down, a switch to cheaper books.
Continual threat
No one knows more about terrorist activities than booksellers in Northern Ireland, when bomb attacks are not confined to Christmas.
‘In city centre Belfast,’ reported Lois Brown at Waterstones, ‘we live with the continual threat, which necessitates regular searching of premises and constant vigilance.
Many incidents go unreported in the national media.
Trade is regularly disrupted by bombs and bomb hoaxes, traffic to and from the city is delayed and searched daily, and city centre parking is very limited.
‘These factors do discourage shoppers from coming to the centre.
However, people here are resilient, and the effects of terrorist incidents are generally short lived.’
In a year of stable and high sales for the shop, Christmas, which represents 30% of its overall turnover, was ‘particularly strong, with a significant increase on previous years, both in turnover and by unit’.
Michael Ryder, reporting for Easons in NI, said that sales in existing shops were ‘static’ but about 15% up in the newer branches.
Drop in prices
In the Republic of Ireland, the withdrawn of the pound sterling from the ERM had perhaps of the greatest impact.
From October the Irish punt was at parity with the pound, which meant that books were cheaper: a £14.99 novel would have been marked up to Ir£16.50 in the past; now it was Ir£14.99.
‘The currency fluctuation between the punt and pound sterling,’ commented Michael Ryder of Easons, ‘meant that overall, prices of books published in the UK have been 10% lower in the Republic, which has made things difficult.
You have to sell hard to cover the drop in prices, and it doesn't follow that a drop in price will mean an increase in sales.’
Turnover was on a par in existing shops, but about 8% up in newer shops.
And Mr Ryder, too, detected some trading down: ‘Overall volume was up at lower average prices.’
Fred Hanna also commented on the currency movement, but not adversely.
‘We think that increased sales as a result were reflected in the figures.’
As in the UK, Christmas was slow to start, with sales at Hannas really taking off from mid-December —‘We had marvellous dry weather in the weekend prior to Christmas and we advertise on radio every year, which we find effective.’
Added to that was the effect of a very good  selection of Irish titles.
On the minus side was ‘the uncertainty of everyday life: we have been hit with mortgages increases and we have a government which can't decide which party is in power.
And people who have money are being offered 30% interest on investment, so were less inclined to spend.’
The chore of shopping
East Anglia was a mixture of good, bad and indifferent.
In Colchester, where Red Lion Books has competition from both Waterstones and Dillons, Peter Donaldson reported sales on a par with last year: ‘A week before Christmas we were about 15% down, but we were saves by strong last-minute sales.’
Overall he was not a happy man: ‘There did not appear to be much Christmas spirit about this year.
Shopping seemed to be a chore for people rather than a joy.’
In Ipswich, the Amberstone Bookshop was having a better time of it after a steady year, supported by some strong local titles.
Though not looking to Christmas to make up lost sales, Amberstone found itself about 15% up, said Sandy Bennet.
‘We would have been happy to have matched last year, so we are delighted with our performance.’
In Norwich, Christmas was ‘reasonable but not exceptional’ for Jarrolds, according to Barbara Gaskin, but it had been a good year and will see Jarrolds 8% up on 1991.
The south has borne the brunt of the recession.
At Sussex Stationers, where Christmas trading represents over 30% of turnover, there was relief that ‘this most difficult year’ had come to an end.
There was also relief that Christmas sales turned out to be ‘generally OK’.
‘Hardback sales held up; paperback sales were  definitely down,’ commented Jonathan Chowen.
‘We have kept our stocks very tight and run the company on a tight budget.
Should there be a recovery in 1993, we should at least be in a position to take advantage of it.’
Bruce Coward at the Harbour Bookshop reported a pretty miserable Christmas in Dartmouth: ‘The slump has finally hit Devon.
People were going round with long faces looking glum right until Christmas Eve.
If it weren't for our export orders, our figures would be looking rather sick.
As it is, we are up on the same period last year, but sales through the till are down by nearly 8%.’
Of the groups, Dillons and Waterstones/W H Smith are in their closed period and so cautious about releasing figures.
Dillons reported ‘very successful’ sales for low priced books (i.e. Reed titles).
An ‘all right’ finish
Waterstones and W H Smith had different trading experiences: Waterstones a slow December start and an ‘all right’ finish.
Martin Lee of WHS felt that, to the group's benefit, people were trading down in their gift buying generally and that some its higher priced books did well as a result.
Richard Barker at Waterstones commented that sales were boosted by a ‘strong and impressive selection of titles.
If books were not selling in some shops, it wasn't the fault of the publishers.’
Praise indeed.
The independent groups gave more detailed reports.
Blackwells, with its nationwide spread, experienced huge differences in trading, from a 20% increase in Aberdeen to 7% in Oxford, static in Cardiff (‘good, considering Waterstones had just opened’), to a decrease at Georges in Bristol because of the new Galleries mall in Broadmead, which drew people down to that end of town.
Karen George of Blackwells Marketing and John Hitchin of Phoenix were both watching the trend towards covered shopping malls.
Mr Hitchin noted that Phoenix branches in shopping centres ‘performed better than those on the high street’.
Blackwells' shop in Broad Street, Oxford, opened on Bank holiday Monday to a queue of 80 people, and proceeded to have a ‘smashing’ day, said David Cordery.
Heffers' sales were up 6 or 7% on last December: ‘Christmas wasn't marvellous, but it didn't turn out as badly as one feared it might,’ reported Mark Wait.
‘Children's books had a very good time, with exceptionally good sales of hardbacks.
Sales of CDs and videos were also extremely good.’
But he, too, was interested in the trend towards out-of-town shopping centres.
‘Our area has been pedestrianised, and while we are convinced that this benefited us in the summer, it worked against us in the winter.
The area is poorly lit and very dark in the evenings, and parking in Cambridge is difficult and expensive.’
Hammicks, with 30 shops, was 6% up in turnover and 4% up by units in December; Sue Baker said the group was ‘very pleased with Christmas’.
The mix of titles was excellent, but people were trading down — buying the same in volume but spending less on each item.’
Happily only one or two shops in the group were affected by bomb scares, though the very wet period in the south and south west put shoppers off.
The stuffed seagull syndrome
The economics, ethics and effects of discounting were not the talking point they had been in 1991.
Heffers reported that customers had made absolutely no comment on the matter.
Hammicks, which had promised to match prices elsewhere, found that it was rarely called on to do so.
And Austicks described discounting this year as ‘literally a non-event, at least in Yorkshire, with very few customers even mentioning the word’.
Several booksellers commented that their sales of Sue Townsend's The Queen and I (Methuen) had roared ahead at the full price, despite the fact that the book was available at a discount at Dillons down the road or around the corner.
In Dublin, Fred Hanna found that ‘one or two’ customers had mentioned discounted books — Conor Cruise O'Brien's biography of Edmund Burke, for example, which Dillons was selling at 25% discount — but added that sales of the work were still good at his shop at the full price.
‘People are a bit wary of discounted books; they think they are old books.’
Mr Hanna made a plea, for licence to discount ‘across the board for, say, a week after Christmas, when everybody else is having sales’.
While he remained a stout supporter of the Net Book Agreement, he described the National Book Sales as ‘too limited’.
Certainly, David Flatman's Bargain Bookshops, which did discount heavily on its bargain books during the Christmas season, ‘because we had too much stock’, found that this helped to get rid of slow moving titles.
‘Cheaper in Dillons’
Rather atypically, Bookland in the northwest conceded that ‘discount competition will have affected our sales somewhat’, but found it impossible to quantify the effect.
Peter Donaldson of Red Lion Bookshop in Colchester spelled out the indirect effects of the Dillons discounting campaign quite graphically: ‘One person came into the shop and was uncertain about buying Michael Palin's Pole to Pole because she thought she would be able to buy it cheaper in Dillons.
‘Thus, although Dillons discounts only a limited range of titles, the knock-on effect of its advertising campaign and aggressive marketing is that it brings people into its shops, and generates the belief that all books are cheaper in Dillons, not just discounted titles.
In essence, this misguided belief is more damaging than whether £2 has been knocked off the price of the latest Douglas Adams.’
But in general, discounting was this year considered of less significance than the proliferation of bargain bookshops, whose advent had been heralded the previous year but whose growth in numbers has evidently continued since.
The phenomenon drew comment from nearly all the booksellers taking part in the survey, looming larger in most booksellers' experience than the formerly familiar threat of expansion by the chains (although the latter phenomenon has obviously not disappeared, with Jarrolds, in particular, awaiting the arrival of a 10,000 sq ft Dillons store in Norwich with a certain apprehension).
‘The growth of bargain bookshops is the biggest change in the bookselling scene since last year, and the most important competitive factor,’ commented Martin Lee of W H Smith.
‘We are taking it very seriously.’
Indeed, Jarrolds took the bargain bookshop business last year so seriously that it decided to join in.
Bargain books now form 10% of its turnover, and were partly responsible, according to Barbara Gaskin, for the book department's 8% rise in sales in 1992.
However, the competitive threat of the bargain bookshops would seem to depend to an extent on the type of customer served by the traditional bookseller.
Thus, for example, Waterstones in Belfast found that the newly opened bargain bookshops, like the increasing number of non-traditional outlets in the city now stocking books, tended to cater for members of the public who were not regular book buyers or to those making one-off purchases: ‘They do not therefore have a serious impact on larger traditional bookshops.’
So, too, Austicks, with its substantial specialist and academic departments, noted the continuing spread of remainder shops, but commented that ‘the effect on sales seems no worse despite the increased number of such shops opening up’.
Attracting the uninitiated
By contrast, both Bookland and Hammicks —‘in some areas’— acknowledged that their sales had been affected.
At Blackwells, Karen George suggested that art books at bargain prices had posed a particular challenge, especially as bargains attracted ‘the uninitiated, who don't really know the difference’.
But it was left to Bruce Coward of the Harbour Bookshop in Dartmouth to explain the origins of the bargain bookshop phenomenon (beyond the obvious attraction that cheaper items, including books, will have in times of recession).
‘The chickens have really come home to roost, after years of overproduction from publishers,’ Mr Coward said.
‘Their warehouses hare full of unsaleable stock, so it's only too easy to get cheap books; and a member of the public doesn't know the difference between a previous edition of, say, the Oxford Companion to English Literature selling for £5 and the new edition selling for £25 — especially since the new edition isn't always better.’
Stuffed seagull shop
The Harbour Bookshop was also among those who commented on increased competition from ‘non-traditional’ outlets.
‘Everybody in this town, including the stuffed seagull shop, seems to reckon they can sell books,’ said a disgruntled Mr Coward.
‘But they do the easy part — they don't take orders or stock a wide range.’
Fred Hanna remarked on the supermarket sales of children's annuals in Dublin every Christmas, which had cut into his shop's market — although it countered by emphasising a broader range of children's books instead.
Easons, too, experienced some increase in competition from ‘non-traditional’ outlets.
Distribution, hotline services and title availability were all given a thumbs-up.
Over 75% of respondents to the survey said that distribution and hotline services were good (Tiptree and Penguin were consistently singled out for special praise), and that wholesalers were outstandingly efficient.
Peter Donaldson of Red Lion Books, Colchester, Essex, said: ‘We hardly used publishers’ hotlines; our basic needs were met by the brilliant service provided by wholesalers.
There is now no reason to order from publishers unless a higher discount is being offered or you require the type of book that wholesalers are unlikely to stock.’
John Lauder at Austicks in Leeds agreed.
‘As usual Bertrams and Gardners provide excellent support.
We are extremely grateful to both companies for their dependable efficiency.’
John Hitchin of Phoenix commented: ‘We liked the way wholesalers continually made follow-up phone calls to check on stock, and on how business was going.
We found this extremely helpful, and wondered whether more publishers were considering this approach.’
Another satisfied bookseller was John Elsley of Bookland.
‘Distribution always seems to improve during the Christmas period,’ he said, ‘but then we bypass inefficient distributors by going direct to the excellent wholesalers.’
Even Sue Butterworth of Silver Moon Bookshop in Charing Cross Road — usually a fierce critic of publishers' inefficiency — had a few complaints.
‘Publishers have got quite good at distribution.
However, I still think that there must be an easier way for hotlines to work — if all publishers used the same system, for example, and if they didn't insist on choosing the titles.’
David Sweeten said he had had no distribution problems.
‘Epos is the next best thing to a crystal ball, and we were able to use it to plan ahead.
So if a book was selling well we knew in advance that we should stock up on that one.
This year our stocks were customer-led, and we stuffed the shops with what we knew our customers wanted.’
There were, however, one or two voices raised in dissent.
John Monk of Books Etc felt that the hotlines did no work as well as in previous years.
‘I can't single out any bad ones in particular— they all performed more or less the same — but a lot of people were taking an extra day, guaranteeing 48 hours and taking 72 hours.
It may have had something to do with the bomb scares in London, when parts were shut off and traffic diverted.’
Karen George of Blackwells said: ‘There were one or two hotline inconsistencies, sometimes four day delivery, sometimes five; but there were no major problems with supply, and we benefited from keeping Pole to Pole in stock.’
And there were problems in both the Republic and Northern Ireland.
Lois Brown was critical of the length of time it took many publishers to make deliveries.
‘Short print runs by many publishers have led to an unacceptable level of reprints and inevitable delays.
The problem has been compounded in Belfast by the fact that several publishers, including Faber and Transworld, do not offer hotline services to Northern Ireland.
Slow delivery times and the absence of hotlines have left us with no option but to turn to wholesalers from late November onwards.’
Fred Hanna noted that few publishers — apart from OUP, Tiptree and HarperCollins — provided hotline serviced for Ireland.
‘So we rely on local wholesalers — Easons, Hughes and Argosy — providing they have the titles we want.
It's not easy if titles run out just before Christmas, and there is no chance of getting replenishment in time.’
Two cheers for the catalogues
Most respondents to the survey said that Christmas catalogues were valuable, while conceding that it was difficult to quantify their effect on sales.
Ainslie Thin said the Booksellers Association's Books for Giving made a strong impact in Scotland.
‘We took a large number and distributed them house to house in the various towns in which we operate.
There was a discernable impact, and in any case, part of the concept is to create an interest in books at Christmas, and we are happy that we were creating extra sales and an awareness of books.’
Blackwell Retail, which used to produce its own catalogue, broke with tradition this year and took Books for Giving for the first time.
Karen George said: ‘We supported it with a local advertising campaign which featured books chosen by our buyers; it certainly drew people in.
However, I think booksellers should have a hard look at what is being done at Christmas to promote books.’
But not everyone was happy.
BA president John Hitchin thought Books for Giving was too long and should list ‘more guaranteed bestsellers and fewer dogs’.
Sue Baker of Hammicks found it dull.
‘The whole area needs looking at: the book trade catalogues don't stand up well against non-book catalogues.’
Producers of their own catalogues reported good results — no surprise there.
Books were included in the W H Smith catalogue for the second consecutive year, which proved ‘popular with our customers, and we reckon we got more sales out of it’.
Waterstones again produced its own catalogue, this time in conjunction with Publishing News .
Richard Barker commented: ‘We were pleased with our catalogue but it is difficult to quantify just how much extra business these kinds of promotional tools generate.’
Lois Brown was certain that the catalogue had a marked effect on sales in Belfast.
Not to be outdone, Pentos also took the plunge and produced its own 48-page, fully illustrated catalogue for all its shops (last year it took the PN catalogue.
It was certainly worth us doing our own,’ said Frank Brazier.
‘We can judge by the rate of sale of books in the catalogue, and we were pleased with it.
It looked good and had a good choice of books.’
In Ireland, Easons repeated its Diamond Collection catalogue, which it distributed through its wholesale division to booksellers in both the Republic and Northern Ireland.
The Irish BA also produced its own colour catalogue,Irish Books for Giving .
Both catalogues were well received, said Fred Hanna.
In Leeds, Austicks took the BA catalogue and supplemented it with its own specialist catalogue for Yorkshire.
Despite these efforts John Lauder was doubtful whether any kind of advertising boosted sales.
‘We felt the design and layout of the BA catalogue and its selection of titles were an improvement on previous years.
But the impact of any national advertising for books — either by publishers when you could find it or by others — contributed little to sales.
Clearly budgets had been directed towards supporting PR campaigns.’
Blackwells Broad Street's display of the BA catalogue and Michael Palin's bestselling Pole to Pole 
That was not, however, the experience in the south of England.
Jonathan Chowen of Sussex Stationers argued that advertising was crucial to successful bookselling.
In 1991 Sussex Stationers ran a large television advertising campaign, supplemented by newspaper and radio advertising to boost sales.
A similar campaign was launched in the run-up to Christmas.
‘We organised another bold promotional campaign.
We ran full-page ads in a selection of local papers, and we ran a television commercial on TVS, which generated a lot of interest,’ said Mr Chowen.
‘We were pleased with the way our campaign went, and we are sure that it helped to improve sales at a difficult time.’
Competition for Book Tokens?
Book Tokens performed steadily, but sales were far from spectacular.
‘Sales were only slightly up’, was the most common response from booksellers, although there were some notable exceptions.
Barbara Gaskin of Jarrolds in Norwich said: ‘Book Tokens went a bomb, and delivery of new cards was prompt when we had to reorder.’
There were also some reports of complaints from customers about having to pay for the cards (particularly since those with Waterstones vouchers come free).
And there was further evidence of the growing popularity of Waterstones and Dillons vouchers.
Could these pose a threat to the long-term health of Book Tokens, which celebrated its 60th anniversary in 1992, and spent £450,000 on a pre-Christmas promotional push?
Peter Donaldson said that quite a few people came into his shop and tried to exchange Dillons vouchers under the misapprehension that they were Book Tokens.
Richard Barker said that Waterstones was pleased with the popularity of its own-brand vouchers: ‘We relaunched our own vouchers in 1992, and they sold very well.
We now sell Book Tokens only when people ask for them.
However, having said that, I was impressed with the range of Book Tokens’ advertising, which I thought was carefully targeted and attractive.’
Quality and value for money
Respondents agreed almost unanimously that the range and quality of Christmas bestsellers was excellent, and a significant improvement on last year.
‘There was something for everyone,’ David Sweeten commented.
‘The range was a good, broad one.
Price doesn't matter if the article is right,’ said Fred Hanna.
That assessment was shared by Richard Barker.
‘I am convinced that sales were boosted by a strong and impressive selection of titles.
If books were not selling it certainly wasn't the fault of publishers.’
Predictably Michael Palin's Pole to Pole was the runaway Christmas hit, proving once again that there is nothing like a television series to help sales of a book — Heffers sold between 1,300 and 1,400 copies.
Those wise virgins (such as Books Etc) who placed hefty early orders cashed in when other booksellers ran out.
Other big sellers included Sue Townsend's The Queen and I (which most booksellers agreed was very sensibly priced at £9.99),Mr Bean's Diary by Rowan Atkinson,The Liar by the ubiquitous Stephen Fry, Douglas Adams' Mostly Harmless , Andrew Morton's Diana (mainly in paperback) and James Herriot's Every Living Thing .
It was a good year for memoirs, and those most frequently mentioned included Nigel Lawson's, Michael Caine's and Harold Wilson's.
Sales of the much hyped Sex tailed off, though John Monk said it was still selling steadily at Books Etc, which by Christmas had about 10% of its stock left.
‘Supplies went from famine to feast; there will be quite a few copies washing around,’ concluded John Hitchin.
Sue Baker of Hammicks Bookshops echoed that: ‘There just wasn't the demand for Madonna second time around.’
The hero of bestselling Mr Bean's Diary 
Price was not an issue.
‘Price doesn't matter if the book is in demand,’ said David Flatman.
‘We could have sold more of the Palin book, but BBC Books insisted on firm sale.
That was the problem with the Palin and Madonna books: you had to buy them firm.
I can understand the publishers’ point of view: they're fed up with booksellers buying 20,000 and returning 18,000.
But you do order fewer with firm sale.’
However, the range of popular titles available at under £10 drew appreciative comments from many booksellers; in particular Bloomsbury's Joanna Trollope collection, novels from Julian Barnes, Michael Stewart and Stephen King, the word-of-mouth seller Donna Tartt's The Secret History , and of course many titles in the Everyman adult and children's ranges.
Blackwells in Reading set up an ‘Under £10’ table, which had to be constantly replenished and which the group may well replicate in other shops next year.
What the bland uniformity of the final bestseller lists (see opposite) fails to reveal are the intriguing regional variations that could be found in most respondents' submissions.
In Ireland, Michael Ryder of Easons reported that 40% of all books that featured in Easons' bestseller lists were published in Ireland.
Hannas was shifting hundreds of Irish titles, from publishers both in the UK and Ireland:Great Gold Courses of Ireland (Gill & Macmillan),High Rollers of the Turf (Sporting Books),History of Ulster (Blackstaff) and Lifelines (Town House), a collection of letters from famous people about their favourite poems, edited by Seamus Heaney and conceived by schoolchildren for charity.
It was a similar story in Scotland and the regions of England, where books of local significance forced their way into individual bestseller lists.
Barbara Gaskin at Jarrolds had both Norwich in Old Picture Postcards and Norwich City Football in Old Picture Postcards in her top 10 paperbacks list.
In London, the Owl Bookshop in Kentish Town provided an insight into the reading habits of the chattering classes, with one of the most literary top 10s, a list that included Nick Hornby's extraordinary study of soccer fanaticism,Fever Pitch , Donna Tartt's The Secret History , Jane Smiley's A Thousand Acres and Angela Carter's Wise Children .
Curiously the Owl's children's bestsellers reflected much more popular tastes:The Fun Fax File , Point Horror series and Home Alone 2 .
One book that definitely did not feature in anyone's final list was Jaws of Death (HarperCollins, £9.99).
‘We had one customer who looked at the book, which has in it some really nasty colour pictures of legs and arms half eaten by sharks,’ said Ainslie Thin.’
This customer went over to our cash till and said to one or our staff Maggie Rodan: ‘This book could almost make you faint’.
He then fainted and there was a loud bang as his head hit the floor.
His friend kicked him in the ribs and asked him what he was doing down there.
He recovered quite quickly, but I don't believe he bought the book.’
THE BOOKSELLER PROFILE
Marketing Headline
Her father, a Swansea lawyer, discouraged her from going into the legal profession because he thought she would get too emotionally involved in her cases.
Instead, she channels the commitment he saw in her into publishing.
Nicolette Jones interviews Siân Thomas
SIÂN THOMAS, joint founder and joint deputy managing director of Headline, with responsibility for the marketing operation of the company, has always shown an astonishing single-mindedness about her career.
Once she had decided to go into publishing, she set out conscientiously to fulfil her aim by getting three qualifications for the job: bookshop experience, a degree in English and secretarial skills.
She also wanted her own business, and during her years in the trade prepared herself for this by learning as much as she could about bookshop buying, repping and wholesaling, financial administration, rights and coeditions, export sales, publicity, and paid-for promotion.
By the time Thomas, Sue Fletcher and Tim Hely Hutchinson set up Headline in 1986, working to five-year plans had already become something of a way of life for her.
Thomas' father, a Swansea lawyer, discouraged her from going into the legal profession because he thought she would get too involved in her cases.
Instead, she channels the commitment he foresaw into publishing, putting long hours and a great deal of enthusiasm into work she obviously enjoys.
She claims she has been ‘very lucky’, though concedes that ‘to a certain extent you make your own luck’.
‘A retiring flower I'm not,’ she says.
Certainly she talks eagerly and at length about her work, but with a clarity of thought  that never wanders from the point, and an easy expertise.
She has a ready laugh — often at her own expense — and at 40 ‘thoroughly enjoys her life’.
Her introduction to publishing was the publishing course at Oxford Polytechnic.
But after a term she decided to take a different route, bookshop experience, a degree in English, more bookshop experience, and some in wholesaling.
‘Working in a bookshop — at Uplands in Swansea, where my family comes from — was lovely and I didn't want to stop.
So during my three years at University College Swansea I carried on at the shop in the evenings doing the ordering, and on Saturdays running the general book department and the educational department.
Uplands also did library supply, and I learned a bit about that.
Useful experience
‘That bookshop experience really helped when we set up Headline and I started running the UK sales force.
It was so useful to have been on the road myself and to have experienced cold-calling, setting up new accounts, or merchandising accounts that didn't want to see you at that particular moment.
Uplands kept its wholesaling operation going for a few years after I left, but it doesn't exist any more; I think the day of the really small wholesaler is gone.’
Her route into publishing was a ‘pretty ghastly’ secretarial course in London, which led to what was then BPC, as secretary to the chairman of the Macdonald Educational group, David da Cunha.
He was keen to encourage her and prepared to see her move on into one of the operating companies.
‘But that year was useful because David's role was very much in financial management.
I learnt a lot.
It was interesting seeing publishing from the top.’
Within the year Thomas had moved into a new company, Macdonald Raintree, which was partly owned by BPC and by Raintree in the US and which had been set up mainly to sell rights and coeditions in Raintree output in Europe.
In 1979 she moved to Futura as home sales office manager.
‘It was a great time for paperbacks.
When I joined they had just published The Thorn Birds so Futura was on a real high — it had expanded considerably over the previous 18 months.’
Moving on and up
When the marketing manager left and the two roles were combined, Thomas had the chance to work on paid-for promotion.
Then Futura and Macdonald merged; Susan Lamb expanded her Macdonald role by adding Futura PR and Thomas began doing some of the paid-for side for Macdonald.
By the time Anthony Cheetham left and set up Century, Maxwell had bought BPCC and Thomas was appointed director of publicity, responsible for both paid-for promotions and PR.
She recalls how she got the job from Robert Maxwell in 1982.
‘I still feel somewhat gobsmacked by the way he appointed me.
Edmund Fisher had taken over as m.d. from Anthony.
He put me forward as head of publicity and asked Maxwell to meet me.
Maxwell, in his usual way, kept me waiting outside his office for five hours.
Finally this big booming voice said, ‘Hello, my dear, very good of you to come and see me.
I'm afraid I only have five minutes so come in and we'll have to go through this very quickly.’
‘He proceeded to spend four minutes telling me why I couldn't have the job, and then said, ‘I'm sorry, my time is more or less up now’.
And I thought, ‘I really want this job’, so I said, ‘Well, I'm so disappointed, because I thought you were a gambler’.
And I knew I had him.
I told him I could do the job and that he would regret not taking this gamble.
‘You've got it,’ he replied.
His argument against me had been my lack of experience — he particularly wanted someone who had a lost more PR experience.
I think I was very lucky.’
Working with Maxwell was not always a horror story.
Early on, when Macdonald was suffering big losses, he was very involved in the company, and Thomas saw a fair amount of him.
‘I found I got on with him reasonably well.
He genuinely like women, and he liked people who were prepared to stand up for themselves.
I think I was fortunate.
It could have gone a different way.’
Then in 1986 came the opportunity to set up independently with Tim Hely Hutchinson and Sue Fletcher.
The trio felt the time was right; they had worked together for four years, and they had a good track record — an important factor when it came to raising money for the new venture.
Thomas considers her motives.
‘Because my family were lawyers and self-employed, I've always had the feeling that I would rather hold my future in my own hands than have it in somebody else's.
It had nothing to do with any particular suspicions about Maxwell.
Most people didn't have any at that time.
I just wanted something of mine.’
She remembers Headline's first day.
‘We had temporary offices in Knightsbridge; the furniture hadn't been delivered; we had one pen between the three of us; and we were sitting on the floor.
There was a telephone, and that was it.
Sue and I decided that we ought to go out and buy some stationery.
But having just banked our rather substantial cheque for the start-up, we looked at the price of everything and thought ‘that's a bit expensive’ and bought nothing.
There was a moment of sudden realisation that we'd spent four months raising this cash and we were not going to let it go that easily.
We were darn sure we were going to get value for money.’
Restraint on overheads has been one of the secrets of Headline's success.
From a staff of three the company has grown to 50; it publishes 400 titles a year (60 in the first year).
‘We planned for the company to grow fast.
When we set Headline up we spent nearly a year before publishing our first full list putting in place the systems that would allow the company to expand.
We always thought of Headline as a big company in embryo rather than as a little company.
It has worked.
The systems have grown, and people have grown with it.’
Rapid expansion
Headline was planned carefully from the start.
It has followed the pattern that was expected, says Thomas, though has grown much more quickly.
‘We started off by concentrating on hardback fiction and mass market paperbacks because we wanted to build a paperback backlist as quickly as possible to get regular sales going through each month.
Then, three months ago, we brought in Alan Brooke to concentrate on building the non-fiction side, which is now doing extremely well.
‘In the early days we were buying more paperback rights from other hardback publishers, because even five years ago there were more hardback publishers around that you could buy from.
Now there are very few.
Added to that, from an author's point of view, it really does make sense to by published by the same house for hardback and paperback — partly because of straight-through royalties, but also because the publisher can plan the promotional campaigns properly, and co-ordinate the publications dates.
We can do far more for the author.’
Tim Hely Hutchinson says that Thomas has been ‘crucial’ to the development of Headline, and the company has always been strong on marketing.
‘Before we take on amy book,’ says Thomas, ‘we think about how we are going to market it.
If we can't see a way to market it effectively then we would probably decide not to take it on.
Headline is here to make a profit.
We wouldn't have got the cash to set up Headline if we hadn't started with the intention to be commercial.’
The company's marketing and editorial operations are unusually harmonious.
‘You have to remember that Tim, Sue and I have worked together for a very long time now.
We know the kind of decisions that each other would make.’
Working closely with the trade
Thomas believes that it is also vital to work closely with the trade.
‘We have never believed strongly in doing consumer advertising for the sake of it — PR and advertising have to go hand in hand.
That was one of the reasons why, when we set up Headline, I called myself sales and publicity director, as opposed to marketing director, because I wanted to make it perfectly clear that we were a combined department.
I believe in running a department where sales and publicity people are talking to each other all the time.
‘With all our promotional campaigns, we want to work as closely as we can with booksellers.
There is no point in having a whizz-bang publicity campaign without the books being in the shops.
So it makes much more sense if you can work co-operatively with a chain.
There will always be books which are worth launching with a party because you are going to get wide coverage, but the half-page ad in Cosmo on your own isn't worth half as much as an advertorial that  is tied in with a bookshop group.
For example, one of the things I've been doing today is submitting titles for Waterstones’ summer reading promotion; they are sponsoring a 32 page supplement in Elle , and are doing a run-on.
That's the kind of thing we are trying to do all the time.’
Co-operation equals success
Headline's greatest successes have been characterised by this kind of co-operation.
‘When we started we felt that there was room for another East End of London author, having publicised (in my case) Lena Kennedy before, and Sue having edited her.
So when Harry Bowling's first book was submitted to us,Connor Street's War , we felt that there was great potential and that he had a great future.
I thought it was appropriate to put my neck on the line with the trade and say, ‘I think this guy is really great and has got what it takes to be the next Lena Kennedy’.
We were very well supported, especially by Roddy O'Halloran at Bookwise and by W H Smith.
‘You have to go the trade occasionally and say, ‘This is the one’.
We did it with Dangerous Lady , too, which was an amazing success for us last year [it sold some 130,000 copies].
Martina Cole is a very talented author.
She's young, so has a great future ahead of her.
We really felt that this was a book to push on, and so we talked to the trade very early on, consulted them on the jacket and so on.
‘We did a big campaign, with WHS in particular, and gave away free extracts of the first chapter in the shops.
Although we did a lot of PR, mounted a big advertising campaign, it worked because the booksellers were enthusiastic from the start.
Booksellers want a publisher to work with them.
And that applies in overseas markets as well.’
Identifying a market position
There is another characteristic that has contributed to Headline's success, Thomas believes.
‘When we decided to start Headline, we felt that we had to identify a position for ourselves in the market, to persuade agents to bring their authors to us, authors to come to us, booksellers to support us.
We thought we had something more to offer in all those areas than the existing houses, and also more to offer our staff.
Otherwise, who needed another publishing company?
‘So we set out from the beginning to be ‘author-friendly’.
We had our ‘author-friendly contract’, which was easy for authors to understand, and we signed the Minimum Terms Agreement fairly early on.
As far as the trade was concerned we tried to, and still try to, do whatever makes it easiest for them to order books from us and sell them.
Publishing has got far more professional.
‘And the trade is changing quite a lot.
Small booksellers often don't have time to see however many reps would be calling on them; they would much rather put all their orders together and send them to Hammicks or to Heathcote or whoever; we will work with them on that.
Last year, for example, we put together a summer reading campaign with the Booksellers Association Charter Group, and I was perfectly happy that they should order via a wholesaler, in this case from Barnicoats.
Having said that, we still made sure that our reps called on the group to give them the information.
One of the subjects on which Headline is careful to listen to the trade is book jackets.
Thomas maintains that, as a marketing tool, jackets are ‘absolutely crucial — especially with mass market paperbacks.
If you've got an unknown author there is no way somebody is going to buy that book unless they have picked it up off the shelf.
‘When we take on authors who have been published by other publishers, we try first to identify how they should be packaged to improve sales.
Dean Koontz is a prime example.
Previously published by Star, he became dramatically more successful as soon as he was published by Headline.
That, I believe, was because we moved him a bit upmarket in his packaging, and gave him more thriller-style covers.
It positioned him correctly for his market.
‘Ellis Peters, who was on our first main list, was very successful in mass market paperback, but not overly successful in hardback.
When she came to us we packaged her new hardback in a larger format and spent a lot more on the artwork — foil on the cover, head and tail bands — which made the books look that much more special.
We also spent a lot on advertising, and selected just a few really good author interviews.
She went onto the Sunday Times hardcover bestseller list for the first time.
The market is there; you just have to find the way to get to it.’
Headline has recently taken on the challenge of some of the Queen Anne Press list — the Rothmans and Playfair sports books.
They involve slightly different marketing tactics.
‘If you are publishing a yearbook, the trade, and to a large extent the public know it's coming.
It's a question of trying to package the book properly, making sure the public know that it's out, and also trying to widen the readership each time, find new outlets for the book.
‘The Playfair football and cricket titles sell a lot of copies through general wholesalers and cash'n'carry, where their customers will buy a counterpack.
Those sorts of accounts don't carry much in the way of other books.’
From the outset Headline has considered WHS to be the centre of its market, though the fast growing non-fiction list with such successes as Raymond Blanc's Cooking for Friends has greatly strengthened its sales through chains such as Waterstones and Dillons, and the mass market paperbacks are benefiting from the increased sales of paperbacks generally in supermarkets.
Marketing cannot exist, of course, without a product.
‘We have what we call ‘the promise of entertainment’.
We believe that all Headline books, be they fiction or non-fiction, should provide entertainment in some form or other.
And there is no point in packaging an author brilliantly unless you believe in that author.
At the end of the day, customers aren't going to come back unless they are satisfied.’
Getting out and about
Thomas' work routine takes out of the office a good deal, to spend time in the trade with key accounts, with the home sales force and in export markets.
‘I don't really have an average week.
I guess I'm in two or three days a week and out the rest.
We visit all our major overseas markets twice a year — Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Canada.
The export sales manager visits Europe, though we employ a freelance team to look after us there.
And one of us will call on the Far East on the way back from Australia.
We need to get out and see the trade, and get a feel for what is happening in those markets as well.
‘Our sales people are two-way channels of information; they aren't there just to tell booksellers about our books, though obviously that's a very important part of it.
They are also there to listen, and come back with ideas or suggestions.
The UK sales force fill in a weekly report form which includes questions about competitors — a successful campaign that somebody else has run, or a successful title — and room for suggestions for new titles or for areas of publishing.
And we will devote an afternoon at alternate sales conferences to brainstorming sessions involving the sales force, editors and others, to look at different publishing areas, backlist cookery or whatever, promotions and areas we should be thinking to expand.’
Thomas believes in the importance of motivating staff.
‘One of the reasons for flotation was to enable staff to buy shares.’
Headline is one of the few companies that has lost no staff during the recession — in fact it has taken more on.
Thomas' own sales and publicity team consists of 12 people in the office, plus eight reps.
Her standards, she says, are high, like those sets herself, but she is fortunate in having ‘loyal, creative, hardworking staff’.
Doing things on impulse
She lives in Gloucestershire, where she has 15 acres of land, and she keeps a small flat just by Regent's Park.
This allows her a degree of flexibility and freedom which she relishes.
It may mean a 5 a.m. start from the country if she is to have her regular swim before going into the office, but if she is going to see WHS in Swindon or Heathcote in Warwick, it is more convenient for her to stay in Gloucestershire than to come back to London.
‘I like the freedom of being able to decide, tonight for example, whether I want to stay in the flat or whether I want to go down to Gloucestershire.
I'm working in Oxford tomorrow, so either would be convenient.
I just like being able to do things on impulse.’
BOOK NEWS
G-Man in high heels
Anthony Summers specialises in works of investigation, with the assassination of John F Kennedy, the life and death of Marilyn Monroe and the Profumo scandal among the subjects he has previously taken on.
His latest book is an exposé not only of a former American hero but also of some of the most shameful secrets of modern US history
J Edgar Hoover ran the Federal Bureau of Investigation for nearly 50 years, from 1924 to his death in 1972.
To most Americans he was, in the words of Richard Nixon, a symbol of ‘courage, patriotism, dedication to his country and a granite-like honesty and integrity’.
Since then, however, his reputation has become as tarnished as Nixon's.
It should be destroyed beyond hope of redemption by Anthony Summers' Official and Confidential: The Secret Life of J Edgar Hoover (£18.99), coming from Gollancz on 3rd March.
Summers' book is a chronicle of lies, corruption and abuses of power.
J Ed; gar Hoover lied about almost every episode in his career.
He lived a life of luxury that was in part funded by misappropriated FBI funds and in part by shady friends.
He pried, manipulated and blackmailed, and involved successive presidents in his activities through his knowledge of their own secrets.
It is also an account of hypocrisy.
Hoover, who persecuted homosexuals, was himself homosexual.
This is not a new disclosure, but Summers has uncovered more evidence that has previously be revealed for Hoover's long relationship with his sidekick Clyde Tolson, and has also unearthed stories of orgies and transvestism.
Much of the publicity for Official and Confidential will doubtless feature the image of the tough G-Man in, as one observer recalls, ‘a black fluffy dress, very fluffy, with flounces, and lace stockings and high heels, and a black curly wig’.
‘People have suggested that I will be attacked for being homophobic for going into Hoover's sex life in such detail,’ Summers says.
‘I don't think that's right at all.
It would have been ridiculous to write about Marilyn Monroe [he is the author of Goddess ]without covering her sex life, or indeed to write a biography of anyone without discussing sexuality.
And in Hoover's case it is especially relevant because, according to numerous crime sources, the reason that Hoover never pursued organised crime after the late '30s was that the mob, in the shape of Meyer Lansky no less, had the mockers on him because of evidence of his homosexuality.’
So Hoover was not even effective as a crime fighter.
Summers does attempt to list his subject's achievements; it does not take him long.
‘I forced myself to write a chapter or two about the good things he did: getting rid of dead wood in the bureau; eliminating corruption among his agents; setting up a fingerprint system, an FBI laboratory that could serve as a technical resource for police forces all over the country.
All that was fine and good, but in the end it's not enough to have someone who makes the trains run on time.
Someone else could have done that.’
Official and Confidential is more, though, than an exposé of a tyrant.
The corruption of  Hoover, who served under eight presidents, taints modern American history.
Each regime's policies were influenced by him.
His story touches numerous key events: Pearl Harbor, the McCarthy hearings, the assassination of President Kennedy, the Civil Rights protests and Watergate among them.
Stores covered by Summers in his previous books The Kennedy Conspiracy ,Goddess and Honeytrap (about the Profumo affair) are all explored further here.
Early warning of Pearl Harbor
British readers are likely to be particularly interested in the Pearl Harbor chapter, which backs up the story of Dusan Popov, a wartime double agent, that he had been sent to warn the Americans that the Japanese were planning to attack the naval base.
‘There has been a major effort to downplay Popov's importance, to dismiss him as a ne'er do well and playboy,’ Summers says.
‘What is new in the book is that we've produced surviving British intelligence officers of senior rank who make it clear that Popov had this information and was specifically sent to the US to impart it.’
Taking in so many events,Official and Confidential involved Summers in a huge amount of research.
‘I don't want to go on about the amount or work — everybody works hard.
But it was something else compared with my previous subjects.
I spent $600,000.
There were 850 interviews.
The paperwork was so vast that in 1988 I had to add an entire floor in my house in Ireland to accommodate it, and that turned out not to be enough.
There's no garage to put the car in now.’
Although Summers presents government and law enforcement in America as having been riddled with clandestine behaviour, from the amount of material he gathered he would seen to have demonstrated the effectiveness of the Freedom of Information Act.
He is not so sure.
Myth of freedom
‘I think it's a myth that America is an open society.
The Freedom of Information Act was emasculated almost out of existence by the Reagan administration.
I probably spent about $100,000 on trying to get documents out through the act, and I'd hate to do a value for money survey on what I got.’
Among his applications was a request to see any file on himself.
Five years later, he is still waiting for a response.
The book became a mini-industry.
‘In the past, I've used researchers to dig around in libraries, but I've always done all the hard work myself, and certainly all the major interviews.
Well, no one person could do 850 interviews in five years.
‘I felt that I should hire a fully fledges historian, and Dr Kathryn Castle was terribly important to this book, as was her husband Paul, who is also an academic.
For considerable amounts of time, I was paying five or six salaries.
‘There's a question over whether non-fiction books like this are economical to do — for publishers as much as authors.
The figure I gave you about the amount of money I've spent gives you a notion about the size of the advance, which was very generous from both Gollancz and the Americans [Putnam].
I have to tell you, there's not much left over.’
Still, Summers is a (missing text?) in another respect.
In 1988 he employed as researcher a Life journalist called Robbyn Swan.
They are now married.
‘In spite of that I can't bring myself to thank J Edgar Hoover.’
He hopes that another good will come from Official and Confidential .
While a psychiatrist quoted in the book suggests that the term ‘J Edgar Hoover Syndrome’ should be applied to cases of ‘malignant bisexuality’, Summers is campaigning for Hoover's existing memorial to be erased.
‘It is outrageous that the name of a man who is so completely discredited, and whose actions run so contrary to everything that America is supposed to be about, should be emblazoned in gold on the federal law enforcement building in Washington.
‘In the '70s, there were a couple of bills to change the name which never got anywhere.
Perhaps with Clinton, and what one hopes will be a breath of fresh air, members of Congress will respond by saying its time to take Hoover's name down.
If I achieve that with this book, five years’ work will have been worthwhile.’
In brief Pitman has signed a deal to copublish training titles with ABTA, the Association of British Travel Agents.
Several titles are already available with the joint logo, and the first new titles under the arrangement come in the first half of this year.
Two-Can is to become one of the early publishing entrants into the multimedia market this spring.
In association with Philips, Two-Can Multimedia is bringing out a CD-I (Compact Disc Interactive) version of its book Make It Work!
Sound is also in development, as are, for younger children,Experiment with Water and Playing with Words .
Another CD-I version of a successful book comes from The Multimedia Corporation .
Last Chance to See , based on Douglas Adams and Mark Carwardine's survey of endangered species, includes the text of the book read by Adams, as well as over 500 colour photographs and supplementary information.
In Scotland last year, the 10 bestselling titles of Scottish interest were:
1 —
King's Close by Christine Marion Fraser (Fontana);
2 —
The First Fifty by Muriel Gray (Mainstream);
3 —
Heart and Sole by David Sole and Derek Douglas (Mainstream);
4 —
Scotland's Music by John Purser (Mainstream);
5 —
The Munros by David Bennet (Scottish Mountaineering Trust);
6 —
Curriculum Vitae by Muriel Spark (Constable);
7 —
The Battle for Scotland by Andrew Marr (Penguin);
8 —
Kenneth by Nigel Tranter (Coronet);
9 —
Ally McCoist by Ally McCoist and Crawford Brankin (Mainstream);
10 —
Highland Journey by Mairi Hedderwick (Canongate).
The list was compiled by the Scottish Book Marketing Group.
BOOK NEWS FIRST REPORT
Brisk business in the life market
Biographies are booming.
Christopher Sinclair-Stevenson has commissioned a life of Barbara Cartland from Tim Heald, as part of a three-book deal which also includes a book about the final year before the handover of Hong Kong to China,The Last Governor , and a third ‘highly confidential’ project.
The agent is Vivien Green at Richard Scott Simon.
Penny Hoare, also at Sinclair-Stevenson, has commissioned the ‘first gull biography’ of Herbert von Karajan , to be written by Richard Osborne; the agent is Caroline Dawnay at Peters, Fraser & Dunlop.
Heinemann's biography of Graham Greene by Michael Shelden (author of Orwell ), bought from Bill Hamilton at A M Heath, has gone to Random House in the US for six figures.
Richard Cohen at Hodder has bought a life of Hugh Gaitskill , by Brian Brivati, who has a doctorate from London University and who came to Hodder on a recommendation from Peter Hennessy (author of Never Again ); Brivati will make use of the last of Gaitskill's papers to be made available, released this month.
Hodder has world rights (there is no agent), and paid a ‘very fair’ advance for publication in 1995/96.
Hodder has also bought, for early 1994, a biography of Rudolf Nureyev , the first to be published since his defection 30 years ago; the author is Peter Watson of the Observer , and Hodder has world rights excluding US from agent Robert Ducas.
Other recent Hodder acquisitions include world rights in Challenge , the story of the British Steel Challenge Yacht Race by Chay Blythe and Elaine Thompson , out next autumn; a history of the computer games company Nintendo,David Sheff ‘s Game Over , bought at auction from Random House US, also for 1993; and a book on Windsor Castle by leading heritage author Mark Girouard , bought from Mike Smith at Curtis Brown for next June/July.
Christopher Sinclair-Stevenson has commissioned Ned Sherrin to write a sage about a theatrical family, set in England, America and Australia, and has world English rights; the agent is Rivers Scott at Scott Ferris.
For September, through Caroline Dawnay, Sinclair-Stevenson has bought A N Wilson ‘s new novel ‘about a country vicar beset by scandal and family strife’.
And Philip Ziegler has moved from HarperCollins to Sinclair-Stevenson and Mandarin, with his book about London during the Second World War; publication will be in 1995 and the agent is Diana Baring at Curtis Brown.
Nick Webb, for Simon & Schuster and Pocket, has secured two books by Ridley Pearson with a bid of £93,500 at an auction conducted by Carole Blake of Blake Friedmann for Writers House in the US.
(Some may recall Ridley's mean guitar-playing for the ‘Rock Bottom Remainders’ rock group at the ABA).
He was previously published by Little, Brown, and Max Eilenberg for Heinemann and Mandarin was the underbidder.
Also at an auction conducted by Carole Blake for Writers House, Peter Lavery at Headline bid £100,000 for two books by F Paul Wilson , previously published by NEL.
The first,The Ingraham , is described by Blake as ‘The Firm goes to medical school’.
And in a third Writers House auction, Blake sold a novel and a volume of short stories by Bruce Sterling to Deborah Beale for Orion's Millennium imprint; Ravi Mirchandani at Penguin was the underbidder.
Peter Owen has bought ‘the previously unpublished, unexpurgated’ diary of Anaïs Nin , ‘the continuation of the story begun in the bestselling Henry and June .’
Incest , covering the years 1932–34, is the section of Nin's A Journal of Love that was censored when Nin began to publish parts of her diaries in 1966.
It ‘details Nin's simultaneous love affairs with her husband Hugo Guiler; the novelist Henry Miller and his wife June; her analysts Rene Allendy and Otto Rank; the writer and actor Antonin Artaud — and her own father’.
It will be published in May 1993, following the 90th anniversary of Nin's birth next month (21st February).
Owen described Nin as ‘the Madonna of her time’, but this diary makes Madonna's love life sound tame.
Neil Belton at Cape has bought a ‘history of the past 10,000 years’, about the role of nature in shaping human societies, which brings together biology, ecology, zoology and history.
It is by Jared Diamond , winner of last year's Rhône Poulenc Science Book Prize with The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee , a bestseller for Vintage.
Belton has also bought African Exodus by Chris Stringer , authority on human origins, and Robin McKie , science correspondent of the Observer : a systematic popular presentation of the controversial thesis that modern humans evolved relatively recently in Africa and spread from there to other continents’.
And Belton has acquired a ‘tragic and shocking’ first novel by Kate O'Riordan :Involved , about a love affair between a Southern Irish girl and a Belfast Republican.
Nicolette Jones 
CHILDREN'S BOOK NEWS
Mad Curriculum Disease
The Children's Book Circle has just celebrated its 30th birthday, having been started in 1962 by Grace Hogarth.
It has long been known for its very good annual conferences, and for giving the Eleanor Farjeon Award.
It also holds monthly meetings, and being made up solely of people with an interest in children's books — mainly publishers and booksellers but also authors, illustrators, agents and critics — it is a useful talking shop with no particular stance or axe to grind.
Its meetings tend to be jolly occasions, though coloured by the perennial frustration of the children's book world: why can't we all get together and promote children's books generically?
Privately I have come to the opinion that we never will, but I'd never say anything as dispiriting as that in print…
The recent CBC Patrick Hardy Lecture, given by Michael Rosen, attracted a good turnout.
Rosen shot down most effectively the old fallacy that somehow or other the 1950s, the era of the Grammar Schools and Beacon Readers, were a golden age for children's books and childhood literacy.
Why did we always talk of it as ‘the age of the Grammar School’?
It was surely more accurately described as ‘the age of the Secondary Modern’.
‘The misty-eyed view of grammar school education we her from such people as Kenneth Clarke has to be qualified,’ said Rosen.
‘At my grammar school, over 60% of the students left before the sixth form.
The formalised and structured use of a variety of books to support learning in schools came into play only when the school population had been weeded down to less that 10% of the state school population.’
The golden age of children's books was probably more like 1970 to 1985.
That was the time — and Rosen remembers it with obvious affection — when the spirit in schools was high, when teachers enjoyed opening school books, running book and reading clubs, and staying late after the bell to do so.
On to the present, and whatever the political and academic motivations behind the all-embracing National Curriculum, there is no doubt that it has had one overriding effect: it has demoralised teachers, and its prescriptive nature and reliance on testing have reduced their spare time and sapped their energy.
Added to that have been the cuts in funding; the attack on the ‘book health’ of schools has been considerable.
Mad Curriculum Disease is taking over.
Rosen is not alone in fearing the return of the work sheet, the fixed course of study, and with it the empty library, and the elimination of support for those splendid creatures, teachers with a mission to find the book that suits the child.
The next monthly meeting of the Circle is at the Groucho Club, Dean Street, Soho, at 6 p.m. on 26th January.
Speakers will include Elizabeth Hammill and Fiona Kenshole.
New members are welcome .
The current members of the Children's Book Circle committee,from left Sara Domville (Reed), Mark Hutchinson (Gollancz), Suzanne Carnell (Penguin), David Morton (HarperCollins), Liz Comstock-Smith (literary agent), Anne Sarrag (Book Bus), Francesca Dow (Orchard), and Clarissa Cridland (Pan Macmillan).
Agents with a finger on the pulse of the business
The usual way of finding out what sort of Christmas the trade had, or what the high street thinks of the year just finished, is to do a ring round of booksellers and publishers and then report the opinions thus canvassed.
This is just fine for taking the patient's temperature, and assessing its current condition, but for a feel for the long-term overall health of our business the opinions from author's agents are a better guide.
They know what is being  produced for future publication and they know who's buying, and for how much.
They should have a good feel for the sector's long-term confidence.
The only problem with the theory, from the point of view of a journalist, is that agents — as opinionated and informed as anyone in the trade — are rightly jealous of their relationships with editors and publishers, and so they refuse to be quoted on anything critical.
I respect that.
So let's just say that in a poll of several of the best known, best regarded children's agents, the general, unattributable response to whether and how the recession is affecting their is as follows.
The recession has had surprisingly little effect on the number of titles agents have been able to place — especially by authors with a track record.
Publishers are still buying.
Sometimes the advances have been less that brilliant, but the demand is there.
Most children's agents feel that they have actually had a rather good year.
The recession has, however made its presence felt in one particular respect — publishers are not paying up as promptly as they used to.
I was surprised to unearth another not insubstantial concern.
Many agents are worried about the current calibre of editors.
There is a general feeling that publishers are more inclined nowadays to do things by committee and the rule book, and that the flair that characterised the Kaye Webbs, Margaret Clarks and Judy Taylors of days gone by is not much in evidence.
There may well be a real problem here.
Most editors these days, whether gifted or not, get so sucked into meetings and other company business that they have precious little time to edit, help authors, or train and nurture younger editors.
It's a problem that many agents talk about with furrowed brows.
Happy Birthday Doubleday
Transworld marked Doubleday Children's Books' third birthday with a jolly party last month (see above ).
Philippa Dickinson, publishing director, rightly likened the imprint to any other three year old — noisy, attention-seeking and lively.
But this is also an intelligent toddler: its list, including the likes of Terry Pratchett, Robert Swindells, Jean Ure, Jacqueline Wilson and Ian Beck, is certainly right, and given a couple more successful years is surely destined for a position very near the top of the class.
‘Noisy, attention-seeking, lively and intelligent’— smiles all around at a birthday party for Doubleday last month.
Standing, from left Jean Ure, Robert Swindells, Ian Beck, Paul Scherer, Jacqueline Wilson, Philippa Dickinson.
Seated Helen Cooper and Terry Pratchett
Walker to the rescue
Apparently for every one serious fire in a royal palace, there are about 38,000 in the nation's schools.
In fact, on the very day of the Windsor conflagration a school in Lambeth, London, was comprehensively destroyed by a vandal's firebomb.
The library of course was gutted, but Walker Books, a near neighbour of the school, is coming to the rescue.
It is donating relief supplies of backlist stock, and has promised to present the school with one copy of every one of this year's new titles.
Where are they now?
I was keeping a glass of chablis company the other day with Jonathan Hayden and Fiona Brownlee from Pavilion Books, and we got talking about what might have happened in grown-up life to the heroes and heroines of the children's books of our youth.
We reckoned that Just William (see right) probably failed to get elected as a Thatcherite Tory candidate in the General Election, his campaign having been scuppered partly because of rumours to his large and highly unsuccessful estate agency, where he is subject to bouts of manic depression and alcohol abuse.
Heidi on the other hand, works cheerfully in Brussels, and is third in line for Director-General of Flavoured Yogurts and Soft Cheeses.
She still has those ghastly bunchy plait things.
If any readers know anything of the current whereabouts of Tin Tin, Milly Molly Mandy, Jennings and/or Derbyshire, Rupert Bear, any of the Famous Five or Secret Seven, Billy Bunter, My Naughty Little Sister (presumably now in freelance tax-free employment round the back of King's Cross?) or any of the many others, I'd like to hear about it.
A bottle of Horace Bent's quite passable claret for the jolliest entry…
DK's Dinosaur Club
Dorling Kindersley, publisher of sparkling non-fiction guides to dinosaur, is launching a Dinosaur Club to cater for the large number of junior dinosaur fanatics.
There is a Welcome Pack full of prehistoric goodies — poster, notepad, pencil, rubber, stickers etc — as well as a newsletter stacked with games, dino-facts and adventures.
Such is the state of computer technology for the registration and running of club membership lists that hobby-based clubs for children or adults like this, run by publishers, could well proliferate, and lively booksellers might do well to get in on the act.
Brough Girling 
Boxtree — no has beans
Boxtree's children's list might be accused of flash in the pan publishing — some flash, some pan.
It certainly seems to specialise in hitting nails on heads at just the right moment.
Some of its products move so fast they don't even get into the catalogue.
‘Marketing’ is a widely misused word in the book business, but when Boxtree's publishing director Adrian Sington sports a gap in the TV-related or licensing market, and sales and marketing director David Inman gets the order book out, the numbers they achieve are impressive.
Boxtree's four Thunderbird titles have sold 168,000 copies since last June, it has shifted 228,000 Beverley Hills novels, 310,000 Simpson colouring and activity books, not to mention over 600,000 Hanna Barbera books.
Boxtree is now claiming that Mr Bean's Diary has sold so well (over 314,000 copies when I last spoke to them) because it is being bought by, and given to, children and teenagers.
This is certainly borne out by School Book Fairs, which sold its 5,000 copies (bought by Richard Ervin almost on a whim at Frankfurt) in two weeks.
One way to the top of the Christmas bestseller lists is to cash in on teenie trends.
Borrowers boost
If proof were needed that intelligent children's television is a friend of children's books, the recent BBC serialisation of The Borrowers provides it amply.
Orion informs me that it sold 60,000 of the revamped hardback, at £3.99 a copy, even before transmission had started.
CRITICS CROWNER
The endearing young Charmley
One expects the first week of January to produce a ragbag of leftovers from the Christmas numbers.
There were a few delayed items, but, surprise, surprise, there was a big juicy book to provide a centrepiece.
Rather clever, I thought, of canny old John Curtis, as part of his alliance with Hodder, to produce Churchill: The End of Glory by John Charmley in so blank a period.
It will remind the elderly of that famous year when the great Ronald Politzer caused Collins to command entire book pages by producing some quite attractive books in the first week in January when no one else published any books at all.
Iconoclue
The clue to the Charmley book came from the Sunday Telegraph , where over the review was the message: ‘Andrew Roberts considers an iconoclastic and scholarly study of the Churchill myth’.
The iconoclasm was soon obvious when the reviewer told us, ‘In seeking to blame Churchill for the end of British Great Power status, the author takes the logic of his 1989 classic,Chamberlain and the Lost Peace , to its intellectual conclusions.’
Later, Mr Roberts added: ‘Employing only strictly contemporary documents and some extraordinarily painstaking historical scholarship, Charmley has disinterred and raked over every stratum of the Churchill myth.’
Some may doubt whether a myth may be stratified, but let that pass.
The reviewer summed up: ‘For those who will not hear a word spoken against Churchill in 1940 this will be an infuriating book, as the watch the sharp, black-white chiaroscuro of Chamberlain v Churchill watered down to what the latter would call ‘a sludgy amalgam’.
For those who love Churchill partly because of his warts and feel they have been waiting too long to hear the case for the prosecution put eloquently and with impeccable soundness, ‘it is a delight’.’
Rubbishing the saviour
A different view was put by Piers Brendon in the Mail on Sunday : ‘This is the most sustained attack ever mounted by a professional historian on the saviour of his country.
Not content with damning Churchill for causing the Dardanelles disaster, attempting to stifle Bolshevism at birth, returning to the Gold Standard and trying to hold on to India, John Charmley faults him for opposing appeasement.
The author suggests Churchill should have negotiated peace with Hitler in 1940 and states that his famous trumpet-call of resistance — we shall fight on the beaches, etc — was ‘sublime nonsense’.’
The tone was to become snarling: ‘Charmley often tortures the evidence and there is much else to criticise in his scholarly but eccentric re-writing of history.
Especially odd is his hero worship of Chamberlain, who sought peace with honour and brought (as Churchill prophesied) war and shame.
However, even Charmley cannot avoid the conclusion that Churchill for all his faults was a great man.
As Boothby said, when the earth was collapsing Churchill stood firm.’
Well, A E Housman put it rather better in a different context.
I am doubtful about the validity of ‘torturing the evidence’: surely, if you torture someone the usual result is that he will speak the truth.
So tortured evidence could well be the truth.
The urbane Philip Ziegler, writing in the Daily Telegraph , took something like a middle course: ‘Charmley is too sensible to push his arguments to indefensible lengths (even if from time to time his attacks on Martin Gilbert's biography and editing of Churchill's papers seem unduly waspish).’
Never absurd
He summed up: ‘I recollect uneasily that some six years ago, when reviewing his biography of Duff Cooper, I was offensive about Charmley's style.
Either I was wrong at the time or the author has dramatically improved.
This is a well-written book, lively, intelligent and lit by astringent wit.
It is pugnacious and sometimes, many will think, wrong-headed, but it is never absurd and even at its most provocative presents a case that needs answering.
Unlike most contemporary Churchilliana, it is well worth reading.’
I know that the rules for feature-page articles are different from those for reviews, but I do think that Alan Clark, who was given large space on the Times ’ main feature page, could have got around to mentioning the book from which he had taken the material for his strictures of Churchill before his last two paragraphs: ‘And yet, so docile and leader-oriented is the Conservative Party [Whoops!
Not so long ago the reviewer was a minister in the Conservative government.
Is this another one leaping on the fashionable let's-destroy-the-party-from-within bandwagon?]that — for years — to assert these facts has been heresy.’
Sorry about the length of that insert — I got carried away.
Mr Clark continued: ‘Now set out in a most scholarly book of some 700 pages, it is probably the important revisionist text to be published since the war.
It is a sad tale.
A heroic moment, whose importance can never be measured, then the inexorable decline — downhill all the way from one miscalculation to another — of the Churchill premiership.
A pied-piper's trail of opportunity discarded, needless abasement endured, and a grievous ransom paid in blood and treasure.
Truly, history can be written in a hundred different ways.
But the lessons are always there, for those who read patiently.’
Truly, reviews can be written in a hundred different ways.
Those who have read Mr Clark's prose with mounting impatience might like to point out a few lessons to him: 1) mention the book early on; 2) avoid the clichés; 3) forswear dodgy phrases, like ‘pied-piper's trail of opportunity discarded’, which really mean very little.
National institution
As has been said many times (certainly by me), it is the easiest thing in the world to write a review of an unimportant book.
I think most people would agree that the writings of James Herriot are pretty unimportant so far as book pages are concerned.
His oeuvre has become a sort of national institution that is regarded with affection by a large number of people, something akin to the singing of ‘Land of Hope and Glory’ on the Last Night of the Proms.
A new Herriot (in this case Every Living Thing , published by Michael Joseph) does not need to be torn to pieces on the book page of the Times , but there was Robert Crampton trying to make a reputation for himself: ‘James Herriot did for the Yorkshire Dales in the seventies what Peter Mayle did for the hills of Provence in the eighties.
Both men tell tales of city boys finding a happy life among the everyday familiarities and inefficiencies of country folk; both deal in folksy anecdotes with too perfect beginnings, middles and ends, using if not purple, then distinctly lilac prose to sing the praises of their patches of heaven, and both employ not very good illustrators.
Nevertheless, both authors sell by the tractor-load.’
Insubstantial pageant
And so on, right to the very end: ‘As each story [the reviewer is now only talking about Mr Herriot]grinds to its predictable punchline, it is as if Herriot has ground a slightly stronger dose of the Nembutal that he uses to dope recalcitrant patients into each successive page.
The reader's eyelids grow heavy.
Herriot quite skilfully opens up with one or two of the more moving tales, and stitches it all back together again, quite painlessly, but when you wake up at the end, it is as if nothing had happened.’
Apart from the fact that the writing is rather sloppy in a pompous sort of way, it seems to me that the whole exercise was not worthwhile.
If the Times wishes to have a go at a book, then at least the paper should choose one that is worthy of shot and shell.
Quentin Oates 
BENT'S NOTES
Tarts, vicars and VAT
January again: yuck.
Nothing to look forward to but post-Christmas depression, endless grey skies and a new VAT regime from Brussels.
Thank you very much.
But perhaps we could do something about it.
We used to, all those years ago, when that fine band of brave book trade thespians gave us their Publishers' Pantomime each January.
But since the so-called Society of Young Publishers has failed to take up my challenge to revive the panto, we'll have to think of some other way to cheer ourselves up.
How about a VAT Party?
I have in mind a large ball, organised by and in aid of the Book Trade Benevolent Society (since it failed to put on its annual Carol Service last month and didn't even bother to tell anyone), at which the whole book business could get together and celebrate the introduction of the new VAT regime as a way of warding off the post-Christmas blues.
And how better to celebrate VAT than with a Vicars and Tarts Ball?
It should, if nothing else, provide The Bookseller with some nice material for its new design…
Quote of the Week: ‘There's no greater bliss in life than when the plumber eventually comes to unblock your drain.
No writer can give that sort of pleasure.’
— Victoria Glendinning,Independent .
And another Quote of the Week (and how long we have had to wait for the national press to notice what has been so obvious for so long): ‘With Waterstones backed by W H Smith, and Pentos’ gearing rising, there can be little doubt who has the deeper pockets to fight a protracted battle.
If the Pentos chairman gets his dearest wish and the net book agreement is abolished, he may just live to regret it.’
— Lex, FINANCIAL TIMES.
Dear Horace, I think I may be a bit late with this as here in the antipodes, and especially being some way down a circulation list, your column takes some weeks to reach me.
I refer to the St Trinian's cartoon of 20th November, and will bet you a bottle of passable claret that the caption is not the same as was originally published.
Rather, someone has added the word ‘pot’, presumably to make the cartoon more in tune with today's world.
Was this Sir Ronald's own change, or is he the victim of some editor who could not resist what H G Wells called the greatest passion?
An enquiry of the publisher might furnish you with material for another item (with another cartoon, please, e.g. of the one with the girl who has collected toadstools and is saying scornfully to her friend who has gathered mushrooms: ‘Dump those, they're harmless’).
Yours sincerely ,
Mike Bradstock
Managing Editor
Canterbury University Press,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
Ever eager to please, I got in touch with Colin Webb of Pavilion which publishes ST TRINIAN'S: THE BEST OF THE DRAWINGS, on 18th March (£5.99), to reply to Mike Bradstock's challenge.
He in turn contacted Searle's agent Rachel Calder at the Tessa Sayle agency (the lengths we will go to to satisfy a reader's enquiry), who confirms that Searle indeed often rewrites his captions, ‘to keep them up to date’.
‘He doesn't consider his captions a sacrosanct collection of frozen moments in time,’ Ms Calder adds, ‘and anyway only really changes the ones that have a dated feel about them.
He reserves the right to fiddle with and recycle his own text, should he wish to.’
That's OK by me, Ron.
So, there you have it, Mr Bradstock.
A bottle of passable claret is on its way to you, and here is the toadstool cartoon:
Apropos the previous item, wouldn't a book of Searle cartoons showing original as well as altered captions make a fascinating (and amusing) study of social change?
Miriam Gross, lit ed of the Sunday Telegraph , had the interesting wheeze last week of publishing 1993 predictions for the book trade by some of the trade's leading lights.
Most of the publishers questioned were pretty gloomy, the retailers (Terry Maher and Tim Waterstone) less so.
‘No prospect of the green shoots of economic recovery’, said Christopher Sinclair-Stevenson; ‘new hardcover literary fiction, unless by well-established authors, will sell, if that is possible, even fewer copies, to the point of virtual extinction’, said Tom Rosenthal; ‘fiction…has long since become all by a branch of gynaecology’, said Colin Haycraft.
And while Carmen Callil hoped for a ‘writer/thinker of some revolutionary kind who could…elaborate some startling new ideas in a work of social and political theory which could get us all thinking and acting again, with hope’, what we would get instead was ‘more self-justifying memoirs from useless politicians’.
as if he had had sight of publishers' replies to the Sunday Telegraph questionnaire, Tim Waterstone warned readers that the book trade had ‘an astonishing capacity for self-pity and self-destruction — ignore publishers’ gloom…
Waterstones will see to it that in 1993 bigger and even-better bookshops open throughout the land.’
And Terry Maher was also upbeat, predicting that publishing would ‘slowly become a little more efficient and a little more commercial’(and, of course, that the Net Book Agreement would receive further setbacks in the year), although he expressed worry about VAT being imposed on books.
On the books front I thought Helen Fraser's predictions the most interesting.
There would, she said, be more intelligent business books, and the appetite for ‘really excellent history’ was growing.
But biography had perhaps peaked as the hardback genre, and travel writing, except by the acknowledged masters, seemed to be on the decline in bookshops.
Further to my note of 11th December, Susannah Wainman of SAWD Books writes to me with more details of the competition for a new logo for the Independent Publishers Guild.
The logo will mark the guild's 30th anniversary, and you will recall that I am offering another bottle of very passable claret to the designer of the winning entry.
Susannah explains that the new logo needs to be ‘simple and clear; able to reproduce well; in two colours (but able to reproduce in a single colour); suggest independence; and able to reduce to or enlarge’.
Entries should go to her at SAWD Books,(), by 29th January.
Horace Bent 