

INTERNAL MORPHOLOGY
An understanding of the internal morphology and structural complexity of the small towns forms a vital framework upon which more detailed spatial, functional and developmental analyses can be built.
It is unfortunate therefore that detailed research into such issues is still largely in its infancy.
Generally speaking, the evidence from the major towns has attracted most attention in the literature, but recent syntheses of the material from the small towns have begun to redress the balance.
Such advances, however, are ultimately dependent upon the quality of the available evidence and their main conclusions, summarized here, may require some degree of modification as more material comes to light.
Three main sources of information can be used to shed light on the small towns, each one offering an important dimension to the overall picture but also suffering distinctive drawbacks.
First and foremost, there is the evidence provided by aerial photography; when this is sufficiently extensive, as for example at Kenchester and Water Newton, there is usually enough data to publish a composite plan of the internal morphology, though normally the picture is far more fragmentary.
Such ‘town plans’ are eminently satisfying but also dangerously deceptive, because in the absence of excavation, they can only hint at the potential complexity involved.
Second, there is the evidence derived from excavation itself, especially at those sites where the internal layout has been extensively sampled, as for example at Alcester, Baldock and Godmanchester.
This has the specific advantage of offering us a series of relatively detailed developmental sequences for individual areas within the plan, but unless such work has been sufficiently systematic, the resulting picture resembles at best an incomplete jigsaw.
Third, and by far the most problematical, there is the spatial information derived from the distribution of occupation debris recorded during fieldwork or building activity.
A considerable number of sites fall into this category, even when there has been some aerial photography and excavation, as for example at Braintree and Horncastle.
The ‘plans’ so derived are the most difficult to interpret in terms of urban morphology, because their apparent size and shape may be deceptively inaccurate in the absence of structures and proper chronological information.
Nevertheless, the evidence from all three sources can be integrated to paint a reasonably coherent picture of the small towns.
Discussions of internal morphology can be divided conveniently into three general sections:
(i)
the range of individual building types recorded within the small towns;
(ii)
the overall development of the settlement plan in relation to the internal roads and streets;
(iii)
the internal organization of the buildings and land-use in relation to the roads and streets.
These aspects will be considered individually below.
Internal Buildings
Despite their importance as one of the basic features of internal morphology, the internal buildings have not always attracted the attention they deserve.
In particular, the large romanized buildings have tended to dominate a disproportionate amount of past excavation at the expense of the more vernacular structures, even though recent evidence has begun to redress the    balance.
From what we know, however, the structural range found in the small towns is almost always far less diverse than in their larger urban counterparts.
Buildings of essentially simple design, conforming to the different regional traditions, predominated and clearly provided the domestic and workshop accommodation for the bulk of the population.
Alongside them, there is a marked scarcity of clearly Roman-inspired structures, especially those represented by the wealthy private houses, public and official buildings so common in the cities.
The relative presence or absence of the latter is an important factor in distinguishing between different categories of small town.
Much of our knowledge about the domestic and workshop accommodation has been derived from aerial survey, supplemented in recent years by larger area excavations and improved recovery techniques.
Particularly interesting is the continuity into the Roman period of the characteristic Iron-Age circular house, several examples of which are now known in the small towns (fig. 2 A–C).
Fairly typical first-century examples are known at Godmanchester alongside a range of other structures.
They usually comprise a circle of stake-holes set into shallow trenches with stouter posts located at the doorways, suggesting a wickerwork construction with mud or clay daub walls and a thatched roof.
These can be paralleled by three second-century structures at Baldock, represented by gullies and shallow post-holes.
Examples with stone foundations are also known at Bourton-on-the-Water and Ashton, the latter with unusual upright limestone slabs.
The retention of such traditional architectural patterns is hardly surprising, but, as yet, none has been found in third-century contexts.
A few are known, however, in the fourth century, including a pair with turf walls in the extra-mural area at Towcester and two late timber examples at Alcester.
Such circular buildings are not confined just to the domestic sphere, as those found in a religious context clearly demonstrate.
Occasionally their exact function is uncertain, as in the case of the three structures in Normangate Field, Water Newton, one of which had a central posthole and was originally floored with a red and white tessellated floor.
The bulk of the domestic and workshop accommodation, however, falls into the category of simple rectilinear forms constructed in a variety of ways from timber and stone depending on the local availability of materials (cf. fig. 2 D–I).
Most common, perhaps because they show up more easily, are the timber-framed buildings which rested upon stone foundations (D).
These are known throughout the province, though regional variations are introduced by the use of flint, chalk, granite, limestone and sandstone among others.
Elsewhere, buildings were entirely of timber-framed construction, either with their sills set into prepared trenches (E) or resting upon the ground surface (F) or based upon timber posts set into individual pits (G) or in linear trenches (H).
A more interesting variant is introduced by those structures where the whole building appears to have been raised entirely above the ground, being represented only by lines of carefully levelled blocks used to support the timber joists (I).
Such diverse construction methods are not confined to particular types of building but rather reflect questions of cost and regional traditions which appear to have been relatively pronounced in Roman Britain.
At some sites, where good building stone was scarce, timber-framed structures predominated throughout the Roman occupation, as for example at Great Chesterford, where all the known buildings with the exception of the two late official structures were of timber construction with gravel or earth floors, plaster covered wattle-and-daub walling and probably thatched roofs.
Where stone foundations are normal, as at Catterick and Hibaldstow, regional variations reflect local sources: flint and chalk in areas dominated by the geological presence of chalk, limestones and sandstones in the area of the Jurassic ridge and granites and slates beyond.
It is interesting to note that rectilinear structures are frequently found in one of two distinctive locations, often accompanied by marked functional variations.
First there are the buildings which are usually, though not exclusively, domestic in character, located in their own spacious plots of land or yards, often in association with a range of agricultural features.
These are well represented at Godmanchester, the first-century examples being generally rectangular cottages with a framework of vertical posts surrounding an earth floor.
Second-century  examples were somewhat larger, with a series of timber uprights defining two separate rooms.
Both types were often set parallel with the road in an extensive plot of land.
Similar buildings seem to predominate at Cambridge and Dragonby, and, interestingly, at accepted ‘village’ sites like Catsgore, a fact which must be important when trying to define the function and status of individual sites close to the town-village threshold.
The second distinctive group covers the well known strip buildings which are set end-on to the road frontages, often in association with a range of specialized activities.
Hence they are traditionally identified as the combined houses and workshops of resident craftsmen.
Our evidence for them, derived from aerial photography and widespread excavation, is sufficiently well known to require little detailed comment here.
Besides the numerous examples recorded at Corbridge along the main east-west and north-south streets, and at Water Newton along Ermine Street and its side-streets, comparable structures have been identified at many other small towns including Alchester, Camerton, Hibaldstow, Sapperton and Sea Mills.
Such buildings often have an associated yard to the rear.
The presence of an open gable end, perhaps with some sort of arrangement to accommodate wooden shutters, indicates the commercial importance attached to such premises, as for example at Catterick.
To judge by the size of individual examples, strip buildings tend to be larger than the domestic vernacular structures within their spacious plots.
The second-century houses at Godmanchester measuring c. 5 by 11 m (16 by 36 ft) had an approximate floor area of less than 55 sq.
m (576 sq.
ft), assuming for the purpose a single-storey building; in contrast, the strip buildings at Hibaldstow and Sapperton, measuring c. 9.7 by 21.2m (32 by 69 ft) and c. 11 by 20m (36 by 66 ft) respectively, offered somewhere in the region of 200 sq.
m (2200 sq.
ft) each.
Such a variation in scale can often be matched by a corresponding degree of ‘romanization’, as in the timber examples at Great Chesterford with their tessellated floors and painted wall plaster.
One further distinctive structure, the aisled building, might also be mentioned here.
This was clearly a multi-purpose unit capable of functioning in agricultural, domestic, industrial or commercial capacities.
Obvious agricultural examples existed at Ilchester and Neatham; in an industrial context belongs the structure fronting Ermine Street in Normangate Field, Water Newton; while the examples at Droitwich and Godmanchester appear in an official setting.
Such structures are generally therefore an integral part of the domestic and workshop accommodation available in all the small towns.
Exceptions like the Godmanchester ‘Basilica’ clearly belong in another sphere.
It has already been noted that buildings of more obviously romanized character play a less prominent role in the overall morphology of the small towns.
Where they occur, they are often difficult to interpret in functional terms.
A case in point is provided by the presence at various sites of more sophisticated houses, which can be compared with their better known counterparts in the major towns and the countryside (fig. 3).
They were generally larger than the buildings described so far and were often more elaborate, with hypocausts, painted wall plaster or mosaic flooring.
The late third-to early fourth-century winged-corridor house at Great Chesterford is fairly typical, offering a floor area of c. 400 sq.
m (4350 sq.
ft) and containing one room with a hypocaust and at least one tessellated floor.
Comparable houses have been recognized, individually or in pairs, elsewhere, as for example at Braughing, Camerton, Droitwich and Margidunum.
In contrast, a handful of small towns apparently contained several sophisticated houses, as the mosaic evidence from both Bath and Ilchester clearly demonstrates.
Aerial photography and excavation have also revealed at least three large houses at Kenchester.
The latter suggest the presence of several wealthy inhabitants, principally in the third and fourth centuries, but the individual examples could represent anything from rural establishments to official residences.
Larger, apparently official or public, structures have also been located within the small towns.
Particularly characteristic are what appear to be large courtyard structures, often associated with a detached bath-house (fig. 4).
A good example is the building at Chelmsford measuring 66 by 42.5 m (216 by 139 ft), with an internal corridor and an associated layout of rooms, and a less well-known bathing complex to the east; the existing stone buildings were founded in c.
AD 125–150, though the courtyard replaced an earlier timber predecessor and the baths incorporated an existing laconicum .
A comparable building complex has also been examined at Godmanchester, built c.
AD 120, while a third is visible on the aerial photographs of Wanborough.
Their identification as mansiones , along with other similar buildings, is discussed below (p. 37).
Various other courtyard structures have been located, though in all cases their exact function is hard to define.
These include two small examples (fig. 5 B and C), one at Cave's Inn and the other, only partially excavated, at Whitchurch, and two larger complexes visible on the aerial photographs at Water Newton.
To these might be added the enigmatic, though incomplete, courtyard building at Corbridge, which, at 65.5 by 67 m (214 by 219 ft), would have been one of the largest of all the structures in the small towns.
Within the small towns, apparently independent bath-houses are more common than might have been expected given the general level of amenity provision (fig. 5 D–H).
Among the known examples there is a marked variation in size, which ranges from the large many-roomed complex located close to the River Rib at Braughing, down to the partly excavated building discovered at the rear of one of the frontage plots at Neatham.
These differences must relate to the function of the individual structures, though it is not clear how many were available to the local communities rather than serving otherwise unattested official uses.
The most marked contrast between the small towns and their larger counterparts is the relative paucity of large public buildings, especially those connected with amusement.
Only a handful have been identified, frequently in very specific religious or industrial contexts.
Pride of place must go to the bathing complexes at Bath, with their normal and curative facilities grouped    around the hot springs and the Great Bath.
A smaller set of baths dependent upon mineral springs may also have existed at Buxton.
Theatres and amphitheatres are also rare, although two amphitheatres have been recognized: the well-known example at the mining settlement at Charterhouse, and the recently discovered structure at the religious site of Frilford.
Recognized theatres appear to have been much less grandiose affairs, witness the enigmatic ovoid area at Wycomb and the possible theatre at Catterick.
These buildings reflect an important social or religious dimension about which more information is needed.
Religious structures are another category which have so far escaped attention, even though temples are well-established features at many small towns.
Those of classical design and inspiration are infrequent, the most impressive being the tetrastyle prostyle temple set on a high podium and dedicated to Sulis Minerva at Bath.
At least some of the seven small buildings just outside the military compounds at Corbridge may also belong in this category.
By far the most common and distinctive type, however, are the Romano-Celtic temples of square, circular and octagonal plan.
The numerous examples vary in importance and location.
One important group lay within an enclosure at Springhead, apparently at the heart of the town itself.
At the height of its development, two main temples lay side by side amidst other structures and were approached through some form of monumental gateway to the east.
Comparable enclosures with square temples are known at Water Newton and Irchester.
In contrast, other Romano-Celtic temples lay within larger enclosures set alongside or apart from the centre of the settlement, as for example at Harlow, where the temple and its associated precinct lay in the middle of a ditched enclosure 4.2 ha (10 acres) in extent.
Besides the square form, octagonal examples have been excavated at both Chelmsford and Nettleton Shrub, the latter being somewhat unusual having three concentric divisions.
Circular temples are often difficult to identify unless they are clearly differentiated from their domestic counterparts.
Examples include the circular building at Frilford and the structure in a precinct visible on photographs of Thorpeby-Newark.
The prominence of temples in the small towns is of some interest.
In many cases, they are distinguished from the prevalent structural range by their degree of architectural pretension.
With the exception of the private houses, and the public and official structures already described, such temples were often the most romanized element and were therefore visually as well as functionally important.
The final category in this section covers defences.
Many of the small towns were supplied with fortifications during their lifetime.
The earliest phase, in the last quarter of the second century, saw the construction of earthwork defences, many of which were subsequently modified by the insertion of a stone wall on the same alignment.
Apparent exceptions to this trend include sites like Chelmsford, with no known stone defences, and Thorpe-by-Newark, where they take a different alignment.
While many sites were upgraded by the addition of walls to the existing earthworks during the third and fourth centuries, new stone defences, with or without a contemporary bank, were also provided elsewhere, reflecting an extension of this important protective function.
The actual areas enclosed vary enormously, from the largest at Water Newton (18 ha/44 acres), down to sites like Mancetter with as little as 2.1 ha (5 acres).
Outside there was usually at least one ditch and frequently more, often with evidence of recutting or later modifications.
Unfortunately very few gateways have been excavated, and at present no common trends can be discerned.
Only the west gate at Kenchester provides a close parallel to the more monumental city gateways, with each side of its double carriageway flanked by an external semi-circular tower.
Other examples are generally far less elaborate, involving only a single carriageway.
The north and south gates at Godmanchester fall into this category, with flanking guard chambers projecting equally to front and back, while at Chesterton-on-Fosse the guard towers were possibly added to the rear of the wall.
Complex changes are visible at the north gate at Great Chesterford.
More obvious trends are visible among the external towers added during the last phase of defensive activity in the mid fourth century.
Semi-octagonal towers are known at Kenchester  and Mildenhall towards the west; while in the east, three varieties can be distinguished, including rectangular (Great Casterton and Water Newton), fan-shaped (Ancaster and Godmanchester) and semi-circular (Caistor and Horncastle).
These trends are paralleled in the major centres, thereby reinforcing the suggestion that individual groups of sites may have been the responsibility of the same builders.
This section on internal buildings has necessarily covered a considerable amount of very detailed information and has inevitably had to be selective.
Numerous miscellaneous and less easily classified structures have therefore been omitted from the discussions.
It is possible nevertheless to draw several conclusions about the general range of structures and their relative importance in the small towns.
Within the overall range, the overwhelming majority of the structures were of simple design and type, conforming to the traditions and materials of individual regions.
In contrast, buildings of a more sophisticated, Roman character rarely form a significant element in the total structural make-up.
Normally, excluding the relatively common temples or temple complexes, only one or two such complexes are found, usually taking the form of a more sophisticated house, a combined baths and courtyard building, or a detached bath-house.
Only a handful of sites possessed a wider range of romanized buildings.
Public buildings, whether administrative or cultural, are found only rarely within the range of structures, in contrast to defences which are relatively common at sites on the main communications network.
Even if such buildings are the exception to the general norm, however, their architectural character, size and visual appearance would have served to distinguish them from their humbler domestic counterparts.
Settlement Layout and the Internal Street Network
Despite the inherent limitations of the evidence, a study of the internal road or street network can offer important insights into the sequence of development and its relative complexity.
Most previous commentators on the small towns have distinguished them from their larger counterparts on the basis of their usually haphazard and seemingly piecemeal development, though it has recently become clear that such a distinction, however useful, obscures recognizable variations among the surviving plans.
They can be shown to range from sites entirely dependent upon the main road frontages, through those which developed a system of irregular internal streets and lanes, to the few with some form of organized street plan.
From such a general classification, discussed in detail below, two very general conclusions can be shown to emerge: that several categories of small towns saw the provision of some form of internal street network to meet the needs of their inhabitants and that the existence of such a system, coupled with other morphological and functional indicators, might well reflect a higher degree of internal organization and urban complexity.
It is possible to identify five broad groups within the range of small-town plans.
The first covers those sites where the main occupation is focused around the junction of two or more through routes.
Such occupation is further characterized by the absence of any substantial developments beyond and away from the main frontages.
Straightforward examples can be seen at Brampton in Norfolk, where the extensive ribbon developments are confined to the junction itself and the main roads radiating east, south and west, and at Braintree, where they occupy only the west and south-west approach roads at the expense of the staggered road junction itself (fig. 6A and B).
A less clear-cut example occurs at Frilford, where several distinct concentrations of debris are known in and around the temenos and the crossroads.
Some sites may have developed this type of location for reasons of overall convenience; others were clearly attracted by the economic potential of the crossroads.
At Godmanchester, for instance, extensive ribbon developments spread outwards well beyond the line of the later defences, but with time, there was a more intense build-up in the area adjacent to the crossroads as the site became more economically specialized.
This centripetal tendency could eventually promote the construction of additional side-streets and lanes, as we shall see later.
These linear road junction sites clearly satisfied the basic land requirements of the resident population, and for many there were clearly no    social, economic or administrative pressures to encourage the creation of a more centralized and compact urban centre.
This general conclusion applies whether the sites had Iron-Age antecedents or developed during the course of the Roman occupation.
The second category concerns one of the most characteristic classes of small towns, the so-called linear or ribbon developments, where the main occupation is confined to the frontages of a single main through route.
Typical examples include Wall, with debris known to extend up to 1.6km (1 mile) along Watling Street, though in places it is clearly intermittent, and Hibaldstow, where the known plots line Ermine Street for up to 800 m (2600 ft)(fig. 6 C and D).
These sites, in their simplest form, betray little or no development away from the main frontages and there appears to have been no obvious urban focus within the plan.
Among students of small-town plans, linear settlements of this type have been seen as the commonest and the earliest form from which more complex plans evolved.
This process usually involved the gradual and haphazard addition of side-streets and lanes so as to provide access to land beyond the immediate frontages.
Examples of this outward expansion, combined with an increasing centralization, are confined not just to sites dependent on a single main road, as at Brough-on-Fosse, but also to sites developing at road junctions as in the case of Great Chesterford.
Both can be seen to be intermediate in form between their humbler, undeveloped counterparts, and those sites characterized by a more complex irregular network of streets behind the frontages.
Not all sites so developed, of course, and much more research is vital before we understand the full nuances of settlement expansion and contraction.
The third class of sites covers those developed linear and road-junction sites where increasingly centralized tendencies had been responsible for the growth of an irregular internal street system well beyond the initial main roads.
A reasonably typical example is provided by Kenchester, where the early ribbon development, extending over some 700 m (2300 ft), was apparently modified in the course of the second century by a much greater concentration of streets within the defended enclosure (see fig. 15).
No attempt appears to have been made, however, to rationalize the plan by linking up the side-streets and lanes by the provision of an intervallum road.
The latter is one of the characteristic features at Water Newton, where the most complicated street system known in this category lies within a walled area enclosing 18 ha (44 acres); it should not be forgotten, though, that extensive ribbon developments also existed to north and south along Ermine Street (see figs. 18 and 20).
It is particularly unfortunate that in the absence of detailed excavations here, we can do little but hypothesize about the expansion of this small town.
This category of plan probably represents the outcome of a cumulative and spontaneous growth of internal streets, to meet a whole range of contributory factors including population growth, increasing functional complexity, the availability of resources and the intangible aspect of focal consciousness on the part of the resident community hence its importance as an indicator of increased urban status.
Two separate processes of expansion appear to be visible: an outward expansion along the roads, representing the primary use of convenient and ready-made frontages, and an outward expansion away from the roads into new land, reflecting a secondary process as and when the need for access to the centre became an overriding concern.
The fourth class of sites is also characterized by an irregular and haphazard network of internal streets and lanes, but one which apparently developed independently of major through routes.
A characteristic example exists at Irchester, where none of the three main roads thought to focus on the site has been conclusively located within the settlement (fig. 40).
Almost all the surviving evidence for the streets is confined to the walled area which enclosed 8 ha (20 acres), even though occupation debris is known to be far more extensive.
Here, the central north-south street, with a marked kink at its southern end, branches at its northern end to the north-west and north-east; along its course, further streets lead east and west with additional side-streets and lanes.
Comparable irregularity also appears to be the rule at Ashton in the area west of the modern Oundle to Peterborough road, though the excavated area is dominated by a single main road with several side-lanes, and in the evidence visible at the problematical sites of Dragonby and Kirmington.
This particular category deserves closer attention, because the level of spontaneous internal development, independent of any main road(s), may well be the result of a native tradition flourishing in the Roman period.
Interestingly all the examples quoted have some Iron-Age antecedents.
Distinctive as the plans are, however, some of the less developed examples like Dragonby are difficult to differentiate from accepted ‘villages’ like Chisenbury Warren and Hacconby Fen, thus reinforcing some of the problems of definition outlined in the introduction (fig. 7).
The final category of small towns covers those sites with an apparent element of planning or some form of recognizable street grid.
Very few, however, appear to be planned in any way comparable with the cities of the province.
Most are basically uncoordinated in that their planning probably represents the outcome of good fortune or minimal management.
At Alchester, for instance, the defended area is quartered by the central crossroads (see fig.24), while a further east-west street is indicated on aerial photographs.
Comparable arrangements are likely at Dorchester-on-Thames and Ilchester.
More organization may be visible at Corbridge, but the resulting insulae are still very irregular.
Some sites possess a more co-ordinated layout, however, either as an original element or as a later addition.
Among the former might well belong the apparently regular arrangement of internal streets of early Roman date on Wickham Hill at Braughing (see fig. 28).
If the fragmentary evidence from Baldock is comparable, both  might well represent a reshaping of an existing layout as part of a general Roman initiative or of native imitation of contemporary development in nearby cities.
The street grid at Catterick, east of Dere Street and opposite the original settlement on the west (see fig. 30), appears to represent the best-known example of a later addition.
Traces of another such planned framework of uncertain date may also exist at Wanborough.
Such evidence confirms the general lack of real planning, however, so that most examples fall into line with the preceding categories where some sort of internal street network was developed as and when necessary to meet the needs of the resident community.
This discussion of the small towns, although descriptive, has helped to clarify our limited understanding of their settlement plans in relation to the organization and development of the internal roads and streets.
While reiterating the apparent importance of a developed street network, we must be careful nevertheless to avoid oversimplifying the picture too far in the current state of the evidence.
Most of our plans are little more than simplified abstractions derived from the overall spread of the known occupation debris, illuminated by infrequent excavation and aerial photography.
Only rarely can we assess this spatial information in terms of settlement expansion and contraction through time.
Such an historical perspective must be our long-term goal, even though for the present we can at best only hypothesize about the nature of the development processes at work.
Internal Land-use and Building Layout
Against the background of the known settlement plans, it is now possible to consider the internal arrangements of the building types and their associated patterns of land-use.
Individual case studies are presented below; here, the aim is to provide a more generalized picture by conflating information from all available sources.
Several questions require specific treatment: what distinct zones existed within the sites and how were they used?
Where were the individual building types and specialist facilities located?
And how far can we determine development trends in the use of space?
Given the obvious importance of the main road and street frontages, it is hardly surprising that they provided the most attractive sites for occupation.
Inevitably, therefore, almost every type of building can be found in just such a location, but here our interest lies in the recognition of broader trends of land-usage among the small towns.
By far the most prominent pattern is represented by the regular development of narrow-fronted strip buildings along the main frontages in such a way as to accommodate the maximum number of properties in the space available.
Their importance within the small towns has already been demonstrated (p. 18), and further detailed examples are unnecessary here.
It is important, however, to consider their overall arrangement and that of their associated features.
At most sites, strip buildings appear to have been constructed as independent entities, separated from their neighbours by either alleys or narrow lanes.
Sometimes, where occupation is particularly dense, there is little or no evidence for any associated property to the rear, suggesting that their occupants either worked land elsewhere or derived their livelihood from other specializations.
This situation apparently applies at Water Newton.
Independence of this type was probably exceptional, however, and among the small towns strip buildings are usually known to lie at one end of a narrow plot or yard.
This could be put to a variety of uses.
At Chelmsford, the individual plots extend only 40–60 m (130–98 ft) and were sometimes occupied by lesser structures, pits and ovens.
Similar boundaries apparently lay 35 and 40 m (114 and 130 ft) respectively behind the buildings at Braughing and Neatham.
At Ashton and Holditch, the buildings lay in simple yards containing ovens and wells, while at Middlewich, the land behind the frontages was used for related industrial activities.
In contrast, the plots at Penkridge, which were up to 30 m (100 ft) deep, may well have been employed as gardens or animal pens.
As might be expected, there is frequent evidence for the reconstruction of such strip building properties, the same property boundaries sometimes being retained over considerable periods, while at others a considerable level of property amalgamation and reorganization was involved.
A second prominent pattern of land use along the frontages appears for the present to be confined to those sites with a marked agricultural bias.
In them relatively spacious plots of varying dimensions were arranged along the frontages and housed a range of individual buildings and other related features.
They are particularly prominent in the early stages of development at Godmanchester where, following the demise of the fort, a system of regular plots was apparently laid out, extending as a series of broad strips well into the territory surrounding the settlement.
These housed the characteristic domestic vernacular buildings already described (p. 17).
Much the same picture emerges at Dragonby throughout the Roman period.
A further feature of this pattern can be distinguished at Braintree, where the plots have been shown to extend up to 105 m (343 ft) away from the frontages and appear therefore to represent smallholdings associated with the various buildings comparable dimensions have also been noted at Great Dunmow.
Clearly the relative importance of such spacious plots within individual layouts, in contrast to the numbers of strip buildings, is of considerable interest to our understanding of their development and function, but precise details are difficult to obtain.
At Dragonby, spacious plots appear to predominate in the excavated areas, but at Ilchester, they seem to be confined to the extramural frontages in the form of a double row of plots 20 by 50 m (66 by 165 ft) in size.
Such diversity is to be expected and may indicate different categories of settlement within the small-town range.
From what has been said, it is clear that the domestic and workshop accommodation, together with their associated properties and features, formed the predominant element along the frontages of the small towns.
Of necessity, therefore, the larger, more sophisticated structures had to occupy whatever land was available, unless they were specifically imposed upon the plan by official action or were grouped together to form some sort of central focus within the layout.
An examination of the location of particular groups of romanized structures allows us to determine general trends.
Mansiones usually occupy one of two specific locations, both probably reflecting the state of development at individual sites when the installations were added.
One favoured location was directly alongside the main road frontages, as for example at Wall.
A similar location appears at Catterick and Great Casterton, and may also account for the courtyard structure parallel to Ermine Street at Water Newton.
The other favoured location was in the land immediately behind the frontage properties, served by either side-lanes or streets; examples are known at Chelmsford, Godmanchester and Wanborough.
These buildings are thus located wherever convenient land was available, though in the case of Godmanchester at least, properties were demolished in the process.
Much the same range of locations seems to prevail for the more romanized forms of housing.
Where several wealthy houses are known to exist, they are usually later developments behind the main frontages and their buildings.
This certainly seems to be the case with the larger structures located in the south-eastern part of the walled area at Water Newton, and is more convincingly demonstrated at Kenchester, where at least three wealthy houses are known in similar locations, served by separate side-streets.
The buildings with mosaics at Bath, if domestic, may also come into this category.
In contrast, however, the two winged-corridor houses at Camerton may lie in a comparable location in relation to the Fosse Way but they clearly predate the well-known industrial expansion of the site along the frontages.
Individual houses present more interesting contrasts.
Examples are certainly known behind the main frontages in whatever land was available, as at both Margidunum and Mildenhall, just within their respective defences; but they were frequently imposed on the main frontages, often overlying earlier occupation levels.
The latter is true of the winged-corridor house at Great Chesterford and the building inside the defences at Thorpe, suggesting that, on occasion, official action could override other concerns in matters of location.
Interesting trends also emerge for the location of temples.
Some clearly occupied positions of convenience near to or alongside the main frontages, as for example at Chelmsford and probably Kenchester.
Yet others display associations with mansiones .
The best attested case is the temple complex west of the mansio at Godmanchester, though comparable examples may exist at Chelmsford and Water Newton.
But by far the most important are those small towns where a major temple complex provided a functional focus within the plan, as for example at Bath or Harlow.
This question of a more developed central core among the small towns is an important one which requires closer attention.
Urban growth is often reflected morphologically by the appearance of a distinctive central area.
This is readily apparent among the cities of Roman Britain, where normally the forum-basilica lies at the centre, but among the small towns, the picture is much less strikingly developed.
On current evidence, only a handful of sites seems to be involved.
Such central foci generally take one of two forms, either the temple complex already mentioned, or one or more large and apparently important buildings.
The first of these can be demonstrated at several sites where a religious element appears to predominate at the core; besides Harlow, with its ditched temenos , central precincts can also be seen at Irchester, Springhead and Wycomb, while much the same level of importance may originally have attached to the enclosure at Frilford.
Such a religious focus perhaps indicates the primary function at these sites, in contrast to those where the temple occupies a somewhat subsidiary location in the known plan.
The second category is represented by several sites with some form of official or cultural focus.
Particularly well known is the planned central core at Corbridge, developed in the later second and early third centuries on either side of the main east-west road.
To this might well be added the two large rectangular buildings and an associated temple compound at Water Newton, the combined temple and baths complex at Bath and the four major buildings in the heart of Braughing.
A different form of core appears to have existed from the third century at Godmanchester, after the creation of the open marketplace and the construction of the official ‘Basilica’ building adjacent to the mansio compound.
Similar market-places are likely to have acted as a focus elsewhere.
Interestingly, only a small number of sites enjoyed such a distinctive central core, suggesting that in addition to a developed internal street network, this might be a further indicator of a higher level of urban development arid complexity.
Behind the developed road and street frontages forming the settlement proper, what might be called the rural-urban fringe was reached.
In its simplest form, this was often marked by the existence of field systems, as for example at Brampton, where they are known immediately beyond the settled frontages and their associated manufacturing areas.
But elsewhere the situation is far less clear, partly for lack of detailed evidence and partly because the boundary is not always precisely defined in archaeologically recognizable terms.
At Water Newton, for instance, the fringes around the urban core appear to merge imperceptibly into the countryside; this is especially clear in the Normangate Field area, where the known kilns are interspersed with the urban workshops and shrines on the one hand and the droveways and rural estates of the villas on the other.
A comparable tendency has also been argued for Godmanchester, where the urban fields appear to merge into the enclosures associated with the villa at Rectory Farm.
At its extreme among the small towns, this blurring of the rural-urban boundary extends over the whole settlement, as at Dragonby, and perhaps suggests some sort of link with the level of agricultural pre-occupation or functional specialization.
At one time the line of the defences used to be regarded as a significant rural-urban divide, but the repeated recognition of extensive extra-mural suburbs has necessarily shifted the emphasis of enquiry.
It is now clear that the construction of the small-town defences provided an additional influence on their morphological development, depending upon the inclusion or exclusion of particular areas.
These defences seldom attempted to enclose the total area of occupation, partly because of its pre-existing shape and extent, and partly because the defences were designed to perform a variety of different functions, many of which fell in the official sphere.
Two broad groups seem to emerge from the known evidence (fig. 8), each with a different level of impact on the defended area itself and on the extra-mural suburbs.
The first category includes those small towns where the defences appear to rationalize an extensive urban scatter and to enclose a suitable urban core.
Sites enclosing 8 ha (20 acres) or more    certainly belong here, though smaller examples like Catterick must also be considered on their individual merits.
Construction of defences inevitably involved some small-scale demolition, seen, for example, at Chelmsford, Dorchester-on-Thames and Great Chesterford, while some internal streets may have been blocked or altered as at Mildenhall and Irchester.
These disturbances must have been minimized, however, where the defences ran through the fringes of the main settlement, as they appear to have done at Kenchester.
Once provided, two general trends are obvious: first, the intra-mural zone remained or soon became relatively well built-up, and second, there was no obvious contraction or shift in emphasis within the extra-mural zone prior to the mid fourth century at least.
Both trends are well attested at Water Newton, especially in the Kate's Cabin suburb, as well as at Ilchester and at Bath, where the appearance of mosaics might indicate some level of intramural concentration of wealth.
Comparable trends are not found among the second category, which includes those sites where the defences are apparently arbitrarily imposed on a straggling ribbon development or urban scatter so as to provide a small defended strongpoint astride the road.
Sites enclosing 4 ha (10 acres) or less are the norm, often including only a small fraction of the occupied area.
Construction in these cases involved considerably more destruction to accommodate the defensive screen, as the evidence from Ancaster, Brough-on-Fosse and Mancetter clearly demonstrates.
Of particular importance, however, is the impact of such defensive provision upon the intra-mural zone; enclosures that are apparently almost empty have been noted at Caistor, Horncastle, Mancetter and Wall, as well as at Margidunum with the exception of the late complex in the northern half.
The situation in the extra-mural areas is much less clear-cut, but the recovery of pottery appears to indicate some level of continued activity.
Clearly the nature of the defences and their effect at individual sites may be yet another indicator of different levels of complexity and status.
It is worth recording also that urban contraction among the extra-mural areas does not appear to be a significant feature before the mid fourth century.
Some sites were even able to expand as Catterick and Towcester attest.
But others show signs of change, especially those where fourth-century cemeteries developed in formerly built-up areas outside the defences; examples of this trend are well documented at Ancaster, Great Chesterford and Godmanchester.
Elsewhere, the nature of the fourth-century levels is difficult to interpret precisely.
These trends will be considered in more detail below (p. 316).
Finally within the context of small-town morphology, we might briefly consider the question of the location of cemeteries.
Despite their potential, however, as an indicator of relative size and development trends, little real systematic research has been undertaken.
All too frequently, as well, cemeteries have been examined in isolation from other components of the plan.
Large examples are known, however, more often than not on the fringes of the main occupied areas, as at Ashton, Baldock, Bath, Irchester and Water Newton.
To these can be added the fourth century examples already mentioned, which clearly indicate some level of extra-mural contraction.
This organized disposal of the dead in large communal cemeteries, set aside for the purpose, is a useful indicator of more complex communities, so that the appearance of isolated burial plots can be instructive; at Ilchester, the late burials within the extra-mural plots might well be indicative of the later Roman decline in standards within a contracting settlement.
Discussion
From such a generalized synthesis of the morphology of the small towns, it is possible to begin to define several recurring features which can help to evaluate our understanding of the overall level of complexity at individual sites, although these will clearly need to be refined as more new evidence emerges from the ground.
Particular attention has been drawn to the significance of a developing internal street network within the overall plan, in contrast to the ribbon developments which remained dependent upon the main roads.
The nature of this development needs closer attention.
Equally significant for the small towns is the existence of some form of central core  within the plan, whether administrative, official, socio-economic or religious, around which the other elements are clearly structured.
It has also been stressed that the overall range of individual building types can be a useful indicator of the level of settlement complexity; in particular, attention has been focused on the relative presence or absence of the larger, more obviously romanized, building complexes and their planned or ad hoc location within the layout.
Just as important for the question of small-town function and status might be the relative proportions of strip buildings in contrast to the more spacious plots, since in general these are functionally distinct.
Importance has also been attached to the nature of the defended area, whether ‘urban-core’ or ‘strongpoint’, and its relationship to the intra- and extra-mural zones so created.
In addition, a close analysis of the organization and location of communal cemeteries should help to define higher orders of social organization and settlement complexity.
We must end this review by noting the relative simplicity of many of the small towns alongside modern notions of complex urban morphologies.
Most would have appeared undistinguished and unsophisticated, especially those ribbon developments with a restricted range of internal structures.
The exceptions, which have some form of developed street network, a more diverse range of buildings and perhaps even a central core, clearly stand out from the pack on current evidence, and they can thus be seen to compare most favourably with the urban patterns recognizable within the major towns and cities of the province.
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
As already indicated, there were sometimes special functions which at first aided the foundation, and later the survival, of certain small towns.
But the existence of these functions does not mean that the towns depended on them exclusively and it did not prevent them from acquiring others from the normal expected range.
Chief among these special functions was a governmental or administrative duty at either local or provincial level or possibly both.
Unfortunately there is all too little evidence from Britain to enable us to discern the precise nature of the relationship between the small towns and authority, although some tentative suggestions can be made.
Consequently it is necessary to rely heavily on sources of information from across the Channel.
It is abundantly clear that when the time came to construct defences around many of these sites, the reason was not always primarily to protect the community.
This is especially true of those, often identified as burgi , which protected only a very small part of the settlement (p. 35 below); but even where larger areas were enclosed, most included only a fraction of the total, as for example at Catterick, Ilchester and Water Newton, where the inhabited extra-mural areas extended for considerable distances.
This is not to say, though, that the interests of the local population were entirely ignored; for, if one of the primary purposes of fortifications was to guard the necessary physical organs of tax recording and collection and the necessary officials, then a secondary purpose may possibly be glimpsed in the simultaneous protection of some of the economic base from which many of the tax payments were derived; hence the inclusion of markets, shops, workshops and houses.
An extreme and exceptional case is the small community outside the fort of Phasis in the province of Cappadocia, which was fortified by the governor solely to protect it from assault by invading Alans in the mid second century.
But this instance apart, there were presumably some official functions which the sites in this category possessed and which were physically concentrated within the defences and probably unrelated to local needs.
Extrapolating from this, it is probably right to assume that these functions also
(I)
existed before the construction of the defences, but in a form which is not yet entirely visible to archaeology, and
(2)
can be connected with provincial rather than local administration.
Two types of evidence can give a clue to this particular function: inscriptions and structures.
A handful of inscriptions from British sites and many more from other provinces refer to various provincial officials, usually soldiers seconded for duty to the governor's staff.
It is probably no accident that they were to be found in most classes of urban or other settlements and in military vici .
The commonest are those with the title beneficiarius consularis ; where information is forthcoming from the inscriptions, almost all were legionaries.
Most are found associated with forts or their vici , such as Lancaster, Binchester, Lanchester, Housesteads, Risingham, Chesterholm and Greta Bridge, but they are also known from the civitas capitals of Wroxeter and Winchester and the small towns of Dorchester and Catterick; it is possible, though, that the latter were present when Catterick was still a military vicus , since one of the inscriptions is dated to AD 191.
The work of beneficiarii is by no means clear, but most authorities accept that they performed various police-type duties over the local populations, and supervised local tax collection.
They  have also been connected with the running of the cursus publicus , the empire-wide postal system created by Augustus for carrying official goods and despatches, and the intermediate stations mansiones and mutationes — along its routes.
It has also been claimed that they acted as Rome's representatives in areas devoid of large towns or cities, or military garrisons, but this hardly equates with the known distribution of most of the British-based officials in or near auxiliary forts.
In sum, their duties probably varied from place to place and from time to time, although there was always likely to be a strong police element, especially in those areas on or near the frontiers where military government was paramount and where the natives enjoyed only limited autonomy.
Even with auxiliary regiments present, there would still have been work for an official to oversee civilian activities.
In Africa, for instance, standard-bearers of Legio III Augusta found themselves agentes curam macelli , or supervisors of markets; a good equivalent here from more recent times might be the bazaar sergeant of British India.
Indeed these officials are likely to have carried out the duties of assistant commissioner, resident magistrate, general arbitrator, tax-collector and market supervisor all rolled into one.
It is interesting that the number of beneficiarii greatly multiplied throughout the empire in the late second and third centuries, although they were not unknown before.
The principate of Severus probably saw the greatest expansion, and it is perhaps no coincidence that it may have been he who introduced the annona militaris , a tax paid in grain or other materials to meet the needs of the army.
The beneficiarii might have been in charge of its annual assessment according to the quantity of the harvest, its collection and safe storage at some central point and its distribution to wherever it was needed.
It must be remembered, though, that the Code of Justinian specifically states that ‘no tax shall be exacted by the stationarii ’, to which general category most officials probably belonged.
A singularis consularis is attested at Catterick on the altar which also records a beneficiarius , Q. Varius Vitalis.
Strictly singulares were members of governors' personal bodyguards, drawn from auxiliary regiments, but they may also have been employed for other duties.
For instance, this altar was dedicated by Titus Irdas to ‘the god who devised roads and paths’.
It is likely, therefore, that on a major route to the north he was on a duty connected with road-works or perhaps travel arrangements for the governor.
Others are known from the military vici at Chesterholm, Ribchester and High Rochester.
Rarer still are the officials entitled stratores consularis , known from the small town at Irchester and the port at Dover.
 Although there is little agreement about their role, they seem to have had slightly more specialized duties.
Strictly they were attached to the governor's staff as equerries or grooms, but as with singulares their duties may have taken them outside his immediate entourage.
Anicius Saturninus at Irchester has been described as a remount officer securing new horses for the army, while O. Cordius Candidus at Dover may have been connected with the transport of horses across the Channel.
Elsewhere, in the Danube province of Upper Moesia,stratores were to be found supervising road stations at both Nis (Naissus)and Cuprija (Horreum Margi), and it is not impossible that they were doing the same in Britain.
Of more senior rank are the legionary centurions recorded as centuriones regionarii ; they probably had wider responsibilities with oversight over whole districts and only four are known in Britain.
One from Bath records the restoration of a vandalized religious shrine by G. Severius Emeritus; he probably controlled a wide area including perhaps the nearby port at Sea Mills, although the situation may be more complicated, since Bath lay close to an imperial estate, the headquarters of which were at Combe Down just outside the town.
This would have come under the jurisdiction of the provincial procurator one of whose assistants restored its headquarters building, and not that of the regionarius .
The other two examples of regionarii come from the auxiliary fort at Ribchester, where both Aelius Antonius and T. Floridius Natalis combined the post with that of praepositus numeri or fort commander.
They were presumably responsible for supervising the civil settlement outside the fort and, in particular, the Sarmatian veterans who had been granted land in its vicinity.
These veterans had originally been recruited into the Roman army as heavy cavalry after the Sarmatian wars fought by Marcus Aurelius in the middle  Danube.
One regiment was stationed at Ribchester from the late second century and its members were granted land as a gratuity upon retirement.
This fact is recorded in the name of the vicus, Bremetennaci Veteranorum , which is contained in the Ravenna list.
This situation was not dissimilar to the frontier districts of eastern Syria, where villages were supervised by centurions seconded from the province's legions.
Various other types of stationarii , to which general category most of these personnel probably belonged, are known in other provinces but none in Britain.
Frumentarii , both cavalry decurions, for instance, are known to have served at Tiffen and Feldkirchen in the mining district of Noricum, while an official bearing the title immunis consularis curas agens vico Saloduro is recorded from Solothurn near Augst; as an immunis he had been relieved of all other military duties by the provincial governor in order to oversee the village community of the Vicus Salodurus .
The second category of evidence, that of structures, is more difficult to interpret successfully, although it is probably more plentiful in Britain.
If we are to connect the small towns and other settlements which were provided with fortifications with the needs of provincial administration, then they should contain buildings identifiable as either the residences and offices of the local officials, or granaries and stores-buildings for the collection and security of taxes in kind.
They may exist in conjunction with, or separately from, road-station buildings such as mansiones and mutationes , which may, or may not, have had their own officials.
These buildings no doubt contrasted with the generally simple and unsophisticated structures found at most of the sites in question.
A note of caution must be sounded, however.
Although the existence of defences is being used here as the criterion for the presence of elements in the provincial administration, the reverse may not always be true.
The same or similar elements could equally exist in unfortified sites, as indeed they probably did in the military vici .
The first structures to be considered must be the defences themselves, especially those which protected only an essential core, even though it may extend beyond the government installations.
In Gallia Belgica there are a comparatively large number of small defended sites situated at intervals along main roads.
They are most closely and evenly spaced along the road from Cologne to Bavai, indicating the hand of the provincial administration; more may yet be found on other roads.
These sites, usually called burgi , are small, that at Liberchies (Brunehaut) being only c.2.5 ha (6 acres).
This latter was situated beside the road and was not bisected by it, as was the larger fortified site at nearby Liberchies (Les Bons Villers).
But these minor structures are not restricted to the west.
They are found throughout the empire in the third and fourth centuries, although they were known elsewhere by different names:castella, turres, centenaria and by the Greek pyrgoi .
They occur in the deserts of Africa, Syria and Arabia, and in the regions of the Rhine and Danube.
They are found along limites and roads, at bridgeheads and crossroads.
They were the late Roman Empire's answer to the weakness of linear barriers and provided a defence in depth which the latter could not.
An attempt has been made to identify a similar system in Britain, comprising the sequence of five intermediate stations which lie along Watling Street between Towcester and Wroxeter, at Red Hill, Penkridge, Wall, Mancetter and Cave's Inn.
They were all fortified some time after the late third century and are characterized by their broadly rectangular shape and small size.
It need not stop here, however, because other sites in Britain might qualify for inclusion.
These include the quartet of sites on the Fosse Way between Leicester and Lincoln, at Willoughby, Margidunum, Thorpe and Brough, and the trio between Leicester and Cirencester, at Chesterton, Dorn and Bourton.
Unfortunately, very little is known about Brough, Dorn, Willoughby and Bourton, and defences have yet to be proven for the latter pair.
Ancaster, Caistor and Horncastle might also be considered, the last two perhaps in connection with east coast defence; both are small, being 3 ha and 2.4 ha (7.5 and 5.9 acres) respectively.
Ancaster lay on Ermine Street south of Lincoln.
It is still uncertain how these possible burgi operated.
They may have contained either small units of the regular army or perhaps a locally raised militia.
Nor is it impossible that bands of laeti or gentiles were settled in some, if not all, during the late fourth century, but unfortunately  the relevant chapter of the Notitia Dignitatum , which listed these barbarian recruits to the Roman army in Britain, is missing.
It is doubly unfortunate that very few of the buckles and belt plates, so often claimed as characteristic of late Roman military equipment, have been found in these sites except for one at Cave's Inn.
Elsewhere, isolated examples are recorded from Catterick, Wanborough and Wycomb, while among the small towns only Water Newton and Dorchester-on-Thames have produced significant numbers.
An alternative explanation might see these fortified sites being used as bases for the storage of spare equipment and horses plus food and fodder for mobile cavalry units of the late Roman field army in Britain.
This would account for the singular lack of internal buildings, even though a civilian element may have remained among the population as the sharp distinction between fort and town became increasingly blurred in the fourth century.
Unfortunately little excavation has taken place in the interiors of these fortified sites and what has been is not very informative for, in many cases, the combination of stone-robbing and deep-ploughing has reduced even masonry buildings to amorphous scatters of stone.
Consideration of these sites, whether they were burgi or not, introduces another element into the discussion of fortified small towns.
It has been pointed out that the insignia assigned to the vicarius of the British diocese, alone of such officers, consists of castellated enclosures instead of maidens, indicating that he commanded troops.
It is also generally accepted that during the fourth century not only were units of a field army serving in Britain but also regular troops were acting as urban garrisons.
These two sources of evidence together imply the presence of detachments of the field army stationed in both major and minor towns.
This would explain the recovery of military equipment and weaponry from several sites, among them Cirencester with one of the largest collections.
Apart from the small towns already mentioned at Dorchester-on-Thames and Water Newton, Catterick is perhaps the most interesting.
Here, the characteristic buckles and belt-plates have been found, as well as a collection of weaponry, which included spears, lances and the barbed head from a martio-barbulus , a type of lead-weighted throwing dart used by the late Roman army.
Three spurs have also come from late levels: they are uncommon finds on Romano-British sites and suggest the presence of a cavalry unit here in the late fourth century.
In addition, excavations over a large area revealed considerable reconstruction and modification of existing buildings in the same period, as though the town was being forced to adapt to its new inhabitants.
The buildings south of the main east-west street were chiefly affected, being united to form a major complex reminiscent of the principia and praetorium of a more normal fort.
There are other structures, besides fortifications, which can indicate an official presence.
These include mansiones and mutationes , the residences of officials such as beneficiarii if they are separate from the former, and warehouses and granaries for the collection of the annona .
It must be stressed at the outset that correct identification is the chief problem.
Mansiones were normally large buildings with ranges of rooms grouped in suites around a central courtyard and a separate bath-house which would be additional to any urban bathing establishments.
They provided overnight accommodation and food, as well as fresh horses, for members of the cursus publicus , and for some other official travellers.
They are likely to be found in both large and small towns, provided they lie on the main roads, and therefore the Antonine Itinerary can be a useful indicator to their presence.
Excellent examples are known at Heddernheim (Nida)and Kempten (Cambodunum)in Germany and Raetia respectively.
Perhaps the most characteristic British example is that in the civitas capital at Silchester, where it was the second largest building in the town after the forum and was situated close to the south gate.
In its final form, it contained some half dozen suites of rooms in two wings opposing each other across a central court.
The third wing, which united the other two, possessed heated rooms which may have been in common use.
All three wings had interior and exterior colonnades or arcades.
The entrance divided the north wing into two unequal parts while the bath-house, placed beyond an outer court, was reached by a covered corridor.
The excavations in the early part of this century have made this a difficult building to interpret, but it is clear from the  published plan that alterations had been made to the original structure, which probably dates from the third century.
The best examples of mansiones yet excavated in the small towns are probably those at Chelmsford (p. 20), Godmanchester and Catterick (cf. fig. 4 A–C).
That at Godmanchester is a nearly symmetrical courtyard building, as at Silchester, but on a much reduced scale, with a separate bath-house close to the south wing.
It is thought to date to the Hadrianic period.
Interestingly, spaces in the north wing flanking the entrance hall have been interpreted as stables and tackrooms.
Outside there appear to have been two aisled barns of second- and third-century date respectively, which were probably used for the safe storage of taxes collected in kind or goods in transit.
This function is also reflected in two small square structures, projecting outwards from the south wall of the mansio which have been interpreted as tower granaries.
One of them remained in use after a disastrous fire in the late third century destroyed much of the town as well as the mansio , which was not rebuilt.
The mansio at Catterick was an altogether more asymmetrical building.
As originally constructed by a ninth cohort, probably of Legio VI , it contained only two or three suites of rooms together with some which are best interpreted as having a communal function.44 There was a small internal courtyard with an ornamental fountain and the old, first-century fort bath-house was rebuilt on a much larger scale.
Both mansio and baths had their own water supply.
Although the floors were at best concrete or opus signinum , most internal wall surfaces were covered in conventionally-ornamented painted plaster.
The building was entered from the south through a porticoed doorway.
It also enjoyed a pleasant situation on the south bank of the River Swale, close to a probable bridge carrying Dere Street.
The mansio was constructed in the Hadrianic period, following the evacuation of the nearby fort, but it seems to have gone out of use and been demolished by the end of the second century.
Why is not clear.
The only part to survive was a later addition to the original building, a warehouselike structure placed in front of and astride the main entrance.
It was extremely well built, with buttresses along its eastern side and a very solid paved floor.
As at Godmanchester, it was probably used as a collection and storage point.
Mansiones in other small towns are less well known.
That at Wall is claimed on the evidence of the existence of a large and complex bath-house and an apparently contemporary adjoining courtyard house, both situated to the west of the later walled enclosure (fig. 5 A).
Evidence indicates a destruction layer of c.
AD 160 across the courtyard building, after which it was not rebuilt although the baths appear to have remained in use.
An aerial photograph also indicates a possible mansio at Wanborough (fig. 4 D), again apparently outside the defences.
Braughing seems to contain a courtyard structure about which nothing is known, while a building at Cave's Inn is also difficult to interpret.
In the north, at Corbridge, a large building with a veranda and an ornamental fountain has been claimed as a mansio , although it started life as a winged-corridor house probably during the third century.
Some northern and Welsh vici also contained possible mansiones , such as Benwell, Chesterholm, Newsteads and Brecons.
As at Corbridge, they sometimes resemble rural dwellings, which should make us look again at some of the larger houses which occasionally occur in small towns further south.
Buildings at Great Chesterford, Margidunum and Camerton might have served as mansiones , although it should be stressed that separate bathhouses are absent, while it is difficult to identify the stables.
One interesting factor, seemingly common to all buildings interpreted as mansiones , is the scarcity of broken pottery, coins and other trinkets.
At Catterick, for instance, the only concentration of pottery was found in the ornamental fountain.
In consequence, it has been claimed that the buildings were seldom used, but a more likely explanation is that they were kept scrupulously clean for official travellers.
The size of most buildings would imply the simultaneous accommodation of several groups of messengers belonging to the cursus publicus .
Moreover, despite the lack of artefacts, the bath-house at Catterick had been heavily used to judge by the state of the furnace cheeks, which had been rebuilt several times, and of the iron beams supporting the hot-water boilers, one of which had been completely burnt through.
Mutationes , which provided a change of horses but no accommodation, have proved much more difficult to identify, even though they should  occur with greater frequency and at closer intervals than mansiones .
Since their prime purpose was to stable horses, and perhaps to accommodate their grooms (though this could have been done in hay lofts at first-floor level), it is instructive to consider the space needs.
Recent calculations suggest that a Roman cavalry horse required a space approximately 2.74 by I.82 m (9 by 6 ft) if it was to have room to lie down and rise again and if other horses could pass to its rear.
This length could be reduced slightly if they were stabled en echelon .
Consequently, it is necessary to seek buildings which conform to these figures or their multiples.
One candidate is the building just inside the north gate at Thorpe-by-Newark, identifiable on the aerial photographs as a much bolder outline than any other structure in the town.58 Excavation has revealed a long rectangular structure, constructed with substantial walls, but no more than mud floors, which was divided longitudinally into two very unequal parts by an internal wall (see figs. 91 and 92).
The wider section measures c. 6 m (20 ft) in width which would accommodate two rows of stabled horses.
The narrower part, c. 3 m (10 ft) wide, running the full length of the north side, could have been a service corridor or store for fodder; alternatively, this could have housed up to 15 or more horses, with the wider section accommodating carts, wagons, fodder or other stores.
This building had succeeded another of equally substantial masonry but of different plan and probably different function, since quantities of painted plaster were recovered.
Beyond this building at Thorpe, there is no other obvious candidate for a mutatio in Britain.
Much of the difficulty of identification is caused by an almost complete ignorance of what we are looking for.
Certainly if the building at Thorpe is a mutatio , then it is not visibly imitated elsewhere!
The last category of official building which ought to exist in many defended sites is the residence of the administrative officer, and there are a number of alternatives.
The officers, whether beneficiarii, stratores or regionarii , might have been in charge of, and therefore accommodated in, the mansio , if one existed, though it has been argued that a beneficiarius , usually only a legionary, was too junior in status to have charge of such an important building.
It is equally possible that these officials were billeted on local householders, a practice which became increasingly common among Roman army units in the late empire.
The last alternative is that buildings were specifically constructed for them.
As already noted above, small towns often contain one or two buildings of greater extent and more sophisticated plan than the general run.
Examples are known at Great Chesterford, Camerton, Margidunum and Droitwich, among others.59 But these structures on the whole resemble the familiar winged-corridor villas of the countryside, a building style which was restricted neither to Britain nor entirely to the countryside.60 Care must therefore be observed in trying to identify them as the residences of minor provincial officials, for obviously they might be no more than the farmhouses of local landowners and in degree little different from a normal villa.
Clearly archaeological evidence is insufficient in itself and absolute proof of official connections can come only from epigraphic sources.
There is one last function which small towns might have possessed at provincial level, that of acting as administrative centres for imperial estates.
Again the evidence is sadly lacking, not only for the centres but also for the estates themselves.
Nevertheless there are some indicators.
In Britain, cases have been argued for the existence of estates in the Fens and around Salisbury Plain and Cranborne Chase, while the inscription from the ‘villa’ at Combe Down near Bath provides irrefutable proof.
This records the restoration of a principia by Naevius, an assistant procurator, in the early third century.
It cannot be the headquarters building of a normal fort and its association with a building which has all the appearances of a normal villa merely emphasizes the difficulties of interpretation; but for the inscription a villa it would be.
Nothing is known about the location and extent of the associated estate; it could have been connected with stone-quarrying around Bath, which was being extracted and used for tombstones at Colchester before the Boudiccan revolt.
A more certain case of an imperial estate is known in Gallia Belgica, in the Ardennes forest region, which was administered from the curia Arduennae (Amberloup).
What form of building this curia took is unknown, though it may not have been unlike a principia .
No small town in Britain can certainly qualify  as a centre for the administration of an imperial estate, although a case might be made for including Godmanchester and Water Newton.
Both lie close to the Fen Edge, where there is some evidence to suggest that the land reclaimed under Hadrian between the Car Dyke and the Midfendic formed part of such an estate.
Godmanchester contains an early third-century building, not unlike a principia in plan, which its excavator originally interpreted as a town hall.
It is difficult to accept this interpretation because there is no evidence to imply that the site was ever promoted to the rank of civitas capital, and it seems simplest to assume that it fulfilled some other official function.
Using the Combe Down principia as a possible parallel, then an official link with an estate in the Fens is a serious possibility.
Interestingly, the date of the building is roughly contemporary with the Combe Down inscription, coinciding with a considerable tightening of control over imperial estates under the emperor Severus, when the liberality which had been introduced first by Hadrian and later by Pertinax was largely cancelled.
The repair of derelict, and the construction of new, buildings connected with these estates could be seen as part of the same policy.
The case at Water Newton is rather less certain, but it has been argued that either one of the two large buildings visible at the centre of the defended area served as an administrative centre for the Fens, or that this function was performed by the remarkable complex identified at Castor to the north-east of the town's extramural suburbs.
Equally, these buildings may have been connected with the promotion of the town to the status of a civitas capital.
Many small towns probably played a part in the machinery of local government.
It has been argued on a small amount of evidence from Britain and a greater quantity from Gaul, that most civitates were divided into constituent pagi , or rural areas, and that small towns acted as pagus centres.
This seems to have been the case among the Cantiaci and Durotriges, with secondary centres at Rochester and Ilchester respectively.
It has also been suggested that several of these pagus centres were later promoted to the rank of civitas capitals in their own right; examples for which a case has been made on epigraphic grounds in Britain include Carlisle, Ilchester and Water Newton.
Various local government officials were connected with both pagi and the vici which acted as their administrative centres.
Again the evidence from southern Britain is scanty, and consequently reference must be made to the similarly organized settlements outside the northern forts.
One class of administrator, the magister , is attested from the vicus outside the fort at Old Carlisle, on an altar dedicated by the vikanorum magistri .
Other communities of vici acting as corporate bodies are attested by inscriptions from Housesteads, Chesterholm and even as far north as Carriden on the Antonine Wall.
The famous inscription from Brough-on-Humber (vicus Petuariensis), attesting the presence of a theatre, shows that some vici possessed magistrates with the title of aedile , although we may be dealing here with a site which was also a civitas capital.
Several inscriptions from Gallia Belgica record officials with the title curator , such as the joint curatores attested at Bitburg (Vicus Beda)in the civitas Treverorum .
Alternatively, as at Old Carlisle, the simple title magister sufficed, as for example on the inscription dedicated to Mercury by Amilius,magister vici Bodatii (Vic-sur-Seille) in the territory of the Mediomatrices.
Another inscription from the same civitas , found at the capital of Metz, refers to …nius Numidius magister pagi Io…and demonstrates that pagi could also have their own officials.
There is at least one instance of an aedile of a pagus , although we might suspect that the praefectus pagi of the Gallic Epotes lies outside the normal run of local government officials, though it must be remembered that magistrates could appoint prefects to act for them in their absence.
Whatever they were called, the duties of all these officials must have been much the same, acting as leaders of their communities, settling minor infractions and disputes, approving corporate actions of the inhabitants, especially in religious dedications, and acting generally as an essential link between government and people.
It is, though, not entirely clear to what extent they were liable for tax collection and assessment.
Ultimately, in most matters, they were probably subordinate to the authorities of the civitas in which they dwelt.
Not all small towns possessed governmental or administrative functions and even those which did more often than not combined them with  others.
Indeed, sites which were generally successful often attracted organs of government to them, as was the case with the cities and major towns, but in these and other instances it is always difficult to distinguish the primary function once it has been overlaid or mixed with others.
Two other specialized functions, those of religion and industry, stand out from the mass and not surprisingly numerous settlements throughout the empire can be shown to have developed around important sanctuaries or centres of manufacturing and extraction.
One of the remarkable features of Gaul was the sometimes huge religious sites which developed often in out-of-the-way places.
The example at Ribemont-sur-Ancre near Amiens extended over 800 m (2600 ft) and contained, apart from the temple at the centre, a theatre, bath-house and numerous ancillary buildings.
Others are known at Champlieu, at the source of the River Seine, and at Sanxay near Vienne, while still others combined sanctuaries with pagus centres.
In Britain, two major religious sites were connected with the spas at Bath and Buxton.
Much is known about Bath, where the hot springs were almost certainly venerated in the pre-Roman Iron Age.
They attracted increased attention soon after the Roman conquest, so much so that by the end of the first century the great sanctuary and classical temple dedicated to Sulis Minerva, together with the bathing establishment, had been fully developed.
The springs' curative properties were well enough known to attract visitors from other provinces as well as several soldiers; the latter raise the possibility that Bath was an official convalescent centre for the army as with some spas in Germany.
Thanks to the fame of its springs, Bath became a prosperous community, providing services for visiting pilgrims and developing its own industries, one of which involved the production of pewter vessels.
As a successful town, it is not unlikely that it also became a pagus centre for part of the Dobunni and additionally the residence of the regionarius mentioned above (p. 34).
It may also have acted as a service centre for the nearby imperial estate centred on Combe Down and for the numerous rich villas which grew up in the vicinity.
By contrast, very little is known about Buxton; but for its name, which includes the element Aquae , as with Bath, there would be little to indicate the existence of a major Roman site.
Its name also implies that the mineral springs, which have continued in use until now, were once presided over by a patron deity called Arnemetia, goddess of the sacred grove.
Somewhere, there must be the remains, of not only a Roman bathing establishment, but also a temple and sanctuary dedicated to this goddess.
Not all religious sites were so openly associated with water, however, despite its popularity in Celtic theology, but caution is necessary when trying to identify religion as the primary function for a settlement's foundation and continued existence, as so many small towns possessed at least one temple.
It is probably correct, nevertheless, to accept a dominant religious function for those sites where there is either a multiplicity of temples or a religious precinct with associated facilities.
Such a site is Springhead between Rochester and London, where at least seven religious structures existed within a common temenos .
This group must have exerted a considerable attraction, enough to account for the growth of a small community containing shops, a bakery and blacksmiths.
Another exists at Frilford, with a walled precinct containing at least one temple and now supplemented by the recently-discovered amphitheatre.
Similar types of settlement have also been identified at Harlow and Wycomb among others.
Some of these sanctuaries appear to lie on the boundaries between civitates , an indicator that they almost certainly date back to the Iron Age and marked tribal limits.
Such is the case with Ribemont-sur-Ancre mentioned above, situated probably at the junction of three boundaries between the Ambiani, Viromandui and Gaulish Atrebates.
In Britain, Frilford and Woodeaton may mark the boundary between the Catuvellauni and Dobunni, Harlow between the Trinovantes and Catuvellauni, and Brigstock between the Corieltavi and Catuvellauni.
Since many of these religious sites supported markets and periodic fairs, it is not surprising that substantial settlements developed round them, often with Iron-Age antecedents.
In the circumstances, it is therefore often difficult to be sure of the first arrival.
Were the sites ancient inter-tribal meeting places, later sanctified by a religious presence, or did an existing sanctuary attract trades because of the volume of people attending?
We shall  probably never know; it is the classic chicken and egg situation!
The last class of small town to be considered in this chapter covers those which developed primarily around either extractive or manufacturing industries.
Since the evidence for their existence is often of a less-perishable nature, it is easier to identify several in Britain.
Elsewhere, settlements like the Magdalensburg and Feldkirchen in Noricum, which depended for their prosperity on the famous Norican iron, are good examples.
In Britain, several small towns grew up close to mining areas, though very little is known about them.
The clearest example is Charterhouse which relied on the exploitation of lead and silver from the Mendips; mining occurred over an extensive area, largely to the south-east of the town, which apparently possessed a complex street system and a small amphitheatre.
A similar settlement seems likely at Weston-under-Penyard, where the widespread mass of slag and many furnaces has long pointed to the exploitation of iron from the Forest of Dean.
In these examples locations close to the sources of ore were of fundamental importance to their development, though distance did not always prevent sites further afield from profiting, as exemplified by pewter manufacture at Camerton and at Lansdown, near Bath, both within easy reach of the Mendips.
Mining settlements must also have existed at Dolaucothi and in the vicinity of Pentre in Flintshire, in association with the known reserves of gold and lead respectively, while a site at Carsington has recently been tentatively identified as Lutudarum , the headquarters of a mining company of that name, which operated the lead mines of the Peak District.
The extraction of salt was also important to the economy, and at least two places in Britain bear the name Salinae .
One can be confidently applied to Middlewich in Cheshire, where early exploitation of the inland brine springs is attested by the excavation of several brine pits and quantities of briquetage.
The other was placed by Ptolemy near the Wash in the territory of the Catuvellauni.
Certainly there is abundant evidence for the extraction of salt from sea water around the Wash, but so far no settlement has been found to match the name; on the distance from London alone, it ought to lie in the Sleaford or Heckington area.
It is usually considered, though, that Ptolemy made a mistake with his co-ordinates, since the distance from London to his second Salinae also coincides conveniently with the distance to Droitwich, where inland salt production had been well established since prehistoric times.
Although caution is necessary with this identification (p. 211), recent excavations have certainly demonstrated an expansion of the industry in the early Roman period, apparently focused on either side of the River Salwarpe.
Most of these settlements were dependent upon the development of their respective extractive and processing activities.
There are, however, several sites which apparently came to depend upon a range of processing and manufacturing activities, over and above the normal level of economic provision.
A good example is Wilderspool, where excavation has revealed considerable metal-working activities, particularly in the second century, as well as the manufacture of glass, tile and pottery, including mortaria .
Much the same pattern emerges at Middlewich, where early salt production has already been mentioned; this was soon joined by iron-working and pottery production, as well as a range of service trades.
Their concentration with other sites in the west Midlands and Cheshire plain, has been mentioned above (p. 12), together with the probable importance of the early stimulus provided by the army.
Finally, the large-scale manufacture of ceramics, principally pottery and to a lesser extent brick and tile, was an important industry at several small towns.
This was, of course, an extractive process partly dependent on the availability of suitable clay, together with supplies of wood for fuel and water; but there is no consistent link between towns and the known production centres, and many kiln sites are unrelated to settlements of any size, such as those at Farnham (Hants), the New Forest, Upchurch (Kent) and the extensive if dispersed area of kilns in the upper Nene valley between Duston and Irchester.
An exceptional case seems to be Brampton in Norfolk, where fieldwork and limited excavation have identified over 140 kilns in a well defined and compact industrial quarter west of the defended area.
Usually, however, the production area is more widely scattered and the exact relationship with a  given small town is harder to define.
The best example is Water Newton, set beside the River Nene, in an area which until recently supplied numerous brickworks.
Here, the largest of the towns considered in this volume grew at the centre of an extensive pottery industry which came to supply widespread military and civilian markets.
The town, known to have had the status of a vicus , is surrounded on all sides by numerous kiln sites and workshops which are everywhere interspersed with agricultural features and a number of substantial extra-mural houses or villas.
In this case, at least, a close link can be discerned between the development of the pottery industry and the increasing size and prosperity of the town.
Certainly the industry must have encouraged the growth of local villas and houses exploiting the potential of their agricultural resources to the full, while the town in its turn would have provided a workforce and essential access to the necessary marketing facilities.
Even so, pottery production was only one of the factors at work.
Elsewhere, the relationships are more difficult to define, usually because too little is known about the individual sites; examples include the extensive industries of Brockley Hill and Mancetter-Hartshill, while Dorchester-on-Thames also lay on the fringes of the kiln area producing Oxford wares.
One factor in the siting of many of these pottery industries and their associated centres was the ease of access to good transport systems, notably by water.
Water Newton was ideally placed on the River Nene running to the Wash, while Brampton enjoyed access to the coast along the River Bure.
Mancetter was even better placed, being close to the head waters of three of the main river systems of Britain — the Avon and Severn, the Trent and Humber, and the Wash; the distribution of mortaria produced here reflects this geographical pattern.
It can be seen, therefore, that there were a number of small towns and settlements in Britain which clearly owed their origin and continued prosperity to certain specialized functions, while others acquired these functions with time, often as a result of direct imposition in accordance with central government policy.
It should be stressed again, however, that although a specialized function might well exist, many small towns ultimately came to possess a range of functions, not least those which were most conveniently placed to exploit their full urban potential.
ECONOMIC FUNCTIONS
Of all the functions which can be attributed to ancient urban settlements, the most universal was an economic one.
No matter what the origin of a site was, at some stage during its development and probably sooner rather than later — it will have acquired an economic role.
It is not difficult to see why.
People in even the simplest forms of developed economy required goods and services which they could not provide for themselves.
When the same people were massed together, for whatever reason, they represented a lucrative market capable of attracting the providers of these goods and services.
In time, this economic function may have grown strong enough to draw yet more people to it, so that it came to overshadow the original cause for the settlement's foundation.
Much has been written about the economy of the Roman Empire and its provinces, and the subject is something of a minefield for the unwary.
Summarized briefly, current opinions see the Roman economy as pre-eminently agricultural, occurring against a background of rising population, a growing proportion of which was not engaged in agricultural pursuits.
Productivity also rose for a number of reasons of which taxation was probably the most important, although factors like technological improvements, peaceful conditions, access to wider markets and slavery must all have played a part.
It has also been claimed that towns were centres of consumption rather than production and that even local trade was insignificant in volume because of poor transport facilities, while long distance trade was with few exceptions restricted to luxuries because there was no mass-market.
These views may well apply to the centre of the empire but require modification for the northwest provinces.
Good transport is vital to any trading activity.
In the Roman world it was probably responsible for any expansions which occurred in trade and equally for any constraints that existed.
Carriage by road was expensive but by water it was comparatively cheap.
In this respect, the northwestern provinces possessed a distinct advantage over the Mediterranean regions; here there was an abundance of navigable rivers, while Britain in particular had easy access to coastal transport.
There is a good deal of evidence from these provinces to show that inland waterways were major thoroughfares; it ranges from the idiosyncratic distribution of pottery and other hardware to discoveries of the boats used, including the great flat-bottomed lighters which plied the Rhine and its tributaries.
Using this evidence it can be shown that, in these regions, large quantities of certain products travelled considerable distances, and with some materials it is more than possible to detect the growth of a sizeable mass market, despite the model of the Roman economy sketched above.
Roads, nevertheless, still played an important part and would have been used by all and sundry, even if they were originally built for military and political reasons.
Indeed, some main roads represent corridors of distribution; objects like pottery are found along them and for a distance on either side, but the number of object-discoveries diminishes rapidly beyond a certain distance from the road.
Yet so much has been written about the wonders of the Roman road system that probably not enough allowance is made for their often poor condition.
Winter frosts would have annually disrupted the surfaces, as happened to the coach roads of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries before the invention of Mr Macadam; the end result would have been a series of  monumental ruts and pot-holes.
Repairs would have been difficult, if not pointless, in the depths of winter, so that almost a close season for carts and wagons might have been observed, with pedestrians and pack-animals being the only travellers.
Most small towns of any significance lay on the principal roads; some also enjoyed the advantages provided by a nearby river.
Many were, therefore, in positions to take economic advantage of the transport system, which connected them not only with each other but also with major centres.
The benefits of this system can be demonstrated by the example of the trader who carted a crate of whetstones from Craven Arms, or possibly from Stony Stratford, to Wroxeter for a market day, where he found himself in the company of other merchants selling mortaria as well as samian ware from Gaul.
It seems unlikely that they were the only merchants travelling considerable distances around Britain selling hardware; nor is it likely that they were unaccompanied by other traders in cloth, leather, wood, fruit and vegetables or other miscellaneous products.
Small towns, therefore, occupied a defined economic niche, even if it is but imperfectly understood.
At one level, they would have supplied a range of services and facilities for a resident agricultural population and for travellers on the roads and rivers; at another, they would have provided periodic or permanent markets for the surrounding countryside in exchange for agricultural products.
In most cases the development of these functions would have gone hand in hand with the growth of the settlement and would have been directly related to the increasing dependence of the surrounding hinterland on the goods and services which it could provide.
The better and more diverse they were, then the greater the area of influence which could be ‘captured’, and correspondingly the more important a site in the economic and urban hierarchy.
Additionally it has been recognized that the largest concentrations of first-class villas often clustered around the small towns in preference to major towns or cities.
Thus in Kent, there are far more villas concentrated around Rochester than Canterbury, while elsewhere it is true of Bath, Ilchester and Water Newton, at the expense of Cirencester, Dorchester and Leicester respectively.
Exceptions among the major towns are Chichester, Verulamium and Winchester.
These distributions are difficult to explain, although they emphasize the importance of some small towns and imply an economic basis for the association.
Villas were profit-making concerns which needed to dispose of their produce to remain viable; towns provided convenient markets, but why some small towns should have seemingly provided better markets than their larger counterparts remains unclear.
The association could be related to the question of landownership and the availability of labour, and may have nothing whatever to do with markets.
The extent of these economic activities must have been constrained by the modes of transport available.
For foot traffic, a distance of some 10–12 km (6–7 miles) would probably have been a more-than-adequate day's journey, especially if burdened with goods and needing to leave enough time for their disposal at the destination.
Pack animals, with the driver also mounted, could probably have doubled the distance, as indeed could have most carts and wagons.
A light chaise or unburdened pony could have extended this perhaps to 30 km (19 miles), but any distances above those quoted would have required an overnight stop and consequently an increase in the prices of the goods.
While this might have proved acceptable for itinerant traders, to most local people it would have been unattractive and most would have preferred to be home by nightfall or soon after.
It seems likely, therefore, that transport must always have been a limiting factor on trade.
How often, for instance, did a normal inhabitant of Thorpe travel to Lincoln, his nearest major town, but some 30 km (19 miles) away?
It is worth remembering that there are still people in Britain today who have never been to London.
Despite traffic and trade, all small towns maintained strong agricultural connections, because their inhabitants had to be fed, clothed and shod.
Unfortunately, detailed evidence for the nature of these connections is limited, so it remains impossible to estimate how many of the inhabitants were involved in farming as opposed to other occupations.
It is difficult to identify farms inside these settlements, while related field systems have been suggested at only a handful of sites, including the presumed Romano-British  fields at Braintree and the sequence of enclosures at Brampton.
Elsewhere, it is likely that the original boundaries between the fields will only be recognized through extensive survey and excavation.
Within many sites, however, there are ranges of buildings which often occupy enclosed strips of land not unlike medieval crofts, suggesting that some people, craftsmen included, were raising their own produce or keeping their own pigs and fowl.
At Great Dunmow, for instance, it has been suggested that such strips were up to c. 100 m (327 ft) deep, while the Fosse Way southwest of Ilchester was lined by two successive rows of enclosures some 50 by 20 m (165 by 66 ft) in size.
There is also evidence from Godmanchester to indicate an associated range of agricultural features, including two-post hay racks, hearths, corn-drying floors, threshing floors and a large number of wicker granaries.
Although we know very little about the tenurial and ownership patterns of these sites, it is likely that some of the inhabitants actually owned land outside the settlement and grew their own crops.
It has also been suggested that they and other less-fortunately-placed inhabitants provided a reservoir of day-labourers for nearby landowners to help on the land at harvest time or on other labour intensive occasions.
It is probably true to say, therefore, that most small towns, when taken with their immediate surroundings, were to some degree self-sufficient in basic agricultural produce.
This would have included grain and a moderate supply of meat, from either stock or game.
Limited supplies of fruit and vegetables must have been available, while an abundance of natural fruits and nuts could have been gathered in season, for either home consumption or for sale in the local market.
Local resources were probably exploited to satisfy the demand for wool, leather and wood, while spinning, weaving, fulling and possibly dyeing were all essentially part of the normal domestic scene.
It remains difficult, however, to measure this level of self-sufficiency on purely archaeological grounds.
Some sites were clearly more dependent than others upon their own agricultural production, which encourages the belief that many small towns at the bottom end of the urban scale did not develop much in size or functional complexity beyond their large-village counterparts.
Higher up the scale, however, a greater reliance on produce from nearby rural estates might be expected, traded in exchange for a range of urban goods and services; however, it is precisely this aspect of economic co-operation which is difficult to establish on current evidence.
Beyond the agricultural connection, the main economic strength of a community resided in the number and variety of craftsmen which it could support.
It is unfortunate, therefore, that the range of economic services carried out at individual small towns is never easy to define.
In contrast to Gaul and Germany, where there are numerous inscriptions referring to craftsmen, as well as several sculptured reliefs, hardly any relevant inscriptions, let alone sculptures, occur in Britain, and even they are usually divorced from the physical structures and work places.
We must therefore depend almost exclusively on the archaeological record, even though the survival of crucial evidence for the range of shops and their resident craftsmen is frequently highly selective and difficult to interpret in the context of market-places and external economic contacts.
Archaeology has, however, revealed a growing number of very characteristic narrow rectangular structures stretching back from the available street frontages and often forming blocks or rows.
These strip buildings are a common feature of urban sites throughout the empire and are usually identified as the shops and workshops of resident traders and craftsmen.
They are normally found to be divided into two very unequal parts.
The larger part at the front often opens directly onto the street, but may have been protected by some form of veranda.
The smaller portion to the rear is sometimes subdivided.
The usual interpretation sees the front section as the shop or workshop and the rear as the accommodation for the shopkeeper.
When the rear subdivision is absent, it is usually assumed, on very little evidence, that an upper storey acted as the domestic residence or, alternatively, as storage space.
A classic example was excavated at Catterick.
The front of the shop was open to the street, but large blocks of stone set at intervals across the threshold carried rebates for timber uprights, presumably to support the gable or perhaps an upper storey.
A narrow slot ran in front of the rebates, which was clearly intended to take a  series of wooden shutters to close the whole opening.
The floors in the front, and larger, part of the premises were a confused mass of earthen layers, intermixed with ash and other deposits.
Exactly what activity was being carried on remains uncertain, but it seems to have had commercial implications.
At the rear of the shop were two rooms, set alongside a narrow passage leading to a back door.
One room was heated by a hypocaust, fired from the shop; the other had a decent pink concrete floor, quarter-round moulding and plastered and painted walls.
Clearly the shopkeeper lived in reasonably comfortable, if cramped quarters.
Comparable strip buildings are found in varying numbers in almost all small towns and they are, therefore, a useful indicator of a town's relative economic importance.
Of course not all such structures can be certainly associated with commercial activities, which has led to the suggestion that many will have served as the homes of men working on the land.
Such caution has to be offset, however, by the rapidly growing body of evidence in favour of a commercial role, despite the fact that many important manufacturing and trading activities seldom left debris which survives except in the most favourable circumstances; the absence of recognizable evidence within individual buildings cannot be regarded, therefore, as proof of a non-specialist role.
Moreover a shop would normally be emptied of its goods before abandonment, so that only a sudden catastrophe, like a fire, would catch it fully stocked.
The relative importance of strip buildings in the urban plan has already been discussed (p. 27), and here it will suffice to mention only a few general examples.
At Corbridge, for instance, shops associated with various furnaces and ovens lined the main north-south and east-west roads from the early third century onwards.
An even more natural centre for economic growth was the junction of Ermine Street and Stane Street at Braughing, where, from the second century onwards, there were several possible strip buildings associated with bone-, iron- and copper-working.
Even more specialized in character would seem to be sites like Middlewich, where a number of strip buildings have already been noted in connection with iron-and copper-working, cobbling, weaving, glass and salt production (p. 41).
This evidence is echoed at a whole range of other small towns, and it is probably safe to suggest a similar interpretation for those sites where strip buildings are well attested but where either excavation or detailed evidence for trading activities is limited, as for example at Water Newton.
Detailed evidence for the full range of craftsmen at individual small towns is inevitably lacking, but it is possible to assemble a general picture by using material from a wide variety of sources.
Evidence is most abundant for specialists involved in ceramics and metal-working, because it survives better in the archaeological record.
Individual workshops are relatively common, being identified by furnaces or industrial waste.
Two examples can suffice.
One is the second-century establishment at Godmanchester, manufacturing both iron and copper goods in a timber-framed workshop with an open front which contained four shaft furnaces and a bowl shaped smithing furnace.
The other, at Ashton, is the second-century strip building with a wide entrance, which has been identified as a blacksmith's shop and contained five identifiable furnaces, a stone-lined quenching tank and numerous tools and completed metal objects.
Blacksmithing must have been a common occupation with one, or probably more, smith in each town and settlement, though it has to be remembered that some of the larger country estates, such as Chedworth, were virtually self-sufficient with their own resident smiths.
Among the sites where characteristic evidence for iron extraction or smithing has been located might be included those at Ancaster, Braintree, Camerton, Holditch, Sapperton and Wilderspool.
The importance of the blacksmith is further attested by three ironwork hoards at Dorchester-on-Thames, Great Chesterford and Sandy.
Copper-working was probably equally common, in view of the frequency of objects made from copper alloys.
A practising coppersmith, who was also engaged in manufacturing fine champleve enamel work, is certainly known from Catterick, where the bottom of a wooden waste tub was found intact, full of small filings and chippings and some tiny fragments of coloured enamels.
Several fine enamelled objects were found scattered on the floor, either representing part of his stock or else intended for scrap.
Of particular interest was a pear-shaped  enamelled perfume flask, since the nearest similar vessel has been found at Nijmegen, indicating some form of trade connection between Catterick and the Netherlands.
Elsewhere, copper-working has been identified at several sites which include Brampton, Droitwich, Harlow, Neatham, Springhead and Wilderspool.
Additional insights into production are provided by the blanks for making brooches at Baldock, while the counterfeiters' Severan coin-moulds at Ancaster and the fourth-century examples at Duston represent a less legal activity.
Other metal-workers are far less well represented in the small towns.
Of particular interest is the goldsmith's establishment recorded in an inscription from Norton near Malton.
It was managed by a slave, who represents one of the classes of society present in the small towns.
Archaeology can also demonstrate an interest in lead and its derivative alloy, pewter, from the evidence of workshops or stone moulds, as for example at Camerton, Nettleton Shrub and Towcester.
Beyond the metal-workers, the only other regularly-attested craftsmen are the residential or semi-residential potters, working a single kiln and producing a range of wares largely for local consumption.
It is important to remember, though, that the production need not have been a full-time or permanent occupation, nor necessarily an urban-based activity, as the much wider pattern of small- and large-scale production demonstrates.
Several individual kilns are known in the small towns, sometimes in association with buildings.
One example is the third-century kiln at Godmanchester, which can be related to a building in Pinfold Lane, while a clay-floored structure at Hacheston was interestingly associated with both a third-century kiln producing grey wares and an iron-smithing furnace.
Elsewhere, kilns have been recorded at several sites, including Coddenham, Great Casterton, Ilchester, Sapperton and Springhead.
Larger-scale pottery production is considered elsewhere (p. 41).
Although the evidence for other craftsmen and traders is not nearly as well represented, being dependent in part upon the degree of archaeological survival, it can nevertheless reveal a surprisingly extensive range.
Particular interest inevitably attaches to the limited number of inscriptions, including two from Bath, which mention Priscus, a lapidarius or stone-mason, and a sculptor Sulinus, who probably also worked at Cirencester.
Priscus was a native of the region around Chartres in Gaul and both may have been employed in the construction of the great bath and temple complex.
Besides them epigraphy records a number of oculists' stamps from Bath, Kenchester (two examples) and Sandy, each bearing the name of the individual concerned alongside his patent remedies for treating opthalmic disorders.
They are likely to reflect an itinerant rather than a permanent presence.
Bath also had a resident gem-cutter, whose collection of 34 unmounted intaglios somehow ended up in the main drain carrying the overflow from the reservoir housing the hot spring.
Such craftsmen were considered more than mere artisans, and their products, especially set in seal rings, were highly esteemed.
His presence at Bath indicates the town's prosperity and perhaps reflects the concentration of rich villas surrounding it.
But he was by no means alone in Britain, for a combined silversmith and jeweller's stock is known at the extensive settlement of Snettisham in Norfolk.
This contained not only 110 unmounted intaglios, but also 17 more set in silver rings which formed part of a collection of 89 such rings; all of them, together with other items of silver jewellery, bars of silver, scraps of gold and two implements, were enclosed and hidden in a small pot.
Several sites provide evidence for leather working, though it is represented by only one identified tannery at Alcester, which probably used the hides of cattle that grazed the water meadows of the River Avon.
More usually, leather fragments and offcuts are the main indicators, as for example at Bath, Brampton, Carlisle, Middlewich and Water Newton.
The importance of shoe leather in some suggests a particular trade, confirmed by the cobbler's last from Sandy.
These activities were presumably far more common than the evidence so far suggests, given the widespread use of leather.
It is likely that most small towns contained a tannery since the processes and equipment needed for the production of leather were not entirely suitable for domestic use, apart from the exceedingly unpleasant smell generated.
The corresponding evidence for textile manufacture  and treatment on a commercial basis is everywhere lacking in Britain, except for the possible cloth-finisher's or dyer's shop at Chelmsford, which contained several hearths and a large tile structure identified as a vat.
But wool was available to all classes of society, and there are numerous references in classical art and literature to its collection from thickets and hedges where sheep grazed.
Consequently a great deal of fulling, spinning, weaving and dyeing was carried out at domestic level, with plants probably being deliberately cultivated to provide dyes.
Working in bone was also important; the debris normally survives and workshops have been recorded at Braughing, Catterick, Great Chesterford, Neatham and Springhead.
Beyond the timber, brick and stone structures themselves and their tiled or slated roofs, there is virtually no direct evidence to confirm the presence of carpenters, masons, bricklayers, slaters, tilers and thatchers, and it is difficult to guess to what degree the local construction industry was a specialist concern.
Tile-kilns have been located at Tiddington and at Kelvedon, south of the town, but as with pottery production they need not be urban-based and may also be seasonal.
They probably served wider markets than the associated town, to judge from the tileries centred on Minety.
In contrast, the lime-kilns at Brampton and Droitwich were perhaps concerned with the construction of the defences.
These two examples can hardly represent the total number which originally existed, although lime may have been produced in small, temporary clamps which have not survived later destruction.
Production centres for window glass and glass vessels are, at present, few and far between, beyond the large glasshouse in the civitas capital at Caistor-by-Norwich.
Fairly extensive production can be envisaged at Wilderspool, where the good-quality local sand provided an essential ingredient.
Elsewhere among small towns, the evidence is restricted to Bath, Ilchester and Mancetter.
At the first, a building a short distance outside the town contained a furnace used for reworking coloured cullet.
Evidence for more exotic trades is also rather limited, except for the suggested school of mosaicists and sculptors at Water Newtons and Carlisles respectively; it is not surprising, therefore, that mosaics are generally rare in small towns, even though they often occur in nearby villas.
Evidence for traders associated with the food market and with the provision of accommodation for travellers is even more restricted.
In the ancient world, the jobs of miller and baker were normally combined, but since much milling and baking was a domestic operation the presence of a professional must indicate the prosperity of the settlement.
The evidence for grain-milling in small towns is limited but includes the third century building with two millstones in the Kate's Cabin suburb at Water Newton, the three millstones in the yard of building 16 at Springheads and the very large millstone at Wanborough, which implies the use of water or other mechanical power.
Water-mills have been identified elsewhere notably on Hadrian's Wall and at Ickham in Kent, where it probably lay on an estate near Canterbury.
Bakeries have also been postulated at a handful of sites, including Holditch and Springhead, as well as the two second-century establishments at Chelmsford.
These examples at least seem clear; more often, buildings contain ovens or hearths which suggest bread-making but no other characteristic debris has been recognized.
An example is one of the strip buildings at Sea Mills, which contained a number of ovens in the front room.
Alternatively it might have been a shop purveying cooked food, or it could have provided eating facilities for travellers along the road.
An open-fronted building at Holditch, containing cooking vessels, a large quern and an oven might have provided a similar service, while the evidence for a counter in the vicus at Greta Bridge points to another obvious gap in the evidence.
Although the quantity and quality of all this information seems impressive at first glance, it is inevitably uneven in its coverage of different trades.
This makes it difficult to define the precise level of services available in individual cases, but it does not prevent an attempt at drawing some general conclusions about the economic role of small towns.
It has to be stressed at the outset that all sites provided some level of economic servicing, which will have originated in several ways.
In some cases a pre-existing centre, which already possessed an economic role, will have been incorporated into the new system and perhaps attracted other functions as well.
In others, the economic function will have followed in the wake of a variety of other causes, as when sites were founded as vici outside forts or posting  stations or as administrative centres in the new local and provincial hierarchy.
Once established, however, this function is likely to have assumed an over-riding importance at those towns which were most suitably placed to exploit its potential.
The evidence demonstrates that most small towns and even some villages provided a range of specialist goods and services.
The range can be seen to be surprisingly restricted, however, with the emphasis on basic services (especially metalworking) at most sites; more specialized activities are less well represented.
Almost all sites probably had one or more resident blacksmith and coppersmith, both repairing old items and manufacturing new ones, whereas plumbers, pewterers and tinsmiths seem to have been rarer; only one goldsmith is known, while no silversmiths are attested.
Less certain is the importance of carpenters, joiners, wheelwrights and coopers, even if all these occupations were distinct.
Carpenters' tools turn up on several sites, together with a variety of nails, no doubt made by the local blacksmiths.
More than enough work for at least one such practitioner must have existed in most towns, as there would have been for slaters, tilers and masons in those areas where building stone was in regular use.
It is perhaps a mistake, though, to try to identify too many categories of independent craftsmen, even though the sources can attest a surprising level of specialization; in a small community, a jobbing builder could be his own mason, bricklayer, carpenter, tiler, thatcher, and slater, possibly even burning his own lime and making his own bricks.
Other specialists might be expected, among them bone-workers, tanners, bakers and millers, and perhaps other food retailers, as well as a local potter and more rarely a glass-blower, where the necessary raw materials were available.
Caution is necessary, however, because not all of these activities were certainly going on all the time.
A single kiln, for instance, probably implies a potter's presence for only a short period in the life of a settlement some may even have been itinerant or at best semi-residential, moving on once local demand had been satisfied.
For luxury and exotic products, such as mosaics, recourse would have to be made, save in exceptional circumstances, to the nearest major centre.
Most of these traders and craftsmen will have contributed directly to the self-sufficiency of the local community, much like the average nineteenth-century village.
Some will also have provided a range of facilities for those officials and private individuals travelling along the highways, which would have been an important element in those small towns which housed a mansio or, to a lesser extent, a mutatio , though there is surprisingly little evidence to demonstrate this.
More importantly, many will have increasingly supplied goods and services to the nearby villas and rural settlements, as individual small towns came to act as centres for periodic or permanent local fairs or markets.
These markets would have attracted a range of itinerant craftsmen and merchants, much like the trader in whetstones already mentioned (p. 44).
But even now it is almost impossible to define the relative economic importance of each town from the available archaeological evidence much of the interpretation depends on hypothesis.
Market buildings, in particular, have proved especially elusive in the small towns and there is little to compare with the forum or macellum of the cities.
Various courtyard buildings have sometimes been interpreted as markets, but certainty of identification remains impossible on current evidence.
They include the larger of the two central structures at Water Newton and, more problematical, the unfinished Building XI at Corbridge.
Supposed market buildings at Alchester and Braughing have now more plausibly been reinterpreted as temples.
In the apparent absence of identifiable buildings, market-places can only be inferred from the presence of large open areas near the centres of towns, which could have served for periodic markets and fairs.
Sufficient examples are now known, sometimes in association with religious precincts or else with significant concentrations of third- and fourth-century coins, to suggest that they may have been more widespread.
Examples include the area of metalling alongside the north-south road at Dorchester-on-Thames, the open area south of the basilican building at Godmanchester, the area south of the temple at Irchester and the gravel areas flanking the temple at Wycomb, from which 1100 coins were recovered.
Not surprisingly the temporary structures erected in these areas have left few archaeological traces.
More problematically, open market areas need not be expected at all sites, because temporary stalls or even trestle  tables could have been erected in side-streets, as in some modern towns today.
The uneven quality of the evidence also makes it difficult to establish the range of goods being traded and the area of influence of any particular market.
One recent line of research has involved the investigation of pottery distributions as a possible indicator of a town's market area, partly because of its abundance and partly because it has been observed that pottery was not normally dispersed through permanent retail outlets.
Promising results were certainly obtained from early studies, not least from the analysis of pottery produced in Savernake Forest near Mildenhall.
This seemed to indicate that its distribution corresponded to the town's market or service area, with more distant projections down the main roads.
Doubts have been expressed, though, on this use of pottery distributions because the evidence can be interpreted in different ways and so care must be exercised in using these projections as indicators of market areas.
Even more difficult to establish is the relative economic importance of individual small towns in the regional and urban hierarchy to what extent was a small town or village dependent on its major neighbours, and how much did the larger towns and cities rely on supplies from the former?
Much would have depended on the distances involved and on the modes of transport available as already mentioned above (p. 44).
The constraints imposed on the market area by travel, therefore, probably account for the limited range of goods and services being provided at many sites, while more specialized facilities and luxury items were only available in the larger population centres where demand was greater.
It remains to mention the evidence for harbours and quays in the small towns, as indicators of a possible role in the distribution of goods.
Not surprisingly these features are principally confined to the cities of the province, though we might expect some form of provision at those sites where water transport clearly played a part in moving bulky products like building stone or pottery (p. 43).
No certain civilian storehouses are known in the small towns, while quays are confined at present to those of the second century at Heronbridge near Chester, probably for official use, the timber platform at Brampton and the timber piles at Scole, though the published evidence for the last is ambiguous.
There is also the possibility of stone quays at Ilchester, while harbour facilities might be predicted with reasonable certainty at Sea Mills, since its restored name should read Portus Abonae .
It should be obvious from all that has been said that most small towns played a significant role in the economic life of the province, alongside the cities and major towns.
What remains to be defined is the relative importance of these activities at individual sites, not least the degree of dependence upon crafts and the economic relationship between town and country.
This is even a problem in better documented periods, and will only be resolved, if at all, by extensive research at the sites.
POTENTIAL CITIES
Carlisle (fig. 9)
‘It is unfortunate that so little is known of Carlisle,Luguvalium (Carvetiorum?), although it seems to have grown to considerable size and may have exceeded 70 acres (28 ha).’
So was written in 1973.
Fifteen years later the town of Carlisle is as much of an enigma as it was then, despite the expenditure of some very large sums of money and several large excavations.
This is not the fault of the excavators, who have worked wonders with the early Roman military installations, but it simply demonstrates the fickleness of archaeological investigation, with the town continuing to prove elusive.
The town of Carlisle is correctly identified with the Luguvalium of the Antonine Itinerary and the Lagubalium of the Ravenna Cosmography.
Comments on the Roman site have been made almost without a break since the Roman period.
In AD 685 St Cuthbert perambulated ‘illis murum civitatis’and also saw a fountain working, implying that there was still a functioning aqueduct; whether he was looking at the walls of a genuine town or of a fort is arguable.
It has always been considered that he viewed the walls of the town, even though they have still to be located with absolute certainty.
Later Bede, William of Malmesbury, Leland and Camden all either recorded or made comments on Roman remains at Carlisle.
Excavations have been taking place almost continuously in Carlisle since the early 1950s, and a number of useful summaries have been published, beginning with Shaw's in 1923.
The site lies on a low hill of red sandstone, which rises gently from the valley of the River Eden to the south but which terminates in two summits at present occupied by the cathedral and the castle.
To north and west of the hill are steep slopes to the Rivers Eden and Calder respectively on the east lies the River Petterill, while some kilometres further north the Solway forms the natural boundary to the Scottish lowlands.
It is, therefore, a site of some strategic significance in any military context, a fact which has been recognized continuously since Roman times, when, at least under Agricola if not before, a fort was established here.
The most recent sequence of excavations has established that there was limited pre-Roman occupation of the site, in the form of a round house, which may have been associated with areas of ploughed fields, found below Roman levels in Annetwell Street, even though they had apparently reverted to pasture immediately before the arrival of the Romans.
The date of their arrival is still disputed, although a temporary pre-Agricolan presence at least seems certain.
Be that as it may, the first permanent construction was a fort of Agricolan date, whose south gate was situated just south of Annetwell Street, implying that the larger part of the fort lay towards the area of the castle.
Although its size is not yet known, suggestions have been made that it was larger than a normal auxiliary fort and may have accommodated either a vexillation, possibly of Legio IX , whose tile-works may have been situated some 8 km (5 miles) south of Carlisle at Scalesceugh,(though the stamped tiles from there may belong to a slightly later period), or the Ala Petriana before its transfer to Stanwix over the river.
The fort underwent several alterations before it seems to have been systematically demolished early in the second century.
Excavations south of the fort have shown the existence of contemporary timber buildings as far south as Blackfriars Street.
One, in the grounds of Tullie House Museum just outside the fort gate, was 12.2m (40 ft) by at least 67 m (219 ft), with a      substantial plank floor over a solid foundation, and may have had a military function; attempts have also been made to interpret it as the base for a rampart surrounding an annexe to the fort.
Two more structures fronting the main road, whose line is roughly perpetuated by Blackfriars Street leading south from the fort, were separated by side-streets and were planned more like domestic dwellings than military structures.
It would seem, therefore, that a vicus grew in connection with the Agricolan fort; a writing tablet from Vindolanda records the presence of a centurio regionarius , who may have been connected with its administration.
So much is certain.
What is not clear, even now, is whether another fort was established in the vicinity before the construction of nearby Stanwix on Hadrian's Wall or whether the Carlisle position was left unguarded for a time.
Higham and Jones have argued, on the sole evidence of internal timber buildings, that another fort was constructed after a short interval early in the second century, and that it survived until it was demolished in the late second century; no contemporary fortifications for it have yet been recorded.
But the vital question still remains, no matter whether a second-century fort existed or not: at what point did the vicus become a genuine town?
It would seem unlikely before the Hadrianic period at the earliest, if comparison is made with some other northern sites such as Aldborough; it might be thought to be more likely under Severus or Caracalla, when the whole northern frontier region was extensively reorganized.
Much must also depend on the, as yet unknown, date of the constitution of the civitas Carvetiorum,for which it has been claimed that Carlisle acted as a capital.
This assumption is based on the figure of 53 Roman miles, quoted on the Middleton milestone as having been measured from Carlisle as the caput viae,and backed by the name of the civitas given on both the Brougham milestone and the tombstone of Flavius Martius from Old Penrith (see below p. 58).
The Brougham milestone dates to AD 258–68, so that the civitas must have been constituted by then.
But the possibility that Kirkby Thore, also a walled town, and some 30 km (19 miles) south of Carlisle, was the capital cannot be entirely ruled out.
One of the continuing difficulties about Carlisle is the elusiveness of the town wall, and consequently the size of the town.
In the past it has always been assumed that the wall followed the same line as its medieval successor.
But a search in Annetwell Street and West Tower Street failed to find it.
Yet the first attempt in 1944 to find the Roman wall of Canterbury, which was also supposed to follow the line of the medieval wall, proved a failure, so not too much should be read into the Carlisle evidence.
Indeed reason would infer the existence of a wall, especially if the town became a civitas capital, and even more so if it became the capital of the late-formed province of Valentia .
It is probably best, therefore, to reject McCarthy's view that the town was never completely enclosed.
If virtually nothing is known of the town defences, only a little more can be said about the streets.
The road leading out of the south gate of the Agricolan fort was adopted as the principal north-south street whose line, as mentioned above, is perpetuated most closely by Blackfriars Street; at one point near its north end there was a suggestion of a flanking portico.
Another street at right angles to it was uncovered in Annetwell Street, where it was lined with timber buildings of second-century date, probably belonging to the fort.
Other streets or lanes have been found at Tullie House, Castle Street and Keays Lane, but their alignments and positions do not fit a regular, rectangular grid.
The main eastern axis of the system may, however, be represented by a major street on the line of Crown and Anchor Lane.
The second-century timber buildings in Annetwell Street mentioned above were replaced by masonry structures, possibly under Severus.
Their plans are reminiscent of barrack blocks, with lanes separating them.
It has been tentatively suggested that they, together possibly with their timber predecessors, formed part of a military enclave within the civilian town, thus perhaps resembling Corbridge (see p. 60) with its two military arsenals.
Other finds from the area which support this conclusion are 38 stamped tiles, representing Legiones II Augusta ,XX and possibly IX ; others were stamped IMP.
Architectural and sculptural fragments, as well as parts of two inscriptions, one of which was a dedication by Legio XX , were also found.
If such an enclosure existed it would presumably, as at Corbridge, have been fortified by a masonry  wall.
It is not impossible that, if the enclosure was abandoned in the withdrawal of the Roman army from Britain, civilians might have moved in to take advantage of its protection.
Were these the walls supposedly perambulated by St Cuthbert?
Another possible official building, constructed of wood and dating to the late first or early second century, was discovered lying within its own ditched enclosure near Keays Lane.
It has been tentatively interpreted as a praetorium , which could provide a residence for high-ranking officers or accommodation for them when travelling.
It had been deliberately dismantled after a short life.
Evidence for buildings that can most probably be associated with the civilian town is slight.
Part of a massive structure with walls 2 m (61 ft) thick was discovered at the junction of Castle and Fisher Streets; it was flanked on the west by a possible road running parallel to the main northwest to south-east axis.
Lying as it does near the putative centre of the town, the building may have had some public function.
The wooden houses off Blackfriars Street, already referred to (p. 51), were ultimately rebuilt at least twice in masonry, and it is interesting to observe that there was little change in the original property boundaries through to post-Roman times, despite changes in use.
Another masonry house, with a hypocaust, has been recorded at Keays Lane.
Its life was extended, with alterations, into the third and fourth centuries.
As an apparently domestic residence it seems strange that it replaced a timber structure which has been interpreted as a temple, although time elapsed between the latter's destruction and the building of the house; it is unusual to find so deliberate a secularization of a religious site in the Roman world.
But it must be admitted that the interpretation of the earlier building as a temple lacks conviction.
It more closely resembles a market hall with one or more tholoi such as can be seen at Lepcis Magna .
The stone-built house existed contemporaneously with a remarkably long-lived timber-framed building across a lane to the north, which was not dismantled until towards the end of the fourth century.
The famous aqueduct seen working by St Cuthbert remains elusive, but a water tank inside the portico of a building uncovered at Tullie House was presumably fed by it.
The most likely source of water was on the higher ground to the south.
Trade and industry are poorly represented in Carlisle, and what evidence there is, such as for copper-working and possibly tanning, may be military rather than civilian in character.
Nevertheless, a dedication slab from nearby Bowness indicates that merchants were in the area, and indeed, as a frontier town, Carlisle must have gained much of its wealth not only from the garrison on Hadrian's Wall but also from trade across the border.
There is a direct comparison here, not only with neighbouring Corbridge, but also with Wroxeter on the Welsh frontier and with major towns and cities on other frontiers such as Carnuntum , where the main trade route from the south Baltic to north Italy crossed the Danube.
Despite the identification so far of only one temple, and that of a dubious nature, something of the religious interests of the inhabitants of Carlisle has survived in the form of inscriptions.
A dedication to Cautes indicates the presence somewhere of a Mithraeum.
Variations on the theme of Mars also occur, such as Mars Barrex, Mars Belatucadrus and Mars Ocelus, while a dedication probably to Mars Victor was observed by William of Malmesbury still in position on a vaulted building, which was presumably a temple; these dedications are mainly by soldiers.
Other deities recorded are the Mother Goddesses, the Fates, Mercury and Hercules, while a small lead statuette of Diana came from the supposed temple site in Keays Lane.
Christianity may be represented by a tombstone and a gold ring with an incised palm branch and the legend AMA ME, although this religion has more significance in post-Roman Carlisle.
The largest cemetery with both inhumations and cremations extended southwards along the London Road, with more isolated burials at Murrell Hill and Botcherby.
The uninscribed tombstone from Murrell Hill is of some interest since it shows in relief a mother dressed in a tunic and seated in an upright chair, while holding an opened fan in her right hand.
Beside her stands a child, who nurses a pet bird on her lap.
This tombstone probably also marks the line of a main road leading southwest from Carlisle to Old Carlisle and Papcastle and thence to the Cumberland coast.
Other tombstones tell us a little about the inhabitants of the town, and include F. Antigonus Papias, a citizen of Greece and possibly a Christian, who      may also have been a merchant.
More importantly, a tombstone from Old Penrith, some distance south of Carlisle, refers to Flavius Martius, who is described as a senator and quaestor of the civitas Carvetiorum .
As a member and officer of the council of the Carvetii, he would have been well acquainted with Carlisle.
The end of Roman Carlisle is inextricably wedded to the account of St Cuthbert's visit, with its implication that there was still a fortified urban community in existence, headed by a praepositus civitatis (an echo from Lincoln?) and with a still functioning aqueduct, towards the end of the seventh century.
But excavations have so far failed to support this image and indeed have indicated a town in decline.
Certainly little structural evidence has been found to support this implication, although in the Blackfriars Street excavations, timber buildings, possibly of the fifth century, were replacing masonry structures on the same alignments.
There came a time, though, when even these were abandoned and a large hall-like building was constructed on a completely different alignment, which even ignored the Roman street lines.
But this evidence still leaves a large gap to be filled between the early fifth century and St Cuthbert's visit.
Helping to fill it, though, is a recent argument that Carlisle, as a civitas capital, was also a bishopric, and one of the few in Britain which survived the Romano-British to Anglo-Saxon transition; indeed the civitas is seen as the homeland of St Patrick.
In this way the Church, as in many other parts of the western empire, would have formed the bridge by which a moderately civilized Romano-British community was maintained and eventually transformed into an English one.
Corbridge (figs. 10 and 11)
Corbridge, like Carlisle, lies just behind Hadrian's Wall on the Stanegate, and as with Carlisle there is difficulty in disentangling the military structures from the civilian.
Sometimes referred to as Corchester, the site is to be identified with the Corstopitum of the Antonine Itinerary, and the Corielopocarium of the Ravenna list.
It is generally considered that the name Corstopitum is corrupt and Rivet and Smith prefer Coriosopitum .
The site has been known to many antiquaries from the eighteenth century onwards; Gordon recorded that the circuit of the walls was still conspicuous, a description which conflicts with the almost contemporary report of that other noted antiquarian of Hadrian's Wall, John Horsley, who wrote that the Roman site was almost entirely levelled and under the plough.
It is also worth noting that Corbridge was the site of what must be one of the earliest archaeological excavations ever to take place in Britain, directed by King John in 1201 when he was seeking treasure.
Apart from this unfortunate monarch, a good deal of interest has always been shown in the site, with a long sequence of systematic excavation from 1906 down to the present day.
Unfortunately, as some might say, the main objective of most of these excavations has been the military sites, and it is only in comparatively recent years that the civil site has gained its just recognition.
The earliest military site at Corbridge lies west of the Roman town at Red House, where a large Agricolan supply base and works depot was discovered in excavations carried out before the construction of the new bypass.
The earliest fort under the town dates to c.
AD 90, and was followed by a sequence of forts, with some chronological gaps, down to c.
AD 160, when part of the conventional buildings were demolished and replaced by workshops.
This succession of forts occupied an important position in the northern military command.
Not only did they guard the bridge crossing the Tyne, but they also stood at the junction of the Stanegate, running west towards Carlisle, and Dere Street, one of the two main arterial routes from York into central southern Scotland.
After Hadrian's Wall was built, they would have helped to control traffic on Dere Street passing through the Portgate, a customs post on the Wall similar to that at Knag Burn near Housesteads.
The military reconstructions c.
AD 160 saw the growth of buildings which were ultimately to affect the planning of the civilian town.
All the barracks were demolished, leaving within the defences only the granaries, now enclosed inside their own compound, the headquarters building and the commander's house.
The structures which replaced the barracks appear, from the  debris which they contained, to have been workshops, so anticipating the Severan arsenals.
But this layout seemingly only lasted a comparatively short time, before it too was swept away, together with the buildings which had survived the previous changes and the fort defences.
Work began on two new, larger, masonry granaries, although they were situated on the same site.
Next to the eastern granary the aqueduct, which no doubt had served the successive forts, was provided with a new channel and distribution tanks; the source of water is unknown but presumably it lay on the higher ground to the north of Hadrian's Wall.
The juxtaposition of a raised aqueduct close to the granary was not, one might think, a particularly sensible arrangement, as seepage from the aqueduct could well have made the granary, despite its raised floor, damper than was  desirable.
In the area previously occupied by the fort's headquarters and commander's house, a large masonry building was started; its plan encompassed an area 67 by 65.5 m (21g by 214 ft), with a central piazza or courtyard.
11 Corbridge looking east.
The exposed buildings show to the left of centre (Cambridge University Collection: copyright reserved )
But work on these new buildings was suddenly interrupted, when some still-standing timber structures in the vicinity were also burnt.
Unfortunately the date of this destruction, which may possibly be coupled with the similar fate of two nearby forts at Rudchester and Halton Chesters, is in dispute, and opinion is sharply divided over it; the date falls into one of the most vexed periods in the history of the northern British frontier.
The modern view sees the destruction as occurring c.
AD 180, to coincide with the account of an invasion of northern Britain by the historian Cassius Dio; the wholesale acceptance of this view, though, causes some strains in interpretation which cannot be easily reconciled, chief among them being the implication that the damaged forts and other frontier works were left in a state of disrepair for the best part of 25 years, an unbelievable occurrence in Roman military affairs of the period.
The alternative, and orthodox view, sees the damage as resulting from invasions from Scotland following the withdrawal of the garrisons by the governor of Britain and usurper emperor, Clodius Albinus, in AD Fig. 7.
A third but less acceptable possibility would place the invasion slightly later than this, in the governorship of Alfenus Senecio, c.
AD 205–7.
Be that as it may, the work on the buildings, which it has been claimed were being constructed for a newly-constituted civitas capital, was at some time in the later second century violently interrupted and, with one exception, not resumed until the Severan period.
The large courtyard building, mentioned above, was never completed.
It has been variously interpreted as a military storehouse, a putative legionary principia and most recently as a forum for an embryonic civitas , to match Carlisle and the civitas Carvetiorum in the west (see p. 54).
This would imply the promotion of another pagus of the Brigantes, and a possible candidate is that represented by the curia Textoverdorum mentioned on an altar from Chesterholm.
More likely, however, is the pagus , otherwise unattested, derived from the corrupted curia part of the name given to Corbridge in the Ravenna list:Corie Lopocarium .
But if this civitas was constituted during the last half of the second century, the problem remains: why was the forum, if it was a forum, never completed?
Only the south range seems to have found a later use as a row of shops fronting one of the main streets.
It must be admitted, though, that it is not entirely convincing as a forum for a civitas capital; it lacks both basilica and civic offices.
It makes better sense as a macellum , or market building, several of which are known in the larger towns of Britain, as well as in some Rhine and Danube frontier towns.
Although some building work had taken place in the pre-Severan period, notably two groups of temples on the south side of the east-west street, the main impetus to rebuild came under that emperor.
Two new military compounds were constructed in the centre of the town and south of the same street; their enclosing walls respected the existing temples.
The granaries were completed and provided with an imposing portico fronting the street; an imperial dedication jointly to Septimius Severus, Caracalla and Geta from one of them refers to the construction by an unknown legionary vexillation during the governorship of Alfenus Senecio.
A fragment of a badly damaged altar, found inside the south entrance of the west granary refers to a nameless officer in charge of the granaries.
These two buildings were, therefore, clearly under military control, and it is most likely that they represented a collection centre for the annona militaris , a tax thought to have been introduced by Severus.
The fountain-head and settling tank of the aqueduct were also rebuilt; two fragmentary inscriptions would suggest that the work was carried out by a detachment of Legio XX , possibly the same detachment that was responsible for the granaries.
Supply-lines were also laid from this castellum aquae to the two compounds.
The remaining buildings, defences and streets of the town are not well known, much of the information being derived from aerial photographs.
The streets present considerable problems.
What should be the main east-west street was inherited from the via principalis of the second-century forts and also represents the line of the Stanegate entering from the west.
Although this road emerges on the eastern side of the town, attempts to trace it much further have  failed.
The main road north, Dere Street, must have described a dog-leg through the site, entering from the known site of the bridge over the Tyne to the south and emerging from the town on a more easterly line on its northward approach to the Portgate.
It is interesting though that another internal street adheres closely to the line of the southward approach into the town, and may represent an earlier version of Dere Street before Hadrian's Wall was built.
Short lengths of other internal streets have been identified but it is clear that, even though they intersect most often at right angles, there was no regular gridded system One strange omission is the absence of a street running down the west side of the supposed forum, which would have linked a known street further north with that running between the two military compounds.
As far as can be seen from aerial photographs and minor excavations, most of the main streets seem to have been lined with strip buildings, which are usually interpreted as shops and workshops.
They probably succeeded those of the second-century vicus , some evidence for which has been gained in excavations.
Further military buildings, probably storehouses and also a bath-house, existed north of the supposed forum.
A curiosity is the way in which the aqueduct channel by which, presumably, it was supplied with water, is diverted round the east end of the bath-house.
The only other major building has been identified at the south end of the site, not far from the bridge crossing the Tyne.
It began life, probably in the Severan period, resembling a winged-corridor villa, which had been terraced into the slope which runs down to the river; it contained several heated rooms in the west wing and a water tank, possibly fed by local collection, in the front courtyard Later additions and alterations greatly improved and enlarged the building; an ornamental fountain behind the house, from which came the famous Corbridge lion, was now linked to the aqueduct.
The building was burnt to the ground in the disaster which overtook the town in AD 296, when the northern frontier was overrun by invaders, but it was soon rebuilt on an even more lavish scale, which possibly included a bath wing The whole complex is usually interpreted as a mansio .
The fortifications of the town are no better known than the streets.
Traces of a rampart and a ditch have been identified by aerial photography and excavation in the north-eastern sector of the town, but doubt has been expressed as to their contemporaneity.
The ditch, some 5 m (16 ft) wide by 2 m (62 ft) deep, seems to have been deliberately filled with clay; the rampart, also of clay, some 4–5 m (13–16 ft) in width, was situated only about 1 m (34 ft) from the inner lip of the ditch.
Foundations for a stone wall, 3–4 m (10–13 ft) wide, lay in front of the rampart and partly over the lip of the filled ditch.
Clearly more than one period of fortification is to be implied, with the likelihood that a masonry wall was added to the front of an existing bank, the contemporary ditch of which had to be solidly filled in order to carry its foundations; a date for the bank of not earlier than c.
AD 130 has been provided by pottery, but no date can yet be given to the wall.
Further excavation, though, may reveal a more complicated sequence.
The sites of two probable gates have been identified.
At the point where Dere Street crosses the northern line of the curtain wall, two masonry foundations, 2.4 m (74 ft) square and 8.2 m (27 ft) apart were discovered in an excavation.
The distance between them would indicate a gate with at least two portals.
On the south side of the town, just north of the bridge crossing the Tyne, a constriction in Dere Street has been noted, of the same width as between the foundations at the north gate; the length of the ‘constriction’ would have accommodated a wall and bank of nearly similar dimensions to that observed on the north side of the town.
Suggestive crop-marks at the point where the projected line of the defences meets the emerging east-west street have also been photographed from the air, but proof of another gate here will have to wait for excavation.
The religious observances of the inhabitants of Corbridge are well attested, not only through the structural remains of the six or so temples which lined the south side of the main east-west street near the military compounds but also through the number of dedications and items of religious sculpture which have been recovered from the site; quite a number, though, of the dedications were made by military personnel or army units.
Some of the cults mentioned are imports from the eastern provinces, presumably by soldiers or merchants, such as Jupiter Dolichenus, Tyrian  Hercules and his consort Astarte, whose altars were inscribed in Greek, and who were served by a priestess named Diodora and the Invincible Sun God, with its undertones of the Emperor Commodus.
The normal run of classical cults such as Mars, Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, Apollo and Mercury are represented, while there is a scattering of Celtic cults, sometimes coupled with their classical counterparts, as with the local patron deity, Brigantia, here linked with Jupiter Dolichenus, and Maponus linked with Apollo also occurring is the ‘Old God’ Vitiris, or Veteris.
Slight knowledge of other inhabitants comes from a small collection of material.
A Greek presence is attested by the altars to Astarte and Hercules and by a gold betrothal ring inscribed in Greek to Aemilia.
Three tombstones are dedicated to children: ‘Ertola properly called Vellibia’, Ahteha, whose name is probably a diminutive derived from the German, and Julia Materna.
The most interesting example though is of a man whose name was probably Barathes; he is described as a Palmyrene, from Syria, and also as a vexillarius , most likely a manufacturer or merchant of military standards, although the possibility that he was a standard-bearer cannot be entirely ruled out.
It is not unlikely that he was the same man as Barates the Palmyrene whose wife Regina was buried at South Shields; a Catuvellaunian by birth, she was at first his slave before he freed and married her.
There was a considerable age difference at death, Barathes being 68 while his wife was only 30.
Despite these few tombstones, the main cemeteries of Corbridge are not well attested.
One seems to have been situated along the Stanegate, west of the town, where, in addition to single burials, a remarkable mausoleum has been investigated at Shorden Brae.
It consists of a massive foundation, 1.8 m (6 ft) deep and 9.7 by 10.3 m (32 by 34 ft), enclosing an irregular space about 4.3 by 4.9 m (14 by 16 ft), and clearly intended to support a superstructure of some weight.
In the enclosed space there was an eccentrically-placed shaft, 1.2 m (4 ft) deep.
This structure and shaft was surrounded by a walled enclosure approximately 41m (134ft) square; the wall was 1.7m (5½ ft) thick.
The corners of the enclosure were ornamented by sculptured funerary lions devouring stags.
Despite the absence of any traces of body or coffin (apart from some nails in the fill) in the central pit, the whole monument would appear to be the probable grave — or cenotaph — of an important official which was erected sometime around the middle of the second century.
Although other burials clustered around the enclosure, the internal area was respected, until the whole monument was dismantled at some time in the fourth century.
The later history of Corbridge is somewhat obscure.
The date of the demise of the military arsenals is not known, although it could have been as early as the late third century.
All the temples were totally demolished during the Roman period, probably by Christian iconoclasts, and the sites turned over to industrial use.
The coin sequence for the site extends to the end of the fourth century, and there is enough evidence to show that a pagan Saxon cemetery exists somewhere in the area of the town.
Beyond that it is not possible to go.
Ilchester (figs. 12 and 13)
Before this century, Roman Ilchester was poorly known, and even Haverfield, in 1906, thought it little more than a village.
The earliest excavations, however, in 1948–9 at Ivel House, supplemented by observation of local service trenches, revealed surprisingly complex occupation including buildings with opus signinum and mosaic floors, at much the same time as Stevens argued for its status as a late civitas centre.
This pioneering work continued throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, but the results remain largely unpublished.
Since then, larger-scale excavations have greatly extended our understanding of the town, focusing attention on the defensive sequence, on an area inside the northern defences in Kingshams Field, and on the suburbs along the Fosse Way and the Dorchester road, most of which are now fully published.
Recent work south of the town has revealed an apparently defended pre-Roman site, while concerted watching briefs and limited excavations have added further information about the town's history and its cemeteries.
Such evidence provides useful insights into the site's morphological development, both inside and outside the central core.
Ilchester lay on slightly raised ground above the floodplain of the River Yeo, where two roads joined the Fosse Way, one leading south-east from the centre towards Dorchester, the other branching north-westwards c. 600 m (2000 ft, north of the river.
The Fosse Way was presumably important in the town's early development but its origins appear to be surprisingly complex.
Although early and middle Iron-Age pottery has been located at various points, there is no evidence for any late Iron-Age settlement underlying the town, where the earliest levels are apparently military.
The 1974 Kingshams excavation revealed two defensive phases in Blue Cutting, commencing with a timber palisade and shallow ditch running north-south, fronting a rampart which probably lay to the west.
A second ditch was cut in the berm west of the palisade, presumably necessitating its removal.
This work enabled the turf-faced clay rampart located at Ivel House to be reinterpreted as the north side of a fort, while further excavations identified its probable southern and western sides, suggesting a vexillation fortress of c. 7 ha (17.3 acres).
Unfortunately little is known about its internal layout, while its date remains uncertain.
More than likely it belongs in the decade AD 60–70, to judge from the presence of a coin of AD 67 in the truncated western rampart and the quantity of pre- and early-Flavian samian recovered in the Fosse Way suburb.
The late Flavian material in the upper fill of the inner Kingshams ditch probably represents early civilian rather than military activity (see below p. 66).
Aerial photographs have also suggested a second unexcavated fort to the north-east, between the Bearley Brook and the River Yeo, with a double-ditched enclosure c. 100 by 130 m (327 by 425 ft) enclosing c. 1.3 ha (3.2 acres), while a third site is suggested by numerous military finds within the Iron-Age hillfort of Ham Hill c. 8 km (5 miles) to the south-west.
Details are limited, but the evidence may indicate early use of the hillfort, followed by two successive installations in the valley related to the communications network.
The actual status of Ham Hill is uncertain, but as one of the largest hillforts in the region it was probably occupied on the eve of the conquest, much like its counterpart at South Cadbury to the east.
This sequence has been complicated, however, by the recent discovery south of the town near the Bearley Brook of a man-made earthwork enclosing c. 16 ha (40 acres).
Excavation revealed a flat-bottomed ditch 10 m (33 ft) wide, in front of a clay rampart, revetted in front by a low drystone wall to prevent slumping.
Inside the enclosure, occupation horizons included the remains of at least one circular house, quantities of animal bone and metal-working slag, and characteristic late Iron-Age coarse pottery, matching material from Ham Hill and local Durotrigian wares; there was nothing definitely Roman in the sample.
How this site fits into the overall picture remains uncertain, but it must surely indicate a significant shift in the local settlement pattern on the eve of the conquest.
Occupation outside the main fort at Ilchester clearly began at an early date and probably included native elements.
Two apparently contemporary circular houses were identified at Ivel House, while the 1975 excavation in Little Spittle alongside the Fosse Way recognized two early timber-framed buildings within a ditched compound west of the road.
The better preserved of the pair had apparently been dismantled, the pottery in the overlying silt horizon suggesting a later first-century date.
Further rectilinear structures associated with Flavian material were also located in 1985 closer to the town.
This occupation was clearly contemporary with the fort, but it is uncertain whether it belongs to a vicus or a military depot.
The complex sequence of sites in the Ilchester area raises several possibilities for early urban development, all involving a complicated interplay between military and civilian populations; much more work is vital to elucidate this.
The military withdrawal paved the way for the civilian development of the site, though details of the early occupation in the town centre have proved difficult to define.
The most interesting aspect of the civil development is the recognition of several elements of a possible internal street grid, apparently laid out in line with or at right angles to the Fosse Way.
Three internal streets were examined in the 1974 Red and Blue Cuttings at the west end of Kingshams Field, two being main thoroughfares throughout the history of the site, while the third was probably a service alley.
One main street (No.
I) lay parallel to the  earlier military ditches, while the other (No.2) joined it at right angles, suggesting that the military plan influenced the layout.
This new layout could not be dated precisely within the later first or early second century, though it may well have followed directly upon the final levelling of the military ditches, dated on pottery evidence to the late Flavian period.
If this was a civilian rather than a military operation, it must indicate a short hiatus between the military and civilian sequences in Kingshams Field, perhaps suggesting a post-military phase of settlement contraction.
It would be dangerous to overstress its extent, however, because the site is well away from the central Fosse frontages, close to the north-eastern limits of the known second century occupation; in Green Cutting to the east, the first and second centuries were represented only by buried soils interpreted as domestic refuse and possible cultivation.
Using the Kingshams evidence and other observations, Leach has postulated an early street grid within the later defences, making Ilchester unique at present among the small towns.
This hint of planning poses as yet unanswerable questions about the early impetus towards urban development.
Outside the central area, occupation spread along the road frontages south-west to Exeter, south-east to Dorchester and north-east across the river into the Northover suburb.
Roads must also have led eastwards and westwards, the latter at least with offshoots serving an extensive suburb south of the river.
Though such ribbon developments are a common small-town feature, at Ilchester their layout was partly constrained by the availability of higher ground above the river floodplain; to the south-west, for instance, the Fosse Way and its associated suburbs took advantage of a rise in the natural gravel which ensured a dry and attractive area for settlement.
Within these suburbs, interesting variations are known in the date of the earliest civilian occupation.
Along the Fosse, there was apparently a lull in the sequence between the first-century activity of uncertain military or civilian origins already discussed and the earliest civilian horizons of the second.
West of the road in Little Spittle, the early levels were sealed by a grey-green sandy silt with charcoal flecks, probably deposited by floodwater silting.
A comparable soil and silt horizon with charcoal flecks was tentatively identified east of the road in Townsend Close.
Subsequent civilian activity is clearest west of the Fosse, represented by a series of ditched enclosures, the essential outlines of which were retained throughout the Roman period.
A similar pattern is probably observable to the east.
Recent excavations in the western suburb have also identified a lull in the sequence, between the earliest pits of the Flavian period and the more extensive second-century civilian activity.
An even more marked hiatus in the occupation sequence was recorded in the limited excavations in Heave Acre, alongside the Dorchester road, where traces of Flavian activity were overlain by a silt accumulation spanning the second century at least.
Thus the earliest civilian activity belongs to the third century with the main stone buildings dated to the fourth.
Across the river in the northern suburb detailed information is lacking, though the known finds would suggest a second century date for the earliest occupation.
All this evidence demonstrates the complex character of the early occupation at Ilchester.
After an initial post-military phase of contraction, development was apparently confined to the central area in the later first or early second century, followed by settlement in the roadside suburbs during the second and third; not until the third to fourth century did occupation reach its maximum extent of c. 20 ha (50 acres), extending north at least to St Andrew's Church and west along the river, south-east to the Bearley Brook and south-west for up to 600 m (2000 ft).
Within this broad framework, excavation has documented interesting morphological trends both in the central area and the suburbs.
At Kingshams, the early streets were accompanied by contemporary timber buildings represented by two clay-filled gullies and several irregularly placed stake-holes.
These survived throughout the second century, before being sealed by a thick deposit of silt and occupation debris suggesting a temporary break in occupation perhaps caused by flooding.
The streets were quickly restored, however, accompanied by new buildings.
One lay in the junction between streets 1 and 2, fronting onto the former, and originally comprised two rooms built of lias limestone, Hamstone and Pennant Sandstone with flint gravel floors.
To  the south lay several layers representing the floors and make-up of a timber building alongside streets 1 and 3.
This was replaced by a stone structure, only partly examined in the excavated area.
It comprised two rooms each c. 4 m (13 ft) square, laid out on either side of the alley (3), which presumably served further rooms and a yard to the rear.
Contemporary with this, its northern counterpart was enlarged to c. 7 by 20 m (23 by 66 ft) by the addition of a third room in timber on the west, on a slightly different alignment, and the rebuilding of its east wall closer to the road, while its eastern room was subdivided lengthwise.
Elsewhere in the central area, enough structures are known to confirm the Kingshams picture, which indicates a dense arrangement of properties alongside the streets.
There is, however, evidence for some 30 tessellated mosaic pavements within the later defences, mostly along the major frontages, suggesting a surprising level of affluence in the town.
Some clearly belonged to relatively small domestic and workshop premises, but others must have adorned larger private houses and official or religious complexes.
At least one large building is known beneath the church and its graveyard, incorporating a range of rooms along its eastern side floored by tessellated pavements, but its precise function remains uncertain.
Possible town houses are suggested by the mosaics found in the vicinity of Ivel House and in the area north of Limington Road close to Green Cutting in Kingshams Field.
In the suburbs equally interesting trends are known.
West of the Fosse in Little Spittle lay several rectangular enclosures defined by ditches.
The most northerly was apparently undivided, though only its southern ditch lay within the excavated area.
At its eastern end two second-century buildings were identified, that to the south (Building 2a) lying at right angles to the frontage and apparently comprising a suite of rooms c. 7.5 by 3.5 m (24½ by 11½ ft), on Hamstone foundations.
Its northern counterpart (Building 2b), though only partly excavated, had begun life as a timber structure with a gravel floor parallel to the frontage, before being widened to c. 7 m (23 ft) upon Hamstone foundations.
Both ranges might have been independent structures, though excavations between them suggest a more complex L-shaped building with a courtyard to the rear and a timber colonnade along the frontage.
Widespread evidence indicated that it had burnt down in the later second century.
The frontage was subsequently occupied by a building (3a) on lias and Hamstone footings, measuring 18 by 6.5 m (59 by 21 ft), which originally comprised two rooms to which a third was added on the north.
At the same time, the timber structure (2a) might have been partially (or totally?) rebuilt, though the details are unclear.
It was certainly suppressed by the late third or fourth century when the stone building was provided with a corridor 4 m (13 ft) wide along its western side, comprising two and ultimately three rooms.
This gave access to the old courtyard area.
Such a complex timber to stone sequence is found elsewhere in Ilchester.
Behind these buildings, the northern enclosure contains groups of post-holes, gullies and occasional pits.
The central enclosure, in contrast, was originally divided by a cross-ditch into two plots each measuring c. 50 by 28 m (165 by 92 ft).
The eastern one was only partly examined, revealing towards the rear a series of pits probably dug for gravel, though no buildings were identified.
Its western counterpart apparently remained open, being used at one stage for spelt cultivation.
The most southerly of the three enclosures had also been subdivided, although little of its eastern half lay within the trench.
Its western half remained open, except for a timber structure represented by two rows of six post-holes.
Subsequent phases saw the amalgamation and redivision of these enclosures, presumably as ownership or tenurial arrangements changed, but the framework, once established, remained remarkably consistent over time, as the layout of the late inhumations attests.
Excavation east of the Fosse Way in Townsend Close was less extensive, though at least one length of boundary ditch suggests a comparable arrangement.
Occupation along the frontages was represented by several rather ill-defined second- and third-century timber and stone structures, succeeded by two fourth-century stone buildings, both badly damaged by a later ditch.
Enough remained to show that the northern one was at least g by 7. 5 m (292 by 242 ft), with two rooms of unequal size at the back, while its southern counterpart, of which only the rear 2.5m  (8 ft) was recovered, had apparently lain in a walled compound measuring 13 by 6 m (42½ by 19½ ft).
Small-scale excavations in Heave Acre alongside the Dorchester road revealed a comparable timber to stone sequence, commencing in the third century.
This evidence from the southern suburbs clearly indicates an arrangement of elongated properties end-on to the frontages housing a variety of activities, but apart from a more generous allocation of space, little differentiates the associated buildings from their counterparts in the central area.
In the western suburb likewise, limited work has suggested the development of a semi-industrial area in the second century, followed in the third and fourth by the erection of several stone-founded buildings, some with evidence for a degree of sophistication.
The construction of the defences, enclosing c. 10 ha (25 acres) at the centre of the settlement, inevitably excluded the northern and western suburbs and the ribbon developments to the south-east and south-west.
This apparently had little impact on the extent of these intra- and extra-mural zones, though it may have encouraged the enhanced development of the central area in the third and fourth centuries.
The defences have been sampled at various points, revealing an interesting sequence.
The earliest phase comprised a clay dump rampart and a contemporary ditch, post-dating a range of Trajanic and Hadrianic material at several points.
This would not be inconsistent with a late second-to early third-century date, in line with other sites, but more precise dating is essential.
Excavations at the south-east gate astride the Dorchester road have suggested that its stone semi-circular tower was an integral part of these early defences.
This recalls the sequence at several civitas capitals, including Cirencester and Exeter, but it remains unique to date at the small towns.
In Kingshams Field, the bank was apparently partly levelled or cut away by the mid third century at least, prior to the construction of a stone building with a courtyard to the south.
This was only partially examined, but seemed to form part of an east-west range of rooms with at least two floor sequences.
Comparable terracing has been noted elsewhere, at the south-east corner and along the south side, but the overall effect on the efficiency of the defences remains uncertain.
The rampart front itself was subsequently cut away to accommodate a massive stone wall set on a foundation of limestone, clay and rubble lenses, which presumably incorporated the existing tower at the south-east gate.
Dating evidence from the south-eastern part of the circuit includes a coin of AD 342–3 from the foundations.
No evidence has yet been forthcoming for any external towers, the mortared stone foundation in Kingshams Field now being assigned to the medieval defences.
From the excavated evidence, various aspects of the town's economic character can be defined.
Few buildings provide any clue to their function, but a room in Building 2 in Kingshams Field contained a clay-lined hearth, a stone trough and a low platform, probably indicating a manufacturing or commercial role.
Elsewhere, we depend upon characteristic industrial debris, which includes iron-working in the courtyard south of Building 3 in Kingshams Field and two pottery kilns in the western suburb; bone-working is also attested by artefactual evidence, while the building trade is well represented.
The most interesting evidence, however, comes from the ditched enclosures in the Little Spittle suburb.
The front row clearly housed small-scale industrial activities, indicated by metal-working debris and a glass-working hearth, while the rear plots were evidently agricultural, one at least being used for growing spelt, and a second probably containing a timber barn.
This combination of light industry and agriculture is probably typical of the suburbs where pressure on land was less acute than in the centre.
Such plots are unlikely to have provided all the necessary food for their inhabitants, so not surprisingly traces of fields have been identified which predate the late cemetery in the Northover suburb.
There is also a possibility that the River Yeo had been artificially straightened in places in Roman times, suggesting that river transportation played a part in the life of the settlement.
Surprisingly little is known about the settlement's religious life.
No temples have been located and only two possible ritual pits have been identified, both in Little Spittle.
One second-century rectangular pit contained several pottery vessels, a dedicatory inscription and three  republican coins, while a re-used fourth-century well had large quantities of animal bone including some complete carcasses and well-preserved plant, wood and leather remains.
Neither is particularly distinctive, but comparable patterns have been noted elsewhere.
A possible Christian presence has been suggested by several fourth century burials in the Northover cemetery, because of their east-west orientation and similarities with Poundbury, but this evidence is insufficiently conclusive.
Ilchester's status has been much discussed.
In 1952, Stevens argued that two inscriptions from Hadrian's Wall, recording building operations by a levy from the Civitas Durotrigum Lendinienses , indicated a subdivision of the tribal territory, and that Ilchester was the obvious candidate for it– administrative centre, given its identification with the Lindinis of the Ravenna Cosmography.
Although challenged, this remains the most convincing explanation.
There is moreover archaeological evidence to suggest that Ilchester was more influential than most small towns, not least the developed central area and urban core defences.
If the known mosaics belonged to private rather than official or religious buildings, this might indicate the presence of wealthier individuals who could have formed a town council, as might the marked concentration of late villas in the area, including that at Ilchester Mead, just outside the south-western suburbs.
Most information about the later phases of the town has come from several late Roman inhumation cemeteries.
Finds of Hamstone and lead coffins at Northover House had long suggested an inhumation cemetery north of the river, where excavation in 1982 revealed a ditched enclosure measuring c. go by 50 m (294 by 165 ft), which surrounded an estimated 1500 burials, apparently laid in rows east-west, some in coffins of lead, Hamstone or wood, others in lias limestone cists.
Excavation also revealed two contemporary buildings, while the burials extended eastwards beyond the enclosure towards the main road.
All the associated grave goods belonged to the fourth century, the cemetery itself overlying earlier field boundaries and enclosures.
Burials were also found in the south-western and southeastern suburbs, the clearest pattern occurring in Little Spittle west of the Fosse.
Here Period V of late Roman date saw the imposition of an inhumation cemetery upon the earlier pattern of ditched enclosures.
Before this, much of Building 3 and its associated courtyard apparently went out of use, judging from an extensive stony layer deposited across their remains.
The burials took their alignment, however, from the older boundaries, all but one lying in the plots nearest to the frontages.
Forty-two extended inhumations, several with wooden coffins, were examined, 14 in the northern and 28 in the southern plot.
The associated grave goods included everyday items like boots, knives and bracelets, though at least one burial contained a pot with chicken bones, and another a dog.
The excavators assigned Period V to the late fourth and fifth centuries, though how long the tradition continued remains uncertain.
East of the Fosse in Townsend Close, the buildings apparently also went out of use, with their associated plots given over to burials, which again followed the earlier layouts and rarely contained any grave goods; observation of roadworks between Townsend Close and Heave Acre revealed yet more similar burials.
These southern burials are clearly very different from the coordinated northern cemetery, obviously occurring once the suburbs themselves were virtually derelict.
This suggests important late fourth century changes in the nature of Ilchester, probably involving a contraction of occupation to within the defences due to growing insecurity.
Even so, the retention of the existing framework in the burial alignment suggests continuity within an essentially Roman context.
The recovery of later fourth-century coins and pottery in the town centre itself certainly also attests continued activity, but it is hard to determine how long this survived into the fifth century, given the cessation of both coinage and pottery supplies and the consequent problem of dating post-Roman levels.
In the western trenches in Kingshams Field, Buildings 1 and 2 certainly lasted into the fifth century, ultimately collapsing, to judge from an extensive rubble spread across the site, but no dating evidence was recovered.
A similar undated sequence was recorded in Green Cutting to the east, where the courtyard had obviously been used for industrial activities prior to the demise of the associated building.
A small quantity of excavated shell tempered pottery and a few sherds of imported  wares also suggest some fifth-to sixth-century survival, but these are not conclusive in the absence of in situ structures.
Three sixth-century Anglo-Saxon brooches are probably stray finds.
At present, there is little to suggest continued occupation at Ilchester by the time of full Saxon penetration in the seventh century.
Kenchester (figs. 14 and 15)
Kenchester's importance was first acknowledged by Leland in the sixteenth century, since when it has continued to attract attention.
Antiquarian observers built up a picture of an important urban complex enclosed by a stone wall, within which traces of an irregular street system and numerous buildings were visible, some with evidence for tessellated pavements and painted wall plaster.
Modern research has expanded on this foundation, drawing upon the results of aerial reconnaissance and, to a lesser extent, excavation.
Aerial survey in particular has revealed some of the intricacies of the site's internal morphology.
Excavation has, unfortunately, been limited in its extent and scope, with only the 1912–13 and 1924–5 sites sampling the interior; more recent work has been confined to the defences and the west gate and to a settlement complex in the rural-urban fringe east of the town.
Inevitably, therefore, our understanding of the site's morphology is considerably clearer than its progressive stages of development.
Kenchester is strategically located in the valley of the River Wye, close to the Iron-Age hillfort of Credenhill, and on an important east-west route heading towards the early military bases at Clifford and Clyro.
Further roads probably led north-east, past Credenhill, towards Leintwardine and Wroxeter, and south across the Wye to Abergavenny.
This must surely indicate that the site played a part in the Roman advance into the Welsh marches, and that the town owed its origins to an early military presence.
Such a fort would also have supervised the native population centre on Credenhill, which is one of the largest sites in the area, with univallate defences enclosing c. 20 ha (50 acres).
Excavations in its interior demonstrated extensive occupation, which had apparently begun to decline in the AD 70s, perhaps in the wake of increasing migration towards a more convenient centre on the road network.
This attractive model of urban development has proved remarkably elusive on the ground.
No trace of a fort has been located at or near the later town, and only three isolated pieces of military equipment are known.
Within the town, the earliest occupation is probably represented by Flavian pottery recovered from the limited excavations, but neither its extent nor its character can be defined.
Recent work in the eastern suburbs on the later winged-corridor building has added a further complexity, revealing an important sequence of later Iron-Age ditched enclosures alongside a stream, in one of which lay a two-phase timber round house associated with pottery, slag, bone and worked flints.
How extensive such activity was on the eve of any military operations remains uncertain, while its implications for the early stages of urban growth at Kenchester must await further research.
Our understanding of the civilian occupation at Kenchester is inevitably dominated by the aerial photographs, which reveal a 9 ha (22 acre) irregular defended enclosure set roughly astride an east-west road immediately to the west of its junction with two other roads.
That to the northeast has not been examined, but its southern counterpart was sectioned south of the junction and shown to be 6.7 m (22 ft) wide with alternating bands of gravel, sand and cobbling.
Surprisingly little occupation is visible alongside this latter pair of roads, despite the normal potential of a crossroads, and is concentrated instead along the main east-west route, principally, but not exclusively, west of the junction.
Within the defended area, the main road is well defined, with a prominent central channel or drain.
It has been excavated at several points, both during the early excavations and in connection with the west gate, revealing informative sequences of relevance to our understanding of the site's development (see p. 73 below).
This road forms the focus for an irregular network of side-streets and lanes which lead off at diverse angles and provide access to land and buildings behind the frontages.
Many are quite short, some extend as far as the defences, and two at least apparently form a prominent central crossroads.
Unlike Water Newton, no attempt was made to link these streets and lanes along the inner edge of    the defences.
Few have been sectioned, though the central pair are known to be contemporary with the main phase of the east-west road.
Extra-mural ribbon development, accompanied by several short side-streets and lanes, is also visible, probably extending as far east as the winged-corridor complex noted earlier.
Numerous buildings are recognizable within this developed street system, though detailed plans can rarely be drawn.
The main frontages were nevertheless crammed with closely packed buildings, while the land behind was evidently more open and occasionally occupied by larger structures.
14 Kenchester, based on the aerial photographs with additions from Jack and Hayter
15 Kenchester, vertical photograph of the defended area (Cambridge University Collection: copyright reserved)
The detailed phasing of this morphological information presents major problems in the absence of large-scale, modern excavations, but a recent reassessment of the early excavation reports has suggested that a major remodelling of the town centre occurred apparently in the mid to late second century.
This clearly involved the construction of a new east-west road and at least one contemporary north-south cross-street, the provision of side drains within the defended area and the erection of at least one probable public building.
This remodelling might also be contemporary with the decision to provide earthwork defences, though it could have preceded it by several years on current dating evidence; either way, such changes mark a significant watershed in the town's development and pose important questions about its status and function.
Jack and Hayter sampled the main east-west road at several points inside the defences, revealing a twofold sequence involving an earlier roadway 9m (29½ ft) wide, with sandstone-lined drains on one or both sides, overlain by an often narrower road with a central open channel.
In the 1912–13 sections, the early road clearly overlay a burnt horizon containing Flavian and Antonine material, while the more informative 1924–5 sections demonstrated that the southern drain overlay Antonine pottery at one point.
This makes it absolutely clear that the early road and the drains belong in a mid to late second-century context.
None of these sections was apparently bottomed if the drawings are to be believed, so we do not know what underlay the burnt layer.
One of the 1924–5 sections also examined the central north-south cross-street, demonstrating that its construction matched that of the early road, with which it was therefore contemporary.
The east-west road has only been examined once since the 1920s, during excavations on the west gate, where it evidently comprised three separate surfaces; the latest (road III) can probably be identified with Jack and Hayter's later roadway; the middle one (II) was contemporary with the mid fourth-century gate and may be a localized resurfacing; while the lowest (I) must represent the east-west route in the preceding centuries.
This latter remains undated, though it was not the earliest feature on site, overlying at least one slot-like channel.
It had also been cut by a culvert originally containing a wooden box drain, which might be connected with the provision of the sandstone-lined drains further east.
This would suggest that the east-west road at this point had not been substantially modified and that the mid to late second-century redevelopment was confined to the intra-mural zone.
Contemporary with the alterations to the main east-west road, at least one or perhaps two possible public buildings were constructed immediately to the south on Sites 1 and 2, each with a frontage carried on four columns and set so close to the road that the new roadside drains had to be diverted.
More importantly, however, the remains overlay burnt material, while the make-up levels on Site 2 contained Antonine pottery, thus demonstrating that the building(s) were part of an overall design reshaping the town centre, which might also have included the first phase of the defences.
Excavations have been largely confined to the western side, revealing an earth rampart made up of material from at least one contemporary ditch to the west.
A stone wall had subsequently been inserted, obscuring its original width.
The best dating evidence came in 1956, not only from the rampart itself and its silted ditch, but also from the occupation layer that it sealed.
This included much mid second century pottery and one piece of samian of AD 140–80, in line with the normal sequence of late second-century earthworks.
These impressive alterations probably represent an important event in the development of the site, even if we cannot define precisely what preceded it, how widespread it was and why it happened.
It does, however, pose some interesting questions as to the nature and extent of earlier occupation on the site and whether the burnt level beneath the main road and the public building(s) represents simply site clearance or a more extensive fire.
These can only be answered tentatively on present evidence.
In situ occupation debris pre-dating the established mid to late second-century horizon has been located on several widely scattered sites, beyond that already noted beneath the east-west road and its side drains and the presumed public building(s).
This includes the occupation sealed by the construction of the western defences, such as the material noted in the 1956 section and the pebbled surface preceding the ditches at the north-west corner.
South of the west gate, the wall had also cut through a hearth and a layer of charcoal and burnt clay deriving from a structure apparently levelled prior to the construction of the first defences.
Few other buildings can be assigned to this early occupation with any confidence.
This evidence is surprisingly extensive, especially at the western end of the site, though more excavation is essential to clarify its distribution.
A recent reassessment of the site has suggested that elements of this earlier activity are also recognizable in the variations of the internal street alignments.
These are said to indicate two broad phases, one apparently following the line of the mid to late second-century north-south cross-street, which is especially prominent towards the western end of the defended enclosure, the other seemingly having its own distinctive alignment more akin to the line of the road running north from the main crossroads; this is more obvious at the eastern end, and might therefore be earlier in origin.
This hypothesis cannot be convincingly proven on current evidence, but if accepted, it would suggest an early ribbon development with short side-streets and lanes, perhaps extending c. 700 m (2300 ft) either side of the main north-south road junction, followed by a mid to late second-century remodelling of the region to the west, perhaps contemporary with the new defences.
Within the developed street network, the evidence indicates a surprisingly wide range of buildings and a marked level of architectural pretension, though most of it clearly belongs in a third- or fourth-century context.
The main east-west road was lined with strip buildings, very few of which have been excavated.
Some, like the building on Site 3, were little more than flag floors, presumably supporting a timber superstructure, while others had stone foundations and concrete flooring; good examples of this type include the two buildings on Sites 5 and 6, fronted by a common veranda.
One was a simple two-roomed strip building, the other comprised a single large room with three smaller rooms along the east.
More imposing structures also lined the frontages, including the public building, or pair of structures, represented by the columned facades on Sites 1 and 2; another is clearly known on Site 9, where an arrangement of four pillar bases suggests an identical function.
Lewis has interpreted these as classical temples, but not enough has survived to prove this suggestion.
Much more interesting are the larger complexes which occupy the vacant land immediately behind the main frontages.
At least three are known, each served by a short side-street or lane.
One large example lay just inside the east gate, although its plan could not be reconstructed from the rather fragmentary remains which certainly included four hypocausts and two mosaics.
To the rear of the plot, excavation sampled part of a bath-house and an associated drain, close to where Stukeley recorded a monument with a niche.
Whether this was all part of a single private house remains uncertain, because its location just inside one of the town's principal entrances might suggest an official function.
North-west of this, another large building examined in 1924–5 extended over at least 52 m (170 ft) at an oblique angle to the prevailing internal morphology.
Its plan is also incomplete but seems to resemble a porticoed house with projecting wings.
Pottery beneath its wall suggests a later second- or third-century date.
A third complex can be identified on the aerial photographs in the south-east quarter, served by a lane from the north-south cross-street.
It has never been excavated but was clearly extensive.
The location of these buildings and the limited dating evidence  strongly suggests that all three are relatively late in the morphological sequence.
Their recognition attests the presence of several wealthy individuals disposed to live in the town itself, while yet others occupied nearby villas, including the winged-corridor complex in the rural-urban fringe to the east, and the villa to the west at Bishopstone.
Such evidence has an important bearing on the site's function.
Judging from the surviving architectural fragments, some of Kenchester's buildings were clearly imposing structures.
Five Doric capitals and bases were recorded in the nineteenth century, while several re-used blocks were found in 1957 in the foundations of the northwest tower; these blocks displayed cramp holes unrelated to the adjacent stones, and one at least was an elaborately moulded part of a plinth.
Obviously by the mid fourth century at the latest, some elaborate buildings had become redundant and could be demolished for re-use in the defences.
Also of interest is the evidence for a stone and timber portico in the town's central area, apparently flanking the east-west road.
This was partly formed by the stone facades located on Sites 1, 2 and 9, but elsewhere a series of morticed stones formed the foundation of a timber veranda.
It is arguable, however, that these stones belong stratigraphically with the later road surface, with its central channel, by which time the earlier drains had probably ceased to function; this would explain certain anomalies in their relative positions and have important implications for the site's later appearance.
Not surprisingly, our understanding of the town's everyday life is somewhat sketchy.
Few buildings have revealed distinctive evidence for specialized activities, though several of the roadside examples contained furnaces and hearths which probably served an industrial role, while iron and lead slag indicates metal-working.
The latter is also known from the winged corridor complex to the east.
Two otherwise unexpected specialists, T. Vindac[ius] Ariovistus and Aurelius Polychrinides, are recorded on oculists' stamps.
Religious activities are just as poorly represented, leaving aside the possible temples already described.
Several altars have been recovered, mostly re-used in secondary contexts, as well as two busts of Minerva, a pipeclay Venus and various miniature votive or ritual finds, including several bronze animals and an axe.
Equally little is known about the urban cemeteries which must exist, except for two inhumations found in 1920 near the main road leading south from the crossroads.
Kenchester's status has been the subject of considerable discussion, not least because of the 1795 discovery of an inscribed milestone, apparently re-used in the northern defences.
This was originally erected in the reign of Numerian in AD 283–4 and apparently includes the reference to a R(es) P(ublica) C(ivitatis) , most probably D(obunnorum) (of the Dobunni), though the latter reading and attribution have produced several fertile alternatives.
This raises the possibility of an administrative role for Kenchester, perhaps initially as a pagus centre, and then later as a full civitas centre.
This promotional process cannot be proven, though it would not conflict with known Roman policy.
Some support for this might come from the archaeological evidence, which attests Kenchester's increasing importance through time.
This includes the upgrading of the central area, its architectural and civic (?) pretensions, the presence of possible public buildings, the provision of urban-core defences and the existence of several intra-mural houses and local villas whose owners could form the core of the local council.
Such features are obviously not conclusive in themselves, but taken together they differentiate Kenchester from the majority of minor towns described in this volume.
Our detailed knowledge of the site's later history is largely dependent upon the excavations across the defences and at the west gate.
It is now clear that the earthen bank had been cut back to make way for a stone wall, resting on cobbled foundations up to 3 m (10 ft) wide, but unfortunately no precise dating evidence for its construction was recovered.
Nor could its relationship to the external tower at the north-west corner or to the west gate be determined.
At the former, stone-robbing had effectively removed the crucial junction on the steeply sloping ground; at the gate, it remained unclear whether the wall was already in existence or whether it had been constructed at the same time.
Only further excavation can resolve this problem.
Though only its rough foundations survived, the west gate turned out to be an impressive and imposing  structure, comprising two towers with semicircular fronts, flanking a dual carriageway.
Its somewhat irregular shape and measurements were presumably counteracted as the building rose above ground level.
It can be securely dated because its foundations sealed mid fourth-century pottery inside a carefully filled and levelled culvert.
Interestingly, the two semicircular towers had been built out over the filled ditch of the earlier rampart, as had the semioctagonal external tower at the north-west corner.
This was presumably one of several added in the fourth century, perhaps contemporary with a new wide ditch outside its predecessor.
The tower's foundations were solidly built and included several fragments of re-used architectural masonry.
Such impressive fortifications clearly attest Kenchester's continued importance well into the fourth century, though the sequence did not end here.
Sometime in the later fourth or early fifth century, major modifications occurred at the west gate, involving its remodelling as a single portal.
The original north passage was retained, with a new spina, while its southern counterpart was blocked and probably used as a guard chamber.
A new road (III) was also laid, much narrower than its predecessor, which might tentatively be associated with the later road in the town centre with its central channel or drain.
Such an identification has important implications for the morticed stones and the timber portico already mentioned, suggesting that the central area preserved some level of architectural pretension; this can only mean that early excavations failed to locate the contemporary timber buildings continuing Kenchester's urban tradition into the fifth century.
Beyond this it is difficult to go; something was worth defending in this late period, but the archaeological evidence fails us.
How long it lasted must also remain a mystery, as must the rise of its probable successor at Hereford, where Anglian settlers known as the Magonsaete were well established by AD 691.
It has been argued that they derived their name from that of Kenchester, which is identified as the Magnis of both the Antonine Itinerary and the Ravenna list, suggesting some tradition of local continuity, but there remain serious problems with this suggested derivation.
Rochester (figs. 16 and 17)
The Roman site at Rochester lies on Watling Street, just east of its crossing of the River Medway.
The town's generally accepted name is Durobrivae , although variations occur in both the Antonine Itinerary and Ravenna list.
The first systematic survey of Roman Rochester was carried out by George Payne towards the end of the last century; this account was slightly amplified in the Victoria County History.
Since then most archaeological work has been concentrated on the fortifications, with all too little excavation being carried out in the interior, mainly because of the presence of modern buildings.
Substantial traces of late Iron-Age settlement preceded the Roman foundation.
Excavations in the High Street in 1961–2 revealed a metalled track and a large timber building; fragments of coin moulds, some 20 ‘tin’ coins and slag would imply that there was a mint here.
It was clearly a site of some importance and it is not impossible that Rochester was the centre of one of the four Kentish kingdoms mentioned by Caesar, although by the time of Claudius' invasion these kingdoms appear to have been united under one ruler.
The River Medway narrows slightly to c. 150 m (490 ft) wide at Rochester, which is usually considered to be the lowest convenient crossing place.
It is unlikely, though, that a bridge existed here in pre-Roman times, since it is usually argued that the first Roman crossing at the famous battle of the Medway took place further upstream towards Maidstone.
But after that victorious crossing, no time would have been wasted in building a bridge, possibly at first of boats, in the narrower Rochester section of the river.
A fort was probably constructed to guard the bridgehead either at Rochester or at Strood on the opposite bank, although no traces have yet been found.
The excavations on the south side of the High Street in 1961–2 also revealed the earliest version of Watling Street, probably dating to the time of the conquest, with associated timber-framed buildings; the road was originally 2.7 m (9 ft) wide, although it was soon widened to 6.7 m (22 ft), and a central stone-built drain effectively divided it into two carriageways.
The new carriageway was, however, short-lived, and a masonry   building, probably a bath-house, was constructed across it at this point; the surviving carriageway appears to have been resurfaced seven times.
16 Rochester (after Harrison)
17 Rochester, looking north-east.
The castle and cathedral lie within the Roman town (Cambridge University Collection: copyright reserved)
As indicated above, most of the information which has been gathered on Roman Rochester concerns the defences, which have now been identified more or less round the whole circuit, and which enclose an area of some 9.5 ha (23 acres).
In 1968 it became clear that the stone wall had been preceded, as in many towns in Britain, by an earthwork, with a date of construction in the late second or early third century.
So it would seem, but closer examination shows that the earthwork incorporated a good deal of turfwork, which in at least two places was laid on top of a layer of flints.
Some time ago it was suggested that three east coast sites, at Brough-on-Humber, Caister-by-Yarmouth and Rochester, possessed late second or early third-century fortifications which were different from the general run of urban defences of this date.
In all three cases the method of construction was changed, with turf on a stone, or part-stone, platform at Brough and Rochester and with only a palisade at Caister.
Only very few other circuits are known to contain turf, and in one case at least, at Cirencester, it was probably inserted as a repair.
Moreover Brough had contemporary timber gates, again a feature unrecognized at any other town, except for Silchester; masonry gates were the norm elsewhere.
These methods of construction, notably turf on a stone platform, employed at two of the three sites, timber gates at one at least and a palisade at the third, possess a martial appearance which remains unmatched at any other towns in Britain, where earthwork fortifications were normally of unrevetted dump construction, using material either scraped up from the surface or derived from digging ditches.
Consequently it is worth reasserting that these three coastal sites may have functioned as secondary naval bases, supplementing the main bases at Dover, Lympne and Boulogne.
The stone wall which was inserted in front of the existing rampart was just over 2 m (6½ ft) in width and was constructed of Kentish ragstone faced with dressed blocks; bonding courses of tile have been recorded in places.
The core of the wall is known to be still standing to a height of nearly 9 m (29½ ft) at its maximum.
Outside the wall, except on the north side, where the river came to its foot, there appears to have been only a single ditch, some 6.5 m (21 ft) wide and 2.5 m (8 ft) deep, which had been truncated by the medieval ditch; it is most likely to have been contemporary with the early rampart.
The date of construction of the wall, which has not been established with any precision, would seem to lie in the third century.
But there is little difference at present between the dates provided for both the early rampart and the wall.
Very little has been discovered of the gates, although their sites can be predicted with tolerable certainty.
Best known is the east gate which is thought to coincide with the site of the medieval East Gate.
Here, when the Mathematical School was being rebuilt in 1894, part of a semi-circular tower of supposed Roman build was encountered beneath the medieval tower.
But excavations in 1969 in the East Gate area failed to add much to what was already known of the gate structure.
The only interesting point to emerge was that the Roman ditch continued an almost certainly unbroken course northwards past the medieval gate and its street to terminate 5.5 m (18 ft) beyond them, while both the early rampart and the Roman wall continued for an unknown distance beyond this end of the ditch.
If this ditch is contemporary with the rampart then the gap for the gate between the rampart ends must have been much narrower than that left between the ditch ends.
Whether the same applied to the wall cannot yet be established.
But a further complicating factor is that Watling Street, in its latest phases, points directly to the medieval East Gate, strongly suggesting that here also lay the later Roman gate, most probably on a different site to that belonging to the early defences; if this is so, then the ditch must have been bridged at the gate.
The north gate is presumed to lie at the point where modern Northgate Street cuts the line of the wall; a Roman street underlying the modern one here would seem to confirm the correctness of this assumption.
Excavations nearby in 1961 failed to locate any structures.
This gate presumably led to a quay, or docks, and there are references to it in some Saxon charters.
Similarly the south gate is usually assumed to be at the end of Southgate Street where an internal street points in the direction of Boley Hill; the existence of a cemetery in this region outside the walls would support this assumption.
Two massive walls were recorded in 1891 lying at right angles to the line of the town wall under the modern street, but no proof of their Roman origin was obtained.
There is greater doubt over the site of the west gate, since the exact line of the wall in this area  near the river has never been adequately established.
Its position will also depend on the whereabouts of the bridge across the river, which is another unknown factor.
Various opinions have been expressed on the site of the latter.
The medieval bridge, built in 1392 and demolished c. 1856, was a little distance south-west of the modern road bridge and is recorded as having been preceded by an earlier bridge on the same line; it had ten waterways set between stone piers and a timber superstructure, a method of construction commonly used by Roman engineers.
Yet the alignment of Watling Street as revealed under the Guildhall would point to a crossing slightly further north, and nearer the modern line, along which a large number of Roman coins have been found in the river bed.
Massive masonry was also encountered when the railway bridge was constructed further north still of the modern road bridge.
But masonry of this nature might equally be part of a dock or quay, so the correct position of the Roman bridge still remains in considerable doubt.
Little extra information about the streets of the town, other than those already mentioned, has been recovered in the course of excavations, but it would seem that from present knowledge there was no regular grid.
Nevertheless, most of the streets which have been sectioned were of substantial construction, in some of the wetter places being provided with a substructure of timber piles or a corduroy; otherwise local material such as Kentish rag, crushed flints or chalk or gravel were used.
An attempt has been made by Nightingale to show that Rochester was the centre from which an area of land to the north had been centuriated on the regular basis of 20 by 20 actus squares.
The main axes of the centuriation were somewhat improbably and completely artificially taken as the eastward continuation of the line of Watling Street, from before its deviation slightly southwards at Salters Cross on its approach to the suburb at Strood and to the Medway bridge, and the extension northwards of the alignment of the road from Maidstone to Rochester.
The area of suggested centuriation lies well to the north of the town on Cliffe Marshes, and Nightingale even claimed that a plot measuring 2 by I actus (=1 iugerum), which features on the 1840 tithe map and is still in the possession of a single owner, was a survivor of the Roman survey.
It must be admitted that the area of Cliffe Marshes contains boundaries which now, and on the map, correspond to centuriated measurements, but there is no proof that they date to the Roman period.
Their extension southwards to the imaginary axes situated near Rochester is stretching the case beyond belief; nevertheless Nightingale's arguments are unequivocally supported by Dilke.
Excavations have revealed fragmentary remains of substantial masonry buildings within the town walls, but no complete plans have been recovered.
The walls were normally constructed of Kentish ragstone, with or without tile bonding courses, or more rarely of brick; some, though, were constructed with clay, a not uncommon feature in the south-east of Britain.
One building beneath the Cathedral apparently contained an apse with a floor of opus signinum , suggesting perhaps the site of a bath-house hypocaust since the floor was covered by a thick deposit of ash.
Another possible bath-house has already been mentioned, having been discovered in the excavation in the High Street in 1961–2.
Elsewhere, near the King's Head, the discovery of flue-tiles carries a similar interpretation.
Other major buildings have been identified in the Northgate area, where much painted plaster and fragments of quarter-round mouldings have been recovered.
The buildings identified so far within the town would imply a fairly dense distribution.
Although there are few indications of local industries at Rochester itself, the town may well have acted as the service centre for the potteries in the Cliffe area to the north and those situated downstream on both sides of the Medway estuary.
Best known, perhaps, are those at Upchurch, on the right bank of the river below Rochester.
The manufacture of pottery seems to have begun there as early as AD 40 and continued at least until the end of the second century.
Another important industrial activity carried on in the neighbourhood was the extraction of salt from sea water.
A band stretching along the south bank of the Thames from Chalk to the Hoo peninsula, then along the Medway marshes, and across the river to the Isle of Sheppey seems to have been devoted to this process.
Large deposits of ash, burnt clay and associated briquetage have been found in numerous places along this coastal strip.
Salt was an important item in the Roman economy, over which some imperial control was probably exercised.
It was not only used as a condiment, but was also the chief preservative of a large range of foodstuffs such as meat and fish, and in the preparation of skins and leather.
If, indeed, production was under imperial control, then Rochester would have been the ideal centre for the administration.
Apart from cemeteries, little of religious significance has been found at Rochester.
One large cemetery lay at Boley Hill outside the south gate, consisting chiefly of cremations, although a fragment of a decorated lead coffin has also been found there.
A second cemetery has been identified at Borstal, about a mile south-west of the town near the river bank; it appears to have contained mainly inhumations, and the coins so far recovered would indicate a third- and fourth-century use.
Two other cemeteries, almost certainly connected with the town, existed across the river at Strood.
There is some evidence of ribbon development along Watling Street on the Strood side of the Medway, but this suburb was probably not large enough to account for the size of the cemeteries, which date from the middle of the first century until at least the third.
Perhaps the oddest feature connected with the cemeteries is that no evidence has ever been found for one outside the East Gate.
The ground outside this principal gate rises along Watling Street and it would seem a most suitable site for a large cemetery.
A similar situation outside any other town would almost certainly have been used for such a purpose; it would seem, therefore, that there was some special reason, at present unknown, why this land was not so used at Rochester.
Lastly it is probable that Rochester acted as a service centre for the comparatively large number of villas situated in the surrounding countryside.
The Darent valley, a short distance west of the town, contains several well-known examples such as Darent, Lullingstone and Farningham; others existed up the Medway valley in the Maidstone area.
The contrast between the number of villas in the western half of the civitas of the Cantii and the comparative few in the east has long caused comment.
It is a phenomenon which is repeated at a number of other small towns such as Ilchester and Bath, but it cannot as yet be explained.
Water Newton (figs. 18 to 21)
Although Water Newton's remains attracted the attention of leading antiquarians from Camden to Stukeley, their full potential was not really appreciated until 1828, when Artis published copious illustrations of his 1820–7 excavations.
These revealed the industrial potential of the neighbourhood and a remarkable series of buildings ranging from simple workshops to elaborate private houses.
By the early twentieth century, an impressive picture had been composed, to which was soon added an important survey of the local road system and the fort near the Billing Brook.
Since then the most significant contribution has been made by aerial photography, such that we now possess a remarkably coherent record of the town's overall morphology.
These advances have not been accompanied, however, by any excavations within the defended enclosure, most work being confined to small areas in the extra-mural zones.
This included rescue work south-east of the walled area and the longer-term operations in Normangate Field north of the River Nene, most of which remain only in interim published form.
Just how little we know about the site's status and function is reinforced by recent spectacular discoveries, including the hoard of gold coins and the cache of Christian silverware.
Paradoxically, therefore, Water Newton is our clearest ‘town plan’, yet surprisingly little is known about its development through time.
The site has no obvious Iron-Age antecedents; more probably it originated as a civilian vicus outside the fort, which aerial photographs show as a multiple-ditched installation enclosing c. 2 ha (5 acres) on a gravel terrace north-west of the later defended nucleus and the Billing Brook.
It remains unexcavated, and therefore difficult to date, but it would logically belong in the pre-Flavian phase of consolidation, protecting an important river crossing on the main north-south line of communication, like the forts at Godmanchester and Great Casterton.
At present there is no clear evidence for a pre-Flavian settlement associated with this site either north or south of the Billing Brook, though some of the later streets immediately outside the fort might perpetuate elements of an original vicus .
This raises interesting questions, both about the layout of any early   vicus and about its relationship with the later town where the morphology is apparently dependent upon the main road frontages and the associated side-streets.
This was not the only military site in the vicinity, however; some 3.2 km (2 miles) down the river lay the vexillation fortress at Longthorpe, which, with its associated works depot and practice camps, is assigned to the period AD 47–62.
This was clearly a campaign base concerned with both east-west and north-south operations, but it does not seem to have been the focus for any civilian development.
Water Newton, defended area south of the River Nene (after Mackreth)
The town's morphology can for convenience be considered in two sections, first the defended enclosure and the extra-mural suburbs south of the river (fig. 18), and second the extra-mural areas to the north and west (fig. 20).
In its developed form, Water Newton is a classic case of increasing centralization leading to the creation of an irregular network of streets and lanes beyond the frontages of a main through-road.
Its main axis was formed by Ermine Street, along which occupation stretched for c. 3 km (2 miles) on either side of the River Nene.
Two sections across its line in Normangate Field, in 1961 and 1969, showed it to be 7–8 m (23–26 ft) wide and up to 1.5 m (5 ft) high, reflecting the repeated resurfacings and repairs made necessary by heavy wear.
South of the river, above the flood plain, numerous side-streets and lanes run both obliquely and at right angles to the frontages, serving further densely occupied zones within the defended area which enclosed 18 ha (44 acres).
Unfortunately their relative chronology remains uncertain, but many are linked by cross-streets which perhaps suggest three or possibly four broad stages of growth:
(1)
The initial ribbon development along the Ermine Street frontages with only a few irregular side-lanes and possibly one large building (No. 1).
This pattern occurs in second- and third-century contexts both at Kate's Cabin and in Normangate Field at the site's extremities, and so probably began earlier within the defended area.
(2)
The extension of side-streets and lanes to serve land behind the frontages, and the provision of an ‘inner ring road’ linking some of them.
This is most obvious east of Ermine Street, though there are traces to the west.
(3)
The construction of two more regularly-shaped (planned?)insulae in the western part of the town, which might represent a separate stage if, as some photographs suggest, their principal axes originally extended beyond the defences.
(4)
The construction of the defences and the creation of an intervallum road connecting up an extended street layout.
The two insulae may actually be contemporary with this, since they follow the line of the defences at this point.
This would suggest that by the date of the walls, the interior was already well built-up; indeed excavations near the south-west gate she wed the intervallum road to have been re-metalled six times indicating prolonged usage.
Beyond the defended area, there are far fewer side-streets and lanes and occupation was concentrated along the main road frontages.
Besides Ermine Street itself, a second road led southwestwards towards Irchester from a gap in the western defences, crossing in the process a further route which runs north-westwards from Ermine Street, roughly parallel with the enclosure, and heads off across the Billing Brook.
Around the east side of the defences, a possible flood bank may also have doubled as a bypass road, though this is probably relatively late.
South of the River Nene, the pattern of intra- and extra-mural land-use and structural build-up is surprisingly clear, though there is little evidence upon which to base a discussion of its development.
There are, however, considerable gaps in the visible building density, due to variable photographic conditions and the presence of unrecognized timber structures.
At the centre of the defended enclosure lay two courtyard structures of uncertain function and a precinct housing several temple-like buildings.
One of the courtyard structures lay alongside Ermine Street (No. 1), with its other long side adjoining the precinct (No. 2) with which it may have been associated.
Its larger counterpart (No. 3) lay at an oblique angle behind the buildings flanking the nearby frontages.
Their locations might suggest that the former developed before the frontages were completely built up (though structures may have been cleared for it) while the latter had to use land behind them.
The intra-mural zone also contains other buildings, most of them relatively small and simple.
Strip buildings of varying sizes are  particularly prominent along the main frontages, some with additions to the rear, others with internal partitions, presumably providing the domestic and workshop accommodation for local craftsmen to judge from excavation in the suburbs.
Few apparently have plots behind, perhaps indicating that their occupants were dependent upon specialized activities or farmed land elsewhere.
Interspersed among these are at least three aisled buildings and several other rectangular structures running parallel to the frontages, some undivided, others with well defined internal partitions; they usually lie along side-streets where pressure on land was probably less acute, and may represent a different class of structure socially or functionally.
Several apparently larger and more developed buildings lie at the ends of short side-lanes behind the main frontages.
These are most evident at the south-eastern end of the enclosure and may be the wealthier houses noted by Artis, at least one of which had Alwalton marble slabs on its walls.
Such buildings suggest that some of the region's wealthier inhabitants resided within the town, which may have a bearing on the site's wider significance.
Outside the defences, interesting contrasts emerge in the extra-mural zones south of the river.
Excavations during 1956–7 revealed extensive ribbon development along the road skirting the south-west side of the defences, close to its junction with Ermine Street.
Occupation began in the second century, being represented by pebbled spreads associated with several poorly recorded timber buildings, one of which contained ovens and hearths.
By the third and fourth centuries at least eleven buildings lined the road, often separated by narrow side-streets or lanes.
Five of these were fairly typical strip buildings, at least three with a room or cellar to the rear; two others were open walled enclosures; while there was also a possible shrine and a stone barn replacing a timber predecessor.
They were associated with pits, ditches, ovens and hearths.
Excavation in 1973 1 km (0.6 miles) to the south revealed further stone buildings fronting Ermine Street, though whether occupation was continuous between the two areas remains uncertain.
Comparable buildings are also visible from the air north of the defences as far as the River Nene, apart from the low-lying Billing Brook area.
West of the walled area, the photographs reveal a complex of fenced or ditched compounds arranged end-on to the main road frontages and sometimes separated by short side-lanes.
On the Irchester road, these are c. 25 m (81 ft) wide and extend over 100 m (327 ft) from the frontages; comparable plots line the cross-route parallel to the defences.
No structures are traceable, so that their exact function is uncertain.
North of the Billing Brook, further occupation including several side-streets flanked by buildings and numerous pottery kilns clearly overlies the redundant fort.
This material is largely undated, although it is clear that occupation along Ermine Street pre-dated the defences and continued with little or no change well into the fourth century.
North of the River Nene, aerial photographs and excavations have confirmed and extended Artis' work, demonstrating the presence of extensive extra-mural suburbs in Normangate Field (fig. 20).
Ermine Street still formed the principal axis, lined by numerous strip buildings and associated kilns and pits, but various roads and streets branched eastwards from it, serving further densely occupied land.
Just north of the river, a main road branched north-north-east for c. 300 m (990 ft), with at least one prominent side-street, before swinging eastwards towards the Fen Road downstream.
Its original alignment was roughly continued towards Castor, however, by a ditched trackway flanked by various enclosure boundaries.
Further north along Ermine Street, another road branched northwards to follow the proposed alignment of King Street skirting the fen edge.
Within Normangate Field, additional sidestreets and droveways can be seen following sinuous courses amid the crop-marks.
One of the most obvious droveways, running roughly parallel with Ermine Street before turning eastwards at its northern end, was excavated between 1968 and 1973.
It was c. 5.5 m (18 ft) wide with traces of rough metalling surviving only in patches, with two side ditches 3 m (10 ft) wide and 1.8 m (5¾ ft) deep.
Some 250 m (820 ft) to the north, another droveway running roughly north-south was examined in 1975; this had originally consisted of fine gravel metalling set between shallow side ditches c. 1.3 m (4¼ ft) wide.
These  
19 Water Newton, the defended area south of the River Nene looking north-west (Cambridge University Collection: copyright reserved)
ditches were subsequently replaced by fences and the road resurfaced with a spread of limestone and river pebbles 7 m (23 ft) wide, later heavily worn.
These droveways formed the focus for a wide range of agricultural and industrial activities.
The development of this northern suburb is better understood than its southern counterpart, because enough small-scale excavation has taken place to elaborate the information from the aerial photographs.
Particularly interesting is the system of ditched sub-rectangular land allotments visible alongside Ermine Street and the associated streets and droveways and also located by geophysical survey.
These resemble the examples alongside the Irchester road, but here excavations   have clarified aspects of their chronology and function.
Work at the north end of Normangate Field in 1974–5 dated the allotments here to the earlier second century at least, thereby suggesting that land closer to the town centre must have been surveyed and allotted at this time or even earlier.
This would argue for considerable community organization and official control of the division and leasing of land on the urban periphery.
Water Newton, north of the River Nene (after Mackreth)
The subsequent history of these properties varied somewhat.
Those at the north end of Normangate Field remained essentially agricultural in character throughout the second century, after which they apparently went out of use.
A single plot of land c. 42 m (137½ ft) north-south by at least 18 m (59 ft) east-west containing a timber built aisled barn, occupied the eastern side of the droveway, while on the west lay various shallow plots defined by post- and trench-built fence lines.
Two of these, measuring 10 by at least 20 m (33 by 66 ft), and 6 by at least 16 m (20 by 52 ft) respectively, each contained a water hole, suggesting, in the absence of any recognizable buildings, their use as animal pens.
In contrast, the more commercially-attractive plots alongside Ermine Street soon attracted pottery production and then became built-up with strip buildings and workshops associated with various specialist activities, as Artis' excavations made clear.
This sequence was confirmed by the 1968–9 excavation of an aisled workshop set end-on to Ermine Street and served by a metalled side-street 4.6 m (15 ft) wide along its southern side.
It had been erected in the second half of the second century to house c number of specialist kilns and furnaces, but clearly overlay the remains of earlier bonfire kilns and spreads of potters' clay.
Initially many of the associated yards remained relatively open, but they gradually filled with furnaces, kilns and clay dumps, clearly reflecting increasing pressure on land.
Most of the buildings lasted into the fourth century.
Excavations in 1969–73 along the eastern side of the droveway behind Ermine Street revealed more complex picture, with a mid to late second century encroachment onto hitherto open agricultural land by industrial concerns, represented by large areas of burnt sand covered by friable clay and wood ash.
These are interpreted as the remains of bonfire or clamp-type kilns, together with a few more substantial updraught examples.
Then, surprisingly, this activity was superseded by buildings of very different, non-industrial, functions, including, from north to south, a circular structure replaced in the late third or early fourth century by an aisled barn, a rectangular shed later embellished with a portico and an internal apse, and two further circular buildings; opposite the latter to the west was a fourth-century mausoleum .
This marked change of land-use and the contrast with the Ermine Street frontages both indicate the level of potential complexity masked elsewhere by the absence of large-scale excavations.
Beyond these main extra-mural suburbs, it is difficult in some sectors to define a clear-cut dividing line between the town and the countryside.
This is particularly true of the extensive areas involved with pottery production and iron-working, which merge into the estates of the surrounding villas.
Many of these features were examined by Artis, though some have also benefited from recent fieldwork and excavation.
It has been demonstrated that the colour-coated pottery industries extended both upstream into the Sibson/Stibbington areas and downstream towards Stanground, in addition to the Billing Brook and Normangate Field sectors already mentioned.
Iron-smelting was also carried out extensively to the west and north-west of the town, especially in the area of Bedford Purlieus.
These areas are not strictly part of the town, though they were clearly important to its lifestyle and economy.
Equally problematical are those villas within walking distance of the town at the t rural-urban fringe.
These include two large buildings in Water Newton parish to the west, the villa at Ailsworth north of the river and the courtyard house at Mill Hill to the east.
Even more imposing is the exceptionally large complex at Castor to the north-east, which has been variously identified as an official residence, a large villa and a rural sanctuary.
Given the limited excavations at Water Newton, only a few buildings can be discussed in any — detail.
Of particular interest for the site's status and function are the two large buildings at the heart of the defended area.
The larger of the pair (No. 3) apparently comprised a courtyard measuring 36 by 22 m (117½ by 72 ft), surrounded   by rooms, though there are irregularities on the north.
It must have been entered via a passage between other buildings.
Its smaller counterpart (No. 1) is less distinct, but apparently involved a series of rooms arranged around one or two courtyards.
Identifying their functions is difficult without excavation, suggestions including a mansio complex and a centre for the administration of the Fens respectively.
The relationship between No.
I and the temple precinct, however, is reminiscent of Godmanchester, suggesting that this is the mansio , while the larger structure might be tentatively identified as a market building or small forum complex, given the potential administrative status of the town; this would be unique among the small towns.
21 Normangate Field, Water Newton, looking south-west.
Elements of the street system and a droveway, flanked by ditched enclosures, are visible (Cambridge University Collection: copyright reserved)
Of the remaining buildings, the circular and aisled varieties deserve closer attention.
The 1969–73 Normangate Field excavations revealed three circular structures, the central one heavily robbed.
The northern example was 7.9 m (26 ft) in diameter with an unusual arrangement of limestone blocks ending in two post emplacements around its northern part and pitched stonework throughout the rest.
At least three pitched stone supports along the inside may have supported engaged pilasters or a bench.
Its southern counterpart, 9.1 m (29¾ ft) in diameter, had pitched limestone walls 0.8 m (2½ ft) wide and a central stone-packed post-hole supporting a timber superstructure and tiled roof.
Inside was a red and white tessellated floor.
All three dated to the third century, and were tentatively identified as shrines, as was the second phase of a nearby rectangular structure.
This building, originally 13.4 by 6.1 m (44 by 20 ft), had a portico added on the west 1.4 m (4½ ft) wide incorporating an internal apse, a tessellated floor and painted walls.
Three aisled buildings also came from Normangate Field.
The 1975 example was a simple post-built construction measuring c. 13 by 8 m (43 by 26 ft), though only its southern wall and aisles had survived later disturbance.
The other two had pitched stone foundations, more normal for the area.
The 1973 example replaced the northern of the three circular buildings already described, and measured c. 15.2 by 9.
I m (49 by 29¾ ft), with two rows of stone-packed post-holes.
Its counterpart on Ermine Street was a two-phase structure, beginning life as a building measuring 25.9 by 13.1 m (84½ by 43 ft), with a shingled roof carried on two rows of massive posts 5.8 m (19ft) apart.
In the early third century it had been rebuilt with a new wall inside its robbed-out predecessor.
It had functioned as a workshop throughout, in contrast with the other two which remained entirely agricultural.
Excavations at Water Newton have yielded little evidence about the settlement's everyday life apart from the industrial aspects already discussed, but there can be little doubt that it enjoyed a close relationship with the imperial estate in the Fens, by acting as a processing and marketing centre conveniently placed both for road and river transport.
Unfortunately, little is known about the function of the numerous strip buildings within the defences, though examples examined in the suburbs may well be comparable.
From south of the walled area comes evidence for metal-working, leather-working, and agricultural processing, represented by two millstones and a cache of cattle and horse bones, while from Normangate Field a single crucible with bronze droplets provides evidence for bronze-working.
In addition to these everyday activities, the suggestion of a fourth-century mosaic school based at Water Newton, coupled with the discovery of weights from a goldsmith's balance, hints at the presence of luxury trades.
More unusual activities are indicated by several moulds for forging coins of the Severan dynasty.
The great bulk of the evidence from the town, however, concerns pottery production and iron-working.
The earliest traces of pottery manufacture are found north of Billing Brook, where at least one late Flavian/early Trajanic kiln was producing calcite gritted wares, and in Normangate Field, represented by several second-century bonfire or clamp-type kilns.
These were superseded by more substantial updraught kilns which have been found right across the northern suburbs.
Evidence suggests that after an initial second-century surge of activity in Normangate Field, the number of kilns declined in the third and fourth, as manufacture gave way to other activities and moved further afield to more convenient locations.
Iron-working is also attested in Normangate Field, principally by several probable furnaces in the aisled building alongside Ermine Street.
Religious activities are not very well represented.
The central temple complex (No. 2) has already been mentioned, but we know nothing of its chronology or its dedication.
The aerial photographs suggest at least one Romano-Celtic temple alongside other circular or rectangular structures.
Numerous finds of statuettes include examples of Hercules, Ceres and Minerva, while a fragmentary inscription apparently dedicated to Mars was found west of the defences.
Less certain is the religious attribution of the three circular buildings in Normangate Field, despite their superficial resemblance to the circular tradition recognized at Brigstock and Collyweston.
The apparent absence of conclusive religious finds might indeed suggest a purely secular domestic role.
Most interesting is the Water Newton treasure discovered in 1975 in the south-east of the defended enclosure.
It included 28 objects, many with obvious Christian implications.
Besides cups and bowls with chi-rho symbols and apparently Christian inscriptions, several leaf shaped plaques recall native Celtic votive objects, clearly transformed and Christianized by the incorporation of a chi-rho emblem.
Such interaction between traditions is of special interest and it is most unfortunate that so little is known about the hoard's original find spot.
Its exact interpretation remains debatable, but it can plausibly be seen as the more valuable possessions, perhaps the church plate, of a fourth-century Christian community focused on the town.
Water Newton's defences enclose c. 18 ha (44 acres); this is comparable with Caerwent and larger than Caistor-by-Norwich and Carmarthen, all civitas capitals.
They have been well known since the eighteenth century, when Stukeley recorded a stone wall fronted by a ditch 15 m (49 ft) wide.
This has been sectioned only once, on the south-west, revealing an apparently single-phase wall on a drystone foundation, backed by a clay bank, itself overlain by the intervallum road.
Doubts have been cast on this interpretation, but insufficient evidence is available to reassess it in terms of the more typical two-phase sequence.
The second-century pottery sealed by the bank suggests a later second- or early third-century construction date, though this clearly requires confirmation elsewhere.
Three gates are visible, all unexcavated, two related to Ermine Street and the third to the Irchester road on the south-west.
The southwestern and south-eastern examples were apparently staggered slightly, accounting for the odd diversion of Ermine Street on the south-east.
Rectangular towers, also unexcavated, appear fairly evenly spaced along the exterior of the wall on at least two sides, but their relationship to the wall remains unknown.
Such defences are clearly of urban-core type, designed to enclose a large part of the occupied area south of the river, including the official buildings.
The very size of the defences emphasizes the local wealth available when compared with other large and small towns in the province.
Not surprisingly, given its apparent importance, Water Newton's status has been much discussed.
The site has long been identified with the Durobrivae of the Antonine Itinerary and the Ravenna Cosmography, and its name is further recorded on several mortarium stamps.
One of these carries the legend Cunoarus Fecit/ Vico Durobrivis , recording its manufacture at the vicus at Durobrivae , which is one of the rare instances in Roman Britain where epigraphy attests a site's status.
It remains unclear, however, whether this relates to the whole community at Durobrivae or merely one ward within the town.
The exact meaning of the word in relation to the status of the early civitas capitals is also still unresolved, but it is at least clear that we are dealing with a unit which enjoyed some measure of self-government.
Further evidence comes from a milestone found in 1785 in the ditch near the northwest gate, though it had probably been moved from its original location.
It had originally been erected in AD 276 in the reign of Florian, and records that it stood M(ille) P(assuum) I (i.e. one Roman mile) from its official point of measurement.
It is usually accepted that such milestones were measured from civitas capitals or cities, suggesting that by the AD 270s Water Newton had achieved this rank and was responsible for the local government of its hinterland.
Such an upgrading process is not unknown in the late Roman West, and there are good archaeological grounds to support its occurrence at Water Newton, not least its increasing size and importance.
This is reflected in the presence of possible public and official buildings forming an obvious urban focus, the recognition of several wealthy  suburban villas and possible intra-mural houses, whose owners could have formed the core of the local council, and the provision of an extensive internal street network and of urban-core defences, all coupled with the obvious agricultural and industrial potential of its hinterland.
Taken cumulatively, this archaeological evidence sets Water Newton apart from all the other minor towns studied in this volume.
There is little recent information about the town's cemeteries.
One clearly lay south of the road near the north-west gate, where Stukeley recorded urn burials and Artis noted stone coffins.
Another lay outside the south-east corner, where Artis excavated several inhumations.
The principal cemetery area, however, appears to have been that discovered during turnpike road construction in 1739 to the south and south-west.
The finds included several urns and glass vessels as well as stone and lead coffins; some graves had even cut through the counterscarp bank of the town's ditch, suggesting prolonged usage.
In 1754, further burials were discovered during the rebuilding of Kate's Cabin at the southern edge of the extra-mural area.
Another large inhumation cemetery has also been recorded from scattered finds on the fringes of Normangate Field.
Several possible rectangular and circular mausolea have been noted alongside the Irchester road, but remain unexcavated.
They probably resemble the fourth-century example excavated alongside the droveway in Normangate Field, with rough stone footings enclosing four burials, one containing a pair of gold earrings, a silver brooch and bronze bracelets.
Lastly in the southern suburb several infant burials were found alongside the timber predecessor of the stone barn (p. 84).
Clearly Water Newton had a range of burial traditions which would benefit from modern excavation and research.
The fourth-century history of the town is somewhat unclear on current evidence, especially inside the defences, but some clues are available for the extra-mural zones.
Within the southern suburb, many of the 1956–7 structures were apparently disused by the second half of the century, their footings being robbed out or cut by a new ditch alongside Ermine Street.
All this suggests contraction in this sector, although coins from the house of Theodosius attest casual occupation until the end of the century at least.
The concentration of inhumation cemeteries close to the defences also suggests contraction, though several presumably earlier cremation urns from the same areas might counsel caution.
Occupation in Normangate Field also continued well into the fourth century.
The droveways and drainage ditches were clearly well maintained throughout and began to silt up only during the currency of late colour-coated wares and coins of the house of Valentinian.
Buildings clearly fell gradually into disrepair, while the fourth-century mausoleum points to a shift in emphasis in at least one area.
More importantly, few coins of the house of Theodosius have been recorded, indicating a fairly rapid end to the occupation.
Further north, alongside the droveway excavated in 1975, the plots were actually vacant during the entire fourth century, suggesting changes here from an even earlier date.
Cumulatively this evidence points to later fourth-century decline in the extra-mural zones, but this is unlikely to be true of the defended area.
The 1974 discovery of the Water Newton hoard, a cache of 30 gold coins of the period AD 330–50, taken alongside the important fourth-century school of mosaicists, clearly indicate continued wealth at the site, about which all too little is known.
The site's fifth-century history remains poorly known, though presumably neither its postulated administrative status nor its manufacturing capacity could have survived long once Roman authority lapsed and the roads became insecure.
There can be no doubt that the countryside remained relatively productive, but we know little about how this influenced the fate of the town, principally because the relevant archaeological levels lie inside the defences where extensive plough damage in the past and the lack of systematic excavation combine to present a rather bleak picture.
MINOR TOWNS I
Alcester (figs. 22 and 23)
The extensive settlement at Alcester lies close to the confluence of the Rivers Alne and Arrow at a point where Ryknild Street, running between Wall and Bourton-on-the-Water, crosses the road from Droitwich to Tiddington.
It has been identified as the Alauna of the Ravenna list by Rivet and Smith, although Richmond and Crawford earlier assigned this name to Alchester, which in some ways makes better sense, since its neighbours quoted in the list would indicate that it lies on the road from Silchester to the south Midlands; nevertheless the derivation of the name of the River Alne from Alauna , and hence the name of the town on or near that river, is an attractive argument in favour of Rivet and Smith.
A fort has been identified by aerial photography on higher ground a little distance southeast of the later town.
It could be as early as the Claudian period, and it has the typical widely spaced ditches of that period.
At a later date, however, the fort was probably moved to lower ground and so closer to the site of the future town; two pieces of cavalry equipment from the Bleachfield Road area plus a few Claudian coins and some slight remains of early timber-framed buildings, might be thought to support this view.
Apart from these fragments, though, the site of the town and its immediate suburbs have scarcely produced sufficient evidence to support the idea of a fort here before the Flavian period, which, in view of the general military situation in the west Midlands at that time, would be unlikely.
Although a good deal of excavation has taken place at Alcester, especially in the south-western suburb around Birch Abbey, very little has received full publication.6 Excavations in the fortified area of the town have always been difficult owing to the presence of modern buildings, but with new developments taking place, they have at last become feasible; even now, though, the line of the defences is still imperfectly known.
A point worthy of comment is that the settlement grew up mostly in the north-east quadrant of the main road junction; the western boundary seems to have been along Ryknild Street, since a large cemetery was situated immediately across it.
An area of marsh northwest of the fortified area, with peat formation taking place in Roman times, probably inhibited the construction of a through road to the town from that direction.
Alcester therefore resembles a minority of other small towns which lie beside rather than athwart main roads, such as Dorn (p. 253).
A complicated and often-changing irregular system of streets grew up around these main roads in the settlement area; most is known about those in the southern suburbs, for which the main road from Tiddington formed an axis, parallel to and south of the modern Stratford Road.
Nevertheless changes must have occurred even in this route, for, during the fourth century, it was partly built over.
One main street, set roughly at right angles, ran north and south from it; its northern arm, possibly Flavian in date, aimed at the southern end of the modern High Street where the south gate of the fortified centre was probably later established; a slight shift towards the west in its alignment in the late second century may have coincided with the construction of the first defences.
The southern arm aimed towards the floodplain of the River Arrow, and was constructed in the middle of the second century.
Another street, also running approximately north-south, lay between it and Ryknild Street; the branch north of the Tiddington road   
22 Alcester (after Mahany and Booth)
23 Alcester, looking east at the Birch Abbey area (Cambridge University Collection, Crown Copyright)
was laid out late in the first century, but its continuation southwards was not constructed until the mid third century.
At its southern end it turned sharply eastwards to cross the street described above, and possibly to link with yet another running south-west from the Tiddington road; it has been suggested that the latter was constructed as a short cut to Ryknild Street and skirted the southern suburb.
Several other minor, and apparently random, streets were also found in this area when flood prevention works were carried out in 1970.
The somewhat cavalier way in which many of the internal streets were treated is illustrated by one which was found east of Bleachfield Street.
Dating to the later first century, it later provided a foundation for at least one substantial masonry building.
The defences of the enclosed area of the town have been identified on the north, east and southwest sides only.
It would seem that on the northwest side, where they are still sought, the marshy area of ground formed a natural limit to their position.
A section across the north-eastern side of the town near Gunnings Bridge revealed a clay bank, dated to the late second century, which was earlier than the masonry wall constructed in front of it.
The wall was 2.7 m (9 ft) wide and rested on a piled foundation.
No ditch was observed here, presumably because the steep slope down to the River Alne rendered it unnecessary.
A similar sequence is reported from the eastern side, in Malt Mill Lane, although no published information is available.
On the south-western part of the circuit though, the line of the later wall departs from that of the early bank, here made of clay and gravel, and assumes an outer course.
A ditch fronted the early bank at this point, while the piled foundation for the wall was here 3.8 m (12½ ft) wide.
An early fourth-century building had been demolished to make way for the wall, thus providing an approximate date for its construction.
Alcester must be, therefore, almost the only town in Roman Britain where the later circuit of fortifications enclosed a greater area than that of its predecessor.
The reason is probably not hard to seek.
This quarter of the town appears to have contained buildings of quality which ran right up to and even over the defences of the late second century.
Even then, despite the more generous line adopted by the wall in the fourth century, at least one major building had to be destroyed.
Presumably an even more westerly line was ruled out by the presence of the marsh.
In these same excavations a square external tower was also examined; it was thought to have been added to the wall at a later date.
But with a date of construction for the wall extending well into the fourth century, and a date now being assigned for the general run of external towers somewhat earlier than that previously postulated in the Theodosian reconstruction of British towns and cities, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that both may be contemporary.
The wall at this point was recorded as robbed, and it is not easy to distinguish building phases when this has happened.
Nothing is yet known of the gates of the town, although the position of the south gate can be inferred from the lines of the streets.
Alcester appears to have contained a number of buildings of quality, both inside and outside the fortifications.
The structure which was destroyed by the construction of the town wall contained a row of some ten rooms; the walls were about 1 m (3¼ ft) thick, and the structure had been roofed with limestone slates.
The surviving floors, though, were of clay, which might imply that there had once been plank floors above them.
Also inside the defences in Tibbet's Close was a sequence of timber-framed buildings, with another masonry building nearby.
At least two mosaics have been recorded in the same area; mosaics are generally rare in small towns, and consequently these have considerable significance.
Outside the walled area, a house built on a disused road (p. 94) began as an aisled structure but later had a corridor and two wings added to it.
Two rooms had concrete floors, while a third, with a pebble floor, contained piles of charred grain; quantities of painted wall plaster were also recovered.
Another building, not far from the postulated south gate, had floors and walls of clay, except for the north end where the floor edge was marked by sandstone blocks.
This may have been an open-ended shop with timber uprights based on the blocks, so providing both support for the gable end and a frame into which wooden shutters could be fitted when the shop was closed (see Catterick, p. 114).
One of the most interesting extra-mural buildings was uncovered in the Birch Abbey excavations.
It was founded on horizontal timber beams and divided into at least four bays with a length in excess of 21 m (69 ft); the floor was of timber laid on shallow joists.
It was associated with large waterlogged pits which contained leather offcuts, dung and other organic residues.
Dated to the second half of the second century, it seems to have been a tannery and leather workshop, and is not only one of the few reliable instances yet found for this industry, but is also one of the few industries attested at Alcester.
Another masonry building was partly uncovered near the junction of the Tiddington road with the ‘bypass’ road (p. 94); one room contained a hypocaust, and a stamped tile was also found, indicating perhaps a tilery in the neighbourhood.
Numerous other fragments of buildings, many of barn-like or shop-like forms, have been discovered in the suburbs, representing almost the entire Roman period from the lat e  first century onwards.
There are also some ditched enclosures which obviously represent property boundaries; of most interest in this respect is a slightly meandering ditch, which appears to have acted as a southern limit for the suburb in the middle of the third century.
Some of the buildings were connected with small-scale metal-working, including smithing, and one at least was decorated with painted plaster which included architectural motifs.
A large pit containing over 50 unbroken mid-Antonine samian vessels might well be taken to indicate a pottery shop nearby.
Another trade is attested by the discovery of an amphora on which a black dip into reads SCO FLOS SCOM[BRI], or ‘prime extract of mackerel’
Almost every excavation which has been conducted in the area bounded by the River Alne on the east and north-east, the marsh on the north and north-west, Ryknild Street on the west and the boundary ditch on the south has produced evidence, however slight, for structures of one sort or another, and it is clear that the whole town was several times the size of the walled area.
As observed above, the quality of some of the buildings is also better than that to be observed in many small towns, in which mosaics in particular are rare.
This would seem to mark Alcester as something apart from the general category, and it is worth noting that the site lies almost equidistant, as the crow flies, from the major cities of Wroxeter, Leicester, Gloucester and Cirencester.
It must therefore be situated not far from the junction of the three civitates of Cornovii, Corieltavi and Dobunni.
Topographically it also enjoys a favoured position on a spur of ground which divides the Severn from the Avon valleys, and close to the fertile land in the Vale of Evesham.
Yet this area is almost entirely devoid of villas.
That being so, it might be argued that Alcester enjoyed an importance, above that of most small towns, for the rural area around it, providing not only its goods and services, but also the accommodation and ancillary buildings for the farmers of the neighbourhood.
Thus it may have become the physical centre as well as the service centre for a considerable area of prime agricultural land near the junction of three units of local administration.
It cannot therefore have failed to become an important centre in its own right after the administrative changes introduced in the fourth century and it may have been promoted to the rank of civitas capital, although there is no evidence for the civitas over which it would have ruled.
A Constantinian milestone, found re-used in a late fourth-century foundation, indicates road-works in the area at that time.
The only area which seems to have been devoid of buildings almost throughout the Roman period lay near the main centre of occupation in Birch Abbey and Evesham Street.
Up to 12 superimposed cobble and gravel surfaces were encountered, and it was suggested by the excavators that the area was an open market.
It thus resembles the open gravelled spaces in the F centres of several small towns, among them Catterick (p. 114) and Godmanchester (p. 126), which, as well as Alcester, most likely functioned as markets for both local and itinerant traders.
Unfortunately, despite the widespread excavations at Alcester, little has been found which can be related to religious practices.
Indeed the only recorded deity is Epona, the Celtic horse goddess, whose name had been scratched on the shoulder of a jar found in a pit in the Birch Abbey area.
This presumably implies that the contents had been consigned as an offering to the goddess, whose shrine or temple may have been nearby.
‘Horsey’ attributes associated with a small temple at Wroxeter might suggest that the goddess had a following in the Cornovian region.
The sites of several cemeteries are known.
The largest so far identified lies west of Ryknild Street, emphasizing the fact that the road may once have acted as a settlement boundary.
Over 100 burials have been recorded here; one appears to have had a stone coffin, while other graves were lined with stones.
The cemetery as a whole would seem to be late Roman.
A second-century cremation cemetery has been uncovered south of the defended area in Swan Street; it was claimed to have been receiving additional burials as late as the third and fourth centuries, when it must have lain within the built-up area.
Another, presumably later, inhumation cemetery lay in and around the southern boundary ditch at its Ryknild Street end.
Possibly even later, two burials have been recorded from Coulter's Garage just outside the south side of the defences; these may be contemporary with the interment of a young girl who had been beheaded and ten infant burials in the garden of Lloyds Bank.