

Chapter Four
The Imperial Hotel proudly faced the sea, halfway between its two rivals, the Albion with its Dickensian associations and the relative newcomer, the Grand Hotel, standing sentinel on the West Cliff.
The Imperial, with its solid, ornate façade and a tower at either end, offered comfortable grandeur, like Broadstairs itself.
It had been built in the 1860s, to take advantage of the sudden influx of visitors provided by the arrival of the London, Chatham and Dover Railway at Broadstairs.
This late start in railway communication with the outside world enabled Broadstairs and the Imperial to gain from the benefits of visitors, while still maintaining their reputation for selectness.
Steamers called at its noisy neighbours, Margate and Ramsgate, but Broadstairs, favoured by the discriminating, in the main slumbered peacefully on.
The Imperial Hotel exuded the essence of Broadstairs: we are here in our excellence should you have need of us, but we shall not stoop to seek you out.
Nevertheless its owner was a worried man.
Particularly today.
‘I don't know, I'm sure, Mr Dee.’
Mr Cedric Multhrop subsided into one of the comfortable armchairs in his lounge, then leapt up guiltily as though a mere hotel owner had no place to be sitting down in his guests' domain.
‘Should it be the red carpet or the blue?
That's what I keep asking myself.
The red is more correct, but new it is not, Mr Dee.
I couldn't say it's new, but then could blue be said to be royal?
That's what I ask myself.’
Auguste, or Mr Dee as he had become over the week, smiled.
He was, after all, on holiday even if it was the all-important 5th August, the day of the Grand Banquet, of the arrival of the Prince of Wales.
He had grown quite fond of Mr Multhrop with his many worries but, being on holiday, failed to view his ‘problems’ with as much anxiety as Mr Multhrop himself.
Auguste had responsibilities of his own.
Already early on this Saturday morning he and his pupils were beginning to prepare for the banquet in the Imperial kitchens.
The hotel staff had been firmly relegated to a very small part of their own domain for the preparation of luncheon and would thereafter be merely onlookers, apart from serving the food to the hoi polloi of the guests this evening, while Auguste and his pupils served the Prince of Wales's table.
‘Oh, do use the blue, Papa; it's so pretty.’
Auguste's eyes misted at the sound and sight of the lovely Araminta, Multhrop's eighteen-year-old daughter, rustling down the staircase in a delightful froufrou of petticoats, her large blue eyes fixed on her father, but well aware of every male in sight.
Her curls bounced enchantingly as she clung to her father's arm, dimpling at Auguste.
‘Do say the blue.’
‘Then the blue it is, my love,’ said her father fondly, as much putty in her hands as was Auguste.
This had truly been a bewitching week, Auguste reflected.
On Wednesday he had escorted Alice to the Grand Theatre at Margate where they had watched Charley's Aunt.
For himself, he did not find the piece as graceful as could be wished, but Alice seemed to find it most enjoyable and had giggled over its charms ever since.
They had returned on the late theatre train, and it had been most pleasant walking down from the railway station and along the seafront so late at night; ah, to have a pretty girl by one's  side, and the touch of her lips on yours.
Which girl, however?
He might have wooed Alice away from Alfred Wittisham had Araminta not stolen his heart.
Never would he forget sitting beside her in the night air watching an open-air performance of The Parvenue and listening to the band at Fort House on Thursday evening.
Never would he forget the walk home along the promenade afterwards when her delicate little hand, albeit gloved, stole into his.
The warm night air had quite gone to his head, and had Araminta not been quite so very unattainable, doubtless other parts also would have shared his intoxication.
Fortunately a decidedly unromantic evening breeze had sprung up, subduing ardour in favour of a brisk walk home.
Bracing was the word for the English seaside, Auguste had decided.
‘Aaah!’ cried out Mr Multhrop in anguish.
Leaving his cry wafting after him, he disappeared in pursuit of a housemaid who was busily removing all the clean antimacassars that had only just been placed lovingly in position for the oil-bedaubed heads that would shortly be resting on them.
Perhaps even royalty's oil.
An army of minions was tidying, dusting and polishing areas that the Prince of Wales could never see, unless he were to perform acrobatics; to Auguste's eye the scene resembled the gardeners at work before the arrival of the Red Queen in Mr Carroll's amusing tale.
Mrs Multhrop sped around after them, confusing matters more, Mr Multhrop sped after her and Araminta remained still, the cynosure of all eyes, smiling delightfully and of no practical help whatsoever.
It was not expected of her.
Auguste repressed the traitorous thought that so far as household management went, she would prove like Mr David Copperfield's ‘child-wife’ Dora.
Some discernment she had, however, for had she not made most complimentary remarks about his filets de sole Murat?
Similar panic was reigning in the kitchens.
The Imperial's staff, torn between a natural amour propre that a rival team had been imported to cook for the Prince of Wales and relief that they would not be responsible for royalty's displeasure (yet with the ignoble hope that they might get all the credit), watched anxiously to ensure that the incoming team was competent.
The procession of raised rook and chicken pies, with their intricate decorations, that made its appearance in the kitchen raised their expectations as high as the pie coffins, as did the jellies vanishing into the larders, and sorbets into the refrigerators.
Auguste had adjusted the menu to his own standards.
His frantic re-reading of Dickens had revealed numerous mentions of grog.
Very well, he reasoned, then grog jelly was not too far removed from the mandate he had been given, and no one could object to the addition of a delicious fruit sorbet.
Dickens must have mentioned fruit somewhere.
They would at least remove the richness of the goose from frightened stomachs.
In one corner of the kitchens the lobsters were awaiting their fate.
At least there he had been successful.
But as to oysters, no.
Not till September, his new friends William and Joseph maintained.
In vain Auguste pleaded that the Prince of Wales would not wait until September.
William pointed out that they had their reputation to consider; French passion met British indomitability, and Auguste yielded.
No oysters.
William and Joseph had glanced at each other.
‘Crabs now,’ Joseph said.
‘You could get a nice crab or two.’
Auguste had not observed the slow smile creeping over William's face as Joseph placed in his hand a rod with a hook on the and.
He looked at it blankly.
‘Dat dere's a pungar 'ook; now you get all the crabs you want, mister; us'll keep all dam furriners away.’
It had been fortunate, Auguste reflected bitterly, that no  necessity had rested on his catching pungar crabs this morning.
One morning's efforts at pungar catching had proved quite enough.
First there was the indignity of rolling up his trousers and removing his socks and shoes, then the endless probing of horizontal holes in the rocks to see if pungars lurked within.
‘Just you tap away, Mr Auguste, and if you 'it the little feller on 'is back you'll 'ear 'is 'ollow sound like.’
It sounded simple; it was not.
The hollow sound was the beginning of the game, not the end.
For the ‘little feller’, once assaulted, retreated to the back of his hole and dug in.
Battle then commenced.
At the end of an hour, only one ‘little feller’ too young to know better had been in Auguste's possession, and William and Joseph were scarcely able to restrain their mirth.
French aplomb was to the fore as Auguste handed the crab to them along with the hook, raised his new Panama hat and bade them a courteous farewell.
Now Mr Multhrop was making periodic incursions into his kitchens, moaning gently, wringing his hands, as he beheld the mountains of food everywhere.
The Imperial was used to large banquets, but the added responsibility of the Prince of Wales made molehills into mountains.
‘I shall be ruined, beheaded, disbarred from the Buffaloes,’ he wailed.
In his self-torture he was unable to answer the simplest query, and Auguste was forced to turn to Araminta.
‘Miss Multhrop, where are the bains-marie?’
‘Oh, Mr Didier, I don't eat buns.’
Araminta looked distressed.
She wanted to help if she could.
Auguste closed his eyes and counted to three.
Perhaps Alice would make the better wife.
Sixty-seven Literary Lionisers were descending on Broadstairs from several directions.
Some were travelling direct from Cowes, most were arriving from London by  railway express, and the remainder by carriage from their country houses.
The committee, as if for protection against the masses, elected to follow Auguste's example and had reserved a first-class railway compartment on the 10.45 express from Victoria.
Here too the atmosphere was strained.
Only Sir Thomas, confidant of victory and in his ability to overcome all opposition by his personal charm, was at ease.
The edginess of the others only added to his opinion of his own rectitude.
His starched collar, sober dark grey tweed suit, and the black bowler hat in the rack above him made no concessions to the seaside.
Oliver was annoyed that Angelina had deliberately chosen to sit next to Sir Thomas; Angelina was determined to bring Sir Thomas to book as soon as she could; Gwendolen was similarly annoyed at the sight of her rival on Sir Thomas's other side and bitterly aware that she herself was viewing considerably more of Sir Thomas's back than of his face.
Broadstairs would, however, solve everything, she told herself.
Samuel Pipkin was tensing himself for the coming life and death struggle this evening, when the vital decision would be made by the Prince of Wales, and Mr Thackeray would be avenged.
Even Lord Beddington was on edge, hands clasped round the duck's-head handle of his walking stick.
He didn't sleep a wink during the journey.
He had a notion something damned odd was going to happen at Broadstairs.
‘Welcome to Broadstairs,’ announced Sir Thomas expansively as he stepped down from the railway carriage, flicking a practised hand towards a porter.
A flood of Literary Lionisers was already pouring out of the railway station, fighting in well-bred fashion over victorias and landaus.
The committee, having done their duty by their flock, were left without transport.
‘Came here once,’ commented Lord Beddington morosely, looking round while they were waiting for cabs  to return.
It was one o'clock, and he needed his lunch.
‘Recognise that’— he jerked a thumb at the nearby flint-faced water tower poking its head above the railway line, the pride of its engineer, Thomas Crampton.
‘Oh, a castle,’ trilled Gwendolen.
‘How romantic,’ she enthused.
‘No wonder Dickens loved Broadstairs so.
Did he, I wonder, base Dotheboys Hall upon it?’
‘The water reservoir was not built when Dickens stayed here, Gwendolen,’ said Sir Thomas smoothly, smiling at Angelina.
Gwendolen flushed in shame, her arms trembling in their lace leg-o'-mutton sleeves, then steadied herself.
No doubt Thomas was deliberately making her look foolish in public in order to hide his real feelings.
Men were strange creatures at times.
She swallowed hard and thought about this afternoon's promenade.
If he did not apologise then…
Oliver, set-faced, assisted Angelina into the first victoria that returned.
She thanked him composedly and made room for Sir Thomas by her side.
Samuel glared at everyone, wishing he were in Tunbridge Wells, the decent civilised sort of place that Mr Thackeray went to visit.
Lord Beddington meditated lovingly on a good luncheon, followed by an even better snooze at the Reform.
It was, he noticed, distinctly less warm than it had been, with an east wind blowing as they turned into the Parade.
And in this mood of low spirits, the Week of the Lion began.
In the kitchens the Imperial's chefs were now preparing to serve a simple luncheon for the new arrivals, while preparations for the banquet continued apace.
Because of the lack of space, Auguste had devised a shuttle system; as luncheon moved out in stages, so more materials for the banquet could be moved in.
Heinrich, James and Alfred were poised to drag in the vegetables delivered to the  tradesmen's entrance, as the soup tureens for luncheon moved out.
Alice and Emily were already engaged on chopping ingredients for sage and onion stuffing.
‘My grandmama says,’ remarked Emily, ‘that it's unlucky to use sage when it's blooming.
You should never let it flower at all.’
She looked disapprovingly at the cluster of purple flowers amid the handfuls of green-grey leaves.
‘Your grandmama will be proved correct, Miss Dawson, if you do not watch your use of that knife,’ Auguste pointed out quickly.
‘You do not concentrate, Miss Dawson.
Where is your mind today?’
Emily's mind was partly on the enjoyable walk she had taken with Heinrich, who had unexpectedly proved a most delightful companion during the week; partly on the bright green foulard dress she had seen on sale at Bobby's in Margate yesterday when they visited the famous menagerie at the Grand Hall by the Sea, and partly it was on the coming evening.
What, if any, dangers did it hold for her?
‘Emily,’ said Heinrich kindly, clearing his throat, ‘the kidneys have arrived.
You do not pay attention.’
Having begun the week convinced that Emily, after her attack on his Nesselrode pudding, was one of the stupidest females he had met, Heinrich had seven days later become quite besotted by her beauty, wit and charm.
Truly, this seaside air had much to recommend it.
He had almost lost interest in a reunion with the Kaiser.
Alice's mind was not on kidneys either.
She had had a splendid and cultural week.
Not only had Auguste taken her to see the amusing Charley's Aunt, but Alfred had escorted her to Ramsgate to see Harbour Lights.
It had been great fun.
And even more fun had been the fact that James Pegg had not been present; secure in his knowledge, as he thought, that Alfred was taking an extra lesson in quenelles cookery from Mr Didier.
She laughed at the thought of his  face next morning when he realised he'd been outwitted it wasn't hard to do.
‘Lord Wittisham,’ called Auguste, agonised.
‘You are behind in your schedule.
It is time —’ seeing covered dishes of roasts exiting from the kitchen —‘to collect the quails and mutton cutlets?
Guiltily Alfred sped to the door.
‘I'll help you, Alfred,’ called Alice.
‘I've finished chopping.’
James, hands covered with chicken entrails, could only watch helplessly.
Perturbed, he swung the cleaver viciously, chopping fowl after fowl into pieces.
He wished that Alice Fenwick could be dealt with so simply.
Algernon whistled as he worked, a habit picked up from his father, who was given to musical expression while chopping up meat.
It was thus a sure sign that his thoughts were far away.
They were certainly not on recipes, Mr Soyer's or Mr Didier's.
Fifteen minutes later, Auguste shot out of the kitchen entrance in search of Alfred and Alice — or — more precisely, his quails and cutlets.
Surely it could not take this long to gather up a few baskets of food?
As he reached the corner of Chandos Place, Sir Thomas Throgmorton was descending from a carriage in front of the Imperial, handing down Angelina with impeccable politeness and leaving young Oliver Michaels to help down Gwendolen.
Auguste failed to see the hidden tensions and passions behind these simple manoeuvres; to him it only signified that the banquet had acquired a reality.
The Literary Lionisers had arrived.
Past the stationary victoria came a donkey cart in which, to his relief, he saw Alfred and Alice serenely sitting side by side bearing familiar baskets.
The quails and the cutlets were safe.
He could relax.
‘Ah,’ he cried out to them.
‘Mes amis, do not delay.’
Attracted by the shout, Sir Thomas glanced first at  Auguste, then at the donkey cart.
He frowned for a moment in shock.
‘What the devil are you doing here?’ he said slowly.
Alfred blushed.
‘I — a — work here,’ he announced with dignity.
Auguste listened with interest to this social interchange which clearly was transgressing barriers.
Sir Thomas looked blank.
‘Work here?’
He stared at him and there was a pause.
‘I'll have a word with you later,’ he said grimly, turned his back on Alfred, gave his arm to Mrs Langham and advanced into the hotel.
‘Welcome, Sir Thomas.’
Mr Multhrop smiled nervously.
He didn't as a rule greet all his guests, but this was different.
It was a rehearsal for the reception of the Prince of Wales this evening.
Sir Thomas, preoccupied, took no notice.
‘Who,’ demanded Auguste despairingly, as the tempo quickened in the kitchen, ‘is responsible for this?
Mr Peckham,’ his eye fell on the culprit, ‘you are responsible for the mutton broth.
Why do you not remember the words of Brillat Savarin: the pot must smile.
Not boil, Mr Peckham.’
‘Because the words of Maître Soyer are boil gently,’ announced Algernon cheekily.
‘Maître Didier says smile, and so we smile, Monsieur Peckham,’ replied Auguste, his voice steely.
‘Yes, Mr Didier.’
The look in Algernon's face boded ill for somebody.
‘Will His Royal Highness like mutton broth?’ wondered Alice doubtfully.
‘It is August.’
‘This menu is not my idea,’ pleaded Auguste despairingly.
‘I have prepared some dishes which I know will please the Prince of Wales.
The quails and devilled bones, also the mutton cutlets give him much pleasure.
But this mutton  broth.
Bah!
I am told Dickens partook of it at home.’
The tones of disgust indicated Auguste's reasons for dreading a wife.
Suppose he were to marry only to be faced with mutton broth?
‘I have therefore made a small portion of almond soup.
Surely in all Mr Dickens's vast works there must be some mention of almonds, and if not,’ he said firmly, ‘remember that in France this dish is named hedgehog soup.
I feel sure Mr Dickens must mention hedgehogs.’
He looked around, but no one had views on this.
‘And if he does not,’ he continued, ‘the Prince of Wales will not mind.
It is better than mutton broth in August.
Eh bien.
Les entrées.
The kidneys.
Where is Mr Pegg?’
He looked automatically at Alfred.
‘'E went to 'elp Miss Araminta with the coffee,’ said Sid brightly.
‘He has no business to be assisting Miss Araminta,’ said Auguste crossly.
‘Not when kidneys require his attention.’
‘I think he's sweet on her,’ volunteered Emily.
‘I saw them spooning on the beach,’ she added, rather wistfully.
‘Our guests will be deprived of their chance of spooning this soup, unless you watch this broth, Mr Peckham,’ said Auguste viciously, returning to the fray.
James Pegg a rival in Araminta's affections?
Impossible.
‘Kindly adjust the temperature, Mr Peckham, before it boils away, and then be so good as to ask Mr Pegg if he can spare the time to rejoin us.’
Auguste busied himself checking the stuffing, unable to get to the root of his unease.
Eventually he did 80.
His pupils were developing minds of their own, behaving out of character, no longer the dull but devoted group of enthusiasts he had taught so constructively for six months.
Did the seaside do this to people?
Or was it more than the influence of the Broadstairs sands?
In the lounge Lord Beddington was taking a short rest after  the exigencies of luncheon.
He had made no concessions to the seaside.
He was wearing a decent black cloth lounge suit, and had no intentions of changing his mode of attire.
He opened an eye as a door closed with a bang.
One of the cooks came in, judging by the white apron.
He shut his eye again, then opened it once more, and glared.
Algernon Peckham glanced at him, and there was a momentary pause before he moved on to speak to James Pegg.
Beddington closed his eyes, but this time he was not asleep.
He was curious to remember where he'd seen that impudent young face before.
At last he did.
There'd been a bench between them at the time.
Once luncheon was over, the afternoon began in earnest for both groups of devoted toilers.
The Literary Lionisers, having commanded their maids and valets, if they had them, to unpack, or if they had not, scurried through this tedious task themselves, were gathering for the first event of the week, the promenade around Dickens's Broadstairs.
Armed with their texts of the Lion's own travel guide to the town, Our English Watering Place, The Lionisers were arrayed in their seaside appeared, no less excited at the beginning of their week's holiday than had been Auguste's pupils.
For some of them, the sands were taking precedence over the works of Mr Dickens, as they gathered to await their leader amid the potted palms in the first-floor sun lounge overlooking the Victoria Parade, the sands and the sea.
In the kitchens below, the other group of devotees, those addicted to cuisine and at the moment wondering why, were entering the most vital and concentrated period of Auguste's schedule.
Everyone worked in tense silence, concentrating on their own particular task.
Vegetables were being prepared; eight dozen quails were ready for the ovens; trays of mutton cutlets, to be served with caper sauce in an attempt to please the Dickensian purists (as well as the Prince of  Wales) were waiting for their moment to come.
Ingredients for the lobster salads were being assembled, the kidneys being sliced for Rognons à la Didier, herbs were being chopped or minced to the accompaniment of the words of wisdom of Emily's grandmama.
Grave discussions between the wine waiter, Auguste and Alfred were in progress; Alfred had been detailed to serve beverages and wine to the top table this evening, at which the Prince of Wales and the committee members would dune.
It had been hard to convince the Imperial's sommelier of the necessity for the presence of porter and ginger beer.
When appealed to for her support over the ginger beer, Araminta had laughed.
It was not helpful, but she looked so beautiful in her blue muslin that Auguste forgave her instantly.
The need for ginger beer was agreed and put down to French eccentricity.
In the sun lounge, Sir Thomas addressed his flock.
‘We shall progress along the Parade and Albion Street, up to Fort House, known as Bleak House, and thence to the pier,’ he announced grandly, pointing with his Golden Jubilee cane.
‘A queer old wooden pier,’ quoted Gwendolen blithely, determined to be noticed in her new sailor hat.
‘Quite,’ said Sir Thomas shortly.
He marched off at a brisk pace, leading his party of fifty or so, including two in bath-chairs intent on taking the tour, come hell or high water, the latter being most probable.
‘Pitch,’ bleated Gwendolen, ‘the pier was covered in pitch, Mr Dickens says’No one commented.
Uncle Mack's Broadstairs Minstrels performing on the sands, the Punch and Judy man, the donkey boys and the fruit vendors were dunned into momentary silence at the sight of this huge party moving along the seafront, like a leviathan as large as the one washed-up at Fishness Point in 1574.
Sir Thomas was in full flood, though his  performance seemed to lack its usual fortissimo, thought Oliver to himself.
It was almost as if his thoughts were not wholeheartedly in it for some reason.
The group came to a halt outside an old cottage on the front.
‘There,’ Sir Thomas announced dramatically.
‘Betsy Trotwood's cottage from David Copperfield.
Until recently assumed to be at Dover.’
‘Donkeys, Janet!’ trilled Gwendolen at his side.
‘We shall be viewing it later in the week, by kind consent of the owner,’ Sir Thomas continued, ignoring this contribution.
He turned to take Angelina's arm ostentatiously, in full view of Gwendolen's watchful gaze and that of Oliver.
The mass of promenaders bulged along in the committee's wake, creating some difficulty as they turned into the narrow High Street and into Albion Street.
Six Broadstairs matrons attempting to shop at Marchesi's the confectioners, two errand boys buying bloaters from Mr Goodman the fishmonger, a few afternoon revellers strolling out from the Dolphin Inn and an eager group from the Tourist Cycling Club staying at the Balmoral Bijou Hotel found themselves swept along with the crowd as they pursued their leaders down Harbour Street under the ancient York Gate (which being without specific Dickensian associations hardly received a glance).
Numbers had swelled to eighty by the time the group reached the old Tartar Frigate Inn and poured onto the pier.
‘The chances are a thousand to one that you might stay here for ten seasons and never see a boatman in a hurry,’ quoted Sir Thomas loudly to his brood, waving a lordly hand towards William and Joe who were enjoying a quiet chew of tobacco at the end of the pier.
Eighty pairs of eyes focused on them with interest, clearly thinking them Dickensian relics.
‘Visitors, Bill,’ said Joe slowly, barely pausing in his chew.
‘Ah.’
‘Dey says dey wants to see us 'urry.’
‘Ah.’
They rose slowly and deliberately to their feet like Tweedledum and Tweedledee.
‘Dat young Dickens, 'e were allus in an 'urry, weren't ‘c, Bill?’
‘Ah.
I remembers dat,’ announced William.
‘Used to come tearing down 'ere 'e did.
Perch on the rail there, chattin' away baht 'is books an' all.
Bill, 'e used to say, I got summat in mind for you.
How d'yer feel about 'Am? 'Am?’
‘'Am, Bill?’ queried Joseph in tones of one who has asked before.
‘Aye.
'Am. 'Am Peggotty.
That's what I'll call yer.
An’ 'e did, didn't 'e, Joe?’
‘'E did, Bill,’ agreed Joseph, with a wink only visible to his partner.
‘'E put yer into David Copperfield.’
With a gasp of pleasure, impressed with this firm evidence of Dickensian times, the crowd moved forward to inspect the relics.
In one lightning movement the two fishermen picked up two pails of stinking fish heads and flung them lovingly at the Lionisers' feet.
Fifty-two grateful seagulls swooped, breaking up the ranks amid cries and squeals of distress.
‘Ah,’ remarked William again.
They resumed their seats as the Lionisers retreated.
‘I hear,’ said Sir Thomas hastily by way of conversation, ‘the news from Cowes was not good.
The Kaiser won the Queen's Cup.’
‘Shouldn't mention it to His Royal Highness, Throgmorton rumbled Lord Beddington.
‘He was banking on Britannia winning.’
‘The Kaiser is determined to win at everything,’ observed Oliver, ‘especially on the sea.’
‘Damned fellow,’ said Beddington surprisingly energetically.
‘Rules our lives now.
You can't go into the Foreign Office or the club without some new story about young Willie's spies.’
‘Spies!’ squealed Angelina in mock alarm, clutching for protection at Sir Thomas's arm.
‘They're everywhere,’ grunted Lord Beddington.
‘Look at that German band down there.
Spies, every man jack of them, I'll be bound.’
‘Not all spies for Germany are German,’ pontificated Sir Thomas.
‘In this modern age, they are everywhere, the enemy in our midst.’
‘Not in the Literary Lionisers?’ squealed Angelina.
Sir Thomas smiled patronisingly and held her arm the more tightly.
Tempers in the kitchens rose with the temperature as ovens burned and broth smiled on.
Kitchen tables resounded to the sound of chopping herbs and eschalots by Emily.
James was occupied on lobsters and kidneys, and Algernon, studiously avoiding meat, on vegetables.
Alfred had already trussed and stuffed the geese.
Only Sid whistled cheerfully throughout, fetching, carrying, soothing.
‘Herr Freimüller,’ Auguste shouted in sudden alarm, ‘where is the prune stuffing?
You have provided only the sage and onion.’
But there was no sign of Freimüller.
‘Here it is, Mr Didier.
Just needs mixing with the pork,’ came Alice's calm voice.
‘Alice, you are a blessed jewel among women,’ said Auguste fervently.
Alice hoped that Alfred was listening and taking due note.
In fact he was not.
He was wondering what Sir Thomas meant by his threat to see him later.
And just what he intended to say.
And what he would do in return.
Fifty people (the other thirty had disengaged themselves at  the first mention of Dickens) were now taking tea in the gardens of the Albion Hotel under the shelter of parasols.
The weather was sultry, not sunny, today but you never knew when a lurking sun ray might attempt an assault upon the complexion.
‘It is here of course that Dickens himself stayed, in a house now put of this hotel, while finishing the writing of the immortal Nicholas Nickleby, and on other occasions and later in the hotel itself.’
‘Here we are to spend a merry right, are we not, Thomas?’ shouted Gwendolen in a high penetrating voice, to the intense interest of those not quite so well acquainted with Dickens's letters.
Oblivious of the equivocal nature of her remarks, Gwendolen was hoping that Angelina, with whom Sir Thomas had chosen to sit at a table for two only, would take due note of her omission of the ‘sir’.
It was a gauntlet flung down before her rival.
‘As did Dickens himself,’ announced Sir Thomas, turning round having recovered some of his composure.
‘Yes, on Tuesday I believe, we shall all be gathered here for an evening together.’
He then resumed his rapt attention to Angelina, thus leaving Gwendolen with no option but to try to think of something interesting to say to Oliver Michaels and Samuel Pipkin.
‘Have you thought further on that we spoke of the other evening, Angelina?’
Sir Thomas said in a low voice, throbbing in what he hoped was emotion.
‘I should perhaps wait for some more romantic hour.’
In fact he had fully intended to wait for a suitable moonlit warm right, but the trying events of the day had put him so out of sorts that he could stand the waiting no longer.
The affirmative he knew would follow would help him in the discussion this evening with the Prince of Wales.
The vote had been taken, but as Angelina would undoubtedly now regret her stance, she would make her views clear to His Royal Highness.
Besides, to appear eager for a decision would be flattering to Angelina.
Would she, or wouldn't she? he murmured, leaning forward.
‘How is your stomach today, Thomas?’ shouted Gwendolen, determined to be heard.
Sir Thomas flinched, and turned his chair even more deliberately away from the neighbouring table.
‘Well, I thank you,’ he managed to say offhandedly before once again addressing his rapt attention to Angelina, albeit somewhat shaken from his confident suavity.
Angelina smiled sweetly and leaned forward herself.
She spoke low and earnestly to Sir Thomas.
She would not, was the gist of what she communicated first.
The reasons why took rather longer to explain and, like her decision, was between themselves, for strain though she might, Gwendolen could not hear.
Shifting her chair position slightly, she saw Sir Thomas's face pale with emotion, she saw him pick up Angelina's hand and kiss it with devotion.
She saw Angelina remove it modestly, with a maidenly flush on her cheeks, or thus Gwendolen's jealous eye perceived it.
Maiden indeed, she snorted to herself.
Mrs Langham must be nearly thirty.
Mature, as she was herself.
Unable to bear what she saw as her rival's triumph, Gwendolen turned to face the teacups again, wrapped in misery.
Oliver, observing the scene with the same keen interest as had she, munched his way through a Dickensian gingerbread cake, his emotions harder to determine than those of his companion.
A few minutes later, Sir Thomas was walking slowly back to the Imperial Hotel in advance of the main party.
He had made the excuse that he needed to be there to greet the Prince of Wales, but making this pronouncement, which he had previously rehearsed many times, failed to fill him with the satisfaction he had anticipated.
For once, his mind was not on royalty and a possible peerage, not on Dickens, not on  his incipient gastritis, not even on the blow that Angelina had dealt him.
It ranged over many other matters, none of which were pleasant and some of which until he came to Broadstairs he had almost put out of his mind.
‘Attention, ladies and gentlemen.
It is time.
The geese!’
He looked impatiently.
Where was Her Freimüller?
He had been detailed to assist Mr Pegg in placing the geese in the ovens.
Heinrich burst in at the doors, carrying two bottles, followed by Emily, somewhat flushed, holding a bunch of herbs.
‘Thyme for the kidneys,’ she announce nervously in excuse.
‘It is not time for the kidneys,’ shouted Auguste.
‘It is time for the geese,’ extracting his head from the oven.
‘That's sage, Mr Didier,’ said Emily, puzzled.
Auguste stared at her, wondering whether he was lecturing to imbeciles, and his gaze fell on Heinrich.
‘This is your job, Herr Freimüller,’ he announced grimly.
‘I get champagne,’ he said.
‘I am sorry, Mr Didier.
For the kidneys.’
‘Forget the kidneys,’ said Auguste wearily.
‘The geese.
They must cook.
Dèpêchez vous!’
Heinrich did not understand French, but the meaning was clear.
Oven doors flew open.
James and Heinrich placed the geese, covered in their layers of goose fat, into their ovens.
The die was cast.
In three hours twelve roast geese would emerge succulent, rich and juicy.
Would they be eaten?
Auguste would take it as a reflection on his honour if they were not, despite the unseasonable time of year.
Only the Prince of Wales could refuse his goose with impunity.
How glorious seemed the morrow, Auguste thought, when he could resume his holiday; tomorrow, after supervising  a light luncheon, he would escort the delectable Araminta to the band concert of the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry.
There he would introduce her to Egbert and Edith.
Even perhaps they would bathe.
The thrill of seeing Araminta in bathing dress, even in the distance, segregated as the gentlemen were from the ladies, made his heart race.
Truly there must be something strange about the seaside, when the mere sight of seeing an ankle had made his heart beat the faster.
How dear Maisie, or Natalia, and certainly Emma, would laugh to see him enslaved by an ankle after their more generous gifts of person yet enslaved he was.
He and Araminta had paddled together earlier in the week, an occupation he found most strange.
But she had lifted her skirts a full six inches above the ground as she entered the water, and he was captivated.
If he were a poet he would write a poem to that glimpse of bare ankle.
True, Araminta had no idea of what a poached egg was, but what delight for a man to cook all his life for such an angel.
This seaside air of Broadstairs was magical.
Never again had he thought the love of woman could touch his heart, not after the pain of knowing Tatiana was lost to him for ever.
Perhaps he should be practical and take a wife for comfort.
He could marry Alice.
How often had he said what a helpmeet she would be, if only Alfred Wittisham were not there.
He could marry Araminta.
His French practicality reluctantly came to the fore.
Alice would be better.
She came in with a further two bottles of champagne and took them, blue eyes shining, to Alfred, assembling the ingredients for the Rognons à la Didier.
‘Heinrich got the champagne for me already,’ Alfred pointed out tactlessly.
Alice's eyes clouded.
Poor Alice, thought Auguste, she tried so hard, but he feared his lordship did not notice her save as a friend, an attitude of which James Pegg would fully approve.
He looked round.
Pegg had disappeared again.
Auguste  promptly despatched Alfred to hunt for him.
Surely, surely Pegg could not be in pursuit of Araminta?
Jealousy flared, a red dagger in his heart.
Sir Thomas walked back to his room in the Imperial somewhat later than he had intended, though he was not destined to reach it quite yet.
Out of the small sitting area at the end of the corridor Gwendolen Figgis-Hewett darted like a vixen from cover.
Yet a third troublesome encounter, but perhaps the easiest to deal with.
‘How could you?
Faithless, faithless,’ she moaned, clutching at his lapels.
‘Tell me it is not true, Thomas.
That you did not mean what you said to me that day.’
‘My dear Gwendolen,’ he cut in impatiently, disengaging her from his new blazer.
‘Of course I meant it.
I am extremely sorry, but I have just had a most trying time.’
He forced a laugh.
‘Among other matters.
Mr Dickens's Datchery has come back, you might say.
And as to you, we are —’ remembering his diplomacy —‘we are good companions, but I haven't the least wish to remarry.’
‘You're going to marry her!’ she shrieked.
‘Who?’
His face darkened.
‘Mrs Langham.’
‘Nonsense,’ he said testily.
‘I cannot imagine where you got that idea.’
‘You lie, you lie,’ she sobbed.
‘Very well then, I lie.’
Finally he lost his temper.
‘I am indeed to marry Mrs Langham.
I consider her a model of feminine beauty and virtue, and of course I would prefer to marry her above you.
Who would not?’— forgetting all about the advantages of a diplomatic approach.
The shriek that went up as she sank back on to a wicker sofa drumming her heels on the ground and yelling and shouting that she wished he were dead, and that she'd been dishonoured, made him quite alarmed.
Should he depart?
Should he stay?
The Prince of Wales would shortly be here, and he was not yet changed.
Really, this was proving a disastrous day.
He pulled the rope to summon help.
It was Auguste and Alfred Wittisham who answered the call, though Samuel Pipkin, attracted by the noise, was first on the scene.
He realised instantly what was happening and why.
‘My dear Gwendolen,’ he solicitously and hypocritically began, ‘I fear this fellow has upset you.’
‘Nonsense,’ shouted Sir Thomas, ‘and who asked you anyway?’
‘My dear sir.’
Samuel was shocked.
‘You have upset a lady.
Humiliated her.’
‘Yes, yes!’ shrieked Gwendolen.
‘He did, he did.’
‘I did not,’ said Sir Thomas cornered.
‘I merely suggested, Mrs Figgis-Hewett, that you were overwrought.’
‘You are no gentleman, sir,’ announced Samuel loftily.
‘And unfit to be chairman of our Society.
Mrs Figgis-Hewett will support me on this.’
Too late Sir Thomas saw the error of his ways.
‘My dear Gwendolen.’
He laid a hand on her heaving shoulder.
‘Unhand me, sir,’ she cried, leaping up and throwing herself hysterically into Samuel's arms.
Over her shoulder he gleamed triumphantly at Sir Thomas.
Vengeance would be his — and Mr Thackeray's — this evening.
It was then that Auguste and Alfred arrived.
This really was the last straw.
‘What the devil are you doing down here?’
Sir Thomas asked wearily.
‘You,’ he turned to Auguste, ‘see to her.’
Auguste obediently disengaged Gwendolen and subdued the hysterics with the aid of a swift slap, and his own comforting arm.
‘Is Beatrice here, sir?’ asked Alfred brightly out of nervousness, with unerring instinct heading straight for disaster.
‘Miss Throgmorton is in France, sir.
She is not planning to marry a cook.’
He gave a scathing look at Alfred's apron.
‘It's a useful occupation, sir.
Practical.
She'll never starve,’ Alfred pointed out, rallying his defences.
Sir Thomas turned puce.
‘You marry my daughter over my dead body, and that's my last word.’
It was not an original word, but it made his point as far as Alfred was concerned.
Sir Thomas stalked off, maddened beyond endurance, and with only five minutes to change before the Prince of Wales arrived.
The royal yacht Osborne had already docked at Ramsgate and the Prince of Wales was passing Dumpton Gapway, comfortably seated in Mr Multhrop's new Panhard motorcar.
He was not a happy man.
There was thunder in the air, in all senses.
It had been far from the capital week he had come to expect from Cowes, what with Willie winning everything in sight, having to make diplomatic speeches to his own nephew about how jolly it was to lose to him, and then just as he got time to drown his sorrows at the Yacht Club he had to come to Broadstairs.
There it was now.
Hadn't changed since Mama used to stay here.
She'd be expecting a full report on Pierremont House and the dear little village, so quiet, so tasteful.
Well, it hadn't changed much, except that it was bigger and a lot of schoolboys were apparently prancing round the sacred portals of Pierremont House.
Apart from that, no change.
Respectable and sober.
Nothing ever happened in Broadstairs.
He climbed down from the motorcar onto a bright blue carpet.
Strange.
Why blue?
Had the driver got the right place?
Mr Multhrop bustled forward in great nervousness.
‘Your Royal Highness, good-bye — a — afternoon.’
He bowed so far forward he nearly butted royalty in the stomach, but the Prince of Wales had met many Multhrops  and greeted him courteously, leaving him pink with pleasure.
He greeted Sir Thomas courteously too; he greeted every damn person lined up with similar courtesy though his private thoughts were on the likelihood of a stiff brandy and soda having been placed ready in his suite.
It must be his age.
Once upon a time the position of the bedroom relative to those of female guests would have been far more interesting.
The preparation of ingredients for the sauce for the kidneys was now in the capable hands of Algernon Peckham, once Auguste had extracted a promise not to follow the Soyer recipe ‘by mistake’.
James had returned, but now Emily and Heinrich had vanished.
Auguste sighed.
People seemed to have been disappearing all the afternoon, one after another.
His schedule had worked, but only because he seemed to be carrying out most of it himself.
Wearily he checked the table china, the hotel staff being responsible for the less venerable Literary Lionisers.
But he himself must oversee the Prince of Wales's table.
He want into the huge dining room, where at last he found Alfred arranging bottles on the serving tables.
His practised eye ran round the room.
Pekin dinner service, silver cutlery, crystal glasses, showy white napkins, all in order.
He cringed at the elaborate Dickensian menus adorning each place, but was grateful for the fact that the catastrophe of the banquet, for such he was sure it would be, would be firmly laid at Mr Dickens's door and not his own.
‘The chef,’ he recalled saying, ‘must at all times be prepared for disaster.’
Alors, he had done his bat.
Surely nothing could go wrong now?
Egbert Rose was helping the sailor-suited youngster on his right to fortify his castle.
Rose's face was lobster red.
He was having a wonderful time and so was Edith.
He liked  the harbour, Edith liked the promenades, they both liked the sands and the Pierrot shows.
They had visited the theatre.
They had met Auguste and seen the Margate grotto with him.
That was sixpennyworth of value all right.
The only thing he couldn't persuade Edith to do was to visit Boulogne for the day.
Easy enough, train to Margate, down to the Jetty, and off they could go on La Marguerite at 9.45.
But no.
No France for her.
She liked Ramsgate.
Why come to Ramsgate if you want to go to Boulogne? was her unanswerable response.
They had been sitting on the sands all day.
It was not so warm today, so Edith had stopped eyeing the bathing machines wistfully and wondering if she dared.
Rose dared all right.
He went down early each morning and jumped up and down in the briny, enjoying every minute of it.
His habitual London expression, cagey and mournful, was never to be seen.
He kept firmly away from Ramsgate police court.
He was having a nice seaside holiday with the added pleasure of Auguste's presence and without that of murder.
Chapter Five
Auguste caught a brief glimpse of himself in the small mirror he had unobtrusively arranged in order that he might keep an eye on events taking place behind his back; the surreptitious addition of Mrs Marshall's abominable Coralline pepper, for example, to an imperfect sauce.
It was one of the less pleasant aspects of his present occupation that the Didier School of Cuisine was constantly mentioned in the same breath as Mrs Marshall's nearby School of Cookery.
He trained master chefs; Mrs Marshall trained domestic servants.
There was a considerable difference.
Now he groaned.
He looked every bit as ridiculous as he feared.
The ultimate insult had been thrown at him: he, the Maître Auguste Didier, had been obliged, nay commanded, not only to appear in Dickensian dress but to don the unmistakable apparel of Alexis Soyer: tight white drill trousers, matching tunic, short jacket, ridiculous cummerbund, slotted into which was his own kitchen knife (no doubt for a speedy self-martyrdom after the imminent disaster of this meal) and, worse, the horror on his head.
He peeped again into the mirror, hoping the sight might have vanished.
It hadn't.
A wide pancake shaped black cloth hat with a huge brim rolled back on one side adorned his dark hair.
He was expected to superintend a grand banquet looking like this.
Like Soyer!
It was too much, even for the sake of cooking for the Prince of Wales.
‘Monsieur, what are you doing?’
Auguste's agonised shout was addressed to the rear end of a gentleman, whose head was in an oven apparently examining a goose at close quarters.
‘Just doing my job, Mr Didier.’
The Prince's detective emerged, flushed.
‘You expect to find an assassin masquerading as a goose?’
Auguste enquired scathingly.
‘Hidden weapons,’ declared the detective mysteriously.
‘If an assassin were to dare to enter my kitchen,’ Auguste announced in tones that made it clear that no villain would have the temerity, ‘do you not think that poison would be his chosen means, rather than an arsenal of rifles hidden in a kitchen range?’
‘If you knew the criminal mind like I do, Mr Didier,’ began the detective loftily, but he left the sentence unfinished, belatedly recalling Auguste's reputation in criminal circles.
He took advantage of the noisy arrival of Auguste's staff to beat a judicious retreat, as Auguste hurled imprecations after him, based largely on the fate that would await him should the goose come to any harm as a result of his incursions into the chef's sovereign territory.
Auguste had granted his pupils a half-hour respite in which to change into their enforced Dickensian dress, and was now confronted with all six apparently sharing some enormous joke.
It was intensified when they noticed the attire of their maître.
Even Algernon's expression changed from sneer to genuine laughter.
‘The Maître Soyer would be proud of you, maître,’ he chortled.
‘I like the hat, Mr Didier,’ giggled Alice, tweaking it to one side.
Auguste regarded them grimly and with foreboding.
No serious attention would be paid to cuisine while his pupils were cavorting around in this outlandish dress parade.
Alfred was waving a white-stockinged leg in the air, Heinrich experimentally bending over in his black knee breeches; James was pulling at his skimpy short jacket, puffing out his chest like Beerbohm Tree as d'Artagnan, Algernon was dancing a Highland fling showing off his black slipper shoes, and Alice and Emily were swishing merrily arm in arm through the kitchen in their huge, gathered black skirts covered with large, bibbed, lacy aprons.
Sid, being unlikely to be displayed to the company, had been excused Dickensian dress.
‘Attention!’
Auguste's cry came too late and a dish of ribboned cucumber, garnish for the lobster salads, landed upside down on the floor.
He rushed to the rescue of the lobster mayonnaise which was teetering ominously.
‘That was you,’ said James accusingly and with satisfaction to Alice.
‘It vas not,’ rumbled Heinrich.
‘Mr Peckham makes the table shake.
I see this.’
‘It wasn't me,’ shouted Algernon.
‘That's not fair.’
‘It was Miss Dawson,’ said Sid casually.
Pandemonium ensued as discussion took place on the onus of responsibility.
‘Enough,’ shouted Auguste angrily.
‘Mes amis, do you forget?
What has happened to you all?’
He looked at them in bewilderment as they stood, abashed.
‘The Prince of Wales is coming.
We have to serve a grand banquet in forty-five minutes.’
At this point Mr Multhrop arrived, sensed the tension and promptly departed again.
‘Enfin,’ said Auguste grimly.
‘Miss Fenwick, more cucumbers.
Mr Peckham, clear up this abomination.’
He pointed disdainfully to the green soggy mess and broken china on the floor.
‘And you,’ his eyes took in the other four, ‘to your tasks, if you please.’
Chastened, they donned their protective aprons, and set to work in silence.
Auguste began to make his final checks.
The broth was  smiling happily, still clear and unclouded.
He had caught it in time.
The lobster salads were temptingly ready save for the cucumber garnish; kidneys and sauce awaited his last minute cooking; the quails and cutlets awaited their ovens, the geese were browning nicely, the entremets, the dessert, cheeses, the prepared savouries — Auguste's practised eye ran over them all in expert fashion.
He had done this so often before.
His brain told him that all would be ready in time, yet anxiety remained.
One day it might not be, unless careful attention was kept.
One day disaster would come.
And despite all his brave words, even he could not be prepared against an disasters.
In a small lounge, polished and dusted five times today by the Imperial's housemaids, four committee members were awaiting the arrival of the Prince of Wales, Sir Thomas and, oddly, Gwendolen, who had inexplicably not yd arrived.
Outside the door hovered Alfred, detailed by Auguste to serve drinks when royalty had arrived.
He was not happy in his duties tonight.
He wished anyone but he were here, for the prospect of serving Sir Thomas was not a welcome one.
He wondered whether he should have taken up farming instead of cooking.
Inside the room, tense silence reigned.
Angelina, for instance, was wondering why Oliver had such a furious expression on his face.
‘What do you think of my costume?’ she enquired politely
Lord Beddington and Samuel Pipkin made complimentary grunts.
Oliver remained obstinately silent.
He glanced at her Little Nell attire, the white pantaloons peeping out from under layers of petticoats, the bright blue skirt, white shawl, and the becoming poke bonnet.
She looked beautiful, but he was not going to tell her so.
‘I see,’ she said sweetly to Oliver, ‘that you feel no need to adopt Sam Weller's cheerfulness as well as his apparel.
Oliver swept off his battered top hat in ironic acknowledgement of her sally.
Oliver's sharp sensitive features and figure adapted well to Sam Weller, but tonight he wished he'd chosen anything rather than the trial scene from The Pickwick Papers to read.
He didn't feel at all humorous.
He felt as black as John Jasper, and wondered even now whether to switch to The Mystery of Edwin Drood.
Murderous was just how he felt.
He would read Edwin Drood rather well, he thought savagely.
‘Have you seen Mrs Figgis-Hewett?’
Angelina enquired anxiously of Samuel Pipkin, since Oliver was clearly in no mood to converse.
‘It's unlike her to be late.’
‘No, my dear lady, I regret I have not.
I — er — do not think she is in the best of spirits.
Perhaps she has decided not to join us,’ he added innocently, hugging to himself his knowledge of the dramatic scene he had encountered.
He intended to press for a re-vote and one member less of old Throgmorton's supporters would suit him nicely.
Angelina fidgeted, worried but unable to leave as the Prince of Wales was due at any moment.
With sudden resolution, she opened the door to despatch Alfred in search of the missing lady, but seeing Auguste just arriving for his final check that all was in order with the drinks, she appealed to him instead.
Reluctantly, he disappeared in search of the missing Lioniser.
Samuel had his own thoughts, lost in a dream of vengeance.
He, too, was thinking lovingly of murder.
He was dressed as Dr Marigold, the cheap-jack trader from The Christmas Stories, his top hat fitted out with advertisements for Dr Robinson's Purifying Pills and Soyer's Magic Stove.
A large white cravat and black jacket unfortunately accentuated his Pickwickian paunch.
He had reluctantly decided against John Jasper, for the good reason that there being nothing distinctive about his dress, no one would realise who he was.
Lord Beddington, though silent, was not for once asleep.
His head was itching too much from the dreadful old grey wig.
This was the last time he would don fancy dress, otherwise next year they'd have him in doublet and hose, no doubt.
Scrooge indeed.
That had been old Throgmorton's idea.
He brooded.
Could it have been a roundabout reference to that old scandal?
No.
Thomas was a tight old so-and-so, but even he would let it die now.
Or would he?
Interesting to have seen that young sneak thief about in the hotel, Lord Boddington switched thoughts, disturbed by memories of unhappier days.
If he was Multhrop he'd be watching the teaspoons.
That young man was the sort to fly high, having cut his teeth so to speak, on — what was it?
Ah yes, the paste diamond jewellery of old Higginbotham's wife at Radstone Hall.
He'd been lucky to get off with a year for that.
Darned counsel with tears in his eyes, murmuring about stalwart butchers' sons who strayed from the path, and, after all, it was only paste.
Meanwhile here was he, the magistrate, in tight breeches, dirty cravat and too tight a collar stud, dressed as Scrooge.
A sudden flurry, as of a dozen Multhrops simultaneously prostrating themselves, and the doors were flung open.
Angelina sprang up, expecting Gwendolen.
The others joined her.
The Prince of Wales had arrived, soberly and correctly clad in formal evening attire.
Behind him came Sir Thomas similarly clad.
Four pairs of eyes fastened momentarily on this and absorbed the fact that they had been cheated.
Sir Thomas was not dressed as Bill Sikes.
They alone were in unorthodox dress.
The Prince of Wale's eyes flicked speedily over the unusual evening dress of the gathering as battered top hats were speedily removed from heads and a lady with long droopy drawers swept a curtsy.
He hadn't seen anything like that since his sister Vicky left the nursery.
Oliver still raged impotently, unable to believe that he could have been so mistaken in a woman.
She was to marry this mountebank, this hypocritical toad of a Sir Thomas.
Samuel was convulsed with fury at this new evidence of skulduggery, resolved that no holds would be barred now.
Even Lord Beddington was upset, being made to look like a damn fool before Her Majesty's son.
None of them betrayed their feelings, however, as they paid obeisance to the Prince, who gravely offered his hand in turn to Mr Scrooge, Dr Marigold, Mr Weller and Miss Nell.
Alfred somewhat nervously served drinks, aware of uncomfortable tight breeches.
He was wondering wildly what had happened to Auguste who had promised to be at his side when, as he fully expected, glasses of this revolting potion were flung over his head by the irate tasters.
‘A Dickensian mint julep, sire,’ explained Sir Thomas, as the Prince of Wales apprehensively eyed the contents of his glass.
Mint?
That was to be taken with roast lamb, not adulterating his drinks.
The Prince of Wales replaced it and took the punch instead.
He sipped the concoction cautiously.
After the first sip he was wishing some awful fate on every Lioniser in the world.
He could distinctly taste cold tea.
He didn't know or care whether Dickens liked this stuff, but he was damned certain he didn't.
Only Throgmorton seemed to have any idea of civilised behaviour.
At least he was properly dressed, not looking like something out of one of Mama's precious charades at Windsor.
It then dawned on him disagreeable that not only was he in for a Dickensian banquet (although he had taken care of that problem, he remembered cheeringly) but for Dickensian readings.
Suddenly, Mama's charades seemed the more appealing.
Even the thought of lunch at Osborne House again tomorrow didn't seem too bad an idea, even if it did mean listening to Mama telling him how she heard nightingales  in the garden at Pierremont House and how she walked all the way to Pegwell when she was twelve and ate shrimp paste at the Bellevue Tavern.
Sir Thomas coughed deferentially.
‘The little matter I spoke of, sire.’
Samuel's eyes suddenly riveted on his hated rival.
The Prince of Wales came to with a jolt.
He hadn't been paying much attention to what Throgmorton had been talking about on the way here, but he recalled his ears had caught the unpleasant words ‘casting vote’, and ‘your important role as president’.
‘Splendid, splendid,’ he had said cordially and automatically at the time.
Now he felt somewhat more cautious about the matter.
He was going to be responsible for something that he didn't know or care the first thing about.
Could it have political repercussions?
Would Mama hear about it?
He looked round sharply.
As he feared, all eyes were on him.
This was going to be awkward, without a doubt.
He'd been caught without a script.
Alfred handed him another drink, and the Prince of Wales absent-mindedly took it.
He gulped.
At least the disgusting taste of mint concentrated his mind.
He watched warily as the little fat chap with bits of paper in his hat leapt to his feet.
They were all mad, these people.
Who was he meant to be?
Pickwick came back to him dimly as a Dickensian character.
‘I vote, sire, instead of your casting vote, we should have a re-vote when Mrs Figgis-Hewett arrives, our remaining committee member.
I feel we may be able to avoid troubling you, sire.’
The Prince of Wales perked up.
The chap was more sensible than he looked.
Angelina fidgeted.
Where was Gwendolen?
And what had happened to Mr Didier?
‘Ridiculous,’ shrugged Sir Thomas smoothly.
‘Why should we?
There is no reason.
No, sire, I'm afraid the rules  clearly state that once a vote is taken, it is irrefutable.’
‘Then we should take a vote,’ shouted Samuel, oblivious of royalty.
‘We've had one,’ snapped Sir Thomas.
‘You need my casting vote, then?’ put in the Prince of Wales, lost.
‘A vote about a vote, sire,’ said Samuel.
‘That's what you need my vote for?’ asked the Prince.
‘No, sir, we haven't taken it yet,’ explained Samuel.
‘Then why ask for my casting vote?’ asked the Prince politely.
‘We need a vote,’ put in Lord Beddington suddenly, deciding this was a legal matter, ‘to vote whether we have another vote for which we need your casting vote.’
‘I see,’ said the Prince.
He always thought old Beddington was quite mad, and now he knew it.
Horrorstruck, Oliver and Angelina listened to their colleagues.
Had they all taken leave of their senses?
‘The rules are rules.’
Sir Thomas, losing patience, was pink in the face.
The Prince of Wales had rules too, and they did not include turning social evenings into bear gardens.
With true diplomacy, he rose to his feet.
‘I shall give my answer tonight,’ he announced with deliberation.
By that time he could have arranged to be called away.
But even princes cannot control every situation.
Before he could move for the doors, they were flung open imperiously, revealing a wide-eyed, agonised Auguste outside.
Past him into the room sailed the last member of the Literary Lionisers' committee.
Gwendolen was in full Dickensian dress.
She was not, however, clad in the unsuitable but respectable garb of Agnes Wickfield or even that of Betsy Trotwood.
David Copperfield had taken second place to Great Expectations.
There on the threshold, clad in a soiled yellow-white satin dress with a very low-cut  bodice, voluminous skirt, white satin slippers and gloves, stood a shrouded figure, of whose identity there was no doubt.
She stood a moment to gain her audience's complete attention, then flung back the long white veil that hid her face.
She sank to her knees before the Prince of Wales.
‘I, Your Royal Highness, am Miss Havisham.
I seek vengeance on the monster who has betrayed me.
I have been abandoned.’
A long, skinny, bare arm ending in a white silk glove was thrust out towards Sir Thomas.
It must be charades, thought the Prince of Wales blindly.
Why had no one told him?
Either that, or he was in for a very sticky evening indeed.
Mesmerised by the scene he had witnessed, and agonised by the scene he had just had with Mrs Figgis-Hewett, when he saw her costume and vainly attempted to dissuade her, Auguste recalled his prime duty and reluctantly despatched Alfred to the dining room to prepare for the serving of wines at the Prince's table.
He himself returned to the kitchens, where the heat was now making the sweat run from everyone's faces.
Feverishly he checked.
Yes, all seemed ready, but disasters might yet ensue.
Look what had happened upstairs.
It was about time now to turn his attention to the kidneys.
This, his own recipe, he would entrust to no one else, though Heinrich had assembled and prepared the ingredients.
‘I've nowhere to put the gravy jugs,’ wailed Emily.
‘Improvise, Miss Dawson,’ said Auguste testily, rushing between salads and soups.
A maître chef was supposed to superintend, not do everything himself.
Would Soyer — no, he would not think of Soyer.
His hat disturbed him too much.
He shuddered at his remembrance of royalty's puzzled look when he removed this ostentatious headgear.
Suppose he were to think it Auguste's own choice?
Emily improvised.
A howl.
‘Not there, Miss Dawson.’
James moved swiftly into the disorder being wreaked in his carefully arranged plates, set in order of service.
Alice came to help him, perhaps under the impression it was Alfred or the confusion of the moment, and earned herself a stinging rebuff, thus beginning another altercation.
‘You keep your bad language to yourself, Mr Pegg,’ she said, pink in the face.
‘You're like your soufflés — hard.’
‘My soufflés aren't hard,’ he glared.
‘They're not your best work,’ Algernon pointed out.
‘Your terrines aren't very good either,’ chimed in Emily.
‘Coming from you, Miss Dawson,’ retorted James cornered, ‘with your soggy pastry —’
‘Please not to be rude to Miss Dawson,’ barked Heinrich walking between them, rolling pin in hand, like Siegfried to rescue Brunhilde.
‘Pegg's right,’ said Algernon, delightedly egging them on.
‘You and the Kaiser think you rule Europe.
You keep out of it.’
‘Silence.’
Auguste was appalled.
Where was unity?
Where was the true love of cuisine that united such diverse spirits?
What was happening to his happy band?
Drama above and now the same below.
Surely this was something more than the heat of twelve geese cooking on a summer's night?
In the enormous dining room, even the chandeliers seemed to tremble as they waited breathlessly for the arrival of the Prince of Wales.
His coming displayed no jot of his inner feelings, though his heart sank at the array of knee breeches and crinolines, and at last it occurred to him that the lunatics he had met upstairs were in Dickensian dress.
He glanced uneasily at his own evening attire.
The Prince politely shook hands with six Peggottys, two Betsy Trotwoods, eight Mr Pecksniffs, seven Mr Fezziwigs, eight Mrs Fezziwigs, two Doras, a couple of Little Dorrits, two Miss Flites, a villainous gentleman who announced he was the convict Magwitch, and numerous other Lionisers too nervous to announce their identities.
Then he turned to seek his reward: a banquet cooked by Auguste Didier.
He had been placed at the head of the table, a Solomon come to judgement, but a far from happy one.
From his vantage point through a serving hatch, Auguste watched as the assemble took their seats after a brief prayer intoned by Sir Thomas.
The chairman was on the Prince's left, with Angelina opposite him and Lord Beddington next to him.
Oliver was below the salt, as far as Sir Thomas was concerned, and Gwendolen had been placed next to Lord Beddington so that Sir Thomas did not have to look at her.
Somehow, however, she had conspired to change places with Oliver so that she was staring triumphantly into Sir Thomas's face diagonally up the table.
The woman was mad.
In fact, he thought, glancing at Angelina, all women were mad.
He just didn't comprehend what she had told him this afternoon.
The Prince of Wales studied his Dickensian menu with instant alarm, followed by deep misgivings.
This was not what he had employed Didier for.
He glanced up, saw Auguste's anguished eyes, and thought he understood.
Nevertheless, he expected assistance from him.
‘Mutton broth,’ announced Sir Thomas proudly, as Heinrich and James, somewhat awkwardly in their knee breeches, moved round the table to serve the soup.
‘You will recall, sire, Mrs Bedwin's restorative broth in Oliver Twist.’
The Prince of Wales looked at the bowl sharply.
Twist?
He was the fellow in the workhouse who wanted more, wasn't he?
Well, he wasn't going to have any at all and that was flat.
He took a large sip of his sherry and refused the soup.
He was rewarded in this wise decision by Auguste's tactful appearance carrying a small dish of almond soup, which he unostentatiously placed before the Prince of Wales.
‘Your own mutton broth, sire.’
While everyone's attention was on Samuel Pipkin who showed ominous signs of speaking, he quickly murmured: ‘It's almond soup, sire.
As mentioned by Dickens to an anonymous friend.’
‘Perhaps you are correct, sire,’ Samuel was announcing firmly.
‘Now Mrs Figgis-Hewett has joined us, there should undoubtedly be a new vote later.’
He had had an opportunity of assessing Miss Havisham's feelings on the subject, not that these were hard to predict.
After her outburst, she now remained silent, darting odd looks of triumph at her betrayer.
The Prince of Wales frowned.
He could not recall agreeing to this at all, but as it offered a chance of avoiding his own intervention, he nodded fervently, and took some more almond soup.
This Dickens had the right idea after all, no matter who his anonymous friend might be.
‘Sire, alas, the rules of the club do not permit this,’ said Sir Thomas.
‘Not without a vote.’
‘My casting vote?’ queried the Prince.
‘No, sire, a vote on the constitution, which can only be taken at the annual general meeting.’
Sir Thomas was not going to be swayed.
With Gwendolen certain to change her vote, and as he could not rely on foolish Angelina to change hers, the situation was dangerous in the extreme.
But he would not press too vehemently or he would lose the support of the Prince.
It was too much on top of an already most trying day.
He looked round uneasily, and Alfred stepped forward to fill his glass with white wine.
Emily cleared the soup plates and Heinrich and Algernon were bringing out individual plates of lobster salad.
‘Sire.’
Gwendolen's voice was shrill enough to penetrate from the end of the table, quite putting the Prince off his lobster.
‘I support Mr Pipkin's proposal for a vote.’
‘I regret this is impossible, sire.
If you recall, I showed you the rule.
It is irreversible,’ said Sir Thomas adamantly.
The Prince of Wales's lobster suddenly tasted of flannel.
He hated everyone.
He did recall the rule, he cordially disliked women who flung themselves at his feet threatening breach of promise actions, and moreover he didn't like the look of that jumped-up Pickwick there.
‘I suggest we take a look at it later, and meanwhile enjoy this delicious meal.’
The Prince summoned his private detective: a message was to arrive no later than 9.30 p.m. calling him urgently to Osborne.
Mama was seriously ill, Alexandra was seriously ill, the boot boy's aunt was seriously ill.
Anything.
‘And of course,’ he continued blandly to the committee, ‘if I can then be of assistance, I should be delighted.’
Oh, for that uncomfortable bed on his yacht that he now resolved to be aboard this very evening, before any such vote could be called.
Like Mr Barkis, he intended to go out with the tide.
A note in his voice that he had long cultivated indicated that the discussion was at an end.
His lobster promptly improved in taste.
There was a short silence as each person cogitated on his position; Oliver and Angelina broke it, with polite murmurings of gratitude and apology for troubling him, Their politeness extended only to the Prince of Wales.
They ignored each other.
Oliver wondered why Angelina was not clamouring for a new vote in order to support her fiancé and decided that this was some further infamous plan on her part.
Angelina wondered whether she would change sides, just to show this pompous young man what she thought of him.
Sir Thomas relaxed a little, Now he had time on his side.
Lord Beddington wondered what was next on the menu, Samuel squirmed with suppressed rage and this obvious sign of the Prince of Wales's inclinations.
And Gwendolen smiled.
She was thinking lovingly of what was to come.
The lobster plates were removed by Emily, and replaced by Alice with bowls for the entree and plates for the remove to follow.
James placed two dishes of kidneys in champagne and mushroom catsup sauce on the table while Algernon and Heinrich faced the organised maelstrom of the kitchen to gather the quails and cutlets for the remove.
Auguste had added the course in the interests of the Prince of Wales; it was to be served virtually at the same time as the entrée, in defiance of the rules, in the hope it would attract less attention.
The Prince glanced at Auguste, who gave an imperceptible nod.
Relieved, the Prince of Wales gave his assent to a portion of kidneys handed to him by Sir Thomas.
One mouthful of the sauce and he nodded appreciation.
Pity they didn't award the Order of the Garter to cooks.
They had a better line in diplomacy than old Chamberlain himself and certainly did more good in the world.
‘This is Mrs Crupp's dish of kidneys, sir, for which she sent out to the pastrycook in David Copperfield.
We have allowed ourselves a little licence with the sauce,’ Angelina explained.
‘Splendid, splendid,’ was the Prince of Wales's comment.
He eyed the dish thoughtfully.
Normally he did not indulge in second helpings, but — no, he would resist.
No he wouldn't; after all, he was off to Marienbad on the 19th.
He murmured in Alice's ear.
It was due to this second helping that he rejected the quail and mutton cutlets (with pickled walnuts) as Alice and Algernon, with a somewhat nervous eye on Lord Beddington, offered them.
‘I don't recall quails on my menu,’ commented Sir Thomas querulously.
‘The remove, Sir Thomas.
The rélevés.
A Dickens favourite according to his manager, Dolby,’ said Oliver provocatively from his lowly position, two seats away from Sir Thomas.
‘One must have a remove, must one not?’
‘I always think it sounds like murder,’ trilled Gwendolen suddenly, coming back into the conversation.
‘What does?’ demanded Samuel, startled from his dreams of vengeance.’
‘Remove,’ she answered darkly.
‘Removing a source of pestilence,’ and relapsed into silence again.
The Prince of Wales decided not to recall the quails.
‘And now for the geese,’ Sir Thomas declared, as Auguste emerged from the kitchen, Soyer hat crammed on.
Goose?
The Prince of Wales gazed in horror as a large, succulent goose was borne in by Heinrich to the dining-room serving table for carving by Auguste.
No leaving this task to others.
Goose required the most careful carving.
Auguste almost laughed as he saw the expression on the Prince of Wales's face as a plateful of roast goose advanced towards him in the hands of James Pegg, followed by an endless procession, it seemed, of forcemeats, vegetables and gravies.
A lift of an eyebrow, a mute appeal to Auguste, who interpreted it correctly and despatched back to the kitchen for the rejected quail and cutlets.
‘With pickled walnuts, sire, as in The Pickwick Papers,’ Angelina announced gravely.
The look Sir Thomas gave her was not a pleasant one, as he defiantly took a sizeable helping of goose.
‘The best goose that ever was,’ approved Oliver gravely after they had finished, catching Auguste's eye as he watched anxiously from his vantage point.
Sir Thomas, however, or rather his stomach, clearly did not agree, for halfway through the entremets, with a few words of apology he absented himself from-the table.
‘It's his stomach,’ explained Gwendolen to the Prince of Wales.
‘He suffers greatly from gastritis.’
She shot a look of triumph at her hated rival.
No doubt Angelina Langham, the upstart, did not even know about Thomas's delicate stomach.
The Prince of Wales bestowed a polite eye upon her, then turned to the rather more salubrious prospect of his favourite savoury.
By the time the coffee made its appearance, Sir Thomas his re-appearance, and Alfred served the brandy, Auguste began to breathe more easily.
No catastrophe had taken place.
Indeed, modesty forbade him to contemplate too long what he could count a personal success.
He would not swear that the Prince of Wales had enjoyed every minute, but at least he, Auguste Didier, had done what he could.
The suppressed tension between members of the committee was still boiling, almost like Algernon's mutton broth; it was certainly not smiling.
Sir Thomas drank several cups of coffee and refused the brandy.
‘My performance, sire,’ he said in a low voice, already hoarse as if from emotion.
‘I am to give the first reading.
Bill Sikes and the murder of Nancy.
If you would forgive me yet again, I must go to change into the appropriate costume.’
as if already suffering from an excess of emotion, he left.
Annoyed at the fellow leaping up and down like a jack-in-the-box, wishing that he could escape as easily, and regretful that he had not demanded his urgent message for somewhat earlier, the Prince of Wales shifted uneasily in his plush upright seat in the ballroom to which they had adjourned.
He felt as if he were at one of Mama's evenings.
She never invited him to the jolly ones.
He had to sit out in the corridor at Windsor listening to Electrophone transmissions of some opera that went on and on before the warblers saw fit to die with some interminable aria.
Mama didn't bother to invite him when she hauled over Lord George Sanger's circus two weeks ago.
Oh no.
Where was old Throgmorton?
He was taking a devil of a time to change.
The audience was fidgeting behind him, and there was a limit to the amount of time he intended to chat to this crazy woman next to him in the soiled wedding  dress and veil.
He felt as if he were at yet another family wedding.
Hallo, something was happening at last.
Samuel Pipkin, eagerness all over his face, had bounded up to the reading desk, arranged to look identical to that used by Dickens himself in his tours around the country.
Samuel begged the company's indulgence as chairman elect to entertain them with a short piece in Sir Thomas's absence.
He had not thought his chance would come so opportunely.
Entertaining it was, if unusual for a Dickens evening, for Samuel was a consummate actor.
When he read from Mr Thackeray's Book of Snobs, choosing the ‘Great City Snob’ as his text, imitating the while Sir Thomas's mannerism of impatiently snapping his fingers and clasping his lapel, followed by his grave walk, hands behind back, no one had had the least doubt as to whom was meant.
A ripple of suppressed laughter ran round the room.
Samuel was declaiming of the ‘grave, pompous and awful being’ with great zest when Sir Thomas himself arrived, clad as Bill Sikes, and with murder on his own mind to judge by his face when he took in Samuel's performance.
Carefully grubbied white breeches tied below the knee, open-necked shirt and spotted scarf tied untidily, lace up boots, he struck as much awe into the onlookers as would Sikes himself.
But remembering the vote to come, Sir Thomas controlled himself in his words.
He, at least, was a gentleman.
He strode to the desk.
‘Thank you, Mr Pipkin,’ he said, drinking from the glass of water placed for his convenience.
‘I look forward later to your own delightful performance of a cheap-jack.
It could not fail to be excellent in your hands, and quite put Mr Thackeray in the shade.
‘Now I open tonight's reading from the master's great Oliver Twist, the famous scene chosen by Dickens for his own readings and which led to his early death, from the violent emotion that swept over him each time he read this passage.’
The emotion seemed to have reached Sir Thomas early for his face was very pale, and he drank the remaining water before commencing his tale.
His voice was even more hoarse now, with the emotion of the reading.
‘The robber…dragged her into the middle of the room and, looking once towards the door, placed his heavy hand upon her mouth.’
His own hand came round like Sikes's, and then passed over his brow.
‘…spare my life for the love of Heaven as I spared yours,’ rejoined the girl, clinging to him.
‘Bill, dear Bill, you cannot have the heart to kill me.’’
Auguste, watching from the doorway, was fascinated, rapt as he continued his performance, the audience equally gripped.
‘The man struggled violently to release his arm.’’
Sir Thomas picked up the empty glass, replaced it, continuing brokenly: ‘…
Bill,’ cried the girl.’
All eyes were on Sir Thomas.
Evan the Prince of Wales was interested.
This man should have his vote, no doubt about it.
He had presence.
Better than old Pipsqueak.
Perhaps he'd stay after all.
‘…
The housebreaker freed one arm, and grasped his pistol…he beat it twice, with all the force he could summon, upon the upturned face that almost touched his own.’
The effort seemed almost too much for the reader, whose voice dropped deeply, Auguste noticed uneasily.
‘She staggered and fell; nearly blinded with the blood that rained down from a deep gash in her forehead; but raising herself with difficulty…breathed one prayer for mercy to her Maker.
It was a ghastly figure to look upon.’
Sir Thomas's face was pale, paler even than those of his audience, most of whom were wondering whether this were not a little too much emotion after all that goose.
‘The murderer staggering backwards to the wall and shutting out the sight with his hand, seized a heavy club and struck…’
It ended in a choking splutter as Sir Thomas, following  Nancy's tragic end, collapsed to his knees, clutching at and dragging over the lectern, and then falling to the floor where he lay as insensible as Nancy herself.
A burst of tentative clapping petered out and a strange unease ran round the audience as Sir Thomas failed to rise.
Angelina ran forward and knelt over him.
‘A doctor, we need a doctor.
Is there a doctor here?
And water, quickly.’
She stood up.
Auguste was already at her side, feeling for a pulse.
‘Thomas,’ cried Gwendolen in alarm, running up.
‘It's his stomach, his stomach.’
‘Marigold,’ cried Samuel, confusing reality in hysteria, ‘I'm Dr Marigold.’
‘His heart beats too rapidly,’ Auguste said to Angelina in concern.
Surely this was no ordinary stomach illness?
Then he saw the eyes, the dilated pupils, as did Oliver Michaels peering over Auguste's shoulder.
‘That's odd,’ said Oliver quietly.
From the audience, a gentleman with check trousers, a huge bulbous nose and an eyepatch arrived.
‘Squeers,’ he announced apologetically.
‘I'm a doctor.
Let me see him.’
Auguste thankfully ceded his place, quietly pointing to the eyes.
‘Opium?’ said Oliver to him as he stood up.
‘Poison of one kind or another, I fear,’ said Auguste gravely.
‘Look at the rash on his face — that was not there before.’
He stood aside as the doctor, consulting quickly with Mr Multhrop who had arrived glassy-eyed and panic-stricken, arranged to have Sir Thomas carried to another room.
Perhaps the patient had taken medicine for his stomach while he had been away from the table, and taken too much.
‘Food poisoning,’ said Multhrop hollowly, avoiding Auguste's eye.
‘Possibly,’ said the doctor noncommittally.
Auguste glanced towards the Prince of Wales deep in  conversation with Lord Beddington.
Quickly his mind ran over all the awful possibilities.
Food poisoning?
Not with his food.
No, this was something more serious.
And this situation, albeit not poison, had happened before too.
Suppose it were not an accident.
Suppose —
‘Sire,’ he said, ‘may I speak with you?’
The Prince of Wales looked up annoyed.
Cooks, however good, should not interrupt his conversations.
‘Sir Thomas is not very well, sire.’
‘I am exceedingly sorry to hear it.’
The Prince turned back.
Auguste hesitated, then plunged again.
‘You will recall, sire, at Cannes a gentleman was taken ill.’
The Prince's head swivelled back to him, and the royal eyes fixed on him.
‘I fear somewhat the same circumstances.’
‘Ah.’
The Prince of Wales rose to his feet.
‘If you will excuse me, Beddington, I see my detective beckoning me.’
Ten minutes later a small party, including a highly suspicious private detective, made its way out through the tradesmen's entrance, escorted by Auguste.
The only other person privy to the beating of the retreat was a young kitchenmaid, who stared at her future monarch in amazement.
Auguste went slowly into the kitchens, unable to think fully of all the awful possibilities of the situation.
Mr Multhrop was ordering hot water and coffee demanded by the doctor.
‘I feel, Mr Multhrop,’ Auguste interjected in the effort to convert unspeakably thoughts in concrete action, ‘we should stop work in the kitchen.’
‘You can't take time off now, Mr Dee,’ said Mr Multhrop, horrified.
He smiled despite himself.
‘No, sir, the food will need to be examined.’
Multhrop looked at him in panic, then remembered he  wasn't responsible for the food.
‘Ya,’ he said eagerly, ‘you're right.’
The order was implemented.
No further work was to be carried out, no food touched.
The kitchens were to be locked.
‘But what about breakfast?’ wailed Mr Multhrop.
‘Why lock them?’
Auguste did not answer.
How could he explain that something inside him, experience, foreboding, sick terror, told him this might be necessary?
Before breakfast a far worse problem than a locked kitchen hit Mr Multhrop, the Imperial and Auguste.
At 4 a.m. after a night in which thunderstorms had rumbled and broke continually, and despite Squeers' and a Broadstairs doctor's best ministrations, Sir Thomas Throgmorton died.
Squeers came out to where Mr Multhrop was sitting, wilting on a chair foreseeing the end of his hotel.
‘He's dead, I'm afraid,’ he said.
‘Can't issue a certificate.
Some highly toxic poison.
Atropine, unless I'm much mistaken.
Belladonna.
That rash was significant, and the delirium, hallucinations.’
‘An accident, perhaps?’ offered Mr Multhrop hopefully.
‘It would have been a large dose.
Odd kind of accident.
We're not talking about children eating deadly nightshade.
This might be suicide or murder.
I'll have to notify the police.’
‘The police,’ moaned Mr Multhrop, mind flitting wearily from one problem to another.
‘But this is the Imperial.’
The doctor had little sympathy for the Imperial.
‘Suicide seems unlikely,’ reflected Auguste dully, eyes smarting with tiredness.
‘He'd have had to have taken it during the meal or shortly after.
A curious time to choose with the Prince of Wales present, and a reading to give.’
The doctor looked at him.
Auguste was still attired  incongruously in his Soyer costume.
‘You're the cook?’
With those three simple words, nightmare swept over Auguste.
He himself had said it: suicide or murder.
And if the latter, he was the cook.
The serpent was present even in this Eden of Broadstairs.
Again it had slithered in on his holiday, and, worst, it was a murder in which he would be interrogated.
Once again he was in the sobering presence of violent death.
That it was at the seaside made it seem all the worse.
His career, all that was left to him now Tatiana was gone for ever, was ruined.
For ever he would be the ‘cook at the Throgmorton death’.
Then a small spark of comfort occurred to him.
Egbert Rose was at Ramsgate.
Chapter Six
Egbert Rose lay in bed blissfully contemplating breakfast.
Kippers, kedgeree, kidneys — what a sturdy sound all these good breakfast dishes had.
Not that he wanted any of them this morning.
He had slept well, entirely oblivious of the thunderstorms that Edith told him somewhat reproachfully had kept her sleepless an night.
Edith was already up, and had awoken him with her cries of woe when she drew back the heavy plush curtains to discover grey skies and drizzle.
Would it clear in time for the band concert this afternoon?
This was her main anxiety.
Should she don her heavier serge walking dress or be optimistic and wear the foulard she had planned?
She eyed its mauve folds wistfully.
‘Which do you think, Egbert?’ she enquired dolefully, uncomfortably aware that the draught coming in the window did not bode well for the foulard.
‘A nice fresh herring,’ he murmured, turning over and going back to sleep.
‘Oh Egbert,’ she snorted, banging the door behind her as she departed for the bathroom.
Rose enjoyed having breakfast at Ramsgate.
In fact he was enjoying this whole holiday.
He enjoyed not being known as Inspector Rose, he enjoyed the sausages from Spratling's Colonial Butchers, he enjoyed kedgeree, and most of all he enjoyed the fresh fish brought in by the landlady's schoolboy son.
Fresh fish was something he didn't see a lot of in Highbury.
‘I've finished, Egbert,’ announced Edith unnecessarily, sweeping back into the room swathed in the huge purple dressing gown she had bought for decorousness lest she be passed in the corridor on the way to the bathroom.
Her pink cheeks bore testimony to the scrubbing they had endured from Dr Mackenzie's Arsenical Soap (as used by Madame Patti, Ellaline Tenriss, etc.).
Rose smiled.
He liked seeing Edith happy.
He thought a little wistfully of Provence, tried and failed to see Edith as happy in the Hôtel Paradis, and returned to savour anew the pleasures of Ramsgate.
Perhaps they'd take an excursion by brake to Pegwell Village this afternoon if the concert had to be cancelled because of rain.
Or perhaps it might clear up?
He jumped out of bed, contemplated his new seaside pyjamas with renewed pleasure, and prepared to enjoy the second week of his precious holiday.
Thirty minutes later, Edith clad in mauve foulard and he in grey flannels and blazer, they descended for breakfast.
Edith walked first into the small dining room already crowded with boarders.
‘Why, good morning, Auguste,’ he heard her say in tones of mingled surprise and pleasure.
He blinked.
He must have heard her wrong.
But no.
There at a table was a clearly dejected, drooping Auguste, with large dark circles under his eyes.
Rose's first reaction was pleasure, the second unease, and the third a downright sinking feeling inside that had nothing to do with appetite.
‘Would your friend like a nice hot kipper?’ asked Mrs Burbanks the landlady solicitously, on the grounds that foreigners, however well they spoke English, would never understand it.
‘He says not, but he don't look well to me.
A nice hot cup of tea is what he needs.’
She bustled out, and five minutes later Auguste was sipping from a willow-pattern cup with Edith's and Egbert's eyes on him.
Coffee, strong and black, was what he needed, not Mr Jackson's breakfast tea, but how could one explain that to the good English landlady?
Nevertheless, he did feel somewhat improved, and he turned to Rose.
‘You must forgive me, mon ami, but…’
‘In-trouble, eh, Auguste?’
Rose asked quietly.
‘Something wrong?’
‘I fear so.
I fear so very much.
I shall be arrested, perhaps beheaded.’
His lack of sleep was contributing to an irrational but lingering fear that the Prince of Wales might also drop dead.
How well did he know his pupils?
Suppose one of them had put something nasty in the food by error — or by purpose.
Even worse, suppose Heinrich Freimüller were a foreign agent, deputed to kill the Prince?
If atropine it was, it was easily obtainable in extract of belladonna.
Or suppose that accidentally seeds or fruit of the atropine group of plants had been included in the vegetables or herbs?
He had not checked them all personally.
His mind ran rampant over the terrible possibilities.
Rose raised his eyebrows and drank a cup of Mrs Burbanks' tea.
The herring looked delicious but he wasn't at all sure he was going to enjoy it as much as he'd thought.
‘Sure you won't have a herring, Auguste?’
Auguste shuddered.
‘No.
I thank you, Egbert.’
‘Then you'd better tell me.’
‘It is murder, I think, my friend,’ he said dolefully.
Edith clucked in anxiety.
Rose dropped his fork.
‘Murder,’ he repeated.
‘Not again.
How the deuce — I beg your pardon, my love — do you manage to do it, Auguste?’
‘I do not know, mon ami, but do it I do.
It is not certain, but I fear it must be.
Poison, you see.’
‘Ah.’
Rose now understood fully the reason for the early visit.
‘One of your pupils, is it?’
‘Non.
It is Sir Thomas Throgmorton, after the Grand Dickensian Banquet I told you about.’
Rose whistled, and the dining room assembly looked up, annoyed at being disturbed in their silence.
‘After the meal for which I was responsible,’ Auguste continued mournfully.
Suddenly the drizzle outside looked a lot less likely to clear up.
‘Murder,’ repeated Rose.
‘Poison.
You cooked the meal.’
He sighed.
‘This is where we came in, at Stockbery Towers.’
Auguste smiled faintly.
‘Egbert, I am not sure.
It was only five hours ago he died.
But who would choose to commit suicide in the middle of a dinner sitting next to the Prince of Wales?’
The knife dropped to join its companion.
‘The Prince of Wales?’ echoed Rose hollowly.
Suddenly this was ceasing to be solely his friend's problem.
If the Prince of Wales were involved in any way, Scotland Yard would be too.
Thomas Throgmorton — wasn't he some kind of banker?
International banker, his memory threw up.
Rose could have groaned aloud.
Trust Auguste to get mixed up with it.
He couldn't throw him to the wolves of his colleagues at the Factory.
Suppose Twitch had an urge to flex his ambitious wings over this one?
‘These kippers are very good, Auguste,’ said Edith hopefully.
‘Are you sure you won't join w?
You need to keep your strength up.’
Auguste reached out his hand and took hers.
‘Dear Edith, will you forgive me?
Your holiday — and I come with tales of murder.’
‘I expect Egbert will help you.
Won't you, Egbert?’
He would not be seen to give way easily.
He regarded Auguste morosely.
‘I'm on holiday,’ he pointed out.
‘Moi aussi, mon ami,’ replied Auguste dolefully.
‘I suppose you'd better tell me all about it.
After I've finished this herring.’
One hour later, Rose stood at the window of his room  looking down at the harbour scene.
He had already spent much time on the hotel telephone to Scotland Yard.
‘My dear,’ he said at last to Edith, ‘do you think you might enjoy the rat of your holiday at Broadstairs?’
The delights of the Paragon, the Baths, the Marina Pier, Ellington Park and the Leghorn hat in Lewis Hyland and Linom's window floated temptingly before her eyes.
‘I'm sure I would, Egbert,’ she answered loyally.
Auguste returned to Broadstairs by donkey cart, somewhat cheered, feeling he could face anything.
First he should go to the hotel to see what was happening.
His ability to face anything was severely tested by Mr Multhrop, who clutched him firmly by his lapels as he entered the door, as if holding him under close arrest, an impression strengthened by the sight of a uniformed policeman standing behind him.
‘I thought you had run away, Mr Dee,’ cried Multhrop in relief.
‘So did the police,’ he added.
A speculative glance from the constable at Mr Didier.
‘My superiors would like to see you, sir.
Very upset they were, sir, when they heard you'd gone missing.’
‘I had not gone missing, Constable,’ retorted Auguste with dignity.
‘Is there any reason that I should not take an early stroll on the beaches like Mr Dickens himself?’
‘This Mr Dickens isn't wanted on no murder enquiry.
The inspector ain't asked for him.’
‘Mr Dee,’ Multhrop cried, tugging at the lapels for attention, ‘you don't understand.
The Prince of Wales has been kidnapped.
He's not in his room.’
‘Mr Multhrop,’ Auguste said patiently, ‘His Royal Highness left yesterday evening together with his staff.
He — er — received an urgent message to return to his yacht.
If you investigate, you will discover that his detective and valet have also vanished.’
‘Had accomplices, did you?’ said the constable, gratified, advancing towards Auguste and slipping an arm far from lovingly through his.
‘I think you'd better see the Inspector right now.’
Auguste was promptly frogmarched into Mr Multhrop's office, Mr Multhrop trotting along behind torn between a certain loyalty to Mr Dee and relief that officialdom had taken over.
Araminta, on the point of descending the stairs in a cream pique dress, turned round and went back to her room.
‘Well, well, well, Mr Didier.
We've met before, haven't we?’
Auguste groaned.
The nightmare seemed to be intensifying.
Inspector Naseby of all people, who had clearly been looking forward to this moment.
Eight years had done nothing to mellow him.
‘Now where was it?’ murmured the Inspector lovingly, his weaselly features cracking into the semblance of a grin.
‘Ah yes, Stockbery Towers.
You got off very easy that time, Didier.
Never thought that justice had been done, whatever your pal at Scotland Yard maintained.’
It certainly hadn't so far as he, Naseby, was concerned.
Promotion at Maidstone was never to be his; instead they'd sent him back to Ramsgate, scene of his early success in capturing the notorious smuggler Rum-Bubber Bill.
Unfortunately he hadn't repeated that success and Inspector he had remained, and would do so until he left the force.
Ramsgate had tired of the honour of his presence and he had been sent to Sandwich, under whose jurisdiction the Broadstairs police force came.
Naseby was not pleased at the way his career had gone.
And here was Monsewer Auguste Didier again, within his power.
‘So now you've gorn and kidnapped the Prince of Wales, after murdering a poor innocent banking gentleman,’ he purred, eyes glittering.
‘Inspector Naseby!’
Auguste tried to keep the tremor  out of his voice.
‘I am delighted to see you again, even if it be under such tragic circumstances.
However, the Prince of Wales has not been kidnapped.
I was present when he left the hotel last evening after an urgent message recalling him to Osborne House.
Family illness…’
He let his voice trail off in the hope that Naseby would not enquire further into such a delicate matter.
‘Would it surprise you to know, Mr Didier, that the Prince of Wales is not at Osborne House?’ said Naseby complacently.
‘That no message was sent to His Royal Highness, and that Her Majesty the Queen, the Princess of Wales, the Duke of York, the Duchess of York, Her Majesty's entire household, the gardener's boy and the royal dachshund are all in perfect health?’
Naseby's chest puffed up with each phrase.
Promotion loomed at last.
‘What have you done with him, Didier?’ he hissed.
‘I have done nothing,’ replied Auguste, goaded.
Sleepless, his fears of the night swept back reinforced.
Suppose the Prince of Wales even now lay lifeless on his yacht?
‘It is not surprising that he has not arrived at Osborne House yet.
It is only ten thirty, and there were thunderstorms all night, which would delay him.
I do not know about illness in his family.
I know only he told me he had to go.
I am not his private confidant, I am only a cook, remember.’
‘Oh, I remember you're the cook all right.
You're the Prince of Wale's own cook, aren't you?
Plans to poison him go wrong, then?’
‘I am not the Prince of Wales's cook,’ said Auguste tiredly.
‘Oh?’
Naseby's eyes gleamed.
‘Mr Multhrop thinks you are.
Been a spot of lying then?’
‘I do not know why Mr Multhrop thinks this.
I think the Prince of Wales may have told Sir Thomas so, after he asked for my services at the banquet.
It was more diplomatic to put it that way for Mr Multhrop's chef.’
‘Oh ho!’
Naseby's delight could not be contained.
‘A  likely story.
Sir Thomas is dead.
You pretend to Mr Multhrop to be the Prince of Wale's chef in order to gain access to the kitchens in order to poison the Prince.
That right?’
‘Yes — no!’ shouted Auguste.
Naseby stood up slowly.
‘Auguste Didier, I arrest you —’
He broke off, transfixed, as the door had opened, and Egbert Rose stood on the threshold.
Even had Rose been wearing his blazer and flannels and not changed into more sober attire, Naseby would still have recognised that face.
It had haunted his dreams for eight years.
Not by so much as a blink did Rose betray his own surprise at seeing Naseby, whose face had turned a delicate shade of puce.
‘What are you doing here?
This is my case,’ he almost wailed.
Rose shook his head.
‘Grave international implications, Naseby.
There's the Prince of Wales to consider.
The Yard's handling it now.’
Naseby glared.
‘I've already got the villain.
There.’
He jerked a finger at Auguste.
‘He's confessed.’
‘Has he now?
Let's hear the evidence, shall we?’
Rose said pensively, walking round and sitting in Naseby's seat before he could reach it.
Naseby was forced to retreat to the only other chair, in a corner.
‘He's admitted having been the lad person to see His Royal Highness,’ he said sulkily.
‘He's admitted passing himself off as the Prince's chef, and when his dastardly plan to assassinate His Royal Highness by poison didn't work, he kidnapped him.
Probably murdered him.’
‘Where is he then?’
Rose enquired.
He was enjoying himself; it was like dangling bait in front of those mackerel on Captain Hawkins's Mary Rose fishing boat last week.
Naseby wasn't much of a catch though.
He'd throw him back later.
‘He's probably —’
‘Quo corpus, Naseby?’
Rose provoked him with dim memories of schoolboy Latin.
‘Where's your body?’
‘That's what he's got to tell us,’ Naseby retorted, coming back like Jem Mace.
In the event it was not going to be Auguste who gave this information but Naseby's own sergeant, who burst in with the news that the Cowes harbour master had telephoned to announce the arrival of the yacht Osborne with the Prince of Wales aboard.
Naseby's face fell, as Auguste's spirits rose.
‘There might have been coercion,’ Naseby muttered hopefully.
‘Removing a witness from the scene of a murder is an important crime.
Ten to one, the Prince of Wales saw him do it,’ pointing at Auguste.
‘Vital-witness.
I'll be speaking to His Royal Highness about this.’
‘I do not think that you will find the Prince overjoyed to be reminded of his presence here,’ said Auguste.
‘I don't need advice from you, Didier.
You aren't out of the wood yet.
Far from it.
You were the cook of this banquet.
And we've got a corpse on our hands as a result.
An important corpse.
He must have been given the stuff in his food.’
‘Or when he left the table on two occasions,’ Auguste said firmly, remembering Sir Thomas's absence after the meal, which had been longer surely than it took merely to change his clothes for those of Bill Sikes.
Had he felt symptoms then?
Or earlier, when he first left the table?
Was what they had taken to be a problem of the stomach something more deadly?
Were the paleness and emotion on his face as he arrived not fury at Pipkin's performance but symptoms of poison?
Or — a thought struck him — was it in the water from which he drank at the reading lectern?
‘The doctor tells us that if it's the stuff he thinks it is, it can take a little while to work, especially if Sir Thomas  drank coffee.
Might have brought some of the stuff up while he was away from the table.
Took coffee, did he?’
Auguste nodded.
‘Several cups.’
Naseby smiled.
A trump had been deftly played.
‘Just a minute,’ said Rose mildly.
‘Let's take things from the beginning.
How do you know it's murder not suicide, Naseby?’
‘No letter,’ replied Naseby scathingly.
‘Important man like that wouldn't go without a note.’
He had a point there, agreed Auguste reluctantly, remembering Sir Thomas's character.
‘The reading, Eg —, Inspector Rose, this was a high moment of Sir Thomas's evening.
Why should he miss it?
Why not take poison later instead of during the meal or the reading itself?’
‘Could have had a sudden shock,’ snorted Naseby, forgetting which side he was on, and unwilling to concede anything to Auguste.
‘How would he obtain the poison so quickly?’
Auguste asked.
Naseby leapt up from his corner seat in a temper.
‘Look here, you.
You're here to answer questions, not ask them.
You're a suspect, not a detective, and don't you forget it.
You don't go committing murders on my territory, no matter what the Yard says.’
Rose remained diplomatically silent.
Uncomfortably Auguste was made aware in the gentlest way that he was indeed a suspect at this early stage.
He had been the cook.
‘Tell us about the banquet,’ barked Naseby, aware he had scored a minor victory.
‘It began with mutton broth,’ said Auguste unhappily.
Egbert Rose's eyebrows rose gently.
‘It is not usual in August, this I know,’ fiercely, ‘but I do not compose this menu.
I am’ told what to do.
It is composed of dishes that Charles Dickens liked.’
Naseby nodded knowledgeably.
‘And you cooked everything yourself?’ he asked comfortably.
‘Ah no.
There are six pupils at my school.
They assist me.’
‘You're still a learner, eh?’ smirked Naseby.
Auguste shot him an indignant glance.
‘I am the owner of a cooking school — through the generosity of the Grand Duke Igor,’ he added as a throwaway, pleased at the look of fury on Naseby's face.
‘My pupils accompanied me here for a fortnight's holiday during which they would acquire the art of fish cookery.’
It occurred to him with a sudden pang that this was now in jeopardy.
‘And how did you get into the Imperial, you and your six cooks?
Ulterior motive, it seems to me.’
‘We had no motive other than to enjoy our holiday,’ said Auguste a little pathetically.
‘The Prince of Wales discovered that I was to be at Broadstairs at this time; my cooking pleased him,’ he added simply, ‘and voilà, he asked for me to cook this banquet too.
How could I say no?’ he asked rhetorically, vowing next time he would do just that.
‘Seems very fishy to me,’ said Naseby.
‘No need to make silly jokes, Naseby,’ said Rose haughtily.
‘This is a serious business.
There's been a murder, remember.’
Naseby, who had not been aware of making a joke, glared at Auguste.
This was all his fault.
‘Where are these people now, Didier?’
‘At the house where we are staying, I expect.
Blue Horizons on Victoria Parade.
I do not know.
I have not been there since yesterday morning.’
Weariness swept over him.
‘Six potential murderers, and you don't know where they are?
Is that because you know they aren't murderers, Didier?
Because you did it yourself?’
‘It is not,’ yelped Auguste, wishing Egbert would help.
At last he did.
‘It seems to me,’ he announced, ‘we'd  better see all these pupils together.
After we've learnt the post-mortem results.
You've sealed the kitchen, of course, Naseby?
Your men stopped any clearing up, naturally.’
Naseby's face glazed over.
‘I did this myself yesterday evening,’ said Auguste.
Naseby glowered.
‘You went in the kitchen yourself though, I'm sure,’ he said viciously.
The kitchens smelled and looked terrible.
Even at the best of times, a kitchen after a banquet for over seventy was hardly appetising.
This time, without even the zest of being able to assess the success of his recipes from the quantities consumed or left on plates, it seemed to Auguste a sorry place indeed.
The scullery was full of dirty pans and half-washed china; the larders littered with cold geese, cutlets and vegetables everywhere; the tables groaning with unappetising-looking dishes of kidneys, tureens of soup and half-eaten tarts.
Rose and Naseby gulped, for once their thoughts in accord.
There were a lot of dirty dishes to sort through, one by one.
Rose sighed.
‘Just give us an idea where to start, Mr Didier, and we'll get a team in,’ Naseby nodded fervently.
‘I suppose,’ continued Rose, looking around hopelessly, ‘we can't say that the top table had a different menu.
It wouldn't be as easy as that.’
‘Non, Inspector, everyone had the same — oh, save for the Prince of Wales for whom I made a special soup.’
Naseby positively glowed.
‘And who's to say Sir Thomas didn't eat it instead?’ impressing even himself by his quick-witted thinking.
Auguste shrugged, ‘Perhaps someone saw.
I cannot say.
You could ask the Prince of Wales — if you think he is a reliable witness,’ he added ironically.
Naseby's eyes narrowed as he indicated that this would be an early priority.
‘But I do not see why Sir Thomas should eat it.
The Prince does not like mutton broth.
He does like almond soup.
Sir Thomas himself ordered the mutton broth on the menu.’
‘So you say.’
‘And anyone else will say,’ snapped Auguste, losing patience, and earning himself a warning look from Egbert.
‘Very well.
Show us this broth.’
They dub investigated the remains of the huge tureens of soup.
‘Next was the lobster,’ said Auguste, waves of tiredness sweeping over him.
‘Everyone had his own salad prepared in the kitchen.’
‘Where are the plates with the remains?’
Auguste took them into the scullery.
‘The plates at least for the first four courses are washed as they come out of the dining room.’
Rose groaned.
‘But 1 do not see how the lobster could be poisoned.
It was all prepared together, the mayonnaise mixed up with it and then the mixtures put in shells and the shells put on plates.’
‘So only the person who served the lobster or put it on the plates could have poisoned it?’
Auguste agreed bleakly, but it seemed so unlikely.
‘Here are the dishes for the entremet courses, some of those for the roast course, those for the cheese, the savouries and the desserts, the glasses and the coffee cups.
Only the glasses for the roast and dessert wine, of course.
The others would be washed first as a priority.
And the brandy glasses are here.’
Wearily he pointed out each stack.
‘And there,’ he said to Naseby, ‘in that bin you will find the lobster shells in which each portion of salad was arranged.’
A smile was almost brought to Auguste's face at the thought of Multhrop's reaction as half the Imperial's china vanished into medical detectives' laboratories.
‘Next the entrées.’
Auguste indicated the large dishes of dark brown stickiness.
He had been so proud of that sauce now so stale and unappetising.
Truly the creations of one  day are the rubbish of the next.
‘And the remove, the quails and cutlets.’
‘Could anyone tell which quail and cutlet would be served to Sir Thomas?’
‘Or the Prince of Wales?’ put in Naseby indefatigably.
‘Or the Prince of Wales,’ repeated Rose.
It was after all possible — if they had a madman among them.
‘The cutlets yes, certainly, since the Prince rejected them first time round, and asked for them later,’ dredging up memories from the depths of his mind.
‘But Sir Thomas — I suppose only the person who served them could be sure.’
‘And who was that?’
‘I really can't recall,’ said Auguste.
‘Somewhere there is a list.’
‘Wouldn't be you, by any chance?’ inquired Naseby sourly.
Auguste did not bother to reply.
‘The geese,’ he said shortly.
‘The vegetables,’ leading the way into the huge meat larder.
‘Voilà, Inspector Naseby, here you will find the cabbage steamed with cocaine, the potatoes mashed with morphine, the parsnips baked with pilocarpine.’
‘Know a lot about poisons, do you, Mr Didier?’ put in Naseby suavely
Auguste flushed red.
‘Go home and get some sleep, Mr Didier, that's my advice,’ said Rose kindly.
It was clearly an order, and Auguste obeyed it.
He walked slowly into Blue Horizons, longing for deep, knowing that he had first to face six anxious faces.
In fact it was only five.
Algernon Peckham in a display of bravado had chosen to walk to Kingsgate.
His companions sat round the kitchen table, the remains of an inadequate breakfast in front of them.
This was the room where only last week they had eagerly discussed the merits of anchovy (protagonist  Auguste) versus red wine sauce for fillets of John Dory; whether sole on prawn mousse covered with aspic (Alice's invention) brought out the true flavours of the fish, or smothered them; whether mussels were preferable simply cooked in white wine or whether, as Emily contended, with cream and sorrel sauce added.
Her grandmama, it appeared, had a recipe.
‘Vot is happening?’ demanded Heinrich heavily.
They had all returned after the closing of the kitchen.
‘I'm afraid that Sir-Thomas is dead,’ said Auguste sombrely.
‘Have a cup of coffee, Mr Didier,’ said Alice practically, handing him a cup.
He took it gratefully.
‘Will that mean they have to talk to us, Mr Didier?’ whispered Emily after a pause.
Heinrich moved closer to her.
‘A formality,’ said Auguste reassuringly.
‘Naturally the police will wish to make enquiries.
We cooked and served the meal that Sir Thomas had recently eaten; it is true he could have taken the poison afterwards, however, or when he was away from the table during the entremets.
He suffered from a weak stomach.
Perhaps he took too much medicine.’
Their faces began to brighten, but in spite of his words Auguste could not share their optimism.
Stomach medicines would not contain sufficient belladonna, if belladonna it was.
‘Anyone could have dropped poison into his food,’ objected James stolidly.
‘It's not fair we should be blamed.
It could have been anyone passing by the serving table, or in the kitchens, or sitting near Sir Thomas —’
‘The Prince of Wales, perhaps?’ suggested Auguste drily.
‘You don't think the poison was intended for him, do you, Mr Didier?’ asked Alice, with horror-stricken face.
‘I do not know, I do not know, mes enfants.’
Auguste covered his face with his hands.
There was immediate and  respectful silence.
The maître did not know.
This had never happened before.
Alfred broke it.
‘Suicide, I expect.’
‘Bills,’ mumbled Heinrich to general puzzlement.
‘He could have been taking bills.’
‘He had a weak stomach,’ pointed out Emily in support of this theory.
Auguste uncovered his face.
‘We must continue our holiday —’ the word struck a curious note —‘as best we can.
I am glad to say my friend Inspector Rose of the Yard will investigate.
This means it will be done quickly — and there will be no mistakes,’ he said reassuringly.
‘After all,’ he concluded, rising to his feet, ‘why on earth should any of you choose to murder Sir Thomas?
No, it is a formality only.’
He half-stumbled out of the room up to his bed and blessed, blessed sleep, where his dreams were a mixture of lobsters with evil intent towards the Prince of Wales, of Charles Dickens teaching him how to catch a pungar, and of Araminta, receding further and further into a boiling sea of mutton broth.
In the kitchen, without his restraining presence, discussion broke out animatedly.
Only Alfred did not join in.
He was uncomfortably aware that Auguste was wrong.
One at least of their number had every reason to wish Sir Thomas dead.
Huddled in one corner of the first-floor sun lounge, the remains of the committee of Literary Lionisers were holding an emergency meeting before facing their sundry charges.
Three couples had already been seen leaving the hotel with baggage.
News of Sir Thomas's death had hit them hard in different ways.
Samuel Pipkin tried to keep excitement from his voice; in truth he was as shocked as any of them at the reality of what in his mind he had longed for.
That Throgmorton had died by poison was hard enough for them to take in, when  all had assumed sudden acute stomach illness.
Accident the mushrooms, the lobster.
Food poisoning.
Only later did Oliver Michaels come back with the sobering news that the hotel was strangely full of policemen, that there was no breakfast to be had save for coffee and muffins, without a trek to the Albion Hotel, and moreover there was thought to be something odd about Sir Thomas's death which no one would specify.
‘Suicide!’ had been their doubtful diagnosis.
Gwendolen was clad in her dark blue serge travelling dress, this being the nearest to mourning she could manage.
A sleepless night had convinced her that in the event of Thomas's death her role was forlorn fiancée.
‘Nonsense,’ she cried.
‘Suicide?
Out of the question.
Why?
When we were happily betrothed?’
Her listeners agreed, suicide was unlikely given Sir Thomas's character, but there agreement stopped.
‘Happy!’ snarled Samuel.
‘Forgive me, dear lady, but that did not appear to be the case last night.’
‘Fiancée?’
Oliver blurted out.
‘But Angelina was engaged to him.’
Angelina turned a cold eye on him.
‘We were affianced, Mr Michaels.
I feel I should know my own situation best,’ said Gwendolen tartly.
‘Dear Thomas and I were on the point of announcing our engagement.
And have you never heard of lovers’ tiffs, Mr Pipkin?’
Grandly.
‘Ah, do you think,’ her face blanched, ‘that he poisoned himself because of our quarrel?
Over me?’
The word ended in a wail, and Angelina ran to her to try to forestall a further attack of hysteria.
‘Thomas, Thomas,’ Gwendolen moaned quietly to herself, and made no further bid for the limelight.
‘What we have to do,’ said Samuel, taking advantage of her exit from the ring, ‘and I take it no one objects if I now chair this committee,’he added off-handedly, ‘is to decide  whether the Week of the Lion should continue or be cancelled.’
‘I fear we have to make a quick decision,’ said Oliver ironically, looking out of the window and seeing a departing victoria.
News had travelled fast.
‘We have no choice ourselves,’ Angelina pointed out.
‘We have to stay.
I have no doubt the police will need to ask us questions.’
Samuel paled slightly.
‘But surely — how could we be thought responsible, if the food or wine were poisoned?’
‘Quite easily,’ said Oliver blithely.
‘It would have been possible for one of w to have poisoned his food, perhaps.
He was hardly a popular man with any of w.’
‘He was with me,’ moaned Gwendolen.
‘With you, of course,’ he agreed gently.
‘Forgive me.’
But everyone was uncomfortably aware of last night's scene.
‘It seems to me more likely he may have taken too much medicine when he left the table yesterday,’ he continued slowly.
‘Ya, yes, his weak stomach,’ said Gwendolen eagerly.
‘But we can't be sure it wasn't murder — yet.
If it's confirmed, our Lionisers will begin disappearing vay rapidly.’
There was a gasp at this public utterance of the forbidden word.
Lord Beddington was somewhat disgruntled.
He had offered his services to this Scotland Yard fellow in his rob as a magistrate, only to have them refused.
‘Damn cheek,’ he told his colleagues.
It was a sign of their anxiety that no one noticed this strong language despite the presence of ladies.
‘Anyway, he wants everyone to stay.
All seventy of them.’
‘In that case,’ said Oliver, ‘we've no choice.
We'll have to carry on with the Week of the Lion tour if only to give there good people something to do.
And ourselves,’ he added.
Samuel glared at him.
He was going to have this young Snodgrass off his committee in double quick time.
‘This was precisely the point I was going to make, Michaels.
I put it to the committee.’
He looked round, somewhat disappointed his first resolution met no opposition.
‘This afternoon we were — are — due for a walk to Ramsgate.’
Everyone looked outside to the still overcast sky.
‘We shall decide after luncheon,’ Samuel announced firmly.
Walking down the Promenade to the Albion Hotel for luncheon, with Samuel striding ahead like Stonewall Jackson, and Gwendolen having found an apparent soul mate in Lord Beddington, Oliver found himself forced to walk next to Angelina.
‘So Sir Thomas had two fiancees,’ he said politely.
‘Please accept my sincere condolences.’
She glared at him.
‘Oh, Oliver,’ she said, pushing her parasol open vigorously, ‘don't be so foolish.
You can't really believe I was engaged to Sir Thomas, can you?’
He displayed complete surprise.
‘Why not?
He told me you were.
Mrs Figgis-Hewett told me yesterday you were.
I saw you leaning together very intimately yesterday afternoon; he was kissing your hand.’
‘Having one's hand kissed does not, so far as I know, oblige one to marry a man,’ she answered shortly.
‘Then why didn't you disillusion me?’ he demanded angrily.
‘It was crud of you.’
She stopped abruptly by the gate to the Albion's gardens, whirled on him, snapping her parasol shut again: ‘Because I was annoyed with you that you could even think such a thing.
And why should I assume you'd be interested anyway?’
‘You know —’ He broke off.
Did she know?
Of course she did.
She was avoiding the issue.
‘Then why were you deliberately setting your cap at Sir Thomas all the while?
I watched you, Angelina.’
‘I had my reasons,’ she said, after a pause.
‘Is that all you're going to say?’ he demanded.
‘Yes.’
She put her nose high in the air and stalked up the garden.
He followed her, troubled.
Marginally refreshed, Auguste made his way back to the Imperial Hotel late that afternoon.
In the Victoria Gardens, the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry band were regaling their audience with tuna from The Shop girl, promenaders were risking the doubtful weather and adorning the seafront in their Sunday afternoon best.
Tomorrow was Bank Holiday Monday, the highlight of the holiday for all but the most upper and select of classes, and this weekend was a kind of holiday rehearsal for it, albeit muted in respect for the Sabbath.
Auguste was thankful when he turned into the doorway of the hotel, the sight of other temptations removed from him.
There were few guests to be seen.
The reason for that, he was to discover, was that Mr Multhrop had made speedy arrangements with the Albion and Grant Hotels to serve luncheon, his own kitchens being hors de combat.
Araminta, a vision in grey, came forward somewhat reluctantly to greet Auguste.
‘Papa says you may be a murderer,’ was her ingenuous opening gambit.
Auguste suppressed a moment's irritation with his beloved, but not his uncharitable thoughts towards Mr Multhrop.
‘No, chérie,’ he explained kindly, ‘I am not a murderer.
It is merely that they wish to question me, for I had responsibility for the food last night.
It is possible but by no means certain,’ he added firmly, ‘that the poison was taken by Sir Thomas during the meal.’
‘Like the Borgias,’ breathed Araminta, in a rare display of audition.
‘Precisely,’ said Auguste, trying to see Gwendolen Figgis-Hewett in the role of Lucrezia Borgia.
‘All the same,’ said Araminta thoughtfully, ‘Papa says I'm not to see you again till it's over, and you're either arrested or cleared.
I would have liked to,’ she added wistfully.
‘Oh, Auguste, you will get cleared, won't you?’
Her lovely eyes brimmed over until he almost forgave the disloyalty.
Mr Multhrop rushed into the foyer like the White Rabbit, saw them and tried to edge away, but Auguste caught him.
‘Mr Dee, you know how it is,’ he said, smiling appealingly.’
‘Non, Mr Multhrop, I do not know how it is.
I have asked my friend from Scotland Yard to help.
Now would I do that if I were guilty?
He is in charge.’
Multhrop thought for a moment.
‘No,’ he said doubtfully, then brightened.
‘They've hat a lot of cases of bribery at Scotland Yard, haven't they?’
Auguste looked him in the eye.
‘I will inform Inspector Rose that you fear he and his department are as corrupt as that of Chief Inspectors Clarke, Druscovich and Palmer.’
Mr Multhrop's eyes bulged.
‘Please don't bother,’ he said nervously, envisaging himself carried off for criminal libel.
Or was it slander?
‘I'm sure any friend of yours…’
His voice trailed off unhappily.
‘Bon.
Then Araminta may accompany me to the sands.’
‘I suppose so,’ clearly weighing up the chances of Auguste's swimming underwater to the women's bathing machine section and drowning his beloved daughter.
But there, one had to take some chances in life.
‘Come for your turn on the gridiron, Auguste?’
Rose, complete with baggage and Edith, had returned to take up new quarters in the Imperial Hotel.
‘Inspector Egbert Rose and Mrs Rose, Mr Multhrop,’ said Auguste feebly.
‘Multhrop is the Imperial's owner, Inspector.
And this is Miss Multhrop, Edith, Egbert.’
Araminta was clearly impressed.
Edith looked around her.
It wasn't as cosy as Mrs Burbanks' guest house or even as Highbury.
But it was certainly very nice.
Quite grand in fact.
It might not be Ramsgate, but Broadstairs might prove to be quite enjoyable after all.
She would have something to tell the Highbury Ladies' Circle at any rate.
Chapter Seven
Egbert Rose woke up to grey skies over Broadstairs, cheered up as he realised he was on holiday, and than remembered that he was not.
With a regretful look at Edith still slumbering at his side in the huge mahogany bed, he swung his feet down to face the day.
One hour later, after a breakfast that reminded him of his French experience in its meagreness, and made worse by the perpetual drone of Mr Multhrop's stream of nervous apologies to each new arrival, he was ready to greet Auguste and his flock.
Yesterday afternoon he and Naseby, with Auguste hovering in the background, had crawled over Sir Thomas's suite of rooms and interrogated every single member of the Imperial's staff on duty the previous evening.
A terrified housemaid, eyed sternly by Mr Multhrop, admitted to seeing Sir Thomas in his room during the course of the evening.
‘'E came in when I was turning down 'is bed,’ she volunteered, curtsying to Rose in fright, somewhat muddled between his ranking and that of the Prince of Wales.
‘About half past eight it was,’ she added, impressed by her own powers of recollection.
‘'E went into the bathroom, and I went.
Then I saw 'e'd gone, so I comes back to finish orf.
And then 'e comes in again.
Says 'e 'as to change his clothes.
Back in the bathroom, so I turns down the bed, and goes.’
She wasn't going to leave this time, however; having got over her initial fright, curiosity made her follow the  detectives into the large bathroom, with clawfoot bath standing proudly mid-floor and a matching rose and violet embossed pedestal water closet.
‘Fond of his medicine, wasn't he?’ commented Rose as he opened the cabinet in the bathroom where a row of bottles and jars indicated Sir Thomas's concern for his health.
‘Wasn't leaving anything to chance.
Homoeopathic, patent, the lot.
Ipecacuanha, tincture of hellebore viridis, Nux vomica, Dr J. Johnson's Pills, Blair's Gout Pills, Dr Grinrod's Remedy for Spasms, Cockles’ Anti-bilious pills — oh, and Mexican Hair Renewer — Dixon's Rhubarb and Tartar Emetic, and Ward's Red Pills.
Made of antimony and dragon's blood, they say.’
He grunted.
‘Dragon's blood,’ he repeated disgustedly.
‘'E was making funny noises,’ the maid offered importantly, and, pleased at the instant attention this won her, added, ‘Like when me ma's 'aving another.’
Naseby and Rose inspected the sanitary ware closely, but if Sir Thomas had indeed been sick, than there were no traces left.
‘You're sure of this, girl?’ barked Naseby.
‘Sure that's what the noise was?
A retch.’
The housemaid clearly took this as a side comment to Rose on her character.
‘I'm an 'onest girl, sir,’ she pointed out, affronted.
‘This is what I 'eard.
Listen.’
The sounds that followed from her would have qualified her to audition for Mr Dickens's Infant Phenomenon.
‘All right, that's enough,’ said Rose hastily.
‘But that noise needn't have been a retch — could have been all sorts of things.’
He cast a scathing eye at the rows of bottles.
‘He did suffer from gastritis, we know that.’
Naseby had positively glowed with satisfaction at the revelations of this budding Sarah Bernhardt.
‘Seems to put it squarely on the meal to me, Rose.
Too much of a coincidence for Sir Thomas to feel ill and then to be poisoned  after that.
Doesn't look too good for our mutual friend, does it?’
He was almost jovial.
‘Didn't know you were a Dickens enthusiast, Naseby.’
Naseby looked blank and then dismissed this as more evidence of London eccentricity.
Fortunately this morning Rose had contrived to rid himself of Naseby's services.
He wanted to be able to draw his own conclusions, without Naseby's helpful commentary.
The once proud members of the Auguste Didier School of Cuisine looked a doleful group as they followed Auguste.
Bringing up the rear was Sid, but even he was subdued this morning.
Their attire was a mixture of the sombre and seaside wear.
Gone were the frivolous hats and bright blazers.
Seaside wear seemed inappropriate, yet they could not see that they had reason to mourn the passing of Sir Thomas Throgmorton.
A certain resentment was becoming evident among them, which the sight of the desolate kitchen enhanced.
On Saturday night, they had worked hard on their holiday for the sake of the Prince of Wales, and this was all the thanks they got.
Here they were, objects of suspicion to be interrogated by the police, and not even noticed by the one or two newspaper men who had arrived at the hotel.
The death of Sir Thomas Throgmorton after a sudden illness was worth a paragraph in view of his role of international banker.
The coincidental presence of the Prince of Wales in Broadstairs for a brief private visit to a friend on the same evening converted it into a two-paragraph story.
Three newspaper man with nothing else to report, since the Transvaal crisis was deemed beyond their capability, were despatched to Broadstairs to try to rootle out any facts that might justify a further paragraph.
Apart from the fact that the breakfast was bad and the service worse and that one or two police constables appeared to be taking their holidays in the hotel, they had picked up nothing of interest.
Rose firmly closed the door as he heard Mr Multhrop's  anxious voice coming distinctly nearer to the now unlocked kitchens.
He had clearly discovered the fact that the dining room too was locked against him.
The empty dishes, china, and uneaten food had been taken away for examination, so the sight and smell were somewhat more palatable than they had been the day before.
Auguste braced himself to sound casual: ‘Alors, mes amis, Inspector Rose wishes us to perform a play for him.
We will show him course by course just what happened on Saturday evening — as far as we were concerned.
Dish by dish, course by course, you will each re enact your roles.’
‘But there aren't any dishes,’ pointed out Emily matter-of-factly.
‘In pantomime, Miss Dawson,’ Auguste explained gently.
‘And than, voilà, Inspector Rose will get to the bottom of the mystery and we can enjoy our holiday.’
Even Auguste felt his voice lacked conviction, and his pupils to judge from their faces were similarly unconvinced.
Scotland Yard meant serious trouble, and though this thin-faced lugubrious-looking man might seem mild at first, there was a quid, controlled purposefulness about him that made holidays seem a 1u way away.
Rose glanced at the menu with which Auguste had supplied him.
‘We'll start with the soup,’ he said encouragingly.
‘Mrs Dickens's mutton broth.
Who prepared that?’
Algernon cleared his throat and spoke a little more shrilly than he had intended.
‘Me.
But everyone had soup,’ he added defensively.
‘There can't have been anything added to it.’
‘The Prince of Wales didn't have the broth,’ said James zealously, a believer in accuracy.
‘Does that make him the murderer?’ whispered Alice in an aside to Alfred.
Auguste, overhearing, frowned at this frivolity.
Murder, as he had reason to know all too well, was a serious business.
‘Who served it?’ repeated Rose, and as no one spoke, picked on the most nervous-looking individual.
‘Lord Wittisham?’
‘I was outside serving drinks.
Isn't that right, Mr Didier?’ he almost bleated.
He was aware that everyone was looking at him, and it was clear what they were thinking.
He was the only person to serve drinks.
He and no one else could have adulterated the wine.
‘I couldn't…
It would have been seen.’
‘Not in the red wine,’ Algernon pointed out, as if conscientiously.
‘So who served the soup?’ repeated Rose patiently.
‘Me,’ said Heinrich grudgingly.
‘And me,’ volunteered James.
‘Heinrich and I were with each other all the time.
We'd have seen if one of us had tipped something into the soup.’
‘Show me,’ said Rose, shortly.
Self-consciously they took the tureens from the kitchens into the dining room, placed them on the trolley, and took it round an empty table.
It was evident that without three hands James Pegg could not have infiltrated poison into the soup bowl.
‘The people next to Sir Thomas could have added something,’ suggested Alice helpfully.
Rose glanced at the table plan: ‘Lord Beddington, miss, or the Prince of Wales?’
‘Oh.’
Alice subsided.
Rose stared at the table, imagining it full of people, talking — but surely not blind.
‘Think it possible for anyone to add poison to a dish intended for Sir Thomas, Mr Didier?’
‘Only Lord Beddington,’ said Auguste.
‘Mrs Langham would have to reach across the table, surely impossible.
Unless there was some incident that diverted and concentrated the general attention, but I noticed nothing.
Did you?’
He looked round the group, but there was no sign of any reaction.
‘Very well.
Clear away for the next course,’ said Rose.
He hadn't expected anything definite to emerge, but it was useful background.
Emily Dawson cleared imaginary soup bowls.
‘I prepared the lobster salad,’ said Alice bravely.
‘I put all the ingredients together and put them on individual plates, but lots of people helped get the lobster out of their shells, and Alfred made the mayonnaise.
Sid helped me carry them to that table ready for serving.
Miss Dawson did the garnish,’ she explained in a rush.
‘She did it twice,’ pointed out Algernon officiously.
‘It fell on the floor, if you remember, Emily.
You did a fresh lot at the last moment.’
Emily went pink, reflecting that if she'd had charge of this youth in his formative years, things might have been different.
‘What if I did?’ she cried, near to tears.
‘How do you poison cucumber ribbons and why should I anyway?’
No one answered.
‘Very well, serve the salads.’
Heinrich and Algernon once more moved imaginary plates from an empty table, staggered under their load into the dining room and served another empty table.
‘Perhaps Sir Thomas ate a bad lobster,’ offered Sid brightly.
‘I remember my gran ate a bad winkle once.’
‘It was all mixed up,’ said Algernon who seemed to be appointing himself ad hoc detective.
Rose tried to suppress the memory of all those smelly shells now being analysed.
‘Which of you gave Sir Thomas his salad?’ he enquired casually.
Algernon and Heinrich glanced at each other.
‘He did,’ said Algernon, just as Heinrich came in with ‘Herr Peckham.’
Rose made no comment.
‘I cleared the dishes,’ Emily said shrilly, defensive of  Heinrich.
‘I'm sure he ate it all.
He wouldn't if he didn't like it.’
‘You cleared the dishes of every course?’
‘Yes, she did,’ said Alice, ‘and I laid them.
Except the lobster of course.’
‘The tureens, now,’ said Auguste.
‘More soup?’
‘No, the entrée.’
Rose began to feel he was back in the maze at Stockbery, but doggedly continued making notes.
He'd work this jigsaw puzzle out later.
‘Kidneys,’ he said, consulting the menu.
‘Mrs Crupp's.’
‘They were my concern, Inspector,’ said Auguste proudly.
‘Not Mrs Crupp's kidneys, but kidneys à la Didier.
The ingredients were gathered together for me by Lord Wittisham, the kidneys themselves prepared by Mr Pegg, and I attended to the final cooking and preparation of the sauce.’
There was a certain defiance in his tone.
How could his beautiful champagne based sauce be indicted for murder?
He went to the hob, and mixed vigorously.
Behind him stood Sid, holding an imaginary tureen.
‘Herr Freimüller served it,’ said Auguste.
‘No, I not do that.
Mr Pegg do it,’ Heinrich said hurriedly.
‘Why was that?’
Rose looked at Pegg blandly.
‘I suppose Heinrich was too busy,’ said James uneasily.
Then seeing this was inadequate, continued, ‘He was ready to take the removes from the ovens, so I took the kidneys in.
I put two dishes on His Royal Highness's table and Sid took the rest through to the other kitchen.’
‘Yes.
I takes the lot in there for the lower orders,’ said Sid.
‘Hallow me, Inspector to present yer with me movements on the evening in question.’
He ran vigorously to and fro between the two kitchens.
‘It was all cooked together, Inspector, but that for the high table was placed there,’ Auguste explained, pointing  to a corner table, ‘and the rest was carried into the other kitchen, which is usually used for the preparation of food and storage.
There it was collected and served by the Imperial's own staff to the rest of the guests.’
‘Could any of them have come into this kitchen?’ asked Rose.
‘No, Inspector,’ Auguste replied.
‘We would most certainly have noticed.
I had forbidden it,’ he added unhappily.
‘So, Mr Pegg, you placed these kidneys on the table, and they served themselves, right?
In two tureens.
Who dished them out?
Did you notice?’
There was a speedy consultation.
Alfred, in the best position to see, thought it was the Prince of Wales.
Auguste considered this unlikely.
His own impression was that Sir Thomas had served his end of the table.
Algernon voted for Lord Beddington.
Rose sighed.
So much for witnesses.
‘I go to fetch with Herr Peckham the quail and cutlets,’ Heinrich declared grandly, if dolefully.
He could see fingers of suspicion approaching nearer every minute.
If only the Kaiser had not beaten Britannia at Cowes.
Sometimes, disloyally, he wondered if the Kaiser were not a little too enthusiastic about the honour of Germany.
‘They were my idea, Inspector, in case, as proved to be so, the Prince did not like goose.
And Dickens does mention both, I am told,’ Auguste added anxiously in case Rose too should look down upon this departure from the true Dickensian menu.
‘I see.
Tell me how you served these removes, Mr Freimüller.’
‘I take quails, Peckham take cutlets.
I go to the Prince of Vales first.
He refuse it.
Then to Mrs Langham and to Mrs Figgis-Hewett.
They refused them too.
Then Sir Thomas.
I do not remember if Sir Thomas had quail,’ he said unhappily.
‘Always I ask myself this, but I cannot answer myself.’
‘The poison isn't too likely to have been in a quail,’ Rose said soothingly.
‘Easier to put in a sauce or gravy.’
Auguste stiffened.
‘Anyway,’ said Emily stoutly in mistaken loyalty, ‘only Heinrich could be certain that Sir Thomas would receive the poisoned quail.’
Heinrich looked at her doubtfully.
‘I do not poison quail,’ he said definitely.
For the first time Auguste began to feel a tinge of fear with this relentless questioning.
He had been so certain that his food could not be tampered with.
Had he been wrong?
‘Goose,’ announced Rose.
‘It says here Bob Cratchit's goose.’
Auguste paled.
Goose had haunted his dreams for ten days.
It would be the last straw if the bird had been poisoned.
Memories of the Prince of Wales's detective emerging from the oven came back and he wondered wildly whether some abstruse method of murder had been performed before his very eyes.
True, it seemed a curious way of implanting poison but — He pulled himself back to sanity.
‘The goose for the high table was taken into the dining room for carving, together with the vegetables,’ he explained.
‘We all helped serve the goose,’ said James, ‘except Alfred.’
Heinrich admitted to carrying in the bird, Auguste to carving, James and Algernon to transporting the results, Alice and Emily to transporting vegetables, sauces, forcemeats and gravy.
‘Just a minute,’ Rose interposed sharply.
‘These sauces.
Were they served or put on the table?’
‘On the table for guests to help themselves, so it wouldn't be possible to make sure that Sir Thomas's portion was poisoned, would it?
Not by us, anyway.’
Emily almost clapped.
‘Who served Sir Thomas's goose?’
He'd nearly said cooked.
There was a silence.
James and Algernon glanced at each other.
Nothing was said.
Auguste came to the rescue.
‘Inspector, this is the problem.
Anything tampered with in the kitchen could not be guaranteed to reach Sir Thomas unless the poisoner served it himself.
And then it would have to be an individual dish — the lobster, the remove or the coffee or wine.’
He went doggedly on, ignoring feeble expostulations from Alfred and Heinrich.
‘Or else the server would have to add poison at the last moment — surely very risky.
Otherwise it was added at the table — or to the glass of water he drank at the lectern.
Or something he took in his room.’
His trump cards.
‘When we get the report from the laboratory, we'll know a bit more,’ Rose said noncommittally.
‘I didn't serve him,’ said James suddenly, since this, to his mind, put him out of the running for the culprit.
Algernon and Heinrich stared at him.
‘It wasn't me,’ said Algernon simply.
‘I served the old gentleman next to him.’
‘The Prince of Wales?’ asked Rose.
Heinrich was as horrified as if the Kaiser himself had been insulted.
Algernon merely grinned.
‘Other side.’
‘Lord Beddington.’
‘No, I served him,’ said James quickly.
They glared at each other, neither budged their position.
Rose quietly made a note.
Inexorably Rose moved on through the entremets and coffee, sending eight people scurrying in all directions as he masterminded the performance, the objects of which were far from clear to Auguste.
‘And the drinks, Lord Wittisham,’ concluded Rose.
‘You served all Sir Thomas's wine?
And the drinks beforehand?’
‘I watched him much of the time, Inspector,’ said Auguste, an anxious sheepdog watching Alfred's eyes glaze over.
‘I'm sure, Mr Didier.
Just covering all possibilities.’
‘No one would poison wine,’ stated Alfred categorically, presumably on the basis that this would be an ungentlemanly act.
Food was a different matter.
‘It wun't the wine, it was the salmon, eh?’ said Rose.
‘Lobster, Inspector Rose,’ said Alice helpfully.
‘Beg your pardon, miss.
Just a quotation from Mr Pickwick.’
It was one of Mrs Rose's favourite books.
‘Any of you met Sir Thomas before?’ he continued smoothly.
‘He was at the dinner we cooked for them and the Prince at Gwynne's,’ said Emily.
Alfred was suddenly extremely grateful that none of his colleagues knew of Beatrice Throgmorton's place in his life.
But problems were about to arise.
‘Ah yes, so he was,’ said Rose easily.
He had an idea at bast some of the party were keeping something back.
‘Miss Throgmorton will be here at lunchtime.
She'll want to meet you, I'm sure.’
Quite why Sir Thomas's daughter should be keen to make the acquaintance of some kitchen staff he did not explain.
It was enough to get a reaction though.
Seven subdued people left the Imperial Hotel to walk back to Blue Horizons.
Preoccupied, they failed to notice that something had changed about Broadstairs.
The weather might be dull, it might be drizzling, but Broadstairs promenade had changed almost beyond recognition.
Where selectness and restraint had reigned, boisterousness and laughter had taken their place.
Fashionable rose-pinks and muted blue dresses had given way to garish reds, bright yellows topped with sailor hats or boaters with matching ribbons.
The sands were crowded with these strange bright parrots, accompanied by young gentlemen with unorthodox headgear and unbuttoned waistcoats.
Itinerant vendors buzzed everywhere, ignoring all Pier and Harbour Commission rules.
More parrots were lined up along the shore, skirts hitched to their knees, paddling and screaming  in the chilly water.
Brakeloads and omnibuses were arriving on Victoria Parade full of fresh supplies, and swarming down the High Street towards their mecca was the first cheap, fast trainload of ‘Arrys and ‘Arriets in search of entertainment.
The downcast Didier School of Cuisine personnel stared in disbelief.
They had completely forgotten it was Bank Holiday Monday.
All the more dispirited as they entered Blue Horizons, they discovered that somehow Joe's dabs, bought with enthusiasm this morning to prepare for luncheon, failed to seem so attractive.
Each one of their prospective cooks was preoccupied.
Heinrich was thinking over all the implications of the last hour, and what he would do if he were correct.
He was concerned he would be locked in an English jail, and wondered if he should seek Embassy asylum.
It would be most unfair if he should suffer for the Kaiser's unpopularity.
In any case, the Kaiser was a most charming man, much misunderstood.
Emily was just scared.
Alice walked hand in hand with Alfred, though it was obvious his thoughts were not with her.
Where were they?
Panic began to seize her.
What could he be worrying about?
Alfred's thoughts were fixed in fact on Beatrice Throgmorton, and the unpleasant scene that had taken place three weeks ago.
Algernon was trying to judge what danger, if any, he was in.
James was trying slowly to work something out in his mind.
And nearly all of them were conscious that they had not told Inspector Rose the whole truth.
Mr Multhrop at least was happy.
His kitchens and dining room were open once more and he was bustling about, as jolly as Mr Fezziwig, envisaging happy hordes of merry luncheon-takers.
Not, he trusted, Harrys and Harriets, as the popular press termed them.
Rose steered Auguste firmly clear, and into the office.
So happy was Mr  Multhrop that he failed to resent the purloining of his room.
‘Now,’ Rose said, once they were settled.
‘Tell me about them, Auguste.
Who's the German?’
‘Heinrich Freimüller, from the German Embassy,’ began Auguste awkwardly, feeling torn between two loyalties.
‘The Embassy wishes to raise the standard of its present cuisine.’
His expression suggested this would not take much doing.
‘He is a good chef.
His pastry has the makings of a vrai maître.
It is true that his mastery of patisserie’
‘Not food, Auguste.
Tell me about him,’ said Rose patiently.
‘My friend, I do tell you about him.
As the chef is, so is the man.’
A grin passed on Rose's face.
‘Have it your own way.
Political chap, is he?’
‘No,’ said Auguste doubtfully.
‘I have never heard him speak of politics.’
Suddenly he wondered why.
‘Yet he is most loyal to his country, as Mr Pegg is to his.
James Pegg is the solid Englishman.
He wishes to advance his cooking career.
He is sound, very sound, but in my opinion lacks the extra something that can create a maître chef.
With meat, however, he has a great affinity.
His father is a veterinary surgeon, and he himself assisted his father for a year or two and then became a groom.
Now he wishes to be a chef.’
‘Cures them, coaxes them and cooks them, eh?’ said Rose.
‘Curious mixture, ain't it?’
‘He is a practical man.
There are animals to be saved.
He does it.
There are those to be cooked.
He does that too.
In one respect is he noteworthy.
In his devotion to Lord Wittisham.’
‘One of them, is he?’
‘I do not think so.
Indeed,’ remembering Araminta bitterly, ‘I am sure.
He sees himself as a protector.
He is proud of their friendship.’
‘And what about Wittisham?
Can't get used to the idea of a lord hard at work, getting his hands dirty.’
Auguste smiled.
‘Ah, Lord Wittisham too is a simple man, as is Pegg.
But he works differently in cuisine.
When he creates a dish he begins and carries on until instinctively he knows the dish has reached perfection.
Nothing is left undone, nothing left to chance.
There are not many dishes he creates so, but those he does create are truly magnificent.
In the rest he is merely mundane.
And as for his private life, I do not think it is James Pegg he desires.
I think he is beloved by Alice Fenwick, but does not see her devotion.
One day he will, and proceed to create from her the perfect dish of a wife and peeress.’
‘And this Alice?’
‘Alice Fenwick.
She too wishes a career, like Rosa Lewis, like Emma Pryde.
She is the daughter of an officer in the army, but I think now alone in the world and with little money.
She is determined to succeed, and she is thorough.
Nothing will be omitted, where Alice is concerned.’
He smiled.
‘She spreads a warmth and comfort in her cookery and spreads this warm cocoon around her, drawing you in.
It is the desire of her life that Lord Wittisham realises her love.
She would make him a good wife,’ he added wistfully, looking into his own bleak future.
‘And the other lady?’
‘Emily Dawson.
Ah, Miss Dawson is interesting.
A governess who decided to make a change.
She had a windfall of money and decided to have a new career.
She is a deft cook with many interesting touches to her work.
Her desserts, her confectionery, her sauces are magical, though the rest of her work remains only average.
But yes, she has something or I would not have taken her.
I am training her so that she can cook for royalty,’ Auguste declared grandly.
‘And the young cock of the walk?’
Auguste smiled.
‘Our Mr Peckham?
Mr Algernon  Peckham I find difficult, since he is, unfortunately, an admirer of Soyer.’
Tones of disgust.
‘I cannot claim I know Mr Peckham.
Yd of all of them I think that he is the nearest to possessing genius.
He wishes to be a chef to travel the great country houses of Europe.’
‘Nothing if not ambitious.’
‘Very.
His father was a butcher, I discovered.’
‘Another affinity to meat, eh?’
‘Non.
Or at least Mr Peckham pretends to have none.
Give him game, fish, vegetables, entremets, patisserie, and he is superb.
Give him meat and the results are a vin ordinaire.’
Rose nodded.
‘And Sid?’
‘I do not see what Sid could have to do with this affair,’ said Auguste, illogically shocked.
‘He was helping in the kitchen all the time fetching and carrying.
He is — well he is Sid.’
He shrugged helplessly.
‘I see,’ said Rose, who did.
Eleven years on the Ratcliff Highway beat had taught him about Sids.
And on the whole they didn't go around poisoning roast geese.
‘But he was in the kitchen.’
‘Not in the dining room, though.
Sid came to me,’ admitted Auguste, as though honour-bound to disclose all relevant information, ‘on the recommendation of Mr Higgins.’
‘Did he now,’ said Rose, highly amused at this resurgence into their affairs of the biggest fence in London.
‘Well, if Mr Multhrop's teaspoons or Mrs Figgis-Hewett's jewellery vanishes, we'll know where to look.’
‘Sid is not like that,’ said Auguste indignantly.
‘Interested in cuisine, is he?’
‘No but —’
‘Why does he work for you then?’
‘He — I suppose he likes me,’ said Auguste inadequately.
Rose looked at him kindly.
‘We'll never make a policeman out of you, Auguste.’
‘Sir Thomas was not a popular man, Inspector,’ declared Oliver, not looking at Angelina.
The five committee members of the Literary Lionisers were subdued; they had talked about the horrors of Saturday night incessantly the day before.
Now, in the face of formal interrogation, they were restrained and cautious.
All but one.
‘He was, he was.
I loved him,’ moaned Gwendolen defiantly.
Then Auguste's presence in the small lounge caught her attention.
‘What's this fellow doing here?’ she shouted, puffing out her hastily improvised dark veil which rose and fell with each indignant gasp.
‘He's a waiter.’
‘Mr Didier is here at my request, madam.
He was overseeing the banquet and had Sir Thomas under his surveillance nearly all the time.
It is possible he may have observed something you were not in a position to see,’ Rose explained diplomatically.
‘It's also possible he poisoned poor old Thomas,’ rumbled Lord Beddington.
‘Don't forget that.’
Auguste went pink.
‘Sir, I did not know him.’
‘Dammit, I remember you at Gwynne's,’ said Samuel Pipkin indignantly.
‘Of course you did.’
‘That is true, sir.
It is also true that I disagreed with his choice of menu, but that is hardly cause for murder.’
This man was not to know that it very nearly was, by Auguste's reckoning.
‘You might have been paid to assassinate him,’ went on Samuel objectively.
‘He was an international banker.
Lots of people might have wanted to kill him.’
He skirted over the small matter that he was one of them.
‘I think you can take it from me,’ said Rose firmly, ‘that Mr Didier did not murder Sir Thomas,’earning himself a look of gratitude from Auguste.
‘Now, Mrs Figgis-Hewett, I gather that you had a disagreement with Sir Thomas.
You were threatening to bring a breach of  promise action, or so you announced on Saturday evening.’
‘A misunderstanding on my part,’ she cried wildly, glaring at Auguste.
‘Sir Thomas would have apologised.
We had been affianced for some weeks.’
‘He proposed to me that afternoon,’ put in Angelina apologetically.
‘Forgive me, Gwendolen, but if this is a murder case —’
‘Murder,’ shrieked the lady, overlooking the relevance of Angelina's provoking statement.
‘No, no.
Sudden illness.
Accident.’
‘Spontaneous combustion you'll suggest next,’ snorted Samuel.
‘Like Mr Krook, eh!’
Gwendolen started to scream at this hard-heartedness, but suddenly stopped again as Auguste rose to come to her aid.
She remembered Saturday's ministrations all too clearly.
‘I make no secret,’ said Samuel suddenly, who had obviously been considering doing just that, ‘that I disliked the fellow.
But if we all murdered for little things like that…
’ He forced a laugh.
‘What were these little things, sir?’
Rose enquired politely.
‘A slight disagreement over club rules,’ said Samuel airily.
‘Sir Thomas was rather, ah, dogmatic.
He was claiming that next year his chairmanship would last a day longer than set down in the rules.
Quite ridiculous of course.
Everyone agreed with me.’
‘I didn't,’ pointed out Lord Beddington.
‘Seemed to me old Throgmorton had a point.
Rules are rules.
As a magistrate I see it as my duty to enforce them.’
‘A day doesn't seem to matter much,’ observed Rose.
‘It would have meant, Inspector,’ explained Angelina, ‘that Sir Thomas would still be chairman when the next Year of the Lion began.
Next year our Lion is William Shakespeare and as the 23rd April, the day in question, is his birthday, important celebrations will be held, as 1900 is such a special year.
Sir Thomas, who set great store on  his cultural activities,’ trying to keep the sarcasm from her voice, ‘considered he would be the best chairman for such an important event.’
‘You agreed with him, madam.’
‘Not over his interpretation of the rules, no,’ said Angelina.
Samuel, picking up an unintentional slight that she considered Throgmorton a better chairman, bristled.
‘There was a vote,’ explained Oliver.
Samuel stopped bristling and shifted uneasily.
‘We were divided.
The Prince of Wales was to give his casting vote later on that evening.’
‘And Sir Thomas expected to gain it?’
‘Ya,’ said Angelina.
‘It seemed probable,’ not looking at Samuel.
‘And who would be the next year's chairman otherwise?’ asked Rose, guessing the answer.
‘Me,’ announced Samuel, less happily than he might otherwise have done.
Rose reflected, and changed the subject.
‘Now if you'd tell me what happened at the dinner.’
‘Slight discussion took place, Inspector,’ Oliver said, taking the bull by its humiliating horns, ‘on the matter of the Prince of Wales's casting vote.’
‘But you still expected Sir Thomas to win?
He would have no reason for suicide?’
‘None at all, not on that issue anyway.
He had won his point over there not being a re-vote.’
Samuel glared at him.
‘Re-vote?’
‘We considered whether to vote again on the issue.
It was thought that some people might have changed their views.
It was than proposed we should have a vote about a vote.’
Rose was now convinced that all clubs and societies were mad.
Processions at Plum's in St James's Square, now votes about votes.
He could take a fair guess how much the Prince of Wales had enjoyed the evening.
‘We were happy,’ put in Gwendolen feebly, following her own thoughts.
‘You did say you wished to change your vote to agree with me, Gwendolen,’ said Samuel meanly.
‘You misunderstood,’ she snapped testily.
‘Never would I have voted against dear Thomas.
Never.’
‘Anything else happen at this dinner?
Did Sir Thomas seem normal to you?’
‘He was not himself’ shouted Gwendolen.
‘He was worried about me.’
They ignored her.
‘He was rather quiet,’ said Angelina doubtfully.
‘She wasn't his fiancée, I was.’
Gwendolen was outraged, having mulled over Angelina's earlier words.
‘I was not engaged to Sir Thomas, Inspector,’ said Angelina patiently.
‘You was,’ retorted Gwendolen, grammar deserting her as well as her fiction about her own relationship with the dead man.
‘No,’ replied Angelina, gently.
‘You only thought I was.
He did ask me to marry him, but I rejected his proposal.’
‘How could you turn Thomas down?’ asked Gwendolen, amazement coming before affront.
‘Would he have taken this rejection hard enough to commit suicide, Mrs Langham?’ asked Rose quietly.
Angelina looked suddenly shaken.
‘I hardly think so, Inspector,’ she said stiffly.
She remained very pale, puzzling Oliver greatly.
‘What I need to know now is, what Sir Thomas ate and drank.’
‘What we all ate of course,’ said Lord Beddington.
‘All this Dickens stuff.’
really there Scotland Yard chaps were dense.
No wonder he had his work cut out on the bench.
‘But did he reject any courses?
Soup for instance.
Or lobster salad.’
‘He took both,’ said Angelina.
‘The kidneys?’
‘Sir Thomas served me,’ said Angelina, trying to recollect.
‘Then the Prince of Wales, Lord Beddington and himself.
I remember, because he said afterwards he hadn't liked them.’
Auguste stiffened.
Not like them?
A sauce à la Didier?
‘Quail and cutlets?’
‘I think — ya, he omitted them.
He felt,’ said Angelina, with a quizzical look at Auguste, ‘that they had not been specified on the Menu.’
‘But he ate the goose?’
‘Indeed he ate the goose.
And all the forcemeats,’ said Angelina.
‘I can't remember after that, except that he drank several cups of coffee, and some wine and some water after he returned to the table.
I remember all the glasses lined up.’
‘I saw him with a strawberry in his mouth,’ said Gwendolen.
With the memory of this fetching scene she subsided.
‘Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
I take it you'll all be staying on.’
There was no question mark in Rose's voice.
‘We will never desert Mr Micawber,’ said Oliver gravely.
Rose shot a look at him.
‘Thank you, Mr Michaels.’
He paused on his way out of the room.
‘By the way, I understand there was a glass of water on the lectern, and Sir Thomas drank from it.’
‘I drank from it too.
It wasn't poisoned,’ said Samuel instantly.
‘Look at me.’
No one did.
It was patently clear to all that Samuel Pipkin could have poisoned the water after he had drunk from it, if indeed he had drunk from it at all.
No one could recall his doing so.
The Imperial's chef, at last let loose in his own kitchen, was making up for lost honour.
Luncheon was produced in  double-quick time, a light snack of herrings à la Broadstairs, pies and salads.
Strangely, very few people attended the luncheon.
Three who did were Edith and Egbert Rose and Auguste, almost forcibly pushed in by a desperate Mr Multhrop.
‘Someone's got to be seen eating here,’ he hissed.
‘Oh me oh my!’
‘One thing, Egbert, troubles me,’ said Auguste, frowning at the haring.
This chef could do with a Fish Fortnight at the Auguste Didier School of Cuisine.
‘I do not think my pupils were strictly accurate about not meeting Sir Thomas before.
One at least had.
Lord Wittisham and Miss Fenwick had been to collect some food — the quails I believe — and were passing in a donkey cart as Sir Thomas arrived.
Sir Thomas shouted to him, ‘What are you doing here?’ and Lord Wittisham replied that he worked here.
I am sure they did not like each other.’
Edith looked from one to the other.
‘You men,’ she said fondly, taking another mouthful of Broadstairs trifle, ‘you see mysteries everywhere.’
Edith had spent the morning touring Broadstairs.
There was not a lot to tour in the inclement weather, though the Bohemia concert party was marked down for a visit, and the bandstand too held promise, though with all these people about, she doubted she would hear the music.
Egbert had said Broadstairs was a quiet, elegant place compared with Ramsgate.
So far she had little reason to believe him.
However, she had met a very nice lady from Pinner who said why didn't she come along with the Lionisers' visit to Fort House that afternoon.
Dickens used to stay there apparently, and Edith liked Dickens.
At least, she liked The Pickwick Papers, which her father used to read to her after Sunday School as a treat.
She had some nice prints on her wall at home too.
Mr Multhrop's luncheon room suddenly acquired another visitor, albeit a non-eating one, as Inspector Naseby rushed  in.
‘What's going on?’ he asked vehemently.
‘I want to Blue Horizons.
Cook's skipped it, and the others said they'd already talked to you.’
He saw Auguste and turned purple.
‘You not locked up yet?
I got a message,’ he said meaningfully, ‘it was this afternoon.’
‘Did you?
Must have been some sort of misunderstanding,’ said Rose.
‘My case, Naseby.’
‘You can't do it alone,’ announced Naseby.
‘You're night there, Naseby.’
Naseby looked smug.
‘I must send for Twitch,’ added Rose thoughtfully.
Edith pinned her best hat from Bobby's carefully onto her hair.
It was after all Bank Holiday Monday.
She felt confident it would not dare to rain; it was her holiday after all.
Descending to the foyer in search of the Lionisers, she saw a sturdy well-dressed girl in black turning away from the reception desk.
Mr Multhrop was hurrying up to her.
‘Miss Throgmorton?’
Mr Multhrop bustled forward, but someone forestalled him with a glad cry.
Alfred, returning home after a kitchen luncheon with his colleagues, had seen the love of his life.
He hurtled forward.
‘I say, Beatrice.
How wonderful to see you.’
He seized her hands in his, and mindful of her enthusiastic response to his advances a few weeks ago, took her in her arms and planted a kiss on her cheek.
In his enthusiasm, and being no lover of Sir Thomas, he quite forgot to offer her his condolences.
‘I don't think this is right, Alfred,’ said Beatrice firmly, removing cheek and hands.
A sentiment with which Alice Fenwick, watching this tender reunion, was in full agreement.
Only the thought of Araminta could cheer Auguste this afternoon.
Not even the invention of a new timbale had succeeded.
A murder, and he wasn't even allowed to play  detective.
He was a suspect, at least until the analyst's reports had cleared him.
Truly, Broadstairs seemed a bleak place.
It grew much brighter when Araminta floated down the stairs, a vision in pale blue foulard with feathery hat to match, her curls peeping out beneath.
He looked doubtfully at the rain-filled skies.
The day was overcast; the sun was struggling to emerge, but so far not succeeding.
There was even a mist over the sands.
No doubt Mr Turner would have found it attractive to paint, but he, Auguste Didier, did not.
Not when he had looked forward to a brief glimpse of Araminta jumping up and down in the sea in a bathing dress.
‘You will risk going out like this?’ he enquired.
Her large eyes opened in surprise.
‘Papa says it's all right so long as there are other people around.’
‘I did not mean risk with me,’ he answered, annoyed, ‘but it is trying to rain and your dress is not covered.’
She smiled beatifically.
‘It won't rain,’ she said in assurance.
It wouldn't dare.
‘Where are we going?’
‘I have to buy some cod,’ he announced.
Indeed he was looking forward to this discussion with William and Joe.
Araminta wrinkled up her nose.
‘I think I'd like to see Punch and Judy,’ she announced.
William and Joe and their entire consignment of cod vanished in the desire to please Araminta.
The Punch and Judy booth was far from crowded, due to the overwhelming preference of the day excursionists for Pierrots, Uncle Mack and the Bohemia concert party.
Indeed in the twenty chairs hopefully placed before it, only six were occupied; two by Auguste and Araminta, two by a disgruntled nursemaid and a purposeful-looking six-year-old female charge, and two small boys who sat innocently near the stand, dangling their legs from their chairs.
The curtains were drawn back to the sound of a hurdy-gurdy.
A despairing showman, whom Araminta announced to Auguste's mystification was called The Professor, cursed  the weather and his audience of six.
This was not the way to do it.
‘Mr Punch,’ he began forlornly.
‘Where are you?’
A long-nosed Punchinello puppet popped his head up on the stand, clad in a red costume and nightcap with a bell on the end.
‘I'm here!’ he shrieked in a falsetto voice.
Araminta laughed and clapped her hands.
‘I've got a big stick,’ mentioned Punch confidingly to his audience, as Judy appeared with her baby.
‘This is a romance?’
Auguste enquired, puzzled, remembering what he had seen before when the lady puppet was attacked and hoping there would be no repetition.
‘Like the Sleeping Beauty?’
Araminta giggled, whether at him or at Punch hitting the baby over the head he wasn't sure; the baby collapsed in a heap over the side of the stand.
‘That's the way to do it,’ Punch informed his audience.
Auguste glanced anxiously at the children.
This was surely strong meat for them?
The little girl, however, appeared to be roaring her approval as Punch proceeded to batter his wife and lay her by the baby's side.
Next a policeman puppet arrived carrying a gallows.
A shiver ran up Auguste's spine.
One of the small boys was busy throwing nuts at Punch in an effort to help justice.
‘Shall I kill him too?’ enquired Punch.
‘Yes,’ shouted the younger members of the audience.
Auguste watched horrified as Punch manoeuvred the policeman into hanging himself.
‘The morals of this story are not good.’
He shook his head.
Araminta looked puzzled.
‘He is an evil man, this Punch,’ explained Auguste.
‘It's only a play,’ said Araminta, holding his hand to comfort him.
‘Don't worry about it.
It's not real.’
‘As Sir Thomas's death was real,’ said Auguste gravely.
‘Araminta, you were around that day.
Did you see anyone  talking to Sir Thomas at all, who might have upset him?’
She did not seem to hear him.
Mr Punch was about to murder a crocodile with his big stick, since the reptile for some unknown reason had stolen his sausages.
Mr Punch should be grateful, thought Auguste, if they were English sausages.
‘Kill him!’ shouted out Araminta loudly.
‘What did you say?’ enquired Punch.
‘Kill him!’ advised four voices.
Auguste and the governess abstained.
The crocodile corpse joined the others.
‘That's the way to do it,’ said Araminta pleased, as all the puppets came to life again for a curtain call.
She squeezed Auguste's hand and he quite forgot to repeat his question.
The Literary Lionisers, or those who had survived the damp morning walk to Ramsgate along the sands (in the steps of the great Dickens on his walk with Hans Christian Andersen), were equally divided as to those who wished no more to do with the Imperial, Broadstairs or indeed the Lionisers, those to whom the sudden disappearance of their leader was an added bonus, and those who were determined not to miss what they had already paid for.
The latter two groups, just over thirty in all, were walking purposefully towards Fort House, the object of the afternoon programme.
Faced with the sight of the excursionists arriving in the morning, they had not hesitated.
They, too, regardless of the loss of their leader, were intent on being suitably dressed for Bank Holiday.
Boaters, with judicious hat retainers in view of the fickle wind, parasols, and Y and N Diagonal seam corsets for easier walking (as well as for bicycling) were speedily pulled into service.
Samuel Pipkin was in a most difficult position.
In order to assume his new role as leader of the party, his dislike of Dickens had to be muted, to put it mildly.
How far should  his conversion go?
Could a few allusions be made to Thackeray? he wondered wistfully; on the whole, he thought not.
Gwendolen, still clad in dark blue, was indefatigably marching with the party next to a most sympathetic lady.
She told her that it had been suggested to her that she should remain behind to rest, but she did not consider her darling Thomas would have approved of this.
Edith Rose fully agreed.
Angelina walked along the cobbled path to the house, revelling in the damp air blowing in her face.
Oliver marched grimly along behind her.
A strong breeze caught the upstanding feathered plumes of her hat and blew it off.
Pointing out the value of hat pins, Oliver fielded it and returned it to her with a bow.
She took it.
She thanked him stiffly.
He caught her eye.
She laughed.
Lord Beddington clomped along in silence.
Why did this fellow Dickens want to live on the top of a hill?
These writers were strange folk.
Next year he'd try a travellers' group instead.
After all, committees were much the same anywhere.
Didn't matter about the subject.
Behind them twenty-eight rank and file Lionisers exclaimed and marvelled at the quaint harbour beneath them, their thoughts torn between Dickens and murder.
Some of them indeed were under the impression that Sir Thomas's disappearance from the scene was some kind of re-enactment of The Mystery of Edwin Drood.
Would he reappear perhaps like Edwin Drood himself might have done if Mr Dickens had been spared long enough to conclude it?
As the party arrived at the small front door of the house, some puffing from the climb, Samuel held up his hand impressively.
‘On top of a breezy hill on the road to Kingsgate,’ he began to quote in low deferential tone, ‘a cornfield between it and the sea.’
He coughed importantly.
‘Ladies and gentlemen, Fort House, known to Bradstonians, as those who live in Broadstairs are called, as Bleak House.
Although Bleak House in the great novel is in Hertfordshire, many authorities believe the work was planned here.’
‘It was not,’ shouted Gwendolen.
‘Thomas told me —’
Samuel smiled, at last able to mention the revered name.
‘May I refer you to an unimpeachable authority: Mr John Camden Hotten, author of a biography of Dickens, and also, he paused impressively, a life of Thackeray, refers to it in 1870 as Bleak House.
Obviously Dickens himself so considered it.
Look at the splendid sight,’ he waved his hand, just as Mr Blackwell the owner appeared, but who almost disappeared again when he saw the vast crowd about to troop up and down his narrow staircase and crowded rooms.
‘This is where the great man sat to write,’ intoned Samuel, as they pushed -half a dozen at a time into the small study, with its huge jutting window overlooking the sea.
‘As he sat here watching the storms, the crashing waves, the evils of the elements, what better place to plan a tale of dark mystery and murder?
Surely here it was that the idea for the famous murder by Lady Dedlock of the villainous Tulkinghorn was born?’
‘Thomas met his enemy face to face that afternoon too,’ shrilled Gwendolen, determined that her beloved's name should at least be represented.
No one paid any attention.
No one, that is , save Edith Rose who had not, at that time, the least idea who Thomas might be.
But Edith understood her fellow women whether they bought their hats at Bobby's or in Bond Street.
‘Tell me about it,’ she said, leading Gwendolen firmly downstairs and into the garden where in defiance of the threatened rain Mr Blackwell had prepared for the serving of tea.
‘Before dinner on that fatal night,’ said Gwendolen between sniffs, ‘we talked of many things.
Unpleasant things.’
She was determined to forget some of them.
‘He told me he had been very upset that day.
There were people  staying in the hotel who shouldn't be there.
He wanted to marry me, you know, but his health was not good.’
She took a sidelong look at Edith to see whether this was going down well.
Apparently it was, for Edith was certainly listening.
‘Someone had told him that if he had his way, he'd like to kill him.’
‘Really?’ said Edith politely.
‘And a few hours later, he did,’ she wailed.
‘Really?’ repeated Edith, suddenly all attention, the bobble on her Bobby's hat bobbing vigorously in sympathy.
‘I am empowered by His Royal Highness to answer any questions on his behalf,’ announced the Prince of Wales's detective who had arrived by railway train.
‘His Royal Highness leaves for Sandringham tomorrow, and shortly after for Marienbad.’
The implication was clear, Rose observed.
His Royal Highness was not available for comment, except in dire necessity.
Restraining the wish to thank His Royal Highness for his co-operation, Rose asked the detective whether there had been any incidents at the dining table involving exchange of plates.
‘His Royal Highness gave me no information on this.
If it had happened no doubt he would have done.’
‘The dog that did nothing in the night-time, eh?’
‘His Royal Highness gave me no information on dogs.’
Rose sighed.
‘Did His Royal Highness have any conversations with Sir Thomas that might have a bearing on the case?’
‘His Royal Highness gave me no information on this.’
‘Does he have any reason to believe the poison was intended for him?’
Rose asked bluntly.
The detective stiffened.
‘His Royal Highness gave me…’ he began, and then became a human being.
He had noticed Auguste.
‘There,’ he said angrily, ‘is your assassin.
When  I was in performance of my duties, he distinctly told me that the Prince would be poisoned.
Did you not?’
‘No,’ said Auguste, glaring at him.
‘And I want to ask him if he did anything to my goose.’
‘Atropine.
That's what the analyst thinks.
As we thought.
It will take him another day or two to confirm it, but he's pretty sure.
The symptoms confirm it.
The dilated pupils, the thirst — all that water and coffee — throat spasms, and a scarlet rash that's quite unmistakable, later delirium and hallucinations.
They've got enough from the stomach alone to kill him twice over and they've still to separate it from the liver and muscles.
It goes in the blood, you see.’
Rose glanced at Auguste who was pale.
Stomachs were for tartes aux pomme and cailles aux raisins, not to be examined in laboratories.
‘Very popular poison out East,’ Rose said hastily.
‘The Indian datura plant is often confused with capsicum apparently.
Didn't use any capsicums in your meal, did you, Auguste?’
‘If Dickens did not mention them, I did not,’ said Auguste sourly.
‘But atropine is the belladonna plant, is it not?
One can get alcoholic extract of belladonna quite easily.
Or do you think I dropped deadly nightshade into the stuffings?’
‘Now, now, Auguste.
I have to ask this, you know.’
Auguste stood reproved.
He was ashamed of himself.
‘You are right, mon ami.
I apologise.
I do not think it possible that datura, Indian or British, or deadly nightshade invaded our menu.’
‘The analyst would agree with you so far — too big a dose.
He thinks it came in the pure stuff, transparent crystals.’
‘But Sir Thomas would notice if there were crunchy crystals in his food,’ Auguste objected.
‘Ah, but these crystals melt in hot water.
And,’ Rose  paused, ‘it dissolves easy as anything in alcohol.
Suggest anything to you?’
Auguste gulped.
‘Lord Wittisham,’ feeling a traitor.
‘Yes, our Lord Wittisham, whom you thought had met Sir Thomas before.’
‘You think him guilty?’
‘I'll certainly be questioning him.
But there's a problem.
We've got preliminary reports on the dishes of the uneaten food too.
Your goose was cleared, Auguste.
But the remains of the entrée had enough atropine in it to kill a couple of horses.’
Chapter Eight
‘Gone,’ said Mr Multhrop disgustedly.
‘Gone, all gone,’ beginning to sound like Lady Audley.
He was gloomily looking at his registration book on Tuesday morning.
‘And with this weather, how can I get replacement bookings?
I shall make them pay,’ he announced with satisfaction.
‘Who's gone, Mr Multhrop?’ asked Rose, suddenly aware that the hotel seemed remarkably empty.
‘Lionisers.
Forty of them have booked out.
And now all the others have disappeared.
I shouldn't be surprised if we don't see them again.
Just send for my things, they'll say.
It's happened before.’
‘They'd better be back,’ muttered Rose balefully.
‘Walking round the town, are they?’
‘They said,’ intoned Multhrop, the emphasis indicating that this was quite probably a placebo for his benefit, ‘that they were going to Rochester.
They said they'd be back for a merry night, whatever that might mean.’
The look on his face suggested it was unlikely they would receive it at his hands.
Auguste strolled past the clap-boarded boathouse, on to the pier, determined to escape at least briefly from murder.
William and Joe were busily employed, hands in pockets, watching the Francis Forbes Barton being winched up the slipway by the old capstan after a practice launch.
‘Fish,’ Auguste yelled at them.
The damp air was full of the smell of fish.
Twenty or so fishing boats were moored to the pierside, fresh from a night's work.
Joe sucked in his breath.
‘Nothing much today, Mr Didier.’
‘Joe, I see boats, I see baskets, I even see fish,’ said Auguste patiently.
‘Only a few whiting.’
‘Only a few whiting!
My friend, you say only a merlan, I say give me your whiting and I will create a masterpiece — a soufflé de merlan à la Didier.’
‘E's off again, Joe,’ chortled William.
‘Only teasing, Mr Auguste.
Dey'll come up lovely, fried in a bit o’ butter, with deir tails in deir mouths.’
‘Fried in butter?
Ah non.
Where is the excitement, the flavour?
You taste only skin and fat.
My pupils learn true cuisine where the soul of the fish is appreciated.’
‘No sole, Mr Didier, not none.’
‘Naturally not if you cook it with Mrs Marshall's Coralline pepper, drowned in pints of anchovy sauce.
It must be cooked à la Didier with the most delicate of white wine sauces or in a soufflé with a touch of parmesan cheese.
Then,’ warming to the task, ‘add anchovy sauce, in moderation, as an accompaniment.
Ah, the time has come, my friends,’ he informed William and Joe, ‘that the world shall know what an artiste it has in Auguste Didier and I shall begin with your whiting, messieurs.’
‘Fancy dat, Joe,’ said William straight-faced.
It was departing from this grandiose encounter that Rose at last found Auguste, his head still full of exalted plans for the humble whiting.
He was almost running along the pier past the Tartar Frigate Inn, such was his enthusiasm to begin the cooking lesson, with a large lobster tucked absent-mindedly under his arm.
The sight of Egbert brought his thoughts down to ground.
‘Your whiting got anything to teach us in the detective line this morning, Auguste?’
‘The whiting cooked with its tail in its mouth teaches us to think all round a problem,’ answered Auguste, lovingly poking back one tail that was sprawling over the edge of his basket.
‘It is an important fish.
But no,’ he said regretfully, ‘I can see no direct comparison at the moment between the merlan and the death of Sir Thomas Throgmorton.’
‘This entrée of yours, Auguste,’ began Rose carefully, avoiding an out of control hoop hotly pursued by its sailor-suited owner.
‘Have you thought any more about it?’
‘Indeed I have, mon ami,’ said Auguste crossly, still mortified that his entrée should be selected, ‘and I tell you this: it does not make sense.
If Mrs Langham is right, then she, the Prince of Wales and Lord Beddington all ate from the same dish.
And so how could it be poisoned?’
‘She might be lying.’
‘Why would she lie about something so easy to disprove?
Why did Lord Beddington not contradict her if he ate no kidneys?’
‘She did mention that Sir Thomas did not like your kidneys,’ said Rose thoughtfully.
‘Atropine has a very bitter taste.’
‘True.’
Auguste looked pleased.
‘So perhaps it is not my sauce, but the atropine he does not like?’
His reputation might yet be restored.
Than he reflected.
‘No, why did the others not notice the taste if it was bitter?’
‘Sir Thomas himself did the serving, there's no getting away from it.
Even if your Mr Pegg added the atropine before he put the dish down, he could scarcely have avoided poisoning the Prince of Wales as well.’
‘Unless it were just one kidney poisoned,’ offered Auguste doubtfully.
‘Then it was an accident, or someone who didn't care whom they killed.
Or Sir Thomas —’
‘No,’ said Auguste.
‘Do you not think, Egbert, that here we have the hareng rouge?’
‘Not a basket of whiting, but a red herring, eh?’
‘Instead of the entrée,’ continued Auguste, brightening with sudden enthusiasm, ‘the poison that killed Sir Thomas was actually in some other dish.’
‘Or the wine,’ added Rose.
‘But why bother to mislead us?’
‘That's what we have to find out.’
‘Mudfog, Our Town, Cloisterham — in other words, dear, dear Rochester,’ announced Gwendolen, alighting enthusiastically from the London, Chatham and Dover Railway and waving her pink umbrella vigorously.
She had decided darling Thomas would wish h* to appear at her best and had therefore forsaken dark colours today in favour of her new blue straw hat with the ruched brim, decorated with tasteful purple roses and osprey feathers.
She would feel particularly close to Thomas here in Rochester, she decided.
It was Mr Dickens's favourite town and described in so many of his books.
It was where he spent his last years, here at Gads' Hill Place, in the house which he had coveted as a poverty-stricken child.
‘Pickwick,’ she announced.
Samuel Pipkin glared at her, then realised that she was not addressing him.
‘The first and the last of Mr Dickens's works were aptly set here in Rochester,’ she informed the party, all of whom then turned to her under the impression she was leading the party, earning another glare from Samuel.
It also ignored the fact that most Lionisers had already heard of Rochester and were aware of the importance of Rochester in the canon of the Great Lion.
‘Pickwick and Edwin Drood.
And here we are!’
Her voice ended on a semi-screech of joy as they entered the portals of the Bull Inn to partake of sustenance in the coffee room, like Mr Pickwick, Mr Snodgrass, Mr Winkle and Mr Tupman before them.
Tiring of the ceaseless flow of enthusiasm from Lionisers, Angelina wandered over to the proudly displayed visitors' book.
‘Did Pickwick sign himself in?’ asked Oliver, wandering as if by chance after her.
She laughed.
‘No.
The visitors seem to be made of sterner stuff.
Listen to this poem about Edwin Drood:…
In Jasper's Gatehouse and with Tope as guide/Explores the old Cathedral, Durdles’ pride/Descends into the Crypt and even would —’
‘Solve the murder if he could,’ added Oliver, improvising.
‘Who do you think did it?’
There was a sudden hush in the room into which his words fell.
Angelina closed the book and returned to her seat, but he pressed her: ‘Landless, Jasper, suicide?’
‘Oh Drood.
I thought you meant —’ Angelina broke off, and the sudden tension in the room subsided.
‘I think it's Datchery.’
‘Datchery,’ cried Gwendolen delightedly.
‘That's what poor Thomas told me that afternoon.
He said he'd just met Mr Datchery.
He had come back.’
She looked round for approbation at this feat of memory but there was none.
Samuel snorted.
‘Datchery indeed.
I heard no such thing,’ he said to her.
‘You were eavesdropping.
You are no gentleman, sir.’
Gwendolen was bright red, having forgotten his unfortunate presence.
‘You were in a public place and having hysterics,’ said Samuel, stung.
‘What do you expect me to do?
Stroll by and pass the time of day, when you were ranting and raving and threatening’
‘I was not, you — you Jasper, sir,’ she hissed.
‘You wanted to kill poor Thomas in order to further your own beastly ends.
You hated my poor darling.’
‘I may have felt like throttling him,’ snarled Samuel, ‘but it wasn't me threatening to kill him.
It was you.’
‘I was not.’
‘You wanted to see him dead, you said,’ he reminded her bluntly.
‘My own death, my own,’ she said quickly, eyes glittering now in the face of danger.
‘A mere turn of phrase.’
‘Perhaps it's a turn the police would like to know about.’
Rose followed Sid into the small kitchen at Blue Horizons and was immediately enveloped in a paradise of smells, reminiscent of childhood, the spices of exotic cooking and the warm scents of Provence all rolled into one.
It was a smell he had come to associate with Auguste Didier's kitchens, and after an hour in Naseby's company, it was all the more welcome.
Rose felt at home with this smell.
Or, rather, not quite at home since Mrs Rose's kitchen did not smell of herbs and spices and Provence.
Too often it smelled of boiled cabbage and steamed fish.
The pupils were standing round the range, from which the delicious smell of a baking soufflé emanated; they were absorbed in studying whitings, some fried, some boiled.
None steamed.
On the table, salads were waiting, prepared for luncheon, and two bottles of wine.
‘It is the sauce and the fish, a unified whole, we must consider.’
Auguste was pontificating in that voice he used solely for discussing cuisine, a mixture of reverence, excitement, practicality and anticipation.
‘True, boiled whiting alone is not a dish for a Icing.
But with the right sauce it might be transformed.
Who knows?
This is the infinite excitement of cuisine.
Now, consider: shrimp, lobster, anchovy, mussel, oyster.
I will hear from each of you, if you please, arguments in favour or against each in turn.
Only when we have settled on the perfect sauce will — Ah, Egbert!’
Auguste broke off, none too pleased to be  interrupted on a mere matter of murder when he had been in a world of his own, exalted by the power of cuisine.
‘I've come about the kidneys,’ said Rose practically.
‘If you'll all take a seat, please.’
Obediently they sat round the kitchen table.
‘Mr Didier has told you, I am sure, that atropine's been found in one of the dishes of entrée.’
James folded his arms defiantly as though daring anyone to try to put handcuffs on him.
‘But only vun person was poisoned,’ pointed out Heinrich.
‘How is this?’
There was a note of challenge in his voice.
‘Any suggestions?’
Rose asked, throwing it back to them.
Alice had.
‘I read in my Harmsworth Magazine once that a man died because he ate rabbit pie and the rabbit had been eating belladonna.
Perhaps that's how the kidney got poisoned.
A sheep had been eating it and poor Sir Thomas got the wrong one.’
‘It's possible, Miss Fenwick, but I think the dose —’
‘And I,’ said Auguste eagerly, ‘heard of a man who was poisoned because the coffee he drank was strained through a linen cloth which months earlier had been soaked in atropine solution, and mistakenly used again.
A lesson I attempt to tell my pupils.
Always —’
‘Coffee,’ said Rose meditatively.
‘Ah yes.’
‘The poison could have been added at the table just before Sir Thomas was poisoned,’ ventured Heinrich hopefully.
‘They have only to lean forward, drop the poison in the dish —’
‘The Prince of Wales perhaps?’
‘Nein,’ said Heinrich flushing.
‘Beddington,’ said Algernon.
‘He was leaning his elbows on the table.’
‘Mrs Langham, I feel, is the most likely person from her position opposite Sir Thomas,’ said Alfred brightly.
‘It is possible, yes,’ agreed Rose.
‘The difficulty is that this poison was added in crystal form; to dissolve it you need  hot water or alcohol.
It would be difficult to add it in the way you suggest since it would have to be poured.’
‘Alcohol,’ repeated Alfred faintly.
‘It could have been added by someone in the scullery,’ said James, rushing to the defence of Alfred.
‘After Emily had taken the dish out, anyone could have done it.’
‘Why would they do that?’ asked Rose.
‘And why did no one notice it?’
There was a silence.
‘There was a lot of fings going on aht there,’ Sid volunteered at last.
‘You wouldn't have noticed if the Crahn Jewels was thrown into the kidneys.’
‘Perhaps.
But we think,’ Rose said, ‘it was done to disguise the fact that the poison that killed Sir Thomas was not in the entrée at all, but in another dish.
Probably one later in the meal, and from the timing probably the goose, though perhaps the soup.
One of the peculiarities of atropine is that it acts differently on different people.
It can take effect immediately, but it usually takes twenty minutes or so for the full effects to be felt.
Now your meal began at seven thirty and the readings were due to begin at nine, although Sir Thomas did not begin until a quarter past nine.
About what time did they finish eating the entrée?’
‘About a quarter past eight, Inspector.’
Auguste prided himself on his immaculate memory for all matters concerning meals for which he was responsible.
‘So if he were poisoned by the entrée, he didn't display any symptoms for over an hour.
That suggests it wasn't the entrée or any of the earlier courses.’
Alfred began to look increasingly unhappy.
‘So we must consider the goose, any entremets he may have eaten.
The goose is the most likely, since it was after that he felt ill and went to his room.’
‘And perhaps took poison there,’ said Auguste eagerly.
‘You're not thinking straight, Mr Didier,’ Rose chided.
‘Now we've found poison in that dish, I think we can rule out any idea of Sir Thomas creeping upstairs to poison himself — purposely at any rate.
Now,’ Rose paused, ‘the coffee and the alcohol.
Did Sir Thomas take a brandy, Lord Wittisham?’
‘Yes,’ came out as barely a whisper.
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Yes!’
Alfred bawled.
‘But it was brandy, just brandy, brandy.’
‘Surely, Inspector, Sir Thomas would have noticed the bitter taste — and would not have drunk it?’ said James, coming to the rescue.
‘He might not have noticed it in coffee.’
‘I didn't serve the coffee,’ pointed out Alfred, relieved.
‘Who did?’
A pause.
‘I did,’ whispered Emily.
‘With Alice,’ she added hastily.
‘I poured it out of a jug,’ said Alice indignantly.
‘It was all the same and Emily watched me as I poured each cup.
I couldn't have done anything to it.’
Emily nodded.
‘She's right, Inspector.’
‘So it's insoluble, Inspector,’ said Algernon brightly.
‘Nothing could have been poisoned.’
‘Oh no, it's not insoluble, Mr Peckham,’ said Auguste gravely.
‘Like the perfect sauce, when the ingredients are mixed correctly, and the right ingredients have been chosen, you will have the answer.
It is like a souffléMy soufflé’ he shouted, agonised.
‘It is over-time, it is ruined.’
He flew to the oven, and emerged, hot-flushed but somewhat relieved, bearing a well-risen and browned soufflé of whiting.
‘This is not perfection,’ he said sadly, ‘but it is eatable.
You will join us, Inspector?’
‘Thank you, no,’ said Rose hastily.
‘Not if it's whiting.’
‘My grandmother says when they're curled up in a circle with their tails in their mouths, that's a symbol of eternity,’ said Emily.
‘I doubt if the whiting sees it that way,’ grunted Rose.
The Cathedral, the Nuns' House, the City Clock and Uncle Pumblechook's residence had been duly venerated, and a luncheon had been provided at the Bull Hotel for the benefit of the Lionisers and an odd and uncomfortable collection of those senior residents of Rochester who still remembered Mr Dickens.
These included Mr Miller, a farmer, the proud recipient of some pears and roses and advice from Mr Dickens, the advice being to stick to farming, not be an author or a poet.
(This did not go down well with the Lionisers.
Oliver, moreover, agreed with Mr Dickens, and this want down even less well.)
The elderly Miss Drages, one of whom had sketched Mr Dickens, sat next to a gentleman who remembered Dickens chatting about the unhappy marriages of actors.
The present owner of Miss Havisham's house told of a fisherman she had met in Broadstairs one day who remembered ‘Old Charley a-coming flying down from the cliff with a hop, skip and jump, with his hair all flying about’.
Moreover he was the very fisherman who was mentioned in Our Watering Place as mending a little ship for a boy.
A gasp of wonder ran round the historians, who resolved to visit every fisherman in Broadstairs forthwith till this treasure was found.
The narrator, waxing enthusiastic at this reception, contrived to relate how the fisherman took ‘Old Charley’ in his boat the Irene round the foreland to Margate the very last time he came down to Broadstairs.
Another Lioniser then proposed a toast to the memory of Mr John Chipperfield, who had died this very week, one of the last known models for a Charles Dickens character: ‘Lamps’ of Mugby Junction was no more.
The Lionisers' cup was thus already full well before they set forth to Gads' Hill Place.
By the time they had toured the famous house with its  owner, studied the illustrious visitors' book, looked round the study with Mr Luke Fildes' picture of the Empty Chair in their mind's eye, and had seen the chalet where Dickens wrote his last words before his death, they were drained of emotion, and it was fortunate that Rochester Castle provided exercise without undue stress.
Lord Beddington was not appreciating the day to its fullest, despite the fact that for some unknown reason it had seemed a good idea to buy a Panama hat.
What should he do about that young scoundrel?
Could it or could it not have a bearing on this present case of murder?
He alone of all the Lionisers was unmoved by illusions of great men.
He'd been forty when Dickens died in 1870, quite old enough to know that, whatever the fuss made over him, Dickens's private life was hardly on a par with Queen Victoria's.
Not that he'd anything against that.
After all, Dickens had had the decency to keep it to himself, not go telling the world about it.
Beddington had lived long enough to know that very few people were quite what the public considered them.
Including old Throgmorton and, he supposed with some surprise, himself.
Gwendolen sitting next to him did not object to his silence.
She was wondering whether Angelina could possibly be cast as Sir Thomas's Mr Datchery.
No, that was too fanciful.
He knew she was coming and, besides, whatever motive could Angelina have for murder?
Regretfully, Gwendolen dismissed the notion.
Egbert Rose had talked to many bereaved ladies; he talked to them quietly, straightforwardly, compassionately.
But he had never met one quite like this.
Beatrice Throgmorton was a large lady, although not yet twenty-one.
Her eyes in her otherwise bovine face were intelligent, her manner brisk.
She had spent the time since her arrival making calm arrangements for the transfer of her father's body to their  Buckinghamshire home after the inquest tomorrow, and was now apparently set on clearing up this murder before she left.
‘There's a lady here who says,’ she began without preliminaries, ‘she's my father's fiancee.
Is this correct, would you know?’
‘I think, miss, it may be a figment of the lady's imagination.
Treat her gently, miss, but not too seriously.’
Beatrice looked uncomprehending.
‘I don't intend to treat her at all, Inspector.
I wondered if she had poisoned him, that is all.’
‘She seems to have felt herself slighted,’ said Rose cautiously.
He would leave well alone and omit the part about Miss Havisham.
‘But that's not to say she'd commit murder.’
‘Someone did,’ pointed out Beatrice.
‘Who else disliked him enough?’
‘That's what I need to know from you, miss.’
Rose was beginning to feel like one of his own suspects under relentless interrogation.
‘Your father thought he recognised someone here in the hotel.’
‘Lord Wittisham,’ said Beatrice promptly.
‘They disliked each other.
Lord Wittisham believes that I wish to marry him.
He proposed.
My father overheard and, without consulting me or waiting to hear my reply, forbade him the house.
Lord Wittisham made strong objections.
My father was far from pleased.
I do not come of age until I am twenty-five and my father's consent was needed for me to marry.
There is also the question of a great deal of money.
Mine.
I did not, and do not, in fact intend to marry Lord Wittisham, but I disliked my father's approach, so I informed Lord Wittisham I would consider the matter.
I intended,’ for the first time Rose saw the beginnings of emotion, ‘to teach my father a lesson.’
‘And have you told Lord Wittisham yet?’
‘No,’ said Beatrice composedly.
‘I suppose I ought to.’
‘You don't think he took his revenge on your father, do you?
It would solve his problem nicely, or so he would have thought.’
She stared.
‘Can you see Alfred doing anything like that?’
Her tone implied she might think the more of him if he did.
Rose thought of the vacuous young man, and silently agreed.
Then he remembered Wittisham was one of Emma Pryde's portégés and that Emma was not known for encouraging entirely vacuous young men.
There must be more to him than Beatrice thought.
‘Have there been attempts on your father's life before?’
‘He never mentioned any,’ she said, reflecting.
‘In fact rather the contrary.’
‘What?’
She almost smiled.
‘It does sound strange, I admit.
My father told me that when he was young he got in a fight with someone and nearly killed him, and that the man swore vengeance.
They fought over a girl, I understand.
Not my mother.
Father was what you might call a rake.
I think,’ she added thoughtfully, ‘that I take after him.’
Rose glanced at her large, cumbrous figure and wondered anew about the passions of men and women.
‘The Lionisers are having an evening at the Albion Hotel tonight, and not only will they be there but all the people who cooked and served your father's dinner that evening.
I'd like to be sure there's no one there whom you recognise from the past.
Would you come?’
She rose to her feet.
‘My father was murdered, Inspector.
I consider it my duty to help in any way I can.
I should —’ she hesitated —‘explain that I was not close to my father.
My mother died when I was fifteen, but I was brought up by a series of incompetent governesses and I saw little of either parent.
My mother was always ill, my father often away or working.
By the time I was out of the schoolroom, I had lost my need for a parent.
Nevertheless, I shall help.
I believe in justice,’ she said firmly.
‘Oh yes, I believe in justice.’
‘Magnificent ruin,’ quoted Mr Augustus Snodgrass,’Samuel Pipkin proclaimed.
The Literary Lionisers gazed up at the most splendid Norman keep in England.
‘Magnificent,’ repeated Samuel in his own person, ducking one of the numerous pigeons that had proprietary rights in the pink dianthus-covered walls.
Samuel had now read all passages from the Lion's work relevant to Rochester Castle, and enumerated every single friend that Dickens had brought there, as far as could be traced.
Oliver and Angelina were inspecting a Jubilee memorial put up twelve years ago commemorating ‘fifty years of ever-broadening commerce, fifty years of ever-brightening science, fifty years of ever-widening empire!’
It could not last, Oliver thought.
Next year would see the dawn of the twentieth century.
Would it continue to see expansion?
Would the Empire go on for ever?
He didn't like this new war in South Africa.
It boded no good for the opening of the new century.
But he dismissed such gloomy thoughts as he followed Angelina in full-skirted blue walking dress up the stairs to the top of the keep, and duly admired the magnificent view.
‘Glorious pile,’ quoted Angelina.
Samuel again produced The Pickwick Papers, after a short cough to draw everyone's attention.
Unobtrusively Angelina and Oliver crept back down the stairs.
‘Snodgrass,’ Oliver remarked, picking up Angela's quotation, when at last they reached the safety of the gardens far below, ‘do not let me be baulked in this matter — do not obtain the assistance of several stalwart Lionisers to carry me prostrate back to Broadstairs, do not listen to me when I say never, never again shall I visit a sight connected to the late great Mr Charles Dickens.
I say do not.’
‘Mr Snodgrass,’ answered Angelina solemnly, seizing Oliver's hand enthusiastically, ‘not for worlds.’
‘A thrill passed over Mr Winkle's face,’ concluded Oliver hollowly.
Angelina laughed.
‘You are an idiot, Oliver.
What did you join for if you don't like literary sights?’
‘For you, dearest Angelina.
Now it can be told.’
He smote his breast, and fell on one knee.
‘Nonsense.
You didn't even know me then.’
‘I see nothing but the truth will do,’ he said ruefully, rising to his feet again.
‘Young man faltered — young up-and-coming playwright joins committee of literary lions — young man speedily discovers his mistake — apart from lovely young lady, jolly boring — stuck with it — what to do?
Brazen it out?
Shoot myself?’
Reverting from Mr Jingle to Oliver Michaels, he added, ‘Six months have proved to me that the passions of Lions are as nothing compared with those of Lionisers.’
—‘Not always,’ she replied, laughing.
‘Look at Dickens and Thackeray.
Look at Speke and Burton.
Look at Gilbert and Sullivan —’
‘Look at Harald Langham and Thomas Throgmorton,’ interposed Oliver quietly.
Taken by surprise, she could not answer for a moment and than said angrily, ‘If you knew, why didn't you say something before?’
He shrugged.
‘It was none of my business until —’
‘Until Sir Thomas died and you thought I might have a motive for murder?’ she finished sweetly.
‘I was going to say until I fell in love with you,’ he answered mildly.
‘Oh, Oliver.’
The Literary Lionisers descending from the keep were horrified at the sight of elegant Mrs Langham clasped in the arms of another committee member, ten were jealous, and the rest averted their eyes.
‘Oliver,’ Angelina said presently, ‘I have to explain.
You don't really think I'm a murderess, do you?
A Mrs Maybrick?’
‘Are you?’
‘No.’
He grinned and released her except for one hand, of which he kept tight hold.
‘Now tell me,’ he commanded.
‘My husband was a very good poet, as you know, but he was unlucky, one of those people who are always in the wrong place at the wrong time in his career.
And then towards the end of his life when he was already ill, he had one last hope to cling to.
He was excellently placed to be the next Poet Laureate when the position fell vacant in ninety-six.
But he was too proud to plead at the right doors.
He wasn't close to the Queen.
Sir Thomas Throgmorton was.
Sir Thomas had quarrelled with my husband over some business matter and persuaded the powers that be that my husband was no fit person to hold the position, whatever the quality of his poetry.
It was given to Alfred Austin instead.
Harald died three months later, I believe of a broken heart.
I suppose it was childish of me, but I vowed to break Sir Thomas's, if I could.
So I got involved with the Lionisers to do just that.’
She tried to smile.
‘Vain of me, was it not?’
‘No.’
‘So I took my petty revenge.
But he got his by being murdered.’
She shook, and Oliver drew her to him, holding her very close, his memory of Angelina assisting Sir Thomas to serve out the dish of kidneys entirely obliterated.
James Pegg should have been a happy man, for he was with Alfred and unaccompanied by Alice.
Indeed, she did not accompany them on this stroll along the Western Esplanade to the Dumpton Gap even in their thoughts.
Alfred's thoughts were elsewhere.
‘Isn't she a stunner?’ he asked James rhetorically.
Despite his outdated slang, James  understood him, and agreed, though not in the same sense as Alfred.
Beatrice Throgmorton would stun anybody, in James's view.
‘Alfred,’ he said, plucking up courage, ‘did you really threaten to kill Sir Thomas?’
‘I may have done.’
Alfred looked sullen.
‘They can't really suspect me though, can they?’ pleadingly, as though James could protect him.
‘They might.
Sir Thomas did have a quarrel with someone in the hotel before dinner.
But it couldn't have been you though, could it?’
‘No,’ said Alfred shortly, and changed the subject.
James walked back to Broadstairs alone, for Alfred had decided to continue to Ramsgate to purchase a new boater in honour of his forthcoming engagement to Beatrice.
James stuck his hands in his pockets moodily as he want back into Blue Horizons trying to think carefully about what he'd overheard that Saturday afternoon, and how he could turn it to his advantage.
On his way up the stairs, however, he was once again an unwitting eavesdropper.
‘It was a perfectly innocent meeting, I assure you.’
The unmistakable voice of Algernon Peckham.
‘No one 'as an innocent meeting with old ‘Iggins.
Gorblimey, even the beer thinks twice before going into the Seamen's Rest.
You're up to summat, ain't you?
What you doin' 'ae?
Got plans involving Mr Didier, 'ave ya?’
Sid was getting aggressive.
The answer was lost but it must have reassured Sid, for he sounded somewhat mollified.
‘What yer do is yer own business, but one sign that things ain't right and I'm orf to Monsieur Didier — and the perlice.
An’ that ain't me usual practice.’
The door opened suddenly and a furious Algernon emerged to find James leaning over the stair rail listening quietly.
Emily and Heinrich were strolling along the Eastern Esplanade towards Kingsgate.
Emily wore her new cream linen skirt and jacket, with a biscuit-coloured Leghorn hat.
She was as happy as possible in the circumstances.
She was safe now, though she had new anxieties.
She glanced at Heinrich.
There seemed to be a sudden restraint between them, or was it her imagination?
‘Have you ever been married, Heinrich?’
There, it was out.
‘Nein.’
‘Oh.’
‘In my job,’ he enplaned, ‘it is difficult.’
‘What is your job exactly?’
‘I am Embassy cook.
You have to travel, live in the Embassy.
It i5 no place for a wife.’
Emily was suddenly even less happy.
‘I wanted to marry once, very much.
It was not possible.
I have never wanted to again.’
This wasn't true.
All last week he had been happier than for thirty years; he was in love, overwhelmed with the charms of Emily Dawson and the outrageous hope that she might return his affection and become his wife.
She tried timidly: ‘I am alone too.’
He patted her hand.
‘You should not go through life alone, Miss Dawson,’ he said absent-mindedly.
‘It is not good.’
Emily was in full agreement.
But ‘Miss Dawson’ he'd called her.
It had been Emily all last week.
‘Heinrich, are you worried about anything?’
‘Nein, Miss Emily, nein.’
His voice was hearty yet the answer did not convince her.
‘You haven't seemed the same since — since it happened,’ she plunged.
‘I do not think any of us be the same,’ said Heinrich, frowning.
‘Murder is not a usual thing.’
‘I still think it was an accident,’ said Emily.
‘Accidents  do happen —’ She shivered, a sudden memory seizing her.
‘And even if it vas not, ve have no need to vorry,’ he said firmly.
‘Atropine is confirmed, and far too much to have been a slight slip of the deadly nightshade.
The analyst was quite excited,’ said Rose to Auguste in Mr Multhrop's requisitioned office.
Auguste had lingered hopefully in the foyer hoping Araminta might appear.
She did not.
‘It's a funny thing about atropine,’ Rose went on.
‘He said it had hardly ever been used intentionally to murder people in Europe, though it's being used all the time out East for helping relatives on to the next world.
He's come back with a report on the rest of the china and food too.
The later courses are all clear, though one or two hadn't much left on them to analyse.
But that's my theory thrown out of court, that the later courses were to blame.
Provided Emily and Alice aren't acting together, the coffee's clear — unless something was added at table.’
‘Unlikely,’ observed Auguste, ‘since he had already felt ill.’
‘So it comes back to the alcohol, probably the brandy, and Lord Wittisham.’
‘I did notice that the level of my brandy was considerably reduced,’ admitted Auguste, ‘but perhaps my memory is at fault.’
‘First time you've ever admitted that possibility, Auguste.’
‘You are right, my friend.
My memory is not at fault.’
‘So everything comes back to our Lord Wittisham.
The time UP is right, he had the opportunity and he had a good motive: with Sir Thomas out of the way, he could get the girl and her money.
It must have seemed a heaven-sent opportunity with Mrs Figgis-Hewett shouting about breach of promise — if heaven sent is the word,’ added Rose hastily, ‘and our Mr Pipkin shouting about his rights.’
‘How did Lord Wittisham happen to have atropine with him, if it was done on the spur of the moment?’
Rose frowned.
‘Perhaps he planned it.
He knew Throgmorton was going to be here, didn't he?
You told them, you said.’
‘Ya,’ said Auguste unhappily.
‘Well, then,’ pointed out Rose reassuringly, ‘you gave them five days’warning to get their poison ready, plus another seven days down here.’
‘But you do not just march into a druggist's and demand atropine,’ objected Auguste.
‘No, but this form of atropine is used by one group of people apart from chemists.
Those who are in contact with horses.’
‘Veterinary surgeons?’
‘Horse trainers, owners, anyone with a stable.
Like Wittisham, no doubt.
Grooms, of course.’
‘Grooms,’ echoed Auguste with a sudden and sickening thought.
‘But James Pegg was a groom, and his father is a veterinary surgeon.
And, Egbert,’ thinking back, ‘do you not remember he mentioned the bitterness of atropine.
How did he know that?
We, I am sure, did not mention it.’
‘There you are then, Wittisham could get the poison through Pegg even if he had no access himself.
Unless, of course,’ he added, ‘Mr Pegg had a motive himself.’
The landlord of the Albion Hotel was as happy as Mr Multhrop was doleful.
He had been doing excellent business from the Lionisers, so good that he was beneficent enough to feel sorry for poor old Cedric.
‘Send them along to me,’ he had said cheerily.
What, after all, could be more suitable for the Lionisers than the hotel within whose walls Dickens spent so much time, and where he had completed Nicholas Nickleby, the Albion ‘where we had that merry night two years ago’, he wrote to his friend Forster, an occasion made  the merrier by indulgence in the landlord's ‘excellent hollands’.
The present landlord was all too eager to keep up his predecessor's reputation in the matter of hollands, and was only too delighted to dispense it to as many Lionisers who requested it.
Since it was a beverage blessed by the great Dickens, it was perceived by the Lionisers as an entirely suitable drink for the ladies, and by the time Rose and Auguste arrived, another merry night was well in progress.
Gin, however, whether the Dutch variety or no, was beginning to have distressing results on the ladies in particular, who nevertheless persisted in their belief that it was all right because Mr Dickens had said so.
There had been anxious consultations among the committee as to the propriety of attending a ‘merry night’ with Sir Thomas dead.
On balance they decided to attend, in the interests of the group, a decision endorsed by Rose who was anxious to see both groups of his suspects together in an informal setting.
Not to mention Beatrice Throgmorton.
Huddled together in the large lounge u if for protection against the monster they had unwittingly unleashed by their programme, the members of the committee were fully aware of the literally sobering fact that Scotland Yard was on its way.
They were somewhat taken aback, however, when its representative arrived not only with the chef, but with an assortment of eight other people, one or two of whom were faintly familiar, though unidentifiable save by Angelina, who had been best placed on Saturday evening to recognise the ‘waiters’ at the banquet.
Angelina had cheered up considerably, having rid herself of the burden of guilt she was carrying.
Oliver had reassured her that Sir Thomas could not possibly have committed suicide through anguish at her rejection and she was now prepared to enjoy the rest of the week immensely, even if it did involve a murder investigation.
It was a shocking thing, no doubt, but compared with her future, which suddenly seemed to hold out enticing prospects of a new and exciting life, it had retreated into the background.
The eighth stranger to most of the Lionisers was Beatrice Throgmorton, dressed superbly and hugely in black, her quick eye running speedily around the assembled company.
Alfred started to his feet, but his glad cry of welcome was cut short when Beatrice inclined her stately head in his direction and moved off to sit sandwiched between Auguste Didier and Egbert Rose.
The landlord, anxious to please, pushed glasses of hollands before the newcomers.
They all took it for white wine and discovered their mistake.
Beatrice blinked and continued to sip, Auguste and Rose choked.
‘This,’ said Auguste carefully, ‘is not a common drink in France: I was not brought up to it.’
‘Hollands, sir,’ said the landlord reproachfully, ‘Dickens liked it.’
Auguste glared.
What Dickens liked was the last thing he wished to have lying in, or rather on, his stomach.
His stomach was as finely tuned an instrument as was his palate.
It had no need of being scorched.
Irreparable damage might be done to one of the main tools of his trade.
‘What is that woman to you, Alfred?’ asked Alice hurt, remembering yesterday's encounter.
‘That's Miss Beatrice Throgmorton,’ replied James, delighted to impart bad news.
‘Alfred's fiancée.’
‘Fiancée!’
Alice went pale and looked down into her hollands.
‘I'm a lucky chap,’ said Alfred smiling.
Alice said nothing, but her hands tightened round her glass.
‘Is there anyone here you recognise, Miss Throgmorton?’
Rose asked her in a low voice.
Beatrice looked round carefully once more and named a few Lionisers.
‘Besides those.
In these two small groups of people here.’
‘Mrs Langham,’ she said.
‘Lord Beddington.
He often used to come to the house.’
‘Anyone else?’
Beatrice drank her hollands steadily.
She frowned.
‘It's so difficult,’ she said after a while.
‘You see people out of context, years later, you try to judge by a hazy memory I'm just not sure.
There's something familiar about one, perhaps — oh, I know him.’
She pointed at Algernon Peckham, who was merrier than Auguste had ever seen him, teasing Emily to Heinrich's disapproval.
‘He was working in the gardens at the château when I was staying in France, and I discovered he was English.
Everyone thought he was Italian.
He disappeared after the burglary.’
‘Burglary?’ said Rose sharply, a dim distant bell ringing in his mind.
‘The Countess de la Ferté's famous necklace that belonged to Madame de Pompadour was stolen.’
‘Was it now,’ said Rose, already moving purposefully towards a telephone.
When Twitch came.
there were a few things he could bring with him.
Gwendolen had had a distressing day and was making up for it with several glasses of this delightfully spicy lemonade.
Unfortunately the lemonade was beginning to wreak its awful revenge in several ways, one of which could not be ignored.
With a regretful look at her glass, and a warning glance at Lord Beddington should he tamper with its contents while she was gone — she had observed his hand stealing towards it already — she rose to make her way upstairs to the ladies' retiring room.
She passed Egbert Rose.
She stopped in front of him, leaning forward confidentially and giving him the full benefit of the satin décolletage.
‘Datchery,’ she announced.
‘He said he'd met Datchery.’
‘Who, ma'am?’ asked Rose, bewildered.
She blinked.
This man was supposed to be at Scotland Yard.
‘Sir Thomas,’ she answered indignantly.
‘My fiancée,’ glaring at Beatrice.
‘He'd met who?’
‘A character in The Mystery of Edwin Drood, Inspector,’ explained Beatrice kindly.
‘A mysterious person who comes along to solve the mystery after the disappearance of Edwin Drood himself.’
‘And did he, miss?’
‘No, because Dickens did not finish the book.
He died.’
‘He was murdered,’ said Gwendolen definitely.
Samuel Pipkin giggled.
‘Oh come, my dear lady, he died a natural death.’
‘Who?’ asked Rose, startled.
‘Dickens,’ said Samuel.
‘Thomas,’ said Gwendolen.
‘Where does Datchery come in?’ asked Rose impatiently.
Angelina leaned forward to explain, leaving Gwendolen to slip away (almost literally) to resume her mission.
She was back within minutes, pale in the face.
‘He's there!’ she shrieked.
‘In the ladies’ retiring room!’
‘Who?’
Rose leapt up.
‘Datchery.’
She had some difficulty enunciating the name.
‘But who is it, ma'am?
Sir Thomas didn't say who Datchery was.’
‘No, no,’ she began to laugh hysterically.
‘This is the real Mr Datchery.
He's in Dickensian dress with a long beard, but he's a young man really, sitting there in the ladies’ retiring room drinking hollands and writing —’
‘Oh!’
The landlord looked up cunningly.
‘That's not Mr Datchery, ma'am.
That's Mr Dickens.’
‘Dickens?’ cried Angelina.
‘Well, his ghost at any rate.’
‘Ghost?’ said Rose and Auguste in unison.
They had no liking for ghosts since their previous experience.
‘Sometimes he sits in here, sometimes upstairs, sometimes in the ladies’ retiring room.
It all depends what he's writing at the time.’
‘Why did he write his books in the ladies’ retiring room?’enquired Auguste.
This Dickens was a most curious man.
The landlord regarded him pityingly.
‘I can see you don't know your Dickens, sir.
Or Broadstairs.
It wasn't a ladies’ retiring room when he was here.
Part of the time he stayed in what's now our hotel; it wasn't even part of the hotel but a private house.
We've expanded, sir.
Expanded very much.’
His chat followed suit.
‘It's not everyone can see him, of course.
You're very privileged, madam.’
Gwendolen did not agree.
She fainted.
The female Lionisers left the rest of their hollands untouched and began to think in terms of returning to the hotel.
The ladies' retiring room remained unused.
Passing through the foyer on a last check before retiring, Mr Multhrop found himself engulfed in a merry throng of post-hollands revellers, intent on beginning a new party.
His reactions were mixed.
While he welcomed this new-found enthusiasm for Broadstairs after the gloomy events of the past few days, this rowdy pink-faced band, hardly recognisable as the distinguished gathering of Literary Lionisers, was not to his taste.
Outside the hotel he would have attributed such behaviour to day excursionist ‘Arrys and ‘Arriets and called the police.
As it was, he was forced to his usual obsequious tolerance.
Summoning a bleary-eyed waiter to serve further alcoholic beverages, he beat a strategic retreat, to the raucous sound of upraised voices trilling ‘Mid pleasures and gin-palaces…there's no place like home.’
And that was where he devoutly wished them.
The inhabitants of Blue Horizons were making quieter arrivals home, one by one.
Alfred had inveigled Beatrice to take a stroll along the pier to gaze at the stars; he was in exalted mood, and felt daring enough to ask her for her answer.
The kilted Scots figurehead loomed above them, his feet busily executing all the steps of a neat Highland fling when Alfred glanced up.
‘I'm afraid not, Alfred,’ was Beatrice's reply.
He stared at her bemusedly.
‘What?’ he said eventually and feebly.
‘No, Alfred,’ she said.
‘I do not wish to marry you.’
‘The shock of your father's death.
You need more time.’
‘It's nothing to do with the shock of my father's death.
I do not wish to marry you.
I never have.’
‘But —’ His mouth fell open like one of William and Joe's larger fishy wares.
Then he perceived the truth.
‘You think me a murderer,’ he cried.
‘Don't be silly, Alfred,’ Beatrice snapped impatiently.
‘You're not a murderer.’
Yet his expression as he looked at her and the strength with which he seized her arm made her uncomfortably aware of their isolated position.
She wrenched her arm away, conscious of fear.
What did she know of him after all?
Alcohol can disguise, but sometimes reveal the true man.
She turned, and abandoning dignity, hitched up her skirts and ran.
Heinrich, reeling after several glasses of schnapps, held carefully on to Emily's arm; whether for her protection or his, he did not question.
Enthused by physical contact with his beloved, he suggested a stroll in the Victoria Gardens; Emily, unusually flushed, and equally enthused, agreed.
By the time they reached the bandstand he was even more enthused with the charms of Miss Dawson.
Not since Greta all those years ago had a woman seemed to him so desirable.
Hollands had blotted out all inhibitions and worries.
‘Emily,’ he said huskily.
‘Emily.’
‘Yes, Heinrich?’ she breathed.
But he was incapable of saying more, and instead seized her in a bearlike hug, heedless of her cry that he was squashing her.
Enthusiasm was all very well, thought Emily, but surely this agony was not the romance she had dreamed of.
She struggled ineffectively and he released her, but not because of her struggle.
Like Gwendolen before him, the hollands had caught up with him.
Muttering incomprehensibly, he made for some bushes where he disappeared from Emily's view.
He did not return.
He could not, for he was lying recumbent and unconscious on the carefully tended garden.
Emily waited, disappointed, rejected — and angry.
When he had not reappeared after fifteen minutes, convinced she had been abandoned, she set off home alone.
Alice, too, was alone.
She had seen Alfred disappearing with Beatrice Throgmorton and walked quickly back along the promenade.
She took a walk up to the West Cliff before returning to Blue Horizons, overwhelmed in misery.
What was she to do now?
Algernon Peckham was alone.
He had had the fright of his life seeing that woman in the hotel.
What the dickens, so to speak, was he to do?
So he had been a gardener at the Château de la Faté.
That proved nothing, did it?
There was no proof that it was he who had taken the necklace.
Naturally, he would say, he had disappeared from the chateau; he was scared they'd pin the crime on him because he'd done stir — time.
Yes, that was the way to handle it.
All the same, there were other problems to be thought about.
James Pegg wandered home alone.
He too had seen Alfred departing with Beatrice, but unlike Alice he had followed them, and had been witness to Alfred's humiliating rejection.
He did not rush to console Alfred, however.
He had a lot to think about, and he preferred to do it slowly and alone.
Auguste did not walk home alone to Blue Horizons.
He had the exciting company of Sid.
Sid was keeping a close eye on Mr Didier; not that he thought anyone would try to poison him, but you never knew, when the likes of Peckham were around.
When they returned, they found Alice in the kitchen.
She was crying.
Man to man, Sid and Auguste exchanged glances.
Auguste nodded, Sid disappeared.
‘They're engaged,’ she wailed as soon as Sid had closed the door.
‘He's led me on.’
‘Are you sure, Alice?’ he asked cautiously, uncertain what he could say if she was sure.
She nodded and burst into a fresh flood of tears.
‘I feel so silly.
He doesn't even notice me.
He doesn't even think of me as a woman.’
‘Chérie.’
He knelt down by her chair and drew her to him.
She was warm in his arms, and he felt Lord Wittisham was foolish indeed.
‘Oh, Mr Didier.’
She raised her tear-stained face to his and it seemed quite natural to place his lips on has, and since she seemed to welcome it, he kept them there.
For some time.
It occurred to him forcibly that he would have no objection at all to extending this romantic episode further.
Much further.
But an irritating and inopportune appearance of honour made him hesitate to benefit from her rejection by Alfred at least for tonight.
He ordered conscience to remove itself immediately, but it did not.
Regretfully he kissed her forehead, extracted himself from her embrace and sent her on her way to a virtuous bed.
Once in his own, he dreamed again of Tatiana, but she was far away from Broadstairs.
Chapter Nine
The night of the hollands had left in its wake the day of the doldrums at Blue Horizons.
There were bright spots for Auguste, however.
The sun was shining, and an early morning trip to the pier had produced some unusually good mackerel.
Being on breakfast duty, Alice and Emily were the first two pupils down to breakfast.
Heinrich was next, entering the kitchen bleary-eyed.
Emily ignored him and he slumped down in a chair, trying to catch her eye.
It refused to be caught.
She had been deserted.
He had left her mid-kiss and come home.
Did he dislike the smell of her southernwood hair wash or her home-made lavender perfume?
She wondered what Grandmama would have advised in all the circumstances.
Few of Auguste's pupils seemed inclined to mackerel for breakfast.
In fact Auguste and Sid were the only volunteers and even Auguste had second thoughts as he smelt them on the gridiron.
Black coffee was much favoured however.
So was silence.
Sid was the exception, whistling happily about daring young men on flying trapezes, the sound throbbing through Alice's headache and giving Emily very uncharitable thoughts.
Algernon and James came in together, requesting thin toast, and black coffee.
Alice fulfilled the orders, then sat down as far as she could from Alfred who had just arrived.
Emily could serve him.
Alice, slightly pink, glanced at  Auguste, and continued to avoid Alfred's eyes which were fixed on her beseechingly.
Alfred had had a dark night of the soul.
He had seen how entirely wrong it had been for him to have assumed that Beatrice Throgmorton would look twice at him.
In any case, upon reflection, did he really want her now he compared her sturdy body and overpowering nature with Alice's pliable warmth?
He stole covert glances at her across the table.
True, she was not blue-blooded, but she was an officer's daughter and therefore fit for a German.
He was suddenly and belatedly delightfully aware of her adoration, of her devotion, of her light hand with the pastry, and even at breakfast time he could contemplate with pleasure how jolly nice it would be to kiss her.
He gazed at her ardently.
When she required more coffee he leapt up, determined to prove his newfound love and to take the opportunity the task afforded of sitting by her side.
James watched aghast, toast suspended halfway to his mouth; the rest of the table observed the manoeuvre with interest, and Alice felt surprise then delight.
Auguste, patronisingly benevolent, glowed with virtue at his sexual restraint.
As yet the sunshine could not be enjoyed for this morning the inquest was to take place.
Once again the world of the sands and holidays was left far behind as the Auguste Didier School of Cuisine and the committee members of the Literary Lionisers, together with such other Lionisers as could squeeze into the room allotted to them in police headquarters, were once again taken back over the events of last Saturday night.
The three uninterested pressmen from the Imperial attended.
After this, they could no longer, they supposed, justify a prolonged holiday in Broadstairs; it would be back to Fleet Street.
They took desultory notes throughout the succession of witnesses that took the stand, They were profoundly bored.
Until it came to the verdict: murder.
Sergeant Stitch, formally attired in dark lounge suit, stiff collar, bowler hat and umbrella, walked out of the railway station, prepared to show Broadstairs how things should really be done.
To this end, he had not even considered packing anything that could remotely be considered seaside wear, and as a result suppressed a pang of envy when his cab turned along the Victoria Parade and his eyes beheld a scene that reminded him irresistibly of his annual holiday at Margate, fortunately yet to come.
‘Scotland Yard,’ he informed Mr Multhrop severely, taking him for the doorman as he marched through the doors of the Imperial Hotel.
‘Ah, Stitch.’
Rose looked up from a Naseby-dominated desk as Mr Multhrop speedily opened the door and almost pushed the sergeant in.
Better be a butler than have policemen littering up his foyer.
As far as Rose was concerned even Stitch made a welcome division from Naseby.
Better the devil you know.
His brain seemed to seize up when Naseby was around, whereas Stitch sharpened it, like a whetstone.
Edith was right.
Albert, she had remarked — Rose hadn't known Twitch even had a Christian name — is like pummy stone, whereas Naseby (who had had a definite smirk on his face when he saw her new hat) is like Irritating Plaster, he causes irruptions.
‘Seen your room yet?’
Rose enquired politely.
‘No, sir.
Eager to begin work, sir.’
‘No sea view,’ said Rose absently.
‘Thought you might get distracted.’
Stitch gulped.
‘Quite right, sir,’ thinking lovingly of what he would do when he was promoted Inspector.
The only problem was that Rose would then be Chief Inspector unless some awful fate overtook him…
Stitch's nose had twitched eagerly as he took in the size of the Imperial.
It was going to be another of those cases with coronets that Rose was  so good at.
And this time he, and not that chef, would be at Rose's right hand.
Usually he got palmed off with the Mile End Road, stabbings in Chinatown, Lascars, opium dens — you name it, Stitch was on the case.
Master Didier got Mayfair, he thought incorrectly and unjustly.
‘Here's my report, sir.
Results of my enquiries.’
‘Pertaining to this case?’ breathed Naseby, eyes gleaming.
‘Just so, Naseby,’ said Rose blandly, eyes skimming quickly through pages of Stitch's careful copperplate handwriting.
‘I looked up reports from the Continental police as requested, sir.’
Virtue oozed out of Stitch.
‘You were right,’ no harm in giving justice where it was (for once) due, ‘the thief of the Château de la Ferté case was believed to be English.
Jobbing gardener, by name Augustus Poplar.’
‘Alias Algernon Peckham,’ said Rose.
‘Only a few miles in it.’
‘What, sir?’
Twitch did not follow the reasoning.
‘Anything on Poplar in our files?’
‘No, sir, not in the Metropolitan area.’
‘Keep trying.
Look under Peckham.
Now, Throgmorton,’ Rose said, returning to the report.
Stitch had been working hard, Rose granted him that.
Like a mole was Twitch blind, but a good digger.
Rose whistled.
Naseby tried hard to read over his shoulder.
Stitch stood stolidly to attention.
‘Born in 1845.
Widower, one daughter.
Studied London School of Economics, Heidelberg, Sorbonne, Vienna, Foreign department of Masterman's Bank 1870–83, President 1883 to date.
Adviser to Treasury and Foreign and Colonial Offices.’
‘That's the formal information, sir.
It gets more interesting.’
‘You seem quite excited, Stitch,’ Rose commented drily.
‘Must be the sea air.’
Stitch ran a finger round his collar.
‘Rumours that he had profited from the Barings Crisis  of 1890.’
Rose frowned.
Wasn't that the time when the Bank of England stepped in to avoid the whole City suffering?
‘Interesting, but I don't see how it can affect this case.
Still, you never know.’
‘And we were in touch with him twice at the Yard, sir,’ Stitch burst forth, eager to display the fruits of his research.
‘Once when the Yard needed advice over a fraud case, and once over a theft!’
‘Theft again eh?’ said Rose studying the report.
‘Big one sir.
Twenty thousand pounds in bearer bonds.
Cashed abroad.’
‘When?’
‘About ten years ago, sir.
The villain was never caught.’
‘Peckham would have been about fourteen.
Pity,’ observed Rose regretfully.
What would he do about that young man and the necklace?
He rather thought he'd let him stew for a while; with the murder investigation on, he couldn't get far — or he'd be a fool to try, and Peckham was no fool.
‘Oh, there was no doubt who stole them, sir.
His groom.’
‘Groom?’ echoed Rose.
‘Name?’
‘I didn't bring it, sir.’
Stitch's face was crestfallen.
‘Back to the Yard, Stitch.
I want everything on that case.’
‘But I've only just got here,’ bleated Stitch.
Rose paused.
An evil look came into his eye.
The sun was shining.
It was holiday time, he reflected wistfully, wondering where Edith was.
He relented.
‘Get them on the telephone then.’
‘The crime's ten years old, sir,’ Stitch pointed out.
‘Is it that urgent?’
Rose sighed.
‘Ever heard of cumulative probabilities, Stitch?’
Stitch hadn't.
‘There's an advertisement I read in here,’ said Rose, tapping the local newspaper, ‘for Mother Seigel's Syrup.
This learned advertisement suggests that, just like in the Bertillon system, when you get a lot of small pieces of evidence grouped together, it can add up to be something prodigious in the way of proof.
And I'm hearing the word ‘groom’ one too many times for it to be coincidence.
So after you've heard from the Factory, Stitch, we'll —’ the ‘we’did not include Naseby —‘be having a word with Mr James Pegg.’
Beatrice Throgmorton saw no point in delaying her departure.
The inquest was over.
She had duly registered the death of her father at the Council Offices that afternoon and the funeral had now speedily to be carried out in Buckinghamshire.
She paid her account at the Imperial Hotel, and with her maid staggering under six hatboxes followed by a small procession of luggage borne by sturdy footmen, she climbed into a victoria to depart for the railway station.
Her cab had no sooner left the Imperial than Egbert Rose tore out of his office, ran to the reception desk to enquire Miss Throgmorton's whereabouts and, being told, continued this headlong rush out of the hotel, hotly pursued by Stitch and Naseby.
There were no victorias conveniently passing, and Rose was forced to commandeer a passing donkey cart, much to the amazement of its young driver, especially when a bowler-hatted Stitch leapt in after him.
‘Follow that victoria,’ Rose commanded.
‘'Ere, no more!’ yelled the boy, seeing Naseby about to follow suit.
‘Scotland Yard, laddie.
Hurry,’ said Stitch grimly.
The boy cast one horrified look at the bowler-hatted majesty and communicated his message to the donkey.
With a jerk they were off.
When he left his home this morning he had not expected to be carrying Lestrade of the Yard and Sherlock Holmes, and was by no means certain he was ready for this responsibility.
Looking by chance out of his kitchen window, Auguste was amazed to see a donkey cart with Egbert Rose and yes — Stitch driving past.
He blinked.
Was this a late hallucinatory effect of the hollands?
Seeing Naseby in hot pursuit running on foot after the cart almost convinced him it was.
The donkey turned into the High Street, negotiating without enthusiasm the usual morning traffic jams in its odd corners and narrow width.
No Miss Betsy Trotwood leapt out to bar the way to their donkey, but a large van delivering beer to the Prince Albert public house did.
A second delivery van by their side, full of interesting-looking vegetables, proved another hazard; the donkey was unwilling to move from these Elysian fields.
By the time it had been persuaded onwards the victoria was out of sight.
When they reached the railway station it was already plying for new hire and the sound of an engine gathering up steam could be heard.
They raced onto the platform, followed a minute or two later by a panting Naseby, only to see the railway train, now bearing Miss Throgmorton, steaming slowly away, enveloping them in white smoke.
‘That's that,’ said Rose gloomily.
‘We won't be able to reach the lady until we can telephone tonight.’
‘Ere, where are your platform tickets?’ demanded the ticket collector.
‘Scotland Yard,’ Stitch informed him loftily.
‘Platform tickets,’ retorted the ticket collector.
‘You know me, my man,’ said Naseby angrily.
‘Inspector Naseby, Sandwich police.’
‘Yes, I do.’
A happy look came to his face.
‘That'll be thruppence,’ he said firmly.
‘We want to hasten the discovery of Sir Thomas's murderer.
Mr Didier, just in case the police think it's me,’ Angelina declared honestly.
She and Oliver were sitting side by side in the small parlour at Blue Horizons, having arrived unannounced while the Auguste Didier School of Cuisine was in session in the kitchen.
Auguste had persuaded his pupils that, having missed a lesson this morning owing to the inquest, this afternoon would prove an ideal time to instruct than on the magnificence of the St Pierre or John Dory.
With regretful eyes on the sunshine outside, they had reluctantly yielded, though not as reluctantly as Auguste had yielded to Angelina's entreaties to be allowed to interrupt the lesson.
‘It is brave of you to come,’ he observed, his mind still in the kitchen where his unsupervised pupils were no doubt ruining the John Dory.
‘Oliver persuaded me,’ admitted Angelina.
‘He felt it foolish for me to do otherwise.
We may be able to help.
We could investigate,’ she said hopefully, remembering ‘Lady Molly of Scotland Yard’.
‘We can talk to our fellow committee members in a way that you can't and not even the police can.’
‘And why come to me, not go to see Inspector Rose?’
‘My friend Lady Jane told me you were a sort of Watson to —’ She stopped abruptly as she saw the look of outrage on Auguste's face.
‘I mean a Sherlock, of course.
How foolish of me.’
Auguste smiled weakly, than laughed at himself for his vanity.
‘I am honoured even to be thought Inspector Rose's Watson,’ he said.
‘I try not to be as foolish u the doctor, and not to blunder in where the Inspector wishes to go quietly.
Yet there are no places I can go, things I can observe that, as a policeman, he cannot.
So perhaps this is true of you also.
And now, Mr Michaels, I wish to ask you one question.
Where did you obtain that delightful snake-buckle belt?’
‘Alors, mes enfants, how is our St Pierre?’
No one replied with glad tidings of a perfect dinner about to be served.
Indeed only Algernon, Emily and Heinrich were present.
The latter two did not appear to be speaking to each other, and Sid and Algernon were prowling round each other like lean and hungry panthers waiting for an opportunity to strike.
James, Alice and Alfred hurried in guiltily a few minutes later, glaring at each other for being thrust into proximity, the former carrying bread and milk for dinner, and the latter clutching a treasure trove of samphire as a peace offering.
‘I know you wanted to try it, Mr Didier,’ he said.
‘Where did you get it, Alfred?’ enquired Alice anxiously.
‘You didn't go clambering over the cliffs, did you?’
‘No,’ said Alfred shortly.
He had no wish to confess that he had visited Madame Mantela, a lady palmist in Margate, in order to discover what his future might hold, the results of which had been far from reassuring.
But not even the prospect of experimenting with cooking samphire raised a sense of oppression that evening; such conversations as were half-heartedly begun petered out.
‘Tomorrow afternoon, mes amis.
I see Inspector Rose again, and then perhaps he will have news for us so that we can resume our holiday,’ Auguste said optimistically.
He did not believe it.
But seven pairs of eyes fastened on him at this news, each with their separate thoughts.
Charles Dickens seemed to have stayed in a remarkable number of houses in Broadstairs, the Lionisers were beginning to fed, looking at their itinerary on Thursday morning.
They seemed destined to study every single house exhaustively.
It was perhaps only in the last ten years that Broadstairs had fully come to realise what treasure trove lay buried in its midst, and plaques began enthusiastically to sprout everywhere.
Aged residents were suddenly objects  of pilgrimage from such far-off places as America, and soon there were few people over sixty who did not have some hastily dusted-down anecdote, remembered, borrowed or adjusted, ready for eager visitors.
, The Lionisers somewhat mystified them, since they were perversely not content with the usual stories, but demanded to know dates, times and exact locations and had an annoying habit of checking these against vast volumes of Letters and Lives.
Why books should know better than them was puzzling to Bradstonians, but they were anxious to please their visitors so did their best to comply.
The first call this Thursday morning was the very first house that Mr Dickens had rented on his very first never-to-be-forgotten visit to the village in 1837, No. 12 High Street.
From this tiny house had flowed some at least of the immortal words that the world had come to know as The Pickwick Papers.
Now thirty-five intrepid Lionisers were gazing at the outside of the small single-fronted cottage with its tiny parlour overlooking the street.
The owner's wife looked nervously out at the throng from behind her lace curtains.
‘Here,’ began Samuel Pipkin loudly, ‘Mr Dickens spent August and September 1837.
Here he found inspiration —’
‘And pears,’ interjected Gwendolen, who had been reading her guide books.
‘There's an old pear tree in the garden.’
‘Thank you, Mrs Figgis-Hewett,’ said Samuel crossly; he proceeded with his speech, only to be interrupted again by the owner's wife who hesitantly opened the door, a less than enthusiastic expression on her face.
It was agreed that only ten people should tramp round the tiny cottage at a time; the remainder were forced to mingle with the morning shoppers and then to walk on to the old St Mary's Chapel, which once had held the shrine of Our Lady of Bradstow and to which passing ships would lower their sails in honour.
But it had nothing to do with Mr Dickens, the Lionisers thought, impatient to be on their way.
Lord Beddington was gazing hopefully into Randalls, the bookmakers.
True, Goodwood was over, but betting went on, thank goodness.
The Charing Races were on this afternoon.
He was debating between a horse called the Prince of Wales and an outsider called Pretty Polly.
He decided on the latter, for once on impulse, not form.
The Prince of Wales could hardly be said to be a good luck symbol at the moment.
‘Who do you think killed Sir Thomas, Lord Beddington?’
Angelina's voice made him jump and he forgot all about Pretty Polly, and all about his chances of sneaking away from the Canterbury trip tomorrow to see the second day of the Kent versus Australia match.
Dickens was all very well, but cricket was better.
Faced with such a direct question, and from Mrs Langham, he felt obliged to reply.
He could not take refuge in a timely snooze.
‘Plenty of people would like to have done,’ he said, more forthcoming than she expected.
‘Nothing against him myself,’ he added hastily, ‘but lots of rumours.
Heard of the Barings Crisis?’
‘Yes,’ said Angelina doubtfully.
It was a long time ago and her head had been full of balls and parties, not City uproars, when she was twenty-one.
‘Nine years ago, nearly.
Barings nearly want down for over twenty million.
That would have punched a few holes in the City's sang-froid, I can tell you.’
He contemplated this thought for a moment.
‘The Government refused to intervene.
Governor of the Bank of England stepped in.
Organised a seven-million guarantee.
Cracked the whip in the City.
No banks to call in loans.
Crisis averted, City settles down.
Baring's now stronger than ever.’
‘Thomas involved?’ asked Angelina, inadvertently falling into his Mr Jingle-like speech.
‘One bank refused to comply with the Bank of England  and threatened to call in its brokers’ loans.
Bank of England not pleased.
Told him so.
Changed his mind rapidly.
Rumour has it Throgmorton's bank did same thing — didn't get found out.
Did very nicely out of it, too.’
He didn't add that he had too, and Throgmorton knew it.
‘Do you think anyone here knew of that?’
‘I did,’ rumbled Beddington virtuously.
‘My firm had one of the loans called in.
It made me wary of Throgmorton — but it doesn't make me a murderer nine years later.’
‘Oh, I didn't mean to imply —’
‘Yes, you did.’
A rare smile crossed his face.
‘You should try Pipkin.
Try saying diamonds to him.
Australian diamonds.’
He positively chuckled.
‘You don't think, by any chance,’ said Angelina, taking advantage of his obvious and inexplicable good humour, and noting the untraditional and definitely garish silk handkerchief in his pocket, ‘that the poison was intended for you?
Sir Thomas did not drink from your glass for any reason?’
Lord Beddington looked dumbfounded.
‘Me?
No one would want to murder me, madam.’
‘There's no one who bears you a grudge?’
‘Good heavens, no.’
He was almost hurt.
—‘Except that young rascal of course.
Can't remember his name.
One of the waiters.
Ah, called after a tree.
Poplar.
That's it.
Came up before me on the bench once.
Gave him a stiff sentence in a House of Correction to teach him better ways.
I could tell he was a wrong 'un.
Had a quick hand with the safe and an even quicker eye to the jewels.
I had a notion we'd be hearing more of him.
And, see, I was right!’ he concluded triumphantly.
‘But his being here is coincidence, surely?
He had no reason to kill Sir Thomas, did he?’
‘You tell me, my dear.’
Glancing over his shoulder, he  disappeared quickly into the bookmakers'.
Pipkin was advancing to summon the next party.
Indefatigably the Lionisers prowled their way along Albion Street and surged up the narrow Fort Road, but this time they stopped before they got to Fort House.
Their prey this morning was Lawn House, lying just below it on the hillside.
Here Dickens stayed for his holiday one year, baulked of being able to rant Fort House as he desired.
‘A small villa between the hill and the cornfield,’ quoted Samuel rapturously.
He had almost forgotten his previous dislike of Dickens, carried away by the opportunities for rhetoric that the Great Man was so unexpectedly granting him.
The owner opened toe door and almost closed it again.
He was wed to groups of two or three respectful Americans, not prides of culture-hungry Lionisers.
Gwendolen was dad in dark grey and was wearing the hat she had just purchased from the Iduns Brothers Bazaar.
This was not her usual choice of milliner, but it possessed the only dark-coloured hat in Broadstairs apparently.
She had decided not to attend the funeral, believing now that dignified restraint was her best role.
She had become rather confused as to what had actually happened between Thomas and herself.
She was, however, quite astute enough to realise the purport of all Oliver Michaels' carefully thought-out questions.
‘You mean, could I have administered poison to Sir Thomas?
The idea is absurd,’ she announced loftily.
‘And, moreover, highly objectionable.
I loved him.
Besides, when could I have done it?’ she asked, more practically.
Oliver had his own ideas on this, which he could hardly put to Mrs Figgis-Hewett; they involved her dramatic appearance before the dinner began when he had worked out she could have added something to Sir Thomas's drink in the confusion.
‘No, my dear young man,’ she smiled, assuming she had won her point, ‘if you seek a villain, look no further!’
Her finger shot out; it pointed to Samuel Pipkin.
Samuel was moving determinedly into position before the last house of the morning, the private dwelling on the seafront where Mary Strong had chased away donkeys from the grassland in front of her cottage, thus inspiring Dickens to create Miss Betsy Trotwood in David Copperfield, though he tactfully set her residence in Dover.
‘Donkeys, Janet,’ Gwendolen trilled again, but the will to fight had left her, and she easily ceded place of honour to Samuel.
He marched victorious into the parlour where David Copperfield himself had sat.
And Charles Dickens too no doubt.
It was notable that Samuel had made no mention of Thackeray for over forty-eight hours.
Angelina had worried how best to approach Mr Pipkin tactfully, but Oliver had no such social qualms.
‘Diamonds,’ he announced thoughtfully as Samuel emerged from the parlour into Nuckell's Place.
Samuel jumped, distracted from his next address on the beauty of the old Assembly Rooms.
But he was no easy target.
He was not to be swayed from duty.
An eye on Gwendolen, he ostentatiously produced his copy of Our Watering Place and began to read.
‘This is a bleak chamber in our watering place which is yet called the Assembly Rooms and understood to be available on hire for balls or concerts, and, some few seasons since, an ancient gentleman came down who said that he had danced there in bygone ages with the Honourable Miss Peepy, well known to have been the Beauty of her day and the cruel occasion of innumerable duels.’
Ah,’ Samuel commented, eyes now anywhere but on Gwendolen ‘how cruel is age, how poignantly Mr Dickens portrays it and how recognisable even today is Miss Peepy.’
Polite cough.
‘I am not a Miss Peepy,’ shouted Gwendolen, more infuriated than wounded.
Angelina hurried to her in concern, but she shook her arm off.
‘I have been silent’(this was news to the Lionisers)‘but my lips shall be sealed no longer.
Ask him about his diamond ventures in Australia and poor Thomas.’
Samuel turned red, than white.
‘I have nothing to say,’ he said and stomped off.
Gwendolen, thoroughly upset by the morning's events but mindful of her appointment for dinner that evening, decided to slip into Mr Horrell's, in order to purchase some of his advertised Special Skin Soap, In the doorway she met the subject of her dinner appointment himself.
Lord Beddington, mindful of the same appointment, was rather optimistically emerging from the shop with a bottle of Lockyers Sulphur Hair-restorer, and six tablets of Amiral soap (‘Removes Burden of Corpulency’).
Auguste was singing an old song of Provence as he worked, then changed countries and song to ‘My Love is Like a Red, Red Rose’.
Araminta was in his mind.
He was content.
He had spent much time on the pier with William and Joe and had returned to find his pupils assembled, eager to learn for once.
They had all been hard at work ever since.
He was cooking; murder was, for the moment at any rate, not in his thoughts, the sun was at last shining in the way it should do on a seaside holiday, and there were still three more days of holiday to go.
Three days of Araminta.
Moreover, to complete his joy, William and Joe, as if taking pity on him, had produced some delicious Dover sole and some more delicious John Dory with the promise of other delights to come.
Perhaps for tomorrow he would prepare a true aioli de morue.
No, he would not.
Why should they eat salt fish, when William and Joe commanded the seas?
Yesterday he had taught the class about the wonders of John  Dory.
Today they would enjoy a Saint Pierre au gratin for luncheon with a true salade niçoise.
Tonight the sole.
What should —
He never came to a conclusion for Angelina and Oliver came at just the wrong moment, just as the fish required the hand of the maître.
Once again, he left the pupils to superintend the luncheon and departed into the small parlour to hear their story.
Really, detective work was all very well, but not when it interfered with cuisine.
‘So you see, Mr Pipkin did have a real motive,’ said Angelina excitedly.
‘Lord Beddington explained that five or six years ago the Australian banking organisation broke down altogether and nobody stepped in to save it.
Many people were ruined.
Mr Pipkin had been advised to put his money into diamond mining and it was handled through this Australian bank.
He lost nearly all his money.
His adviser had been Thomas Throgmorton.
Beddington thinks Pipkin thinks,’ concluded Angelina confusedly, ‘that Sir Thomas did it on purpose because he disliked Pipkin.’
‘But when could Mr Pipkin have given the poison to Sir Thomas?’ asked Auguste reasonably.
‘He was at the far end of the table; he had no opportunity.’
‘He could have done it beforehand when we met for drinks and everyone's attention was on Mrs Figgis-Hewett,’ said Angelina, albeit with a feeling of disloyalty to a fellow female.
‘This is possible,’ admitted Auguste, ‘but doubtful.
And does it not make the time problem even worse?
Sir Thomas drank a lot of coffee, and as this is often given as an enema in atropine poisoning cases, it might have led to his being sick, perhaps even delayed the onset of symptoms.
Yet I feel it is unlikely to have delayed it so long.’
‘So you don't give us full marks, Mr Didier.’
Oliver was disappointed.
‘You carry out excellent research,’ said Auguste  diplomatically.
‘But now it is for me, the analyst, to take over.
We must sort out these ingredients and consider their relevance to the final dish.’
He puzzled about it when they had left.
Two things occurred to him: firstly, that they were extremely anxious to divert attention away from Mrs Langham, which was natural enough.
The second was the stirrings of a memory in his mind.
He returned thoughtfully to the Saint Pierre au gratin, only to discover that matters had not progressed well in his absence.
He passed Sid and Algernon on the stairs having a heated argument, which stopped abruptly as he appeared.
Alfred was nowhere to be seen, Emily and Heinrich were bickering over the mayonnaise, and James Pegg and Alice were silently working together on a salad.
At luncheon there was an odd restlessness among his pupils, which Auguste attributed to excitement at seeing what a true salade niçoise should taste like.
Alice explained the real reason: ‘We're all going bathing, Mr Didier.
Why don't you come?
Miss Multhrop will be there,’ she teased.
Yes, why didn't he?
‘That would be most pleasant,’ he said, gratified.
‘I have to visit Inspector Rose at three-thirty, but there is time to bathe as well.’
as if in anticipation of the coming treat, relations had thawed between the pupils.
Alice now sat next to Alfred, Heinrich next to Emily, Algernon was chatting to Sid.
Only James remained as abstracted as he had all day yesterday.
In the evening Auguste had found him wandering around on his own.
Auguste glanced at him curiously.
Perhaps it was love of Araminta or perhaps, glancing at Alfred, it was pique that his lordship had reverted to Alice.
Perhaps James still secretly adored Alice?
There was a scramble to finish luncheon, and due regard was not paid in Auguste's view to the seriousness of the John  Dory as a fish.
The usual critique was reserved for the evening, in view of the common abstraction.
Coffee was taken amid a rush to wash up the dishes, and at last, at two o'clock, they were free.
‘It's too nice an afternoon to spend inside listening to a lecture,’ announced a Lioniser suddenly.
Mr Multhrop groaned.
‘No, no, the sun will hurt your complexion, dear madam.
It is bad to take too much sun.’
He had a splendid tea arranged and could see his profits disappearing yet further.
But it was too late.
The idea had borne fruit.
Yesterday had been the group's first taste of real sunshine and comparative warmth and it had fired their enthusiasm.
There was a sudden rebellion — or, rather, a retreat.
Faced with a lecture on ‘Dickens's Use of Language in Hard Times’ or the delights of the Broadstairs sands, the Lionisers did not hesitate.
They were going to break out of their self-imposed cage.
Bathing, which before leaving London had been deemed suitable only for the lower classes, suddenly seemed a most adventurous and desirable way of spending an afternoon.
Bathing dresses had been surreptitiously acquired, those provided in the machine, Araminta had assured them, being definitely not suitable for ladies and gentlemen of their status.
Being now the proud possessors of these shocking and daring items, they were determined to try them out.
‘After all, bathing is a Dickensian-approved activity,’ pointed out one person, anxious to appease her conscience.
‘He did write to that American professor that Boz ‘disappears and presently emerges from a bathing machine, and may be seen — a kind of salmon-coloured porpoise splashing about in the ocean’.’
‘He bathed naked as was the custom, madam, for both men and woman,’ pointed out Oliver wickedly and  grandly.
‘We must do the same, to be true to the Master.
‘Oh!’ cried the good lady, shocked, flustered and titillated.
‘He doesn't mean it,’ soothed Angelina.
‘Don't I?’ muttered Oliver, seizing her hand.
The attendant of the bathing machines was overwhelmed by the sudden rush for service as first the Lionisers' committee, then Auguste Didier and his retinue arrived, with the rest of the Lionisers in hot pursuit.
The latter were forced to repair to the waiting area where they enviously sipped ginger beer while waiting their turn and watching the old horses pull the machines into the water, one after another.
Auguste and Sid had made the mistake of sharing a machine.
Since the machine began to move towards the water as soon as they were inside, changing in its damp, smelly and retracted confines was none too easy, despite the lure of their newly acquired bathing costumes.
Auguste wondered if his blue one piece button-to-neck stockinette costume were not too daring with its knee-length shorts and short sleeves.
What would happen when this material got wet?
He was rather glad that Araminta would be some way removed from him, and reflected that cold water might be no bad thing.
Sid had chosen plain black drawers, constructed from his granny's old skirt.
One by one, the men descended, Heinrich in demure body-concealing maroon jersey, Alfred in rakish red and white striped drawers with plain red jersey top, James in black stockinette, and Algernon in garish green stripes.
Oliver was dashing in blue serge, Samuel Pipkin pumpkin-like in large enveloping flannel; Lord Beddington rivalled Sid in black drawers, though it is doubtful whether they were made from his grandmother's skirt.
The men's eyes automatically swivelled left to the women's section at a tasteful thirty yards' distance.
Heinrich felt possessively protective as he recognised Emily's head in a mob cap, the rest of her splashing up and down in grey sage  knickers, tunic and blouse and black stockings.
Alice, more sporty, boasted navy blue knickerbockers and striped jersey, without stockings, and serviceable yellow jaconet bathing cap.
‘They're looking at us!’ screamed Emily, promptly disappearing from view underwater; Alice waved to Alfred and promptly followed her example, as a scream came from behind.
Gwendolen Figgis-Hewett had stepped out of her machine into three feet of water.
AU eyes were on her in a bright red cretonne two-piece and Normandy satin hat with wide frill.
Gwendolen did like to be beside the seaside.
She jumped up and down experimentally in the briny, took a step further full of confidence, then further and further still.
Forgetting all about her need to keep one foot on the ground and splashing wildly, she announced she was swimming, and then shrieked.
She was out of her depth.
‘Help!’
Her hand was thrust up.
Gentlemen dithered.
Was it a greater crime to let her drown or to cross the great divide to the women's section to rescue her?
Fortunately they were not called upon for the supreme test, however, for Alice scooped her up from behind and tried to propel her into safer water.
It was not easy for Gwendolen seemed hysterical and determined to avoid arrest.
Emily, swimming vigorously, came to assist her, and together they managed to reach shallow water, where Gwendolen promptly denied she had been in danger.
The man resumed their bobbing about.
‘Angelina!’ shouted Oliver as he caught sight of her trim figure clad in pink cotton.
She did not hear him and vigorously continued splashing.
The sea was a mass of foam with so many bodies stirring it up, and some of the men ventured further out to try their skills at swimming.
Of them, only Alfred, Auguste and lames were adept.
The rest bobbed up and down at chin height, or remained by the bathing-machine steps.
Auguste found himself caught up in the general excitement  and cursed his heavy waterlogged costume.
In his childhood swimming at Cannes there had been no need for these ridiculous costumes.
There was no great excitement about swimming either.
One swam because one had to.
But than there were no Aramintas at Cannes.
She was a vision of loveliness with her curls peeping out from her mob cap and oh, those beautiful arms emerging from the short sleeves of her blouse.
He wondered what would happen if he swam to her underwater and surprised her, and decided he would probably be imprisoned by Naseby for rape.
He was the first to emerge from the water, partly because he had an appointment with Rose, partly because he could see Araminta leaving.
True, he had told James Pegg he would be available to discuss a problem with him after bathing, but now that must wait until he had seen Rose.
He had certainly not drawn James's attention to Araminta's departure — or his own.
Hastily he dried himself on the thin towel and clambered into clothes that stuck to every inch of his damp body.
Pulling on his socks and shoes, he opened the door to realise that, since Sid was still in the water, so was the bathing machine.
He had three feet of shallow water to cross — and there was Araminta floating across the sands.
Hastily he whipped off shoes and socks and prepared to paddle.
‘You're too early, Auguste,’ Rose said sourly.
It was all too clear Auguste had been out enjoying the pleasures of Broadstairs, one of which was just disappearing up the main staircase, folding up her parasol.
‘Twitch hasn't heard from the Factory yet.’
‘About what, mon ami?’
Rose told him.
‘Grooms,’ he said.
‘Amazing.
James Pegg.
But I still don't see how he could have done it.’
Auguste looked unhappy.
One of his pupils?
It reflected  on his honour.
He could not, would not believe it.
‘Mon ami, I have an idea,’ he announced.
Three minutes later they were in the still-locked room lately occupied by Sir Thomas Throgmorton.
Auguste marched to the bathroom.
‘In here,’ he said.
‘I think — yes.’
His memory had not played him false.
There it was in the cabinet amid the long row of bottles.
‘Grinrod's Remedy for Spasms,’ said Rose.
‘You think he took some?
How does that help us?’
‘Because this remedy, Egbert, contains morphine.’
‘So?’
‘Your analyst's report about atropine stated that morphine is sometimes a treatment.
Suppose he took it thinking that his malaise stemmed from his gastric trouble?
What with the coffee, it would help to slow down the symptoms even further.
He was drinking a great deal, he felt ill — pain, burning, hoarseness.
But the full force of the poison was staved off for a while.
Atropine affects different people in different ways, if you recall.
This would make it possible that the poison was administered earlier in the meal.
The soup, the salad even.’
Rose considered.
‘It's possible.
I'll say that.
So our thesis is he was Throgmorton's groom.
Runs off with the money, comes back to this country thinking he's safe after ten years, changes his name perhaps, than you announce he'll be waiting on Sir Thomas down here.
Daren't risk being seen and so he makes his plans.
Yes, as soon as I hear from the Factory, we'd better have a word with Mr James Pegg.’
Sergeant Stitch came marching into the bathroom, to find Egbert Rose.
He did not for the moment notice Auguste.
When he did, his cup of woe was full.
Naseby would have sympathised.
The rest of the revellers emerged dripping from the brine.
Their clothes felt damp, corsets defied fastening by chilling  fingers, socks and stockings were recalcitrant, the bathing attendant was shouting impatiently.
One by one they emerged down the steps onto the sands, glowing.
They had bathed.
They were ready to enjoy the fruits of victory, and to listen to Uncle Mack's Broadstairs Minstrels.
One bathing machine, however, had remained in the water.
So had its occupant.