

MONARCHS AND DESPOTS: TENSIONS WITHIN THE STATE
Every State in eighteenth-century Europe, with a few relatively unimportant exceptions, was a monarchy.
Almost everywhere the monarch was, and was expected to be, the moving force behind the machinery of government.
At their highest level the internal politics of the European States were the politics of monarchy.
Political conflicts normally took the form of struggles between parties or individuals for influence over the ruler, struggles in which the victor secured the all-important privilege of easy access to him and in which the vanquished were dismissed, disgraced or exiled.
The fate of a fallen minister or favourite might be even harder if he had aroused real fear and hatred in his opponents the executions (or rather judicial murders) in 1719 of Baron Goertz, the adviser of the dead Charles XII of Sweden, and in 1772 of Count Struensee, the progressive-minded but tactless favourite who had for several years dominated the court of Denmark, are good illustrations of this.
On the other hand anyone who could establish a real ascendancy over a monarch might himself become almost a surrogate ruler: the extraordinary position achieved by Prince G. A. Potemkin in Russia through his personal hold on Catherine II for some years before his death in 1791 is an outstanding case in point.
Perhaps the most convincing illustration of the power of the monarchical idea and the extent to which it was still unchallenged is the way in which almost everywhere opposition to rulers, insofar as it was formed or organized at all, tended to centre around the heir to the throne or at least some member of the royal family and to use him as a figurehead.
From the 1690s, for instance, discontent with the  policies of Louis XIV gathered around his grandson, the Duke of Burgundy, and hoped for a change of course with his accession to the throne; while in the last two decades of the reign of Catherine II her son, the Grand Duke Paul, acted as the focus of potential opposition.
Even in Britain it seemed almost a law of politics under George II and George III that the Prince of Wales should act as a rallying-point for all those who hoped to benefit from a change of ruler.
Few people seriously questioned the practical advantages and moral justification of hereditary monarchy as a system of government, particularly in the larger and more powerful States.
Its superiority to its rivals seemed proved not merely by argument but by experience.
In Italy a few famous and ancient republics — Venice, Genoa, Lucca — continued to exist; and in some of them republican government, even in the highly oligarchical form which had prevailed in these small States for centuries, continued to arouse genuine loyalty.
The successful revolt of 1746, for example, which expelled an Austrian garrison from Genoa, expressed a powerful urban patriotism which drew strength from the city's long republican tradition.
But none of these was strong enough to make much difference to the general picture of eighteenth-century Europe as overwhelmingly monarchical.
In some other States elective monarchy provided opportunities of limiting the powers of each ruler at his election.
Each of the ecclesiastical electors in Germany (those of Mainz, Cologne and Trier), on being chosen as ruler by the cathedral chapter concerned, had to sign an agreement (Wahlkapitulation) in which he confirmed and promised to respect its ancient privileges.
The Pacta Conventa which the nobility imposed on each newly elected king of Poland performed, on a much more important scale, a similar function.
Each Holy Roman Emperor, the supreme example of an elected monarch, had to accept the same kind of limitations when he was chosen by the imperial electors.
But even this does not seriously modify the picture.
Every successful large State in eighteenth-century Europe, every one which made significant territorial gains or played a great independent role in international affairs, was ruled by a powerful hereditary monarchy.
Those which lacked this essential source of strength were either impotent small ones on the fringes of the great political developments of the age, such as the Italian republics, or, in the case of some more important States, were notably less well  governed and less effectively led than their neighbours and competitors.
Of the latter group both the United Provinces throughout the century and Sweden during the period of weak and limited monarchy from 1718 to 1772 were examples; while the destruction of Poland was the supreme warning of the fate in store for any State whose rulers were too weak to repress internal dissension or ward off the attacks of external enemies.
The United Provinces, a cumbersome federation of seven units each with estates and administrative machinery of its own, was an uneasy compromise between the monarchical and republican forms of government.
Each province had its own Stadtholder (the formal head of its administration, chosen by its estates).
It was possible, however, for a member of the House of Orange (the descendants of William the Silent, the leader of the struggle for independence against Spain in the later sixteenth century) to be elected Stadtholder of all or most of the provinces and thus attain the position of General Stadtholder of the federation.
He thus became in a sense a monarch, though one whose powers were strictly limited and often jealously scrutinized by the provincial estates.
The monarchical tendencies typified by the Orange family were stoutly opposed by the republican forces which were strong in Holland, by far the most powerful province of the federation, and notably among the great merchants of Amsterdam.
The result throughout this period was a continuous struggle between republican and Orangist groups and an uneasy oscillation of power between them.
The death in 1702 of the Stadtholder William III (King William III of England) who left no son to succeed him, was followed by over forty years of republican rule.
His heir, John-William Friso, was Stadtholder only of the province of Friesland, while the government of the United Provinces fell under the dominance of Anthony Heinsius, Grand Pensionary of Holland, who remained until his death in 1720 one of the leading figures in European politics.
The power of the republicans suffered a serious setback in 1747, at a moment of crisis when French invasion seemed imminent, by the victory of the Orangists and the accession to power of William IV, the posthumous son of John-William Friso.
In that year he received the title of Captain and Admiral-General and became Stadtholder of all the provinces.
When he died in 1751 he was succeeded by his son William V, then a child of three.
The republicanism of Holland, however, was far from dead.
Encouraged by the long minority of the new  Stadtholder it helped to influence Dutch policy in a pro-French and anti-British direction during the Seven Years War (the Orange family, now closely associated by marriage with that of Hanover, was generally pro-British in outlook).
It did much to bring about the Anglo-Dutch conflict of 1780.
In 1787 it led the country to the verge of civil war and provoked the intervention of the Prussian army in defence of William V and his wife, a Prussian princess.
What one British envoy called the ‘crazy constitution’ of the United Provinces thus appeared to contemporaries a poor advertisement for any form of government which attempted to escape from the conventional pattern of monarchy.
This impression may have been strengthened by the slow decline in the country's commercial importance (see pp. 90–1), though this would have taken place whatever its political structure.
Even the judicial system in the Dutch republic, in so many ways still among the most advanced parts of Europe, suffered from the lack of a powerful monarchy able to press effectively for the sort of reform which rulers in many less developed areas were now forcing upon their subjects.
It is significant that judicial torture was abolished in the province of Holland only as late as 1798, while in the generally more backward Austrian Netherlands the Emperor Joseph II had ended it, at least in principle, fourteen years earlier.
Moreover the United Provinces showed themselves throughout the later decades of the century notably less welcoming than their southern neighbours to ideas of penal reform of the kind now being put forward by Beccaria and others.
In the same way the constitution of 1720, which drastically limited the powers of the Swedish monarchy, hitherto one of the most absolute in Europe, seemed to condemn the country to perpetual divisions and faction-fights and therefore to impotence in international affairs.
It was for precisely this reason that Russia, which had far more than any other State to fear from strong government and an active foreign policy in Sweden, did everything in its power to uphold that constitution (see p. 266).
Sweden continued to be in some ways deeply divided even after the coup d'état by which Gustavus III reasserted in 1772 the power of the monarchy.
Moreover the constitution which the Swedish Diet was forced to accept in that year (the first in the world to be embodied in a single comprehensive organized document) was in some ways relatively moderate.
It left both the Senate and the  Riksdag with considerable powers.
Nevertheless the king had restored to government and policy-making an element of continuity and decision which had been lacking for many years.
Most of all the fate of Poland illustrated the necessity of strong monarchy and the fatal disunity which usually followed when it was lacking.
At the end of the sixteenth century the ‘crowned republic’ of Poland had been in some ways one of the great powers of Europe.
Her decline to the position she now occupied, that of a helpless victim-State, was the product of many factors — economic and social backwardness, long frontiers unprotected by natural obstacles to invasion, religious divisions and the aggression of her neighbours.
But underlying all these was the fact that the power of the Polish monarchy had evaporated since its elective character (which had existed in theory since the 1430s) had become finally established in practice from the 1570s onwards.
Henceforth each successive royal election provoked party conflicts and personal intrigues which often led to civil war, as well as pressure and even forcible intervention from abroad on behalf of competing candidates.
The kings of Poland, often foreigners, their hands tied by promises made to the greater nobility at their accession, had to submit to continuous scrutiny and control by the same nobles.
Any effort to increase their powers, most of all any suggestion that the Crown might once more become hereditary, at once aroused the most violent opposition.
At their disposal were a ludicrously inadequate army and an administrative machine so primitive that one observer in the early eighteenth century alleged that the tiny Italian city-state of Lucca possessed a larger civil service than they.
Their ministers (if such a term can be used of the great officials such as the treasurers and hetmans of Poland and Lithuania) were irremovable; and the principle of the liberum veto meant that any of the two hundred or so members of the Diet (Seym) could nullify the work of an entire session by recording a single dissenting vote.
A strong monarchy could have developed a powerful army and an effective bureaucracy.
It could have defended the frontiers, repressed religious intolerance and done something to accelerate economic and intellectual progress.
The rulers of Russia, Prussia, and the Habsburg territories succeeded in varying degrees in achieving all these aims.
Without such a monarchy progress in Poland, though not impossible, was very difficult.
Only from the 1760s and 1770s onwards were there signs that it might be  achieved.
By then it was too late: the destruction of the country's independence was already under way.
Only political units which were small and remote from the international conflicts which agitated the greater powers, as were the Swiss cantons and some of the city-states of Germany and Italy, could hope to dispense permanently with some more or less effective form of kingship.
To the greater States, on the other hand, strong monarchy was essential.
It alone could safeguard them against disintegration and the disruptive effects of faction and provincial particularism.
The monarch, it was argued, unable to escape from his burdens by resignation, as a mere minister could, and anxious to pass on undiminished to his heirs what he had inherited from his ancestors, was the safest and most effective possible guardian of the public welfare.
‘An absolute king,’ wrote Voltaire, ‘unless he is a monster, can wish only the greatness and prosperity of his State, because it is his own greatness and prosperity, because every father wishes the good of his own household.
He may be mistaken in his choice of means, but it is against nature that he should wish harm to his kingdom’ A unified and consistent policy, it was often contended, could be carried on only by a monarch, not by a group of ministers each of whom had his own axe to grind (this was a favourite argument of Frederick II in particular).
And the greater the State the more inescapable was monarchy and the more powerful it must be.
The argument was well put by the ruler of the biggest of them all.
‘The Russian Empire’, wrote Catherine II in 1764, ‘is so large that apart from the Autocratic Sovereign every other form of government is harmful to it, because all others are slower in their execution and contain a great multitude of various horrors, which lead to the disintegration of power and strength more than that of one Sovereign, who possesses all the means for the eradication of all harm and looks on the general good as his own.’
Monarchy in eighteenth-century Europe was thus buttressed by powerful utilitarian arguments.
It was also strengthened by the assumption, inherited from the Middle Ages and still very widely accepted, that the relationship between a ruler and his subjects was analogous to that of father and children.
‘The true image of a free people, governed by a patriot king,’ wrote Lord Bolingbroke, one of the most sophisticated intellects of the century, in 1738, ‘is that of a patriarchal family.’
Even some of the articles of the great Encyclopédie, the supreme general expression of a radically enlightened  view of the world and society, as its successive volumes appeared in the 1750s and 1760s (see p. 410), contained distinct traces of the same pervasive traditional assumption.
In small States it was often possible for the ruler to express very effectively by his own actions this paternalist view and to have some more or less personal contact with an appreciable fraction of his subjects.
Thus John V of Portugal (1706–50) gave public audiences regularly twice a week at which he personally received petitions for the redress of grievances.
At the same time he gave alms with his own hand to the poor from a basket of coins placed by his side.
In Mainz an ordinance of 1788 announced that the elector would give general audiences every Monday at precisely 4 o'clock in the afternoon: at these every inhabitant of the electorate was entitled to attend and present in person any grievance he might have.
In the larger States contacts of this direct and relatively informal kind between ruler and ruled were obviously impossible on a large scale.
Even in them, however, the assumption that the monarch was in some sense a father of his people and that he should therefore be freely accessible to them died hard.
In the 1760s Catherine II of Russia had in self-defence to issue decrees ordering her subjects to petition her only through the appropriate officials and not by the direct personal presentation to her of their grievances and requests.
The extent of the childlike and almost filial loyalty felt by the ordinary man everywhere towards his ruler, the great fund of emotion of this sort upon which a monarch could still draw, are clearly seen in France in the crisis of 1789.
Many of the cahiers (the statements of grievances and proposals for their rectification drawn up for the guidance of the States-General when it met in May 1789) proposed the building of public monuments to Louis XVI in recognition of his action in calling the States-General and thus restoring the ‘liberties’ of his people.
Some also suggested that a national holiday be established in his honour or that he be given some honorific title — le Bienfaisant or (significantly) Le Père du Peuple.
Paternalist assumptions were an aspect of the deeply entrenched feeling, which time and education were only slowly eroding, that legitimate rulers were in some sense the agents of God.
From this it followed that kingship, like fatherhood, was a divine institution to which resistance was not merely impolitic but sinful.
Ideas of Divine Right were, it is true, becoming increasingly difficult to justify in intellectual terms.
In the later decades of this period  particularly, they could seldom be openly asserted with the conviction which had been possible in the sixteenth century and much of the seventeenth.
Indeed the years immediately before 1789 saw in some of the greatest European monarchies (most notably in Prussia) a growing demand for the drawing up of fundamental laws which would prevent the ruler from behaving in an arbitrary manner, particularly by increasing the importance of legal institutions.
Among ordinary people almost everywhere, however, the idea of monarchy had still great emotive power.
The ruler continued to enjoy, unless he were unusually vicious or unlucky, a respect which sometimes verged on worship.
One of the Russian admirers of Peter I actually hung the Tsar's picture among the holy ikons in his house and burnt candles before it.
Few things in the history of the eighteenth century, indeed, are more significant than the unquestioning support which the Russian monarchy continued to receive from its subjects in spite of the wild vicissitudes of intrigue and revolution through which it passed.
Even the wars and internal reforms of Peter I, bitterly unpopular as they were with great masses of his people, could not eradicate the feeling that the Tsar was, in some ultimate sense, the father and protector of the ordinary Russian.
The institution of monarchy thus dominated the political horizon, whether it was thought of in terms of Divine Right or merely as a secular institution guaranteeing civil peace and security.
Republican theories were never a serious factor in the politics of any major European State during this period.
The ‘republicanism’ of the great merchants of Amsterdam or the nobles and gentry of Poland was in no sense a system of ideas.
It was rather a façade behind which classes and individuals with a vested interest in weak and decentralized government could entrench themselves, and also a mere mechanical adherence to established practices and institutions.
The ideology of republicanism aroused some interest; but it was thought of in terms of ancient history rather than contemporary politics, in terms of the world of Lycurgus, Solon and Pericles rather than that of Louis XV, Frederick II or Catherine II.
Genuine republican feeling, in so far as it existed at all in the major States, was a nostalgia or very occasionally an aspiration, never a programme.
The great monarchies of eighteenth-century Europe, like its administrative systems, can be roughly classified into groups.
Russia and to a lesser extent Prussia are at one extreme, Great  Britain at the other.
France, Spain and the Habsburg dominions occupy intermediate positions.
Of Russia and Prussia little need be said, for there, as has been seen (see p. 138) the administrative system was the real constitution.
In autocratic States such as these limits to the authority of the monarch were imposed by the efficiency of the bureaucracy and the strength of the army rather than by political institutions capable of opposing him.
But without political institutions enjoying some real power it is difficult to have political conflict or political life in any but a very narrow sense of the term.
In Russia such institutions did not exist.
In Prussia provincial estates continued; but even before the accession of Frederick William I in 1713 most of their functions had been lost to the permanent officials of the centralized royal government.
It can thus be argued that Russia and Prussia have in the eighteenth century a very important and interesting administrative history but little real political, still less constitutional, history.
In Russia there were not even formal rules regulating the succession to the throne until 1796, while Peter I, in an exercise of uncontrolled personal power unparalleled in any other monarch of the period, had in 1722 assumed the right to bequeath the throne to a successor of his own choice.
In both Russia and Prussia, though much more in the former, can be seen struggles between competing ministers for royal favour and support.
In both a change of ruler or minister often had drastic repercussions, particularly on the conduct of foreign policy.
Thus the death of Catherine I of Russia in 1727 and the changes it produced in Russian policy in the Baltic brought about a reconciliation with Britain after a long period of antagonism; the death in 1762 of the Empress Elizabeth meant Russia's immediate withdrawal from the Seven Years War; and the accession to the throne of Frederick II was an essential preliminary to the Prussian attack on Silesia in 1740.
In both Russia and Prussia the dependence of the government on a single class, a landowning service nobility, was complete.
In both public opinion of a modern kind scarcely existed during this period.
In both therefore it is difficult to speak of political life or political problems except in a limited and rudimentary sense.
At the other extreme stood Great Britain.
Here too the monarchy was central to the political life of the country; but it was a monarchy to which the rest of Europe offered no parallel.
Its powers were wide.
The government was still the king's  government: the monarch retained great influence over the administration and to the end of the century expected to have a say, even a dominant say, in the making of policy.
In particular the degree of negative control he could exert over the actions of the government, his ability to obstruct change, remained important until well after the end of this period.
In 1801 and 1807 ministries fell from power because of the obstinate resistance of George III to the grant of equal political rights to Catholics.
Moreover there were certain branches of the governmental machine and certain aspects of policy on which the king was considered to have a special right to make his views heard.
Such were the army, in which both George I and George II took a strong personal interest, and foreign policy, about which as a rule few ministers knew or cared very much.
The king also retained a considerable range of prerogative powers, those inherent in the office of king and not conferred on him by legislation or the common law.
Of these some, such as those of creating peers and making promotions in the armed forces, could have very real political importance.
Parliament, moreover, was open to considerable royal influence, since a large proportion of its members, both in the House of Lords and the House of Commons, held offices, pensions or contracts awarded by the Crown.
An effort to exclude office-holders of this type from the House of Commons was made, with no great success, by the Act of Settlement of 1701.
A more thoroughgoing attempt to reduce the parliamentary influence of the Crown by the ‘Economical Reform’ legislation of 1782 was little more effective.
Also throughout this period some members of the House of Commons, though their numbers steadily decreased, owed their election to the influence which the Treasury and Admiralty were able to exert over certain constituencies.
The exercise of electoral influence of this kind, by individuals as well as by the government, was made possible by the fact that most of the members representing boroughs, who made up over four-fifths of the House of Commons, were elected by very small numbers of voters.
The county members and those who sat for the few boroughs in which the franchise was reasonably wide were normally the most independent of eighteenth-century MPs; but they were in a minority.
The extent to which the Crown could control the composition of Parliament was, however, habitually exaggerated by contemporaries, at least from the 1760s onwards.
The House of Commons was far from being a genuinely representative body, but it was not the mere tool of the king.
It was rather a kind of oligarchy, with a strong hereditary element in its composition.
It is important also to remember that a post or pension given to a member could be a reward for past services as well as a means of securing future ones.
The Hanoverian monarchy could also draw on a more profound and lasting source of strength than any of these.
This was the very widespread feeling (at least in Parliament: public opinion normally tended to be suspicious of ministerial projects) that the king and his ministers had a right to the support of all loyal and patriotic subjects.
In particular it was almost universally agreed, at least until near the end of this period, that it was wrong for any group of politicians to unite to offer systematic and continuous opposition to the government.
A ‘formed opposition’ of this kind was frowned on even by professional politicians; and this feeling explains the efforts of the opposition to group themselves round some discontented member of the royal family and thus acquire a kind of respectability.
Thus the death in 1751 of the Prince of Wales, who had long been on bad terms with his father, led to a virtual collapse for the time being of all political opposition.
In other words monarchy was, in Britain as almost everywhere else in Europe, a genuinely popular institution.
It retained its popularity even though none of the Hanoverian kings was an inspiring personality and none, with the possible exception of George I, a man of much intelligence.
In any political conflict the king always tended, so far as the ordinary man was concerned, to be given the benefit of the doubt.
No government which was known to enjoy the support of the Crown was defeated in a general election until well into the nineteenth century.
Nevertheless the real power of the monarchy in Great Britain declined during the three generations which followed the revolution of 1688–89.
In the first place its prerogatives were considerably reduced by legislation.
The Declaration of Right of 1689 abolished the power claimed by James II to suspend the operation of any law, and to some extent the power which he had also claimed to exempt individuals or groups from the operation of certain laws.
Five years later the Triennial Act imposed a limit of three years on the life of any Parliament (it was raised to seven years by the Septennial Act of 1716).
It thus became impossible for any king in future to prolong indefinitely the life of a  complaisant House of Commons, as Charles II had done with the ‘Cavalier Parliament’ of 1661–79.
More fundamentally, the Act of Settlement of 1701, by asserting the right of Parliament to decide the succession to the throne, struck a decisive blow at the mystique of absolute hereditary monarchy still so widely accepted in many parts of the continent.
Moreover under William III, who was a foreigner, and Anne, who was a woman and a stupid one, the influence of Parliament over foreign policy grew rapidly.
The long struggle with France in 1689–1713 meant an unprecedented raising of money for government purposes by methods such as the levying of a land-tax and the creation of a funded debt.
This could be achieved only through Parliament.
As a result, from the end of the seventeenth century onwards both Houses increasingly demanded to be informed about the negotiations with foreign States which made necessary the taxation and borrowing to which they were being asked to agree.
The position in this respect remained more or less the same in the eighteenth century.
To speak of Parliamentary control of foreign policy would be quite misleading.
Nevertheless the influence of Parliament in this respect could be considerable and the need to give it at least a certain amount of information about foreign affairs could hardly be avoided.
Thus the generation 1690–1720 saw a considerable transference of real power from the King to Parliament, partly as a result of specific acts of legislation and partly because of the enormous changes in the country's fiscal system and relationship to Europe which occurred in these years.
The next four decades saw a slow but fairly steady erosion of royal power.
This was produced not so much by Parliamentary aggression as by the personal characters of George I and George II.
The former, a middle-aged German prince at his accession, was always more interested in Hanover, and more at home there, than in England.
George II was essentially a weak and second-rate man.
The result was a slow leakage of power, to individual ministers and the new and still half-formed institution of the Cabinet rather than to Parliament itself.
Under George III there was, in a sense, an effort to restore and increase the authority of the Crown.
The king did not attempt to achieve this by overthrowing or even modifying the constitution, for which he had a sincere and perhaps exaggerated respect.
Rather he asserted and tried to use effectively in the 1760s and 1770s powers which he  undoubtedly possessed in theory but which under his predecessors had begun to be whittled away in practice.
In particular he demanded the right to choose his own ministers, who were to be responsible to him alone, and to exercise an effective supervision over the workings of the machinery of government.
During the long ministry of Lord North (1770–82) he seemed for a time to have achieved this objective.
But his efforts to regain the ground which the monarchy had lost were stultified by Britain's defeat in the War of American Independence.
They also aroused much antagonism; and the last years of the war saw a determined effort by the king's opponents to reduce his influence over Parliament and the political life of the country.
Public discontent at the defeats Britain had suffered, coupled with resentment of the unrepresentative character of the House of Commons, helped to produce in 1779–80 a movement of an almost revolutionary kind.
The County Associations which were then formed to demand a widening of the suffrage and a redistribution of Parliamentary seats, and the General Association, a substitute Parliament, or anti-Parliament, in which some of them proposed to combine, seemed for a time to threaten drastic and violent constitutional changes.
In the event the movement collapsed quite quickly in the summer of 1780, largely because there was no sustained demand for such changes in the country as a whole.
Nevertheless the monarchy did not escape the crisis unscathed.
The ‘Economical Reform’ programme of 1782 was the most determined attack on the power of the Crown since 1641.
Its practical effect was not very great; but it began an attack on what radicals later came to call the ‘old corruption’, the network of sinecures and jobbery which still played a large role in British political life.
Englishmen thought of the internal politics of their country in the eighteenth century largely in what had now become the traditional terms of a dialogue, usually though not always amicable, between king and Parliament.
Almost imperceptibly, however, the dialogue was now being transformed into a general conversation by the emergence of new and immensely important institutions — the Cabinet and the political parties.
The development of the Cabinet is one of the most obscure and difficult aspects of British history in this period.
By about 1740 and probably earlier a definite distinction had emerged between the ‘formal Cabinet’, a relatively large body which included a number of holders of great court and ceremonial offices, and the  ‘effective Cabinet’, a much smaller and more compact group of ministers.
The former met rarely and for purely formal purposes.
The latter, an active body including the heads of all the great departments of State, was in fact the ‘government’.
However even the ‘effective Cabinet’ was not during this period a real political organism.
Some of its members were experienced professional administrators.
Others were leaders or representatives of the small and competing groups into which Parliament was normally divided.
Their allegiance was thus to the king, who had appointed them and was the source of their power, and to their followers, for whom they sought offices, titles and pensions, rather than to their colleagues or to any leader amongst them.
Cabinets were therefore often divided by personal rivalries — the schisms in those led by Sir Robert Walpole (First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer, 1721–42) are a good example — and this lack of unity tended to increase the influence the king could exert over individual ministers and the Cabinet as a whole.
In particular the whole idea of a Prime Minister was looked on with the gravest suspicion.
Walpole, who has been traditionally and perhaps wrongly regarded as the first British Prime Minister, always took pains to deny that he occupied such a position.
As late as the 1760s the ideal government, in the eyes not merely of George III but of the great majority of his subjects, was one consisting of a number of heads of departments, each performing his task efficiently and responsible only to the king and Parliament.
Both the unity of the Cabinet and its independence of the king began to be unmistakably and effectively asserted only after the end of this period, during the long premiership of the younger William Pitt (1783–1801).
In the long run the most fundamental check to the power of the British monarchy was that imposed by the growth of increasingly organized and coherent political parties.
It was these which, by limiting the king's freedom of manoeuvre, in the end destroyed his ability to play a great role in politics.
At the end of this period matters had by no means gone as far as this, for the growth of political parties in eighteenth-century England was curiously erratic.
Under Queen Anne parties of a modern kind did not exist; but it is possible to speak without gross inaccuracy of Parliament and the politically active part of the nation as being divided for the most part into Whigs and Tories.
Between these two groups, each including within itself many sub-groups, there was on most  of the great issues of the day a fairly clear division.
The Whigs favoured the accession to the throne, on the queen's death, of the Elector of Hanover, the later George I. They demanded that England should give effective support on the continent to the Dutch and the Emperor against Louis XIV during the War of the Spanish Succession (1702–13).
They were in general tolerant in their attitude to the Protestant Dissenters.
Some of the more extreme Tories, by contrast, flirted with the idea of restoring the son of James II, the Catholic Stuart king deposed in 1688, while most of them demanded that the British war effort be concentrated on a mainly naval and colonial struggle against France.
Above all they were much more aggressively Anglican than the Whigs.
Peace with France in 1713, the accession of George I in the following year, and the easy suppression of a revolt in Scotland of the Jacobites (the partisans of the exiled Stuarts) in 1715, changed this position completely.
Excluded from power by the new king who understandably distrusted them, discredited by their connexion with the defeated Jacobites, the Tories as a significant Parliamentary group soon ceased to exist.
In the middle decades of the century every leading figure in British politics would, if pressed, have described himself as a Whig.
Parliament by then had become atomized, divided into small and continually fluctuating groups or ‘connexions’, which were usually formed around some leader or based on family or regional relationships.
This lack of real parties during the period of Whig supremacy in 1714–60 was made possible by the lack during these years of real issues of principle around which opinion could crystallize and in terms of which politicians could arrange themselves.
With the Hanoverians secure on the throne (especially after the defeat of a second and more serious Jacobite revolt in Scotland in 1745–46), with the grant of a considerable degree of de facto toleration to the Dissenters, the questions which had dominated internal politics in the reign of Anne appeared to have been settled.
Nothing now remained to contend for but the possession of office: politics were reduced to a struggle between ‘ins’ and outs.
In the 1760s the position began to change again.
Once more genuine issues of principle arose.
The career of the demagogue John Wilkes aroused political passions fiercer than any seen for half a century, passions which were often rooted in real political  idealism.
It was his publication in 1763 of what the courts decided to be a seditious libel on George III which led to the judicial decision that general warrants were illegal (see p. 136).
His election on three separate occasions as MP for Middlesex in 1768–69, and the repeated refusals of the House of Commons to admit him as a member, did much to stimulate in London the current of political radicalism which was later to run so strongly there.
Simultaneously the far more important question of relations with the American colonies, and of the moral justification of the demands which the mother-country was now making on them, roused intense feeling and stimulated widespread political discussion, much of it at a relatively high intellectual level.
This injection of principles and ideas into British politics ended the easygoing cynicism which had been marked in the generation before 1760.
Political groupings now began to emerge which more closely resembled modern parties than anything hitherto known.
The Whig group led by the Marquis of Rockingham provided, in the 1760s and 1770s, the first example of this; while many of the ideas for which it stood inspired the somewhat similar group led by Charles James Fox in the 1780s and 1790s.
More important, the younger Pitt, during his long tenure of office, laid the foundations of the nineteenth-century Tory party.
By the end of this period the political groupings which were to carry out the great changes of the next century in Britain, though very far from having assumed their late-Victorian form, were slowly evolving.
It is easy with the advantages of hindsight to think of the political structure of eighteenth-century England, with all its defects, as the best in Europe.
It is necessary, therefore, to remember that for most of the century this admiration was not felt by most foreigners.
Not until the 1760s did Britain begin to live down her reputation (based on the violence of the period 1640–1714) as an inveterately turbulent and factious country where almost anything could happen.
‘The people are really richer here than anywhere else,’ wrote a French observer in 1747, ‘and they partly at least owe this advantage to the wisdom of their laws.
But amidst all this abundance, the nation is so disunited and rent by continual factions, that it seems at every moment to be threatened with the horrors of civil wars…
A man tortured by a continual fever with exacerbations, to me appears the image of the English government, constantly disturbed by parties, and  frequently altered by revolutions.’
It was the victories won during the Seven Years War of 1756–63 much more than any intrinsic merits of the British constitution which forced a revision of disparaging estimates of this kind.
The French monarchy, like the French administrative system, occupied during this period a position intermediate between the extremes to be found in Russia and Prussia on the one hand and in Great Britain on the other.
The kings of France possessed in theory great personal power.
They were the supreme embodiment of sovereignty; the army owed obedience to them personally; the debts of the State were their personal debts; they could override or anticipate the decisions of any court of law.
Louis XV was stating what had, at least until very recently, been a commonplace, when he claimed in 1766 that ‘in my person alone resides sovereign power…
I alone possess complete and untrammelled legislative authority.’
Even the most extreme partisans of absolute monarchy were prepared to admit that there were theoretical limits to the power of the king.
He could not change the monarchical nature of the government or the hereditary nature of the monarchy.
Nor could he disregard the Salic Law which forbade the accession to the throne of a woman.
It was agreed, moreover, that he must obey divine law by doing justice and showing mercy and that, at least beyond a certain point, he had no right to infringe his subjects' property rights or their personal liberty.
These restrictions, however, were vague and impossible to define accurately; and the plenitude of royal power was thus little affected by them.
Most important of all there was no individual or institution in France with any right to override or control the actions of the king.
Such was the position in theory.
In practice it was strikingly different.
At certain points in the machine of government the power of the king was still great.
His ministers depended on his favour for their continuance in office.
They were thus subject to effective control if the king chose to exercise it.
The sudden fall of an able and apparently powerful minister such as the Duc de Choiseul in 1770 showed that even in the last years of the lethargic and indifferent Louis XV this control was real.
But it was a negative control.
‘Each (minister) is absolute master in his department’, wrote the Emperor Joseph II to his mother after a visit to Paris in 1777, ‘but fears to be, not controlled, but displaced, by the sovereign…
The king is absolute only in his power to pass  from one slavery to another.
He can change his ministers; but unless he is a transcendent genius he can never be master of the conduct of affairs.’
Lower down the administrative hierarchy royal influence was much less effective.
In particular the fact that so many officials had bought their offices and thus made them their personal property (see p. 126) made it very hard to dismiss them, since the government could seldom afford to refund the purchase price.
The lower and even the middle ranks of the bureaucracy were to a considerable extent decentralized and independent of royal power.
As time went on their responsiveness to local pressures and needs, as opposed to those of the central government, tended if anything to increase.
Even the intendants, who had been under Colbert and his successors the greatest of all agencies of administrative centralization, showed tendencies of this kind in the last decades of the period.
‘For long[before the revolution of 1789]’, wrote a contemporary, ‘the intendants, directed by public opinion, sought rather to distinguish themselves by their care for the people and by works of public utility, than by their obedience to ministerial wishes.’
Some, such as Turgot in the généralité of Limoges and Orceau de Fontette in that of Caen, were much in advance of the central government in their attitude to the areas they administered.
An able and strong-minded  intendant could enjoy during the last decade of the ancien régime a remarkable degree of autonomy and independent initiative.
Moreover the French monarchy found itself, in the generation before 1789, faced by increasing opposition from the parlements and to a lesser extent from the estates, normally dominated by the nobility, which still existed in one or two provinces.
In September 1715, immediately after the death of Louis XIV, the Parlement of Paris had restored to it by the Regent, the Duc d'Orléans, the right of remonstrance which allowed it to impede royal legislation.
This it at once began to use to hamper the government's efforts to cope with the desperate financial situation.
Proposals to suppress unnecessary offices, to fund part of the state debt and to debase the currency, all had to face stubborn resistance.
This increasingly impossible situation was brought to a head when the Parlement was temporarily exiled to Pontoise in 1720 and threatened with the creation of new judicial institutions which would take over much of its work.
Such measures brought it to heel for the time being; but this was to be the last occasion  before the end of the old monarchy when the government won a real victory over this increasingly dangerous opponent.
On a number of later occasions — in 1749, 1753, 1771–74 and 1788 — the device of exiling the Parlement to a provincial town was resorted to; but every one of these struggles was ended by concessions made solely or mainly by the king and his ministers.
From the moment its powers were revived in 1715 the Parlement was a strong supporter of the Jansenist minority in the French Church (see pp. 451–3).
From the 1730s onwards, therefore, it was involved in intermittent but sometimes very bitter disputes with the government, which was notably more orthodox in its attitude to religious matters and often overbearing and insensitive in its efforts to have the papal bull Unigenitus (see p. 453) registered by the Parlement.
In 1749–51, with the support of the Church and much of the nobility, the Parlement was able to defeat a series of efforts by Machault d'Arnouville, the Controller-General of Finance, to impose a tax of one-twentieth on all incomes.
This victory of the privileged was one of the decisive events of the century in France.
The struggle over Machault's proposals was fought with a bitterness which for several years partially paralysed the workings of government and led to widespread speculations of imminent revolution.
The defeat of the government in this conflict condemned it, irretrievably as events were to show, to growing financial weakness and vulnerability.
This, made worse by the war of 1756–63 and catastrophic by that of 1778–83, was to destroy it in 1787–89.
Moreover by the 1750s the provincial parlements, hitherto relatively inactive, were increasingly following the lead of that of Paris.
The Parlement of Bordeaux, for example, gave forcible expression in a remonstrance of May 1757 to the idea that it was the guardian of the ‘ancient and fundamental laws’ of France and could and should not register any legislation which infringed these.
In 1763 that of Toulouse placed the Governor of Languedoc under arrest merely because he had done his duty by attempting to collect new taxation ordered by the government; while for several years in the 1760s Brittany was convulsed by a violent conflict between its Governor, the Duc d'Aiguillon, and the Parlement of Rennes, over the same issue.
In 1783–84 the Parlement of Bordeaux was able, after a struggle, to force the removal from office of an intendant who had tried to reform the system of corvées (forced labour, mainly on road-building) in the area of its  jurisdiction.
All this to modern eyes looks like, and indeed very often was, mere selfish defence of local and sectional interests.
Yet it is important to realise that in the last decades of the old régime in France the parlements were often expressing more or less accurately what public opinion there was on the issues at stake, and that they had frequently widespread popular support for their attitudes.
They were, after all, the only secular institutions which could claim some formal independence of the Crown and the nearest approach to a constitutional opposition which France could muster.
This meant that in spite of their class selfishness and legalistic pedantry they were widely regarded as the defenders of liberty and established rights (the two were still largely synonymous) against royal autocracy and ‘ministerial despotism’.
This function they performed only in a limited and highly conservative way; but there was hardly any other institution in France which could perform it at all.
They could therefore claim a good deal of genuine popular backing; and their power, or at least their powers of obstruction, survived almost as long as the monarchy itself.
In 1771 the Chancellor, Maupeou, exiled the Parlement of Paris once more and abolished the offices held by its members.
He thus, in the face of furious opposition, cleared the ground for the drastic overhaul of the fiscal system which was now more essential than ever.
Three years later, however, he was dismissed on the accession of Louis XVI and the powers of the parlements restored.
For the next thirteen years they offered no really serious opposition to government policies: but their refusal in 1787 to accept proposals for important new taxes and tax reforms was a crucial step in the destruction of the old regime in France.
The generation before the Revolution saw not only the opposition to royal power offered by the parlements and their allies but a growth in criticism of the monarchical regime of a more fundamental and ultimately more dangerous kind.
Demands were now being made that the people, or at least the educated and property-owning classes, be given more effective means of making their wishes felt.
Suggestions that some representative element be added to the government, an idea which very few people would have taken seriously before the 1750s, were now being put forward.
In 1763 the Cours des Aides, one of the chief legal and financial institutions of the monarchy, asked for the convocation of the States-General (a national representative body, organized by social orders, which had originated in the later  Middle Ages and had not met since 1614).
In 1775 the Physiocrat Dupont de Nemours drew up an elaborate scheme for a hierarchy of local and provincial representative assemblies with a national one as its culminating point.
Three years later the Controller-General Necker created such an assembly, one-third of whose members were to be nominated by the king and the rest elected, for the province of Berry.
A similar one was set up in 1779 in Haute Guienne; and in 1787, in the last desperate efforts to save the old régime in its death agony, no fewer than nineteen were established in généralités throughout the country.
Underlying and largely explaining the increasingly difficult position of the French monarchy during this period were the personal characters of the monarchs concerned.
Louis XV became King of France in 1715 as a child of five.
His reign thus began at a moment when, as a result of defeat and financial stress, the difficulties which now faced the monarchy were beginning to be all too visible.
The Regency period (1713–23), during which the government was controlled by the able if dissolute Duc d'Orléans, saw a violent reaction against the rigidity and authoritarianism of the régime of Louis XIV.
The most striking political expression of this reaction was the establishment of the system known as polysynodie (government through councils or committees in place of Secretaries of State) in 1716–18.
The experiment was short-lived and a failure; but it suggested that the young king might not be able to reckon as a matter of course on wielding all the powers of his great predecessor.
It was, however, his own personality at least as much as the difficulties of the position he had inherited which prevented his following in the footsteps of Louis XIV.
Served by a chief minister of some ability, Cardinal Fleury (1726–43), and a more able Controller-General, Orry (1730–45), he remained personally popular until the middle of the century; but the limitations of his character had already begun to show themselves.
The sexual irregularities of which biographers have made so much were not in themselves important or unusual for a ruler of that age.
The charge which the historian must bring against him is not that he was vicious but that he was timid, selfish and worst of all lazy.
Apart from the system of secret diplomacy under his personal control which he developed after 1745 and which served merely to complicate and frustrate the foreign policies carried on by his ministers through regular channels, he took little interest in the machinery of government.
He  exercised no effective supervision of the great departments of State.
His unwillingness to face serious opposition, his tendency to seek an easy solution for every difficulty at the expense of the real interests of the monarchy, are well illustrated by his abandonment of Machault's taxation proposals of 1749.
In the last years of his reign, embittered by external defeat and domestic unpopularity, he sank into a kind of sullen apathy.
‘His lamentable reputation in history,’ it has been said, ‘derives less from what he did than from what he never tried to do.
For him all evils were incurable.’
His last years saw in Maupeou's attack on the parlements a real effort to give the monarchy more freedom of action, and in the radical fiscal expedients of the Abbé Terray (Controller-General, 1770–74) a partially successful attempt to ease its financial position.
Nevertheless as his reign drew to a close Louis was perhaps more hated and certainly more despised than any king of France for generations.
He was, wrote a contemporary critic, ‘A king whose death was…the triumph of the nation’.
His grandson and successor Louis XVI was not the man to regain either the power or the popularity of the monarchy.
Well-meaning and pious, he was of mediocre intelligence and inherited the timidity which had been one of Louis XV's greatest weaknesses.
His recall of the Parlement of Paris within a few months of his accession, his failure to support his radically reforming Controller-General Turgot (1774–76), showed that he was no more able than his grandfather to withstand the opposition of the privileged groups.
More serious still, during his reign the lack of contact and sympathy between ruler and people, already growing during the last two decades of the life of Louis XV, became more marked.
Apart from a visit to Cherbourg in the 1780s to see the new harbour works there his movements were confined entirely to a group of royal châteaux in the neighbourhood of Paris.
To the day of his death on the guillotine in January 1793 France remained to him an unknown land.
Like France, Spain and the Habsburg territories can be regarded as occupying an intermediate position in the spectrum of European monarchy in the eighteenth century.
In each rulers were faced, in their efforts to create an efficient administrative machine, by stubborn opposition from privileged groups and institutions.
In each they struggled with considerable success to overcome that opposition.
In the explicit limits to their power which they had  to accept in some of the areas they ruled (especially in Hungary and the Basque provinces) the Habsburgs and the Spanish Bourbons had something in common with the Hanoverians.
On the other hand in the fact that they were not limited by any central representative institutions, and that they based their power largely on their armies and bureaucracies, they were in the main stream of continental absolutism.
It is above all in the general success of their rulers in improving the position of the monarchy that the history of Spain and the Habsburg lands differs, at least until the 1780s, from that of France.
In both the challenge offered to royal authority by provincial particularism was far greater than in France.
The importance of this factor in the Habsburg territories has already been mentioned (see p. 152).
In Spain the struggle over the succession in 1702–13 had seen a prolonged effort by Catalonia and much of Aragon to throw off Castilian rule, an effort which drove them to support the Habsburg Archduke Charles against the eventually victorious Bourbon claimant to the throne, Philip V, grandson of Louis XIV.
Throughout the century, moreover, the Basque provinces retained a remarkable degree of autonomy (notably the right not to be taxed without their consent) while the cortes (provincial estates) of Castile and Navarre continued to meet, though infrequently and ineffectively.
There were thus substantial obstacles in Spain and the Habsburg lands to the creation of an effective centralized absolutism, obstacles greater than those which existed in France.
Yet the Habsburgs and Spanish Bourbons attacked and partially overcame them.
They did not surrender to them as Louis XV and Louis XVI did to the opponents of monarchical power.
It was only in October 1714 that Barcelona at last surrendered to Philip V after a long siege.
Not until the following year, when Majorca was forced to submit, did armed resistance to him in Spain come to an end.
As late as 1719 there was a plot to hand over the island of Ibiza in the Balearics to the British; but by then Catalan resentment of rule from Madrid, though still a factor of importance, was ceasing to be an immediate danger to national unity.
The Basque provinces, though they could not be taxed at will, were persuaded by Philip and his successors to provide the monarchy with considerable sums in the form of free gifts (servicios).
If the cortes of Navarre and Castile prolonged a phantom existence that of Aragon vanished for ever.
Moreover a new drive towards  administrative efficiency was seen in the reorganization by 1714 of the higher ranges of the bureaucracy on the French model.
This involved the creation of an Intendant-General of Finance and a number of Secretaries of State: the cumbersome system of councils on which the Spanish Habsburgs had relied so heavily in the previous century began to fall into disuse, the Council of Castile alone remaining important.
In 1718 a system of intendants on the French model was established; and though it did not survive for long it was revived in 1749 with marked success.
The new machinery, though it had considerable defects, proved more efficient and much more flexible than the old.
In the Habsburg territories also, as has been seen, a series of able ministers backed by Maria Theresa, the greatest ruler of the dynasty, created from the 1740s onwards a whole range of important new organs of administration (see pp. 153–4).
They broke down to some extent, particularly in Bohemia, the former administrative separatism of the provinces, and provided the monarchy with an income far greater and an army far stronger than it had ever possessed before.
Thus in Spain and the Habsburg provinces progress was made in the creation of powerful monarchies and centralized administrations.
In France this process was halted and even reversed.
The contrast cannot be explained entirely in terms of personalities; nevertheless the characters of the rulers concerned were of great importance in this connexion.
In Spain the feebleness of the melancholic Philip V was partially redeemed by the energy of his masterful second wife, Elizabeth Farnese.
Charles III was hard-working, patriotic and conscientious, though intellectually unremarkable.
In the Habsburg States Maria Theresa displayed a courage and tenacity equalled by very few eighteenth-century rulers, while her son Joseph II, whatever his faults, did not lack energy and public spirit.
The strength of their personalities partially explains the fact that Charles III was able to exert more effective authority than any ruler of Spain for generations, and that the powers of Maria Theresa were greater than those wielded by any of her predecessors.
The French monarchy under Louis XVI was by contrast in many ways a shadow of what it had been under Louis XIV.
In an age of monarchy there was no substitute for an able and energetic ruler.
It is often claimed that the government of many European  States in the generation or more before the French Revolution is distinguished from earlier practice by the existence of something called ‘Enlightened Despotism’.
How far is this claim justified?
Clearly some rulers and ministers were being affected in the second half of the century by the complex and often conflicting currents which made up the great intellectual movement of the Enlightenment (see Chap.
XV passim).
In the 1760s the Physiocrats in France laid much of the ideological foundation for a new form of monarchy by popularizing ideas of a natural social order which could be easily discovered by the use of the human intelligence and which all unbiased men of goodwill must support.
This natural harmony of interests, it seemed, could be most easily given political expression by an enlightened government, which must be the work of an enlightened monarch.
In 1767 one of these thinkers, Lemercier de la Rivière, in his L'Ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés politiques (1767), presented such a ruler as not legislating in any positive sense but merely declaring and applying fundamental laws which were immanent in the nature of things, in the structure of the world as it is and must be.
In this capacity he was entitled to obedience from the subjects whose welfare he served.
This concept of ‘legal despotism’ had for a time considerable importance, at least in intellectual circles.
The belief, universal in the political thinking of the Enlightenment, that the best form of government is one in which the individual is subject to known and clearly expressed laws, ruled out the arbitrary and uncontrolled ‘oriental despotism’ which every thinker of the age agreed in rejecting.
But it did not at all rule out the possibility of these laws being enunciated by an enlightened monarch.
Such attitudes were an expression of the tendency of the age to produce simple, general answers to what in modern eyes seem highly complex and intractable problems.
Underlying them was a widespread assumption that the principles of good government were clear, absolute and unchanging, that they could therefore be applied anywhere with relatively little modification.
Even a Tatar Khan in the Crimea in the years before the Russian annexation of 1783–84 is said to have wished to rule in terms of‘enlightened’ ideas.
The ideology of Enlightened Despotism, however, as it existed in the three or four decades before the French Revolution, was not the expression merely of intellectual forces.
Underlying it was also a vein of genuine practicality.
Despotism seemed, to the French writers who were much the most important source of this  type of thinking, to promise more rapid progress than was possible under balanced and ‘mixed’ régimes in which power was widely distributed, such as that in Britain.
What mattered, after all, was the use made of power, rather than its formal institutional aspects.
The enlightened ruler must first of all laicize monarchy.
He must free himself from the control of any established church and its priests and instead subordinate them to the State.
As his ministers he must take men of true enlightenment; great nobles with an interest in maintaining a feudal past and its practices should be kept at arms length.
A monarch who behaved in this way could rely on the support of many of the leading intellectuals of the age, however despotic his power.
There were important figures of the Enlightenment who distrusted and disliked any form of despotic rule.
Side by side with Voltaire and Kant, with their admiration of constructive and public-spirited autocrats, were others such as Helvétius, Holbach, Diderot and Rousseau, who refused to believe that this form of rule, however ‘enlightened’, could do anything for the liberation of the individual subject.
Yet often such writers, while denouncing despotic or absolute rule in principle, were willing to take advantage of the practical benefits it might bring.
Turgot, for example, though he denounced any form of despotism, was himself very authoritarian in his methods during his brief term as Controller-General of Finances in 1774–76; and even Rousseau was opposed only to the despotism of individuals, not of groups or collectivities.
Sometimes, as with Kant, a period of more or less authoritarian government under an enlightened prince was seen as a necessary preliminary to the introduction of a more liberal and representative form of rule.
The intellectuals of the Enlightenment showed, in general, remarkably little interest in the structure of government provided it was pursuing what they saw as the correct policies, those directed towards greater tolerance and efficiency and the happiness and welfare of mankind as a whole.
It is important to remember, moreover, that most eighteenth-century reformers saw freedom in largely negative terms.
To them it meant primarily the sweeping away of restrictions and prohibitions, on particular forms of trade, on the free choice of a profession or occupation, on the practice of minority forms of religion.
For this essentially destructive task, this necessary clearing of the ground so that greater liberty for the individual could be obtained naturally and more or less spontaneously, an absolute ruler seemed well suited.
The most impressive contemporary tribute to the idea of enlightened despotism, therefore, is the number of idealists who accepted that only through this form of government had their ideals any chance of realization.
‘It is a humiliating thought, but true,’ wrote one of them, the educational reformer J. H. Pestalozzi, ‘that any advance in the good leadership of people must proceed from the cabinets of monarchs’; and he himself acted on this thought by offering his services to the Habsburg emperors Joseph II and Leopold II.
The difficulty is to relate this body of theory to what rulers, ministers and officials in fact did in specific situations.
Clearly it was possible to have great administrative, fiscal and even social progress under a ruler who was not personally at all in sympathy with the Enlightenment.
The Empress Maria Theresa presided over a transformation of the Habsburg hereditary territories which was the greatest achievement of its kind anywhere in Europe during this period.
Without her work the power of the Habsburgs could hardly have survived in the predatory State system of eighteenth-century Europe.
Yet in intellectual and to some extent in practical terms her attitudes were overwhelmingly conservative.
She was opposed to toleration of Protestants and Jews in her dominions.
She wished for good relations with the Papacy, which was the target for the scorn and hostility of almost every leading figure of the Enlightenment from Voltaire downwards.
She regretted the dissolution in 1773 of the Society of Jesus.
She wished so far as possible to respect in her dominions the rights of the provincial estates, the greatest bastions of resistance to change.
Yet the permanent achievements of her reign were not surpassed by any other ruler of the age.
In many States, moreover, efforts at more or less enlightened reform were inspired by history and tradition rather than by abstract ideas.
They were rooted in the necessities of the countries concerned and in earlier efforts to meet these necessities, not in the mere words of intellectuals, however plausible.
Thus in Spain the reforming work of Charles III and his ministers was a reflection of well-marked national traditions.
The idea of radical change in terms of a few basic ideas runs through many of the proposals for reform of Spanish government and society made in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries as well as those produced by the age of the Enlightenment.
In particular the regalism, the desire to assert royal rights over the Church and Church property, which  was a notable feature of this movement of reform, had deep roots in the earlier history of Spain.
It is note-worthy that of all Charles's ministers the one who most forcibly asserted rights of this kind, Pedro Rodriquez Campomanes, was also the one least influenced by ‘enlightened’ ideas, which in Spain were very much a foreign, overwhelmingly French, import.
For all his regalist attitudes Campomanes showed the sincerity of his Catholicism by dying a member of the third order of the Franciscans.
Moreover, even of the rulers who were more strongly and self-consciously influenced than Maria Theresa and Charles III by the attitudes and assumptions of the Enlightenment none, with the exception of Catherine II, regarded himself as absolute in any complete sense.
None wished or attempted to destroy all the institutions which acted as possible centres of opposition to their reforming efforts.
None, with the possible exception of the Grand Duke Leopold in Tuscany, dreamed of challenging the principle of social and political inequality on which all European society rested.
None of this means that the element of intellectual conviction was negligible in the policies of many of the rulers of Europe in the generation before the French Revolution.
It is clear that the greatest of them had beliefs about their relationship to and responsibility for their subjects different from those of their seventeenth or early eighteenth-century predecessors.
The welfare of those they ruled and still more the greatness of the State (now clearly separated from the ruler and the ruling dynasty) dominated their calculations as never before; indeed an ideal of State service was the one thing which they had in common.
This ideal was sometimes expressed by partisans of Enlightened Despotism with almost religious fervour.
‘The State’, wrote one, ‘is a lifeless mass, to which the monarch first gives life; a machine without motion, which the monarch first sets moving and to whose mechanism he gives reality…the monarch lives for the State and the State lives through him.’
Attitudes of this kind meant that purely dynastic considerations played strikingly little part in the thinking of most of these rulers.
Family feelings and any sense of monarchs as a divinely blessed group had in general little hold on them.
In Prussia Frederick II was often on bad terms with his younger brothers, whom he treated with great severity; and he disliked and neglected his nephew and heir.
His lack of family feeling and unquestioning assumption that it must always be sacrificed to  necessities of State emerge clearly from his political testaments of 1752 and 1768, the most revealing of all statements of his basic ideas.
In Russia Catherine II, after conniving at the overthrow and murder of her husband in 1762, was on continuously bad terms with her son and heir, Paul, who feared and hated her and whom in the last two decades of her reign she scarcely ever saw.
In the Habsburg territories Joseph II treated other members of the ruling family with a studied rudeness which shocked contemporaries: in the 1780s he deeply antagonized his younger brother and successor Leopold, Grand Duke of Tuscany, by pressing for the merging of the Grand Duchy with the hereditary lands of the monarchy.
The history of every European dynasty is full of rivalries and antagonisms; such things could flourish very well without ideas of enlightened government to give impetus to them.
Nevertheless there is little doubt that in the cases of Frederick and Joseph at least a feeling that an enlightened ruler ought to be above merely personal and family considerations, that it was his duty to sacrifice them ruthlessly on the altar of the State, was a factor in their behaviour to their own blood relations.
The contrast with the dynasticism of the age of Louis XIV is a striking and significant one.
No ruler of a large State, however, could afford the luxury of uncritical adherence to an ideology, even one so loosely defined as that of enlightened government.
All of them, to only slightly varying extents, were inevitably the prisoners of history.
For all of them limits to possible action were set by economic, social, political or military necessities which were in the main the legacy of the past.
Completely ‘enlightened’ government was a goal which, even had they wished to attain it, the internal complexities of their own countries and the external pressure of others placed beyond their reach.
Only small States, freed from the burden of playing a leading role in international affairs and often more homogeneous economically and socially than their more powerful neighbours, could afford to apply the political panaceas of the Enlightenment with some approach to thoroughness.
Thus the only European ruler to introduce, even on a restricted scale, the impôt unique (a single tax on land) which was perhaps the most important practical innovation advocated by the Physiocrats, was the Margrave Charles Frederick of Baden.
(The experiment was a failure.)
With the great exception of Joseph II the rulers of the major States in the later eighteenth century were not prepared to  face the problems involved in pushing through really radical changes of this kind.
Frederick II of Prussia is of all the major rulers of the century the one about whose stature historians have disagreed most violently.
There is no doubt that to his contemporaries he seemed, for much of his reign, the outstanding example of a modern and enlightened ruler.
By raising Prussia from the position of a second-rate State to that of at least a kind of great power, and by achieving this with very limited physical resources, he provided the supreme illustration of what might be accomplished by an intelligent and dedicated ruler inspired by enlightened ideas.
The decade after 1745, when the successful struggle for Silesia, which had transformed Prussia's international standing, was followed by internal consolidation and some limited domestic reform, saw his reputation at its height.
In these years Frederick gave Europe its first real example of enlightened despotism in action.
Moreover throughout his life he continued to stress very heavily in his voluminous writings the moral obligation of the ruler to use his powers selflessly, unsparing of his own peace and comfort, for the good of the State.
From his Anti-Machiavel (1741) to his Essai sur les formes de gouvernement (1781) he expressed a view of monarchy which was utilitarian, secular, antidynastic and untraditional.
The people, by a tacit and irrevocable act of delegation, had handed over their powers to the monarch.
This surrender was legitimized only if the monarch devoted himself unsparingly to the good of the state and his subjects.
Indeed he alone could see clearly what that good was; for in virtue of his position he was impartial and disinterested as no mere section of society, no corporate body or representative assembly, ever could be.
This austere doctrine meant for Frederick a lifetime of toil and effort: no monarch in the history of Europe has worked so hard over so long a period to meet obligations which were essentially self-imposed.
It was also a view of monarchy quite compatible with a deep contempt for the subjects whom the ruler served from above and whose interests he safeguarded with such jealous care, often against their own misguided inclinations.
Frederick himself showed this contempt, in writing and conversation, with an often brutal lack of restraint, especially as he became soured by decades of effort and struggle.
The humanitarian side of the Enlightenment, the emphasis it laid on making the ordinary man happier through religious toleration, economic progress and education, always made a genuine appeal to him.
But the necessities of the State, its imperative demands for physical security and therefore for military strength and administrative efficiency, took precedence over everything else.
To these the happiness of individuals (not least of Frederick himself) was always sacrificed without hesitation.
The idea of the humane, creatively enlightened State, which cared for ordinary men and their development, was in his thinking always overshadowed by that of the power-State, Spartan, demanding and careless of the feelings or immediate interests of the individual.
Duty and service, not freedom or happiness, are the notes which reverberate through the history of eighteenth-century Prussia.
Yet it must be stressed that in the eyes of Frederick and most of his contemporaries his rule was never a crude despotism.
On the contrary, the Prussian State was seen as having been turned consciously, by a great act of will on the part of its ruler, on to paths which were constructive and enlightened.
Justice, religious toleration and codification of the laws; economic progress through internal colonization and a great variety of government measures; intellectual life, above all through Frederick's own example as a writer and the symbol of the Enlightenment enthroned — all these seemed to be served by his rule.
Yet when we turn to Frederick in action, to the administration of Prussia during his forty-six years on its throne, the ambiguity of his position becomes fully clear.
Throughout his reign he trod, where day-to-day rule was concerned, in paths already marked out for him by his father, to whom the Enlightenment had meant nothing.
In spite of the profound dissimilarities between father and son, and the bitter personal conflicts between them, Frederick II remained always the executor of Frederick William I. ‘Only his care,’ he wrote of his father, ‘his untiring work, his scrupulously just policies, his great and admirable thriftiness and the strict discipline he introduced into the army which he himself had created, made possible the achievements I have so far accomplished.’
Frederick was fully conscious, as perhaps his father had never been, of the State as an entity completely distinct from the person of the ruler, its greatest servant.
Nevertheless he made few fundamental changes in the system of government he had inherited, and in one important respect, his active and explicit preference for aristocratic ministers and officials as against commoners, his reign sees a definite regression from what had  preceded it (see above pp. 146–7).
In economic life, in spite of a long series of efforts, little was achieved.
Monopolistic trading companies, a state bank, efforts to stimulate industrial development; none of these had much success.
The silk industry in which two million thalers were sunk (heavy investment for a poor country) produced goods of such poor quality that they were very difficult to sell.
The porcelain industry, in which again much government money was sunk, was also a failure.
Prussia remained, in spite of all Frederick could do, what the most severe of his modern critics has quite fairly called ‘a backward, retarded, autocratic and sergeant-like (feldwebelhaft) economy’.
In cultural terms, again, it is easy to overrate what Frederick achieved.
His flute-playing, the vast quantity of bad French poetry he wrote, his friendship with Voltaire (carefully advertised but when put to the test no more than skin deep) impressed many contemporaries and have impressed some historians.
Yet they count for little when balanced against his blindness to the cultural ferment which was agitating educated Germany by the later decades of his reign and his ignorant contempt for most of the greatest German writers and scholars of the age.
It is no accident that so many of the latter — Wieland, Winckelmann, Lessing, Gottsched — disliked both him and Prussia.
Frederick thus presents the paradox of a ruler who was sincerely attracted by many of the ideas of the Enlightenment, who voiced these ideas and advertised his adherence to them throughout his life, and yet whose policies in practice were hardly affected at all by the new intellectual currents of the age.
He was, to be fair, in a position which left him little real freedom of action.
Prussia, even after the territorial gains of his reign, was a relatively small and weak state surrounded by more powerful neighbours.
Mere self-defence meant the fullest possible mobilization of all available resources.
The king had, therefore, to command and manipulate his subjects with much of the harshness of a Prussian sergeant drilling new recruits.
A more liberal regime, a greater degree of economic freedom, serious political experiment of any kind, even had Frederick ever desired such things, were luxuries too dangerous to be indulged in under these conditions.
Moreover under his rule the extent to which Prussia was committed to Eastern Europe and had her centre of gravity east of the Elbe was markedly accentuated.
The alliance of 1764 with Russia was a politic, even necessary, move after the frightening demonstration  of her military power during the Seven Years War (see p. 300).
Yet coupled with the seizure of Polish territory in 1772 it helped to emphasize Prussia's affinities with her eastern rather than her western neighbours.
The deep ambiguities of the Prussian State as it existed in the nineteenth century, intellectually a part of Western Europe yet with a social and military structure much of which continually tended to align it with Russia, trace largely from Frederick's reign.
He himself did not much value the small detached territories — Cleves, Mark, Ravensberg — which he ruled in the Rhineland.
He discriminated against them in his tariff policies and would have been happy to exchange them for land in Pomerania, Saxony or Mecklenburg.
In terms of his own situation and interests this attitude is perfectly understandable.
Yet it illustrates once more how throughout his reign, in spite of his personal adherence to so many of the attitudes and ideas of the Enlightenment, he was turning Prussia's energies and attention to the East, with all that this implied for the future.
Catherine II of Russia is almost as controversial a figure as Frederick.
Throughout most of her reign, and particularly in its early years, she made strenuous efforts to show herself an adherent of advanced theories of government and of the ideas of the French Enlightenment in general.
On a superficial level this can be seen in her long and mutually admiring correspondence with Voltaire, and in her financial help to Diderot and the unsuccessful visit to Russia which he paid at her invitation.
On a more serious one the same efforts underlay the calling in 1767 of the Legislative Commission, the most ambitious effort made in eighteenth-century Russia to provide the country with a rationalized and workable legal code.
The Instruction (Nakaz) which Catherine personally drew up for the guidance of the deputies who made up this Commission was a conflation of ideas drawn, with little alteration, from West European writers, particularly Montesquieu and Beccaria.
Though it was completely lacking in originality its publication in Western Europe drew the admiration of many of the leading figures of the Enlightenment.
The Legislative Commission produced no results.
The outbreak of war with the Ottoman Empire in October 1768 led to the suspension of its work; and the explosion of the great peasant and Cossack revolt led by Pugachev in June 1773 ensured that it was not reconvened.
But though Catherine was clearly disappointed by its failure to produce a new code of laws as quickly and easily as she had  hoped, and perhaps not very reluctant to end its activities, there is no doubt of the sincerity of her motives in calling it.
Nor is there any question of the reality of the belief in the principles of enlightened government which underlay the Nakaz.
Moreover, as has been seen (pp. 150–1), the 1760s witnessed in Russia the beginnings of a remarkable process of administrative reform which culminated in the great overhaul of provincial government in 1775.
All this gives Catherine II apparently formidable claims to be regarded as a genuinely enlightened ruler.
Yet many historians would argue that these claims were fraudulent, or at least greatly exaggerated.
Criticism of the empress has developed along at least three different lines.
In the first place it is argued that the real motive which underlay her ostentatious partisanship of enlightenment, especially in the 1760s, was not a concern for the well-being of her subjects or even a deep belief in ideas of enlightened government, but mere vanity.
She was inspired, it is argued, by nothing higher than a desire for self-advertisement and for the applause of Voltaire and his fellow-writers in Western Europe.
Doubts of the sincerity of her much-advertised desire for reform were already being voiced in the early years of her reign.
A British commentator, for example, writing in 1768 when her reputation as an enlightened ruler was at its height, thought that ‘there is a sort of whim or affectation of singularity, in the manner of conferring her favours, that looks as if the desire of being spoken of, fully as much as the desire of doing good, was the fountain from which they flow’.
Certainly there is no doubt of the strength of Catherine's desire for a good press in Western Europe and of her sensitivity to criticism of any kind: vanity and amour propre played a greater role in her policies than in those of any other ruler of the period.
A second and more serious line of criticism is that the empress's claims to real enlightenment and concern for the welfare of her subjects are shown to be a hollow pretence by the intensification and geographical extension of serfdom in Russia during her reign.
The marked deterioration in the position of the Russian peasant under Catherine's rule has allowed historians to point the contrast between the enlightened ideals which she proclaimed and the oppressive despotism which she allegedly practised.
In particular the decree of May 1783, which in effect established serfdom definitively in the Ukraine, has attracted much criticism.
Yet the  question is not a simple one.
The most recent work on the subject stresses the complexity and ambiguity of much of the legislation of this period regarding the serf population of Russia: it also suggests that after 1775 repression of peasant disorder may have been less arbitrary than before and that it was sometimes accompanied by efforts by provincial governors to persuade landowners to treat their peasants with greater humanity.
It has also been argued that the halting of peasant movement in the Ukraine and the extension to it in 1783 of the poll-tax, which doomed the Ukrainian peasant to serf status, were inspired by a desire to end the privileged position enjoyed by many border areas of the empire, and to some extent by the need to increase revenue, rather than by the extension of serfdom as a matter of policy.
(The poll-tax was in fact extended in the same year to Esthonia and Livonia for these reasons.)
Moreover it is true that in one or two specific minor ways the express tried positively to limit serfdom — by ordering in 1781 that war prisoners were in future to become free men if they were converted to Orthodoxy; and by reducing the possibilities which had hitherto existed of enserfment by marriage.
But none of this alters the fact that when she died there were more serfs in Russia than ever before and that they were worse treated than under any of her predecessors.
Finally Catherine's claims to be a genuine enlightened despot can be impugned, like those of Frederick II, on the grounds that she was merely carrying on policies inherited from her predecessors.
In many essentials this charge is undeniable.
The reform of provincial government in 1775 had been anticipated by proposals made in the 1750s under the Empress Elizabeth.
So had the great survey of landownership in Russia which Catherine set in motion in 1765 and even the Legislative Commission of two years later.
The secularization of Church lands in 1764 was the completion of a process begun early in the century by Peter I. The system of government which Catherine perfected, an autocracy based on the support of the landowning class, was entirely Russian.
Only in a few cosmetic details did it owe anything to French or other West European influences.
Like every other ruler of a great State, the empress was the captive of the historical situation in which she found herself, and in her case this forbade any radical change in the social structure of Russia or any far-reaching amelioration from above of the position of the peasant.
It is unfair to see her, as Soviet historians have done, as the mere representative  of the Russian nobility, trampling underfoot the interests of the great mass of the population to serve those of a small ruling class.
It is significant that the huge grants of land and serfs to noble favourites and officials, for which she has been so much blamed, followed the first partition of Poland in 1772.
After the original grants to her supporters in the coup d'état of 1762 which placed her on the throne, Catherine made very few presents of this kind during the decade 1762–72, when her dependence on noble support is usually supposed to have been at its height.
Nevertheless as a woman, a foreigner and a usurper, Catherine was never in a position to dispense with the backing of the landowning class in Russia even had she ever dreamed of doing so.
Throughout her reign, and particularly in its first decade or so, noble factions and the struggles between them did much to restrict her freedom of action: in 1772–73 the conflict at court between the rival Panin and Orlov parties for a time deprived her almost completely of any such freedom.
This situation, coupled with the insuperable physical difficulties of governing a huge, thinly populated empire, set inescapable limits to what she could hope to achieve.
As a French observer at the end of her reign pointed out, ‘it was solely by suffering her power to be abused that she succeeded in preserving it’.
It would be wrong to end this discussion of Catherine's work on a merely negative note.
Apart from the very real administrative achievements of her reign she had some grasp of the advantages of giving the nobility, the townsfolk and even the state peasants an improved status as efficient and creative autonomous groups within Russian society (see pp. 51–2).
During her reign the proportion of government revenue spent on civilian and ‘welfare’ objectives as opposed to military ones rose substantially.
Moreover her rule saw in Russia an unprecedented growth of intellectual life and a flow and expression of ideas more free than ever before in the country's history.
The members of the Legislative Commission of 1767 received from the areas which elected them both instructions and statements of grievances: digests of these were studied by the empress and had considerable influence on her later activities, notably on the reform of provincial administration in 1775.
This upward flow of information and suggestions for change was something new in Russian history.
A different expression of a roughly similar tendency can be seen in the fact that the total production of books in Russia during the  years 1762–1800 was about three and a half times that in the entire period from the introduction of printing down to 1761.
An ambitious Statute of National Education was promulgated in 1786, though lack of money and trained teachers meant that when the empress died in 1796 there were still only 62,000 pupils in all the state schools in Russia — a very small number in terms of a population of thirty million.
Catherine is best seen, in the last analysis, in essentially the same terms as Frederick II.
She was, in other words, a genuine believer in the ideals of enlightened government (perhaps a more sincere one than the king of Prussia); but her application of these ideals was limited to some extent by her personal weaknesses and far more by the demands and pressures of the situation in which history had placed her.
There were none the less in the later eighteenth century a number of rulers and ministers in Europe who were prepared to break radically with the past, to override vested interests and disregard deep-rooted traditions in the interests of the States they ruled.
Yet in almost every case of this kind the difficulty of relating theory to practice, of showing that radically reforming policies were inspired or even strongly influenced by theories of enlightened government, is marked.
Most of them are to be found in southern and Mediterranean Europe, an area in terms of its society and institutions closer to France than to Prussia or Russia.
In many of the States concerned, Portugal or the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies for example, the machinery of administration was poor, very much poorer than in Prussia.
Few of the rulers or ministers who attempted far-reaching reform in these areas were much influenced by the Enlightenment and none advertised his adherence to its ideas as Frederick II and Catherine II did.
(This explains the small amount of attention given them by contemporary theorists of enlightenment in contrast to the adulation lavished on the Prussian and Russian rulers.)
In the kingdom of Savoy-Piedmont, whose ruler was one of the most absolute to be found anywhere in Europe, a series of remarkable reforms throughout the century went far, at least in theory, towards creating a modern State and society.
A unified legal code was established there in 1725–29.
The completion of a great survey of landownership in 1725–38 paved the way for a high degree of equality in respect of taxation; the nobility and clergy retained tax privileges only in respect of properties which they could prove they had held before 1584.
In January 1762 King  Charles-Emmanuel III freed all serfs on the royal estates and encouraged those of the nobility to negotiate their own freedom.
Another decree of December 1771 began the abolition of feudal rights, which were to be redeemed by money payments to their owners.
In Savoy as elsewhere, it was one thing to issue a decree and another to make it effective.
Not all this legislation was quickly or completely put into force.
The poverty of the peasants and the village communes meant that in 1792, when the situation was transformed by the irruption of the armies of revolutionary France, less than half the redemptions of feudal rights envisaged two decades earlier had been completed.
Nevertheless in theory and to some extent in practice a programme of very far-reaching change was carried out; and this was achieved in one of the most intellectually backward and undeveloped areas in Western Europe.
Charles Emmanuel III was certainly influenced by the humanitarian ideals of the Enlightenment.
Nevertheless it seems likely that change was forced on him, as earlier on such ‘empirical’ despots as Peter I in Russia and Frederick William I in Prussia, by the need for greater practical efficiency, and to some extent perhaps by an instinctive feeling for rationality, not by theories propounded in Paris.
The same is true of the Marques de Pombal, who for over a quarter of a century (1750–77) was virtual ruler of Portugal as all-powerful chief minister of King Joseph I. His efforts to revive the country's economic life and challenge the dominance which British merchants had for decades wielded over its foreign trade, his ferocious repression of noble opposition, his brutal expulsion of the Jesuits in 1767 (see p. 454), show a far more truly radical attitude to tradition and established interests than Frederick II displayed.
In 1759 some of the greatest Portuguese nobles whom Pombal regarded as threats to his position, the Duke of Aveiro, the Marquis of Tavora, the Marquis of Alorna, were accused of conspiring against the king, tortured and in some cases broken on the wheel.
Nowhere else in Europe outside Russia can one find a willingness to treat men of this social standing with such brutality.
Yet however radical some of Pombal's attitudes, he has little claim to be considered an ‘enlightened’ minister.
His policies were empirical, dictated by what he saw as the necessities of the immediate situation.
Though he destroyed the power of the Jesuits he left untouched the politically less threatening one of the Inquisition (largely because he was able in 1760 to make his  brother Grand Inquisitor of Portugal).
Though he had served as a diplomat in both London and Vienna he owed little to the ideas of the Enlightenment: his favourite author was Molière, not any eighteenth-century writer, and under him the works of Voltaire and Montesquieu, as well as Hobbes, Locke and Spinoza, were banned.
His efforts to stimulate industry in Portugal, largely by the setting-up in the 1760s of a number of privileged and mainly foreign-owned enterprises, owed more to the Colbertian attitudes of late-seventeenth century France than to any economic theories of his own day.
Rather similar arguments apply to Bernardo Tanucci, the greatest reforming minister in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
Tanucci was an innovator only to a very limited extent.
An edict of 1738 against abuses of the judicial system, for the promulgation of which he was responsible, led to no real change.
A commission for legislative reform set up in 1742 produced a decade later not a legal code but a mere collection of edicts and regulations, neither amended nor unified.
In one area Tanucci did aim at far-reaching change.
He was bitterly hostile to the enormous powers and privileges of the church in southern Italy, and thus abolished the Inquisition in the Two Sicilies and attacked the right of mortmain which had over generations accumulated vast amounts of property in clerical hands.
In 1762 he even secured a royal edict which compelled the clergy to contribute a fifth of their income to charitable purposes, though this soon had to be withdrawn.
Yet in spite of this he remained a convinced Catholic, regarding Voltaire and the Encyclopédie as profoundly dangerous.
Pombal and Tanucci were therefore severely practical and utilitarian in their attitude to the problems of government.
To them enlightened rule, in so far as they thought in terms of it at all, meant simply effective solutions to immediate problems.
Of the Enlightenment as Kant or Voltaire saw it (see pp. 411ff below), as the human mind liberating itself from the self-imposed tutelage of centuries, a new birth of intellectual adventure, they had no inkling.
The same is true of Charles III of Spain (1759–88) and his most important reforming ministers, Campomanes and Jovellanos.
It is important to remember that the Enlightenment as a set of economic or administrative reforms could be conscientiously and effectively applied by men indifferent or hostile to it in its higher sense as a movement transforming the human consciousness.
The Grand Duke Leopold of Tuscany (1766–90) presents a more difficult problem.
He was the most remarkable and most interesting of all the ‘enlightened despots’.
Tuscany at the beginning of his reign was still what it had been since the formation of the Grand Duchy in the sixteenth century, a personal union of a number of medieval city-states of which the most important were Florence and Siena.
These for generations had remained distinct in their administration, their laws and their economic institutions.
From this unpromising inheritance Leopold had created by the end of his reign, at least on paper, one of the best-governed states in Europe.
Aided by some of the ablest ministers possessed by any eighteenth-century ruler (Pompeo Neri until his death in 1776; Francesco-Maria Gianni after that date) he changed every aspect of the life of his dominions.
Here as elsewhere in Catholic Europe reform meant a reduction in the stifling power of the Church.
The right of mortmain was limited in 1769, the Inquisition abolished in the Grand Duchy in 1782 and in 1785 the powers of religious tribunals limited to spiritual affairs.
Reform in Tuscany also had important economic aspects.
In 1767 the import and movement of grain was freed from restrictions; while the craft guilds were suppressed in 1770 and a great survey of landownership begun in 1781.
Municipal government throughout the Grand Duchy was overhauled in the 1770s.
Most striking of all was the constitution which Leopold presented to his subjects in September 1782.
This provided for the election by all landowners over the age of twenty-five of representatives to local and provincial assemblies.
These in turn were to be represented in a central assembly for the entire State.
Without the consent of the latter neither the succession to the throne nor the territorial limits of the Grand Duchy were to be changed; nor was war to be declared or existing legislation altered.
The ruler could not on his own initiative build fortresses, hire troops or alter the judicial system.
These proposals remained only a paper scheme; but they were the most remarkable constitutional document to take shape in any European State during the generation before the French Revolution.
If we interpret Europe as excluding Great Britain there is a good deal of force in the claim of one historian that Leopold was ‘the first constitutionally-minded monarch known to European history’.
There is no doubt, moreover, of the sincerity of the Grand Duke's belief that he was merely a trustee acting on behalf of his  subjects, whose interests must always be paramount.
In one of the most striking of his letters to his brother, the Emperor Joseph II, he stresses the need for a ruler always to be willing to give his subjects a complete account of the finances of the state and of their administration; such action, he writes, is ‘glorious, useful and just’.
The State finances are ‘entirely a public matter’ and the ruler merely their administrator.
He is entitled to spend money only ‘in accordance with the intentions of his principal’(i. e. the people), for the advantage of the State and the individuals who compose it.
In 1790, writing to one of his sisters, he put the case even more strongly.
‘I believe,’ he wrote, ‘that the sovereign, even when he rules by hereditary right, is only a delegate and representative of the people, for whom he exists and to whom he must devote all his care and labour…
I believe that the sovereign must rule through the law and that the people are his constituents.’
Such attitudes are a striking reflection of the idealistic and libertarian aspects of the Enlightenment.
Since Leopold ruled a small State and had neither fears nor ambitions so far as territorial changes were concerned (he wished to establish the perpetual neutrality of the Grand Duchy as a tradition of European diplomacy, to give it more or less the status which Switzerland was to enjoy in the following century) he was able to accept radical ideas and even try to realize them in practice in a way quite impossible to Frederick II or Catherine II.
There is no doubt moreover that, unlike Pombal, Tanucci or Charles III, he was in close touch with the most progressive thought of the age on political and social problems.
His tutor, Anton von Martini, was one of the foremost representatives of the Enlightenment in the Habsburg territories.
He read extensively many leading political writers of the age, notably Turgot.
He was deeply interested in the progress of the American Revolution, and owned and studied in detail a copy of the constitution of Pennsylvania.
Yet not even Leopold was merely the Enlightenment enthroned.
Another force underlying his policies, one which helps to explain his ready acceptance of ideas of limited monarchy and some degree of representative government, was aristocratic conservative influences, derived particularly from the Habsburg province of Carinthia and the traditions of its estates, which were strongly represented in his entourage.
Unlike his brother he genuinely respected the constitutional structures of Hungary and the Austrian Netherlands: he was attracted by the possibility that the  local autonomy which they so strongly represented might make government cheaper by reducing the number of centrally appointed officials needed to run it.
The only great late-eighteenth-century example of the ruler-ideologue, the monarch who attempted as an act of faith to impose enlightened rule upon his subjects, was the Emperor Joseph II, the elder brother of the Grand Duke Leopold.
In outlook and temperament the brothers differed sharply.
Where Leopold was uninterested in territorial gains Joseph spent much of his life in often fruitless efforts to add to the Habsburg power in Germany, Italy, Poland or the Balkans.
It was his strongly expressed desire to annex the Grand Duchy of Tuscany to the hereditary provinces of the monarchy which at least in part prevented the putting into force there of the constitution of 1782.
Where Leopold was cautious and realistic, Joseph was rash, obstinate and inflexible.
Where the younger brother was moderate and willing to compromise, aware of the rights and claims of his subjects and of the impossibility of ruling despotically, the elder was conscious of no such limitation and, with the highest intentions, was deeply intolerant of all opposition.
The contrast is well illustrated by some of the entries in Leopold's diary during a visit to Vienna in 1778–79.
In these he criticizes severely his brother's régime as ‘arbitrary despotism’ and accuses Joseph of wishing to ‘dispose despotically and capriciously of the lands, persons and goods of his subjects’.
Joseph's view of kingship had no particular originality.
It was essentially the same as that of Frederick II, whom he greatly admired and took in many respects as a model.
He thought of his authority as delegated to him by his subjects and thus contractual in origin.
He was the mandatory of his people, the trustee of the general good.
The power delegated to him must never be misused for merely personal or even dynastic ends.
It was, however, absolute.
The people, having once surrendered it, could not revoke their delegation; and no subordinate authority in his dominions, whether of a guild, a religious order or the estates of a province, could be valid unless it emanated from or was confirmed by him.
He thought always much too easily, in highly unrealistic terms, of the peoples he ruled as a mere aggregate of individuals face to face with an absolute State.
The importance in many parts of his dominions of institutions intermediate between ruler and subject he underestimated grossly almost to the end of his reign.
His objectives were no more original than his political ideas.
As with Frederick and Catherine, his overriding consideration was the power and well-being of the State.
It was his ability to achieve that power and well-being which alone justified his despotism.
In practical terms this meant curbing the powers and reducing the property rights of the Catholic Church; hence the ‘Josephinism’ which was one of his most important legacies to his successors (see pp. 458–60 below).
It also meant centralized and rationalized administration; hence efforts were made to extend to Hungary, so jealous of its autonomy, the administrative system of the hereditary provinces.
Joseph's attempts to end the dominance of the Hungarian county assemblies by the local gentry, and to substitute German for Latin as the language of administration, provoked deep and passionate national resentment.
State power and the public good also demanded efforts to improve the position of the peasant: free peasants would be more productive than unfree ones.
Hence the very important legislation of 1781, which abolished personal servitude, though not labour services, in Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia (it was later extended to the other hereditary provinces and in 1785 to Hungary).
Hence the Strafpatent of the same year, which limited the lord's right to punish his peasants, and the Unterthanspatent, also of 1781, which allowed a peasant to lodge a complaint against his lord with officials of the central government.
Hence also the introduction in 1789 of a very ambitious though shortlived scheme of tax reform which provided that in future the peasant should pay to State and lord combined only 30 per cent of his gross income.
This did not in practice apply to landless labourers or peasants with very little land, a large and growing element in the rural population; but if it had been put into effect it would none the less have been the most sweeping social legislation seen anywhere in old regime Europe.
Some limited degree of universal education was another obvious step towards the strengthening of the State and the fostering of general well-being.
Basic literacy, which was all that was aimed at, would allow the people to grasp more easily the intentions of the ruler and thus ensure their more effective cooperation in his policies.
Hence the creation in the Austrian provinces and Bohemia, beginning with the Allgemeine Schulordnung of 1774 (though this was the work of an official, J. I. Felbiger, not of Joseph himself) of the first truly universal system of education in European history.
None of these policies was really new.
The greatest period of administrative reform in the history of the Habsburg territories had come in the two decades after 1749 (see pp. 153–4); here Joseph achieved much less than his mother.
Official efforts to protect the cultivator against an oppressive lord went back at least as far as legislation by the Emperor Leopold I in 1680; and in many ways Maria Theresa showed a truer concern for her peasant subjects than her son was ever to do.
In Hungary she had attempted by the Urbarium of 1767, against bitter opposition from the Diet, to protect the peasants against excessive exploitation.
From 1771 onwards a series of codes for different provinces, beginning with Silesia, had set for the first time clear official limits to what the lords could demand of their peasants, especially in terms of labour-services.
In the 1770s she had envisaged the abolition of serfdom in Bohemia, Joseph merely its amelioration: his attitude probably contributed to the outbreak in the province of the peasant revolt of 1775.
‘Josephinism’ in religious matters, again, it is now clear, had behind it a long tradition extending back to the first years of the century.
In one significant way, it is true, the reign of Joseph marked a distinct break with the past.
It saw, especially in its early years, a great advance in freedom of expression on political and other questions in the Austrian provinces and the emergence of an embryonic public opinion there.
The relaxation of the censorship which was one of his first actions after the death of his mother meant that in 1780–81 an extraordinary flood of pamphlets (many of them admittedly on very trivial subjects) engulfed Vienna.
In March 1782 the British ambassador there spoke of a freedom of political debate ‘almost as extensive as in England’.
But for the great bulk of Joseph's subjects this was a meaningless luxury; and in any case the later years of the reign, as opposition mounted, saw the government's control of publication and the press partially reasserted.
In the main, Joseph's work was a logical continuation of that of his mother and her ministers.
What was novel about his reforms was not so much their content as the spirit in which they were carried out.
A dogmatic intolerance which refused to recognize that he might sometimes be mistaken, a haste which incessantly demanded immediate and clearly identifiable results, undermined policies always well meant and sometimes even well conceived.
About many of the emperor's actions there hangs an atmosphere of niggling dogmatism, of intolerant high-mindedness, which makes him, for all his good intentions, personally one of the least attractive of eighteenth-century rulers.
Thus Joseph realized one of the objectives of radical idealists throughout Europe by virtually abolishing the death penalty in the Austrian provinces: only one execution took place there during the whole of his reign.
But the hard labour for criminals which replaced judicial execution was so appalling that it was in effect a living death.
The judicial reforms which he introduced in 1781 revived a number of harsh punishments which his mother's law-code of 1769 had abolished, such as the branding of life-prisoners on the forehead and the chaining of some prisoners to the walls of their cells.
It is significant of Joseph's attitude that his legal code of 1787 declared that henceforth all offences were against the State and must therefore be prosecuted even if there were no individual victim willing to begin legal proceedings.
The genuine and constructive concern for elementary education which the emperor showed was combined with a marked dislike of scholars, whom he regarded as useless parasites.
The result was that though his reign saw a growth in popular literacy, the setting up of Jewish and Protestant schools and the supply by the government of free textbooks for elementary teaching, it also witnessed a serious attack on secondary education and the universities.
When he died there were only about half as many pupils in secondary schools as at his accession to the throne.
Moreover the number of universities in Joseph's dominions had by 1790 been reduced to a mere three (Vienna, Louvain and Pest) and these had been forced to concentrate on such useful subjects as medicine and law and virtually to end the teaching of luxury ones such as foreign languages.
The fostering of economic growth was a constructive objective, at bottom perhaps the most important of all.
But it was not helped by such petty interferences with ordinary life as a decree of 1781 which forbade young men under the age of twenty-eight to travel abroad, or another of 1789 which forbade the granting of a marriage licence to peasant couples unless they could prove that they had already enriched the state by planting a number of fruit trees.
The mental atmosphere of Joseph's reforms — idealism, effort and self-sacrifice combined with dogmatism, intolerance and a humourless lack of any sense of proportion — is very reminiscent of many aspects of the French Revolution.
The emperor himself, indeed, was well aware of this  similarity.
Shortly before his death he complained with much justification that his Belgian subjects were refusing to receive from him as a gift benefits which the French were at the same moment extorting from Louis XVI by a great upheaval.
It is suggestive that during his reign military uniform became for the first time permissible dress at the Habsburg court.
A man of this stamp, ruling what was still in essentials, in spite of the reforms of Maria Theresa, a mere group of separate provinces, was certain to encounter opposition.
Of the great established interests in his dominions — Church, nobility, provincial estates, privileged towns — none was on his side.
Active support Joseph could expect only from a small number of officials.
Moreover his domestic position was seriously weakened by his obvious lack of success as a diplomat and a military commander.
His failure to gain much of Bavaria in 1778–79, to exchange the whole electorate for the Austrian Netherlands some years later (see pp. 303–5 below), or to achieve real military success against the Turks in the war of 1788–90, undoubtedly did a good deal to increase the difficulties he faced within his own dominions.
To these difficulties he himself added immensely by his insistence on extending his reforms to Hungary and the Austrian Netherlands.
Had he confined his attentions to the Austrian provinces and Bohemia the story might have been very different; but the nationalism of the Hungarians (or at least their ruling class) and the ingrained particularist conservatism of the Netherlands provinces, above all Brabant, proved too much for him.
Yet far from leading him to abandon or modify his policies, opposition incited him to more drastic methods.
If his subjects were unwilling to accept the progress and enlightenment he offered, so much the worse for them.
If they could not be enlightened by persuasion it must be done by force.
We are thus faced in his later years by the paradox of a ruler who had spent his life in efforts to make his subjects prosperous and happy compelled to create a system of secret police and to hold down considerable parts of his territories by armed force.
From the early 1780s onwards an increasingly elaborate network of agents and informers kept foreigners and even many important figures in the government under surveillance, and from 1782 there was provision for dangerous political prisoners to be held in complete isolation in special underground cells.
Events were to show that the persuasive power of force was not lasting and that some parts of the Habsburg  lands were still able to defend their privileges effectively.
The emperor's reforming policies in the Austrian Netherlands, in particular his efforts to reduce the power of the Catholic Church there and to override provincial traditions and institutions, meant that from 1787 onwards much of the area was in open opposition to him.
His drastic remodelling of the archaic and irrational administrative system, replacing it by a system of intendants on something like the French model, his abrogation in June 1789 of the Joyeuse Entrée of Brabant, the most important of the constitutional documents which limited his powers in the Netherlands, his collection of taxes which had not been approved by the provincial estates, all aroused furious opposition.
Coupled with the almost equally difficult situation in Hungary this resistance disrupted the fragile unity of the Habsburg dominions.
Even before his death in February 1790 Joseph, ill and discouraged, had been driven to revoke some of his most unpopular measures.
His brother, who succeeded him as the Emperor Leopold II, was able to restore peace in the disturbed areas only by a skilful mixture of force and concessions.
Enlightened Despotism is not a mere figment of the historian's imagination.
It had a real existence, in the sense that a number of rulers in the period 1750–90 attempted, to differing extents and in differing ways, to shape their policies in terms of a body of current theories about the duties of monarchs and the nature of good government.
They were more influenced than their predecessors by consciously held and relatively sophisticated beliefs and less by unthinking traditional assumptions.
Yet if we look at what they in fact did, it is striking how little practical difference these beliefs really made.
In almost every case (Leopold in Tuscany is perhaps the one real exception) the new façade of fashionable ideology clothed policies which followed naturally from what had already been attempted by relatively unenlightened predecessors.
No ruler of the later eighteenth century except Joseph II was willing to press home ‘enlightened’ policies in the face of really formidable opposition; and his fate showed the near-impossibility of doing this successfully.
All eighteenth-century governments existed, in the last analysis, by the consent or at least the acquiescence of the governed.
No ruler, therefore, could force his more powerful subjects to accept innovations which they really disliked.
In every State the mass of the uneducated and a large fraction of the educated were deeply hostile to change, quite untouched by  the intellectual currents of the Enlightenment and intensely suspicious of any government-inspired innovation.
During the Hungarian revolt of 1790 against the innovations of Joseph II the new registers of land titles (an essential tool of modern government which had taken years of labour to complete) were ceremonially burnt to the accompaniment of music, drinking, feasting and general rejoicing.
Members of the estates then took a public oath that no trace of these hated documents should be preserved.
Everywhere measures to free the grain trade aroused the deepest suspicion and hostility.
France is the best-known example of this but there are plenty of others; the riots in Tuscany in 1790 provoked by measures of this kind are a good example.
In particular any tampering with traditional religious institutions or observances, of the kind so common among enlightened rulers and ministers, was likely to generate deep resentment.
In Bohemia under Joseph II opposition to the burial of Protestants in cemeteries hitherto reserved for Catholics was so great that it required the presence of a considerable force of cavalry to ensure that one such burial took place; while the disastrous flooding of 1785, when the Danube broke its banks, was widely regarded as a divine punishment for the emperor's impious attacks on the Church.
Attempts to interfere with the liturgy; the abolition, for economic reasons, of some of the very numerous religious holidays; the dissolution of the Jesuits, still deeply respected over much of Catholic Europe — all these manifestations of enlightenment could easily arouse widespread and sincere opposition.
The experience of the Electorate of Mainz, hardly one of the most backward parts of Europe, is illuminating in this respect.
When the Jesuits were expelled from the city in September 1773 public resentment was so real that the entire garrison had to occupy key points and patrol the streets to maintain order.
When in 1787 a new hymn book in German was introduced by a reforming elector this aroused bitter popular hostility.
The peasants tore up and burned the copies they received; and often it was simply ignored and the singing of hymns in Latin continued.
It is important to remember that however misguided, selfish or short-sighted this opposition to change may seem, it was none the less sincere.
Almost always it was underlain by a passionate feeling that genuine rights were being trodden underfoot, that the structure of custom and tradition by which all but a small minority of Europeans lived was being wantonly shaken, that any increase  in government activity must threaten the subject.
What the ordinary man most wanted of the State was that it should so far as possible leave him alone.
The more enlightened and reforming a government the more obviously it must flout feelings of this kind; and sometimes the price to be paid for flouting them was high.
However limited its immediate effects, the ideology of Enlightened Despotism was important in the long term.
A heavier emphasis than ever before was being laid in the later eighteenth century, notably by monarchs themselves, on a ruler's duties to his subjects.
These duties were now increasingly defined in terms of progress towards a better, or even an ideal, form of society and government.
The frequent acceptance of ideas of this kind by monarchs helps to explain the lack of hostility, sometimes even enthusiasm, with which the French Revolution in its early stages was received by many of them.
In St Petersburg in 1789 the French ambassador was publicly congratulated by the Grand Duke Alexander (later Alexander I) on the fall of the Bastille, while Alexander's younger brother the Grand Duke Constantine, who was later to become an extreme reactionary, was also at first an enthusiastic partisan of the Revolution.
In the same way the Emperor Leopold II approved of much of the work of the Constituent Assembly.
Even when the more violent and disruptive aspects of events in France had become clearly visible, it was often the methods as much as the objectives of the revolutionaries which aroused opposition.
Increasingly in the later eighteenth century it was felt, at least in intellectual and opinion-forming circles, that monarchy was on trial, that kings must now provide not merely good government but progressive government.
By the 1770s or 1780s there were few European rulers who could feel the same unquestioning self-assurance as Louis XIV a century earlier.
ARMIES AND NAVIES
In 1764 James Boswell's friend Rose claimed, in a conversation which the two men had at Leyden, that ‘wars were going out nowadays, from their mildness’.
Nearly three decades later a British publicist had no doubt that ‘the refinement of modern ages has stripped war of half its horrors’.
They were expressing a point of view widespread among their contemporaries, at least in Western Europe, a feeling that for several generations warfare had been becoming steadily milder and its influence on the ordinary man more limited.
Many historians have shared this view.
Are such judgements justified?
Certainly as far as Western Europe is concerned there is a good deal of evidence to support them.
For nearly a century and a half after the end of the Thirty Years War in 1648 there was a tendency for the ratio of casualties to total numbers engaged in West European wars to fall and for that of prisoners to dead and wounded to rise.
These are clear signs that warfare was tending to become less bloody.
By the end of the seventeenth century a pamphleteer commenting on this tendency could write that now, in contrast to the attitude of former times, ‘20,000 Men are accounted great Slaughter’.
Widespread looting of the kind which had disfigured almost every war of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries was very largely brought under control in this period (in the interests of discipline rather than humanity).
It was replaced by contribution agreements by which the local authorities in an area occupied by a foreign army undertook, often with the consent of their own ruler, to pay the occupying force a fixed sum in return for a promise that it would not pillage.
These became more and more normal in  Western and Central Europe.
Adam Smith even argued in 1763 that ‘war is so far from being a disadvantage in a well-cultivated country, that many get rich by it.
When the Netherlands is the seat of war, all the peasants grow rich, for they pay no rent when the enemy is in the country, and provisions sell at a high rate.’
It is true also that warfare had little influence on the arts, the most obvious indicator of the ‘climate of opinion’, during the eighteenth century.
The best example of this is the fact that none of the greatest music of the period was inspired by the idea of military conflict (as some of that written by Beethoven in the following generation clearly was).
Its ‘military’ music is that of courts and Te Deums, or at most of parade grounds, not that of battlefields.
The element of ritual and formality bulked large in much eighteenth-century warfare in West Europe.
This was particularly marked in attacks on fortresses and fortified towns.
‘The art of conducting sieges’, wrote Frederick II, ‘has become a trade like that of carpenter or clock-maker.
Certain infallible rules have been established, and we carry on an unvarying routine in which we apply the same theory to the same cases.’
The idea of a siege as a ritual conducted according to well-defined rules is clearly illustrated by the answer of the commander of the Spanish garrison at Gaeta in southern Italy when faced in the 1730s with an Austrian demand for surrender: ‘It is not yet time, since no batteries have been formed and no cannon are yet in place which would be a cause for surrender.
The general must be patient for a while.’
Moreover the armies of all West European States tended to be slow-moving, tied to fixed magazines and supply depots and further restricted by the ever-present fear of desertion.
These limitations did not make rapid movement impossible, as Marlborough showed in 1704 and Frederick II in 1757; but they ensured that it should be the exception rather than the rule.
Also commanders were not usually eager to fight decisive battles; and victories were seldom followed up with real energy.
(The obvious if partial exception here is again Frederick II; but he never had the material resources needed for a truly Napoleonic strategy and became steadily more cautious and conservative in his later years.)
Indeed it was the accepted orthodoxy that battles should in general be avoided as too risky and that skill in manoeuvre was the real criterion of ability in a commander.
‘A battle’, said the Saxon Dienstreglement of 1752, ‘is at once the most important and  the most dangerous operation of war.
A great general shows his mastery by attaining the object of his campaign by sagacious and sure manoeuvres, without incurring any risk.’
A good many observers even doubted whether wars between States at approximately the same level of civilization could have any decisive result.
The growth in Europe's population and the increased number of fortified towns to be found on every frontier, wrote a pamphleteer at the end of the seventeenth century, made it more difficult than ever before to conquer great areas of territory.
The diffusion of military techniques, he went on, had the same effect, for ‘now both Parties are Equally Disciplin'd and Arm'd; and the Successes of War are not so great; Victory is seldome gained without some Considerable Loss to the Conquerour’.
A hundred years later the same ideas were still widespread.
‘Conquests are never very extensive or rapid,’ wrote the historian Robertson, ‘but among nations, whose progress in improvement is extremely unequal.’
None of this meant that war was a rare or unimportant phenomenon in the eighteenth century or that the demands which it made on the peoples of Europe were negligible.
The political and diplomatic history of the period was dominated by warfare.
With the partial exception of the two decades which followed the Treaty of Utrecht (and even then there were probably never less than half a million men under arms in Europe) there was scarcely a year in the century during which a large-scale struggle was not either raging or threatened in some part of the continent.
Europeans, almost as much as in preceding generations, took war for granted as a normal part of their lives.
These struggles, moreover, could still inflict intense and widespread suffering.
Wounded men and prisoners could still have much to fear if they found themselves at the mercy of their opponents.
In 1706, after his victory at Turin, Prince Eugene had to interfere in person to prevent a general massacre of the French wounded by the imperial forces; and after the battle of Zorndorf in 1758 many of the wounded Russians left on the field were buried alive by Prussian soldiers and local peasants.
Civilian non-combatants could also on occasion have much to fear, especially when a city was taken by storm with all the looting, killing and destruction which this involved.
The French ravaging of Bergen-op-Zoom in 1747 or the Russian sack of Memel ten years later are good cases in point.
On occasion whole provinces could be savagely treated in an  effort to deny their resources to an enemy, as the French devastation of Westphalia in 1759 showed.
It is true that among intellectuals, influenced by the cosmopolitanism of the Enlightenment, there was a fairly general feeling that war was unworthy of an age in which reason was taking control of human affairs.
‘Nothing is so evident’, wrote Sir James Steuart, one of the most important economists of the period, ‘as that war is inconsistent with the prosperity of a modern State.’
By the last years of the period there were indications that anti-militarist ideas were beginning to influence even the policies of a few important statesmen — Turgot, Vergennes, possibly the younger Pitt.
They had little importance, however, outside a small minority of the educated classes.
A tendency towards a general, though slow, increase in the size of most European armies is visible during this period.
That of France, the greatest European State, did not again reach the level achieved in the War of the Spanish Succession, when in 1710 Louis XIV had some 360,000 soldiers at his disposal; but most others grew.
There was, however, a widespread feeling that very large armies were undesirable because they were difficult to supply and manoeuvre.
The Marechal de Saxe, one of the best-known military theorists of the century and himself a highly successful commander, thought the ‘acting body’ of an army should not exceed 46,000 men, ‘for multitudes serve only to perplex and embarrass’.
It was also possible to argue that the size of armies must be limited by the capacity of society to maintain them: Montesquieu believed that a ruler could hardly afford to have more than one per cent of his subjects under arms simultaneously, and other writers put the proportion still lower.
But such ideas were unduly cautious.
Half a century before Saxe wrote, the forces engaged in the great battles of the War of the Spanish Succession had sometimes amounted on each side to 60,000–90,000 men and the French army had been equivalent to about two per cent of the country's population: he himself is said to have commanded 130,000 at Raucoux in 1746 and 98,000 at Lawfeldt in the following year.
This numerical growth is seen strikingly in the extraordinary development of the Prussian army.
At the most critical moment of the Seven Years War it amounted to 4.4 per cent of the total population of the country, the highest proportion of this kind reached in any State during the century.
Even more remarkable in some ways was the emergence of the  Russian army.
Still an inefficient and partly feudal force at the end of the seventeenth century, it had become by the last years of Peter I one of the most powerful in Europe.
In 1731 its strength was fixed at over 132,000 men: by 1796 (i.e. before Russia had begun to play an active part in the struggle against the French Revolution) it numbered 458,000.
The same tendency to growth is seen, less strikingly, in Spain and some of the smaller States, notably Savoy-Piedmont.
Also if the destructiveness of warfare was declining, militarism was increasing, and was indeed largely a creation of this period.
Louis XIV, during much of his reign an aggressive ruler, was not a soldier by taste, outlook or training.
He would have regarded it as a breach of etiquette for a French nobleman to present himself at court in uniform.
All his war ministers were civilians; and the commanders of his armies tended to be aristocrats first and professional soldiers second.
The Marquis de Chamlay, his most important military adviser in his later years, had the title of Maréchal-Général des Logis; but he had little experience of active service and was often employed on non-military tasks.
The same attitudes held sway in Vienna.
Prince Eugene of Savoy, until his death in 1736 the most famous commander in Europe, had to wear civilian dress when he appeared at the Habsburg court.
From the beginning of the eighteenth century this position changed rapidly.
There was a striking increase in the attention paid by most European rulers to military details of all kinds.
A number of monarchs — Charles XII of Sweden, Frederick William I of Prussia, Paul of Russia, to some extent Peter I and Frederick II — began to regard uniform as their normal dress.
In England George I and George II devoted their energies to the organization and discipline of their army in a way that no Stuart king had ever done.
Even in Spain, none of whose rulers had any pretension to military ability, royal interest of this kind can be seen in the frequency with which military uniforms were remodelled under Charles III and Charles IV.
It is true that over much of Europe military administration at its highest level was still largely in the hands of civilians.
This was so in Britain, where the post of Secretary at War was held by politicians and changed hands with the ebb and flow of party politics.
It was also the case in the very unmilitary Dutch Republic; and in the Habsburg territories the Kriegskommissariat set up in 1657 and reformed by Haugwitz in the 1740s was made up largely of civilians.
Even in this respect, however, some signs of change can be seen.
In France the post of Secretary of State for War was given for the first time to a soldier (the Maréchal de Belle-Isle) in 1758; and in the second half of the century there was a slow but steady tendency for the most important officials concerned, the intendants d'armées and the contrôleurs des guerres, to be military men.
In a number of ways also armies became more conscious of themselves than ever before as entities clearly distinguished from civilian society.
There was a marked multiplication of military decorations and orders, distinctions of a kind hitherto very rare.
To the first important one, the Order of St Louis created by Louis XIV, were now added the Prussian Pour le Mérite in 1740 (though until 1810 this was also awarded to civilians), the Habsburg Order of Maria Theresa (1757) and the Russian Order of St George (1769).
In 1771, a significant innovation, the French army began to award to old soldiers of twenty-five years standing the first long-service medal.
During the second half of the century, moreover, there was a tendency in several States to house soldiers in purpose-built barracks rather than, as hitherto, to quarter them mainly in the houses of civilians; by 1775, 200,000 French soldiers were living in barracks.
This meant that the population in general was increasingly spared an irritating and resented burden; but it also meant yet another hardening of the distinction between the soldier and those he defended.
More important, as armies became more highly organized, more permanent and more self-conscious, the temptation to use them as moulds in which civilian societies might be recast became stronger, at least in the relatively poor and backward States of Eastern and Northern Europe.
In these a clear tendency developed to militarize society in general in the quest for greater political and economic efficiency.
This bore fruit in Peter I's Table of Ranks of 1722 (see p. 50), itself based largely on Swedish precedents, and in the subjection in Prussia of the administration and much of the economic life of the country to the needs of the army.
Finally many of the checks on the ferocity of West European warfare did not exist, or were less effective, farther east.
In the West most eighteenth-century campaigns were fought in densely populated and wealthy areas.
In the East Russian, Turkish, Swedish and Polish armies struggled with one another in country which was usually poor and sometimes almost uninhabited.
There sieges were less frequent and pitched battles more important.
In  the West armies were cosmopolitan and religious animosities relatively insignificant.
In the East the Russian and Swedish forces were remarkable for their national character and resulting homogeneity; and every Russo-Turkish war was a religious at least as much as a political struggle to the ordinary soldier on both sides.
The result was that in the long Russo-Swedish conflict of 1700–21 both combatants endured sacrifices surpassing those of any Western country in the War of the Spanish Succession, while Russia's wars with the Ottoman Empire were fought almost in the spirit of a crusade.
In the West, again, warfare was largely, though by no means completely, dominated by a defensive spirit.
There tactics were strongly influenced by reliance on line formation and fire-power, as against attack at close quarters.
In Russia, on the other hand, commanders such as Rumyantsev and Suvorov had developed to a high pitch of effectiveness by the end of this period the more aggressive method of attack in column with the bayonet (though the contrast between Russian and West European tactics has been greatly exaggerated by some Soviet historians).
Above all, in the West warfare was increasingly governed by rules which gave some protection to prisoners and civilians.
In the East these restrictions were either almost unknown, as in the Ottoman Empire, or were only slowly winning acceptance, as in Russia.
Thus the early years of the century, when war was taking on ‘so decorous an aspect’ in Western Europe, saw the conquered provinces of Livonia ravaged by the armies of Peter I with a ferocity which shocked Western observers.
Later events, such as the devastation of East Prussia by Russian troops in 1758 or the terrible slaughter which followed the storming of the Turkish fortress of Ismail in 1790 in which some 30,000 were killed, underlined to contemporaries the freedom from conventional restraints which characterized warfare in Eastern Europe.
The nature and value of every European army was determined largely by its recruiting system.
Most States developed during the century some system of compulsory service; but all of these were in varying degrees incomplete, haphazard and inequitable.
In many countries militias of widely differing efficiency existed.
In some they played a role of significance as sources of recruits for the regular army in time of war — for example in France, where a system of militia service was established by Louvois in 1688 and revived in 1726, in Spain, in Piedmont and in England after the passage of the Militia Act of 1757.
In others forces of this kind  were unimportant or non-existent: in these the defence of the State rested as a rule upon armies raised largely by some modified and limited form of conscription.
Such was Prussia, where a new system of recruiting, based on the allocation to each regiment of a defined area, a canton, upon which it could draw for its manpower, was introduced in the 1730s.
The cantonists, as the conscripts were called, were however trained reserves rather than regular soldiers.
After their first year of service they were normally on active duty for only two months in each year.
In the hereditary provinces of the Habsburgs a somewhat similar system was introduced in 1771; but in Russia things were very different.
There Peter I had developed at the beginning of the century a system by which a specified number of peasant households had to provide, in periodic levies, a recruit to serve for life.
The Prussian army was unique among those of the major States in relying for its manpower neither on any militia system nor on voluntary recruiting.
Thus many though by no means all European States had at their disposal means of recruiting by compulsion considerable numbers of men for military service.
With the exception of Russia, however, no major European power attempted to raise the bulk of its forces, at least in peacetime, by this means.
In most States the army was still dependent largely on voluntary enlistment.
There were several motives which might bring a man to commit himself to a fairly long period (eight years in France from 1762 onwards) of military service.
One, significant in a few parts of Europe, was the growth of a genuine popular military tradition and a willingness to regard the army as a respectable, even honourable, occupation.
In the frontier areas of eastern and north-eastern France, especially those near main roads where the sight of columns of soldiers on the march was a familiar one, this factor clearly operated.
These provinces produced, in proportion to their population, enormously more recruits than the centre, south and west of the country.
Similar feelings were at work to some extent in the later decades of the century in the Scottish Highlands, both a cause and a result of the growing prominence of Scottish regiments in the British army.
Men were also led to become soldiers by the desire to escape the monotony, drudgery and narrow horizons of rural life, or by a difficult domestic situation.
Often a young man might be led to join up by the death of his mother, the remarriage of his father, and a resulting feeling that  he was no longer wanted at home.
But over most of Europe the most effective of all recruiting-sergeants was poverty.
Army service offered poor living conditions, low pay and severe discipline; but at least it usually gave security against starvation.
Moreover some governments, notably the British one, offered cash bounties to men willing to enlist.
Everywhere, however, the burden of service fell most heavily on the poorer groups in society.
The fact that a man liable to army or militia service could almost always provide a substitute if he had the money to pay for one accentuated still further this inequality.
Over most of Europe any form of military service was generally unpopular.
That in the militia was one of the most deeply resented burdens on the ordinary man in France; and in England the Militia Act of 1757 was widely resisted.
Where a system of conscription operated all sorts of expedients were used to avoid service.
Since married men were normally exempt, youths in some areas might for this reason marry as young as fourteen or fifteen and be given a small piece of land by their parents to maintain themselves: the proliferation of very small peasant holdings in Denmark has been attributed to this factor.
Even self-mutilation to avoid service was not unknown.
The size of the forces which might be raised by these primitive and inequitable means, especially at moments of real crisis, should not be under-estimated.
In France during the most critical years of the Spanish Succession war in 1704–8 and 1712, one in six of the male population was serving in the army or the militia; and in the period 1700–63 about two million men were enrolled for military service there (though some 300,000 of these were foreigners).
The idea that the army should be a microcosm of the nation, or representative of it in any true sense, would have seemed to most contemporaries ridiculous or even shocking.
It was generally agreed that it should be raised as far as possible from the social groups of least value.
‘It would undoubtedly be desirable,’ wrote the Comte de Saint-Germain, perhaps the greatest French war minister of the century, ‘if we could create an army of dependable and specially-selected men of the best type.
But in order to make up an army we must not destroy the nation; it would be destruction to a nation if it were deprived of its best elements.
As things are, the army must inevitably consist of the scum of the people and of all those for whom society has no use.’
Frederick II himself had argued a few years earlier that ‘useful hard-working people  should be guarded as the apple of one's eye, and in wartime recruits should be levied in one's own country only when the bitterest necessity compels’.
This assumption that the productive and educated parts of society were too valuable to be squandered in battle, that their function was to pay for wars not to fight them, was almost universally accepted.
A few military theorists — Saxe in his Rêveries (1757), Justus Möser in his Patriotische Phantasien (1775–1804), Guibert in his Essai générale de tactique (1772)— as well as political writers such as Montesquieu, Morellet and Mably, might advocate some form of extensive or even universal service; but there was no serious possibility of their ideas being adopted by any government.
One result of this attitude was that the strain placed by warfare on the economies of most European States was less than the mere number of men engaged in fighting might seem to indicate, since these were drawn so largely from the least productive elements of society.
Another was greatly to minimize the impact on the educated and property-owning classes (and hence often on the towns) of the rudimentary conscription systems of the period.
It was calculated that in Prussia at the end of the century 1,700,000 men in a total population of 8,700,000 were completely exempt from military service (1,170,000 because of privileges possessed by most of the Prussian towns, 530,000 because of their social status or occupation).
In 1745 the municipality of Seville, one of the largest cities in Spain, claimed that only 201 of its inhabitants were liable for military service, all the others being covered by exemptions of some kind.
In France the more well-to-do cultivators (those who paid 50 livres or more in taille) were exempt from militia service, as were the servants of nobles or clerics, though exemptions of this kind were increasingly cut down as the century went on.
It was only in 1742, moreover, that the militia there began to recruit from the urban as well as the rural population.
Even in Russia the years after the death of Peter I saw the exemption from service of considerable social groups hitherto liable — the merchants of Astrakhan in return for a money payment, the arms-makers of Tula, Church servants, some groups of the better-off peasantry.
In these circumstances almost every eighteenth-century army was likely to contain a large element of ne'er-do-wells, social misfits and even criminals.
In Britain, where suspicion of the army as a possible instrument of tyranny together with a generally rising level of prosperity made recruits unusually hard to obtain, this element was prominent.
In the War of American Independence three British regiments were composed entirely of reprieved criminals, while vagrants and other undesirables were often forced into the army as an alternative to prison.
Such elements could be found in varying degrees in the fighting forces of most European States.
The desire to shelter large sections of the population from military service also strengthened the willingness of most governments to employ foreign mercenaries, who retained throughout this period much of the importance they had possessed since the Renaissance.
The French army included in the middle of the century over 50,000 foreigners, and still had over 40,000 serving in it on the eve of the Revolution.
Of 133 battalions of infantry in the Spanish army in 1751 twenty-eight were composed of foreigners; and it was seriously proposed in that year to raise twenty more abroad.
The United Provinces had a Scottish brigade in their service until the last years of the century.
The most striking example of all of the employment of foreigners, however, was Prussia.
There in 1751 in an army of 133,000 only 50,000 were natives of the various Prussian provinces; and even in 1786 the proportion had risen only slightly, to 80,000 in a total of 190,000.
The Swiss cantons in particular continued, as in the previous century, to provide considerable numbers of recruits for foreign armies.
In 1789 there were a dozen different States which made use of Swiss units; and probably one Swiss in every twelve of military age was serving in a foreign army in time of peace.
In time of war the proportion was probably as high as one in eight.
Switzerland was now challenged as an exporter of military manpower, however, by some of the smaller German States above all by Hesse-Kassel.
Nor were mercenaries supplied only by very small or weak States.
Denmark and Saxony hired out considerable forces to the anti-French coalition during the War of the Spanish Succession, while Britain employed Russian  auxiliaries in 1747–48 and confidently expected to obtain others for use against the American colonists in 1775.
Armies so non-national and drawn so largely from the lowest strata of the social pyramid were prone to lose men by desertion.
This was so serious a threat to their efficiency, especially in wartime, that officers and NCOs had to spend much of their energies in checking and forestalling possible efforts by their men to desert.
Thus in the army of Frederick II it was a rule that when passing through wooded country in which escape would be relatively  easy infantry units must always be surrounded by cavalry patrols; and that when detached to fetch wood or water ordinary soldiers must always be accompanied by an officer.
The need to guard against desertion had considerable influence even on the development of tactics; and governments naturally made efforts to repress a practice which so obviously threatened the strength and morale of their armies.
In 1710 Prince Eugene ordered that all soldiers found more than a hundred paces from his army on the march and more than a thousand from it when it was in camp should be hanged.
A year later Frederick I of Prussia ordered that in future deserters should have their nose and one of their ears cut off and be sent to hard labour for life, while after the Seven Years War a chain of military posts was set up on France's frontiers to prevent the escape abroad of soldiers fleeing from their units.
That eighteenth-century generals and governments were justified in the attention they gave to this problem is clear.
In 1713–40, a period during which it did hardly any fighting, the Prussian army lost over 30,000 men by desertion.
During the Seven Years War the Austrian army is said to have lost over 62,000 men in this way, that of France about 70,000, and that of Prussia about 80,000.
In the 1780s it was estimated that of the troops raised in Great Britain on the Irish establishment one-sixth deserted every year.
Even in Russia, which was to some extent spared these difficulties by the relatively high morale and national feeling of her soldiers, 20,000 deserters were counted in 1732.
It should be remembered, of course, that quite often a man who deserted would rejoin the same army a short time later in a different unit, perhaps under another name, to gain a new enlistment bounty.
This means that the figures quoted in this paragraph have to be taken with a small pinch of salt.
Nevertheless there is no doubt of the reality of the problem which desertion presented to every eighteenth-century army.
These armies of peasant conscripts, mercenaries and ne'er-do-wells were officered predominantly and in many cases overwhelmingly by nobles.
In the seventeenth century army service had sometimes offered to ambitious men of low birth the prospect of raising themselves in the social scale, and perhaps of acquiring nobility for themselves and their descendants.
Even then, however, the great majority of successful commanders were of noble origin; and by the early eighteenth century it was becoming increasingly difficult in many countries for a commoner to acquire  commissioned rank in any but the more technical branches of the service, and almost impossible for him to rise to high rank.
This tendency was not universal.
In Spain for example, where the social importance of a commission was comparatively slight, would-be officers were required to prove noble descent only in a few calvary regiments.
Nevertheless in some of the most important European States social status became increasingly the passport to military rank as the century progressed.
For this growing noble monopoly of commissions there were a number of reasons.
Rulers often felt that a hereditary privileged class alone possessed the sense of personal honour which was seen as an essential ingredient in the make-up of a successful officer.
The middle classes, it was argued, attached to their own comfort and influenced by rational calculations of private profit, could never make good officers.
To allow them to attain commissioned rank, wrote Frederick II in 1775, would be ‘the first step toward the decline and fall of the army’.
Even a relatively liberal and progressive administrator like Saint-Germain was extremely unwilling to grant commissions to parvenus at the expense of poor but military-minded nobles.
Sometimes the landowning class might be the only social group possessing the qualities of leadership and the minimum of education without which an officer was useless.
This was the case in Russia, where Peter I, in the face of great hostility and obstruction, succeeded in forcing the privileged landowning class to become in effect a group of hereditary State servants (see p. 51).
It also applied, to a lesser extent, in Prussia.
There Frederick William I, again in spite of much opposition, achieved a similar success and became the real creator of the Junker officer.
In many countries, especially in the later decades of the century, the privileged classes came to regard a monopoly of commissions (except in the artillery and engineers) as a right to be jealously defended against bourgeois encroachments.
This attitude can be seen in Prussia, and more strikingly in France.
There the officer class, which consisted at the regimental level largely of provincial nobles with a well-developed military tradition, showed itself increasingly hostile to the purchase of commissions by rich bourgeois, even if recently ennobled, and to the invasion of the army by the power of money.
Buying a commission for one of its members, it must be remembered, could impoverish a poor noble family for decades; and if the holder died in the performance of  his duties the sum paid was lost to it.
The dependence of many French nobles on army pay or pensions for their livelihood added bitterness to the social struggle involved.
It also led to a marked inflation of the number of high-ranking officers.
‘I have officers whom I do not need,’ said Louis XV, ‘but I am sure that they need me.
The eighteenth century was not an age of rapid development in military techniques.
Nevertheless it was also not a period of stagnation in this respect.
It saw the introduction of new arms, tactics and methods of organization, which made the armies of the 1780s appreciably different from those of the 1700s.
It was in the first place a great age in the growth of military education.
Apart from recruitment the greatest problem most armies faced was that of giving adequate training to their officers.
The Accademia Reale set up in Turin in 1677, the Noble Cadet Corps established in Saint Petersburg in 1731, the Ecole Royale Militaire which came into existence in Paris in 1751, the military academies established at Wiener-Neustadt in 1752 and Zamora in 1790, were all essentially intended to prepare young nobles for a military career.
In 1776 twelve schools of this kind were set up in the French provinces, largely in an effort to cope with the military pretensions of the poorer nobility.
One of these, at Brienne, was soon to have the young Napoleon Bonaparte as one of its pupils.
On a different level the academy established at Woolwich in 1741, the great engineering school set up at Mézières in 1748, the combined artillery and engineer school created in Russia in 1756, and a number of similar establishments, provided the armies of Europe with a greater fund of technical knowledge than they had hitherto possessed.
From such new creations, notably in France, came a high proportion of the most important writing on military problems produced during the century.
The technical improvements of this period centred around the problem of increasing the fire-power of armies; and towards this end a good deal of progress was made.
At the beginning of the century the average well-trained soldier could fire about one round per minute.
By its middle years the introduction of a number of relatively minor improvements, such as cartridges and iron ramrods, had allowed this rate of fire to be trebled in the most efficient European armies.
The excellent French musket of 1777, for example, could maintain a rate of fire of three rounds per minute with an effective range of 200 metres and could fire  8,000 shots without needing modification or repairs.
A general tendency towards making artillery lighter and more mobile can also be seen in the later decades of the century.
It is visible especially in France, where the changes introduced by Gribeauval in the 1770s were of revolutionary importance.
After his reforms a French 12-pounder gun could be drawn by only six horses and an 8-pounder by only four (in each case about one-third of the number needed two centuries earlier) while the interchangeable parts which he introduced made it possible to carry out repairs and replacements with hitherto unheard-of speed.
From the 1760s onwards both the British and French armies made intermittent and rather unsuccessful experiments with explosive shells, while shrapnel was first demonstrated publicly at Gibraltar in 1787.
The bayonet, perhaps the greatest contribution to warfare made by the seventeenth century, was well established almost everywhere in Europe by the beginning of this period.
Nevertheless the scope and importance of these technical changes should not be exaggerated.
Compared to those of the century which followed they were slight.
The smooth-bore muskets which British soldiers used against Napoleon did not differ very substantially from those which their ancestors carried against Louis XIV.
Marlborough, if brought back to life, would have found on the field of Waterloo comparatively little with which he was not already familiar.
On the battlefield armament was still much less important than discipline and fighting spirit.
It is significant that the Prussian army, the most successful and admired of the age, used a heavy musket which was generally regarded as the worst in Europe.
In the field of tactics the main interest of the eighteenth century lies in the slow modification of the traditional line formation of troops on the field of battle by the new or rediscovered idea of attack in column.
In Western Europe the idea of attack by columns in close formation seems to have been put forward for the first time by the Chevalier de Folard in his Nouvelles Découvertes sur la Guerre (1724).
It was soon taken up by other French writers, many of whom were attracted by its reminiscences of the Greek phalanx of classical times, and a prolonged controversy between the advocates of the new system and those of the traditional line formation developed.
The supporters of the new school of thought were not completely victorious.
Columns of men in close order moved slowly and were very exposed to  enemy fire.
Moreover to change quickly from column to line and vice versa was a complicated business, though methods of doing this were evolved, notably by Guibert, the greatest military theorist of the century.
Nevertheless the rigidity of the traditional line tactics which dominated most European battlefields in the eighteenth century had been shaken, with important results for the future.
In Russia too, where ideas of linear formation had never taken such deep root as in the West, attack in column became, in the hands of generals such as Suvorov, a weapon capable of achieving great results.
Moreover all tactical systems were, in the eighteenth century, becoming more effective simply because of improvements in discipline and the increasingly effective training to which the ordinary soldier was now subjected.
More and more armies were becoming reliable though still very cumbersome machines, mechanisms which could be relied on to perform competently on the battlefield the evolutions in which they had been trained, and to stand enemy fire without flinching.
This development is usually associated particularly with the Prussian and Russian forces.
But the same trend is clearly visible in Western Europe also.
From the Spanish Succession war onwards, for example, there was an increasing tendency for French soldiers to receive wounds in the left side — the part of the body which in line formation was exposed to the enemy's fire.
This is one of the most convincing of all proofs of increasingly rigid discipline on the battlefield.
This period also saw the introduction into every major European army of various forms of mobile and lightly-armed troops to supplement the slow-moving line regiments.
Units of this kind were first used on a considerable scale by the Austrian army in the 1740s; and the Croat sharpshooters who composed them were considered by Frederick II the most dangerous opponents he had to face.
They were soon copied by the French, who developed formations of this kind on a large scale from the 1760s onwards, while light infantry were used for the first time in Europe by the Russians at the siege of Kolberg in 1761.
The British army created a regiment of light infantry in 1757 for scouting duties in North America; and in the war of the American Revolution troops of this kind were the most effective part of Britain's forces in the colonies.
To some military theorists such as Guibert, who was influenced by Rousseau and to whom the soldier of republican Rome was an ideal, formations of this kind seemed not merely  useful in a military sense but possible signposts towards a different political system and society.
The qualities of initiative, responsibility and loyalty which they demanded from the soldier were very different from the passive obedience and mechanical discipline typified by the army of Frederick II (which, significantly, found it difficult to create units of this kind).
They could therefore be seen, with some stretch of the imagination, as forerunners of a new army and a new society, more austere, more national and patriotic, even more egalitarian, than any hitherto known.
Finally, important changes took place in the eighteenth century in the means by which armies were controlled and maintained by the governments for which they fought.
Even before it opened they had become emanations of the State, a branch of the machinery of government.
There was little scope left for the condottiere, no possibility of the rise of a new crop of Wallensteins or Mansfelds, the warlords and military entrepreneurs who had played so great a part in the struggles of the 1620s and 1630s.
The last great assertion by the government of a major European State of its monopoly of military power in its own territory can be seen in the whittling away by Peter I of the autonomy of the Zaporozhian Cossacks on the Dnieper from 1709 onwards, and in its final destruction by Catherine II in 1775–83.
Many aspects of military life, however, were still only indirectly controlled by the State, at least in Western Europe, at the beginning of the eighteenth century.
Many armies still relied on civilians to drive their artillery train and baggage-wagons, and on draught animals commandeered from civilians to pull them.
Civilian contractors were normally responsible for provisioning these armies, and often for supplying them with arms, ammunition and uniforms.
Military hospitals also were often left in civilian hands, usually with unhappy results.
The period saw in most Western countries a series of intermittent and disjointed efforts to remedy this state of affairs.
Thus the British government acquired a powder-mill of its own in 1759, though it seems to have made little use of it, and another in 1787.
In 1793 two companies of horse artillery were formed, the first British artillery units to have their own drivers; and this reform was later extended to the whole of this branch of the army.
The same increasing central control and rationalization can be seen also in the introduction in 1720 of a regular tariff for the purchase of commissions; in the 1750s of the custom of numbering regiments  rather than referring to them by their colonel's name; and in 1792 of a common system of drill, based on that of Prussia, for the whole army.
In France State-owned arms factories were set up at Maubeuge and Charleville in 1718; the government made itself responsible for the supply of uniforms in 1747; and the old system of military hospitals, which had left them largely in private hands, was abolished in 1788.
More important, in 1762 recruitment was made for the first time a direct concern of the government, taking it out of the hands of the regimental officers who had hitherto controlled it.
The most important assertion of central control over all aspects of military life made by any government during this period came, however, in the Habsburg Empire.
There during the first half of the century, as in other armies, notably that of France, regiments were in effect the property of their colonels.
These had not only control of promotions in them, with powers of life and death over their men, but even the right to impose their own systems of drill and tactics.
The military crisis of the early 1740s (see pp. 290ff) made it impossible for this situation to continue.
In 1749 for the first time a single system of tactics was laid down for the entire army, while in 1765 the Hofkriegsrath assumed the power to appoint to all ranks above that of captain and from 1776 an organized State military transport corps began to be built up.
The eighteenth century was thus a period of slow evolution rather than radical change in military affairs.
It saw the continuation of a number of tendencies already visible in the reign of Louis XIV — a growth in the size of armies, a formalization of tactics, a rise in the importance of the technical branches of the service, an increase in the effectiveness of State control.
It was by no means a period of stagnation.
It was an age of militarism, though not yet of popular militarism; its wars and battles were a good deal more than the courtly and rather ineffective rituals which some historians have tended to imagine.
Eighteenth-century navies fluctuated in size and efficiency more, and more rapidly, than armies.
For almost all European States with vulnerable land frontiers it was easier and safer to neglect the navy than the army.
Also navies were, in proportion to the manpower they employed, far more expensive than armies.
A ship of war with its armament and equipment was costly both to produce and to maintain: even a moderate-sized naval squadron involved a concentration of expensive artillery far larger than that  of any field army.
Great dockyards such as Chatham, Brest or Kronstadt were the biggest and most complex unified industrial enterprises of the age.
Naval bases, with the fortifications and dock facilities they involved, were more expensive than any fortress on land: the new one built by the French government at Cherbourg in the 1780s was the most ambitious and costly public work undertaken anywhere in Western Europe during this period.
By 1790 the European navies numbered in all about 470 ships of the line (the large vessels which formed the line of battle in important naval conflicts) together with about a thousand frigates and a thousand smaller ships.
It is true that in peacetime a large proportion of these ships were normally laid up and had their crews paid off: only when war was imminent or had broken out were they brought back into service.
This meant that a high proportion of the manpower of many European navies was available in time of peace for use in the civilian economy.
The British navy which had 76,000 sailors at the end of the Seven Years War in 1763, for example, had only 17,500 in the following year.
Nevertheless naval power on a large scale meant a very heavy commitment of resources: the temptation to economize on the navy in times of financial stringency was correspondingly strong.
Throughout this period Britain had the largest fleet in the world.
She emerged from the War of the Grand Alliance in 1697 as the greatest of European naval powers; and this position she never lost.
In 1721 she had 124 ships of the line and 105 smaller vessels, of which roughly a quarter had been built since 1714.
These figures were virtually unchanged when war broke out with Spain in 1739; but lack of maintenance under the Walpole regime meant that she had only 35 of the line fit for immediate use.
By 1762, however, she had 141 of the line and 224 smaller vessels; while by 1783 these figures had risen to 174 and 294, by far the most powerful fleet hitherto possessed by any State.
The development of the French navy was a good deal more erratic.
The War of the Spanish Succession and the financial strain it involved reduced France's strength at sea to a very low ebb, so that in 1719 she possessed only 49 ships of all rates.
Yet twenty years later, largely as a result of the work of Maurepas, an energetic Secretary of State, she had nearly 50 ships of the line and was once more clearly the second-greatest European naval power The war of 1744–48 with Great Britain meant fairly heavy losses; but by 1754 she possessed 57 ships of the line and 24 frigates.
Even during the  much more disastrous Seven Years War she made strenuous efforts under the Duc de Choiseul to recover her lost seapower, and these were continued in the 1760s and 1770s.
In 1773 she had 66 ships of the line: by 1780, when she had 81, she was stronger at sea than ever before in her history.
The development of Spanish naval strength was in step to some extent with that of France.
Her fleet, which had almost ceased to exist by the end of the War of the Spanish Succession, was rapidly revived in the next two decades by able ministers such as Alberoni and Patino.
By 1737 it included 33 ships of the line.
Her losses in the great wars of the mid-century were smaller than those of France; and after 1748 the attention given to the navy by another Spanish statesman, Ensenada (which included the recruitment of a considerable body of shipbuilders and technicians in Britain) led to a fairly rapid increase in its strength.
By 1774 she had 58 ships of the line: she is said to have possessed 72 in 1789.
More dramatic still was the growth of the Russian fleet.
Its Baltic squadron, always the most important part of it, began to take shape only after Russia had acquired a foothold on that sea in 1703.
Yet in the face of almost every conceivable difficulty widespread and bitter popular hostility to the whole idea of naval development, the need to import from abroad officers and technicians of all kinds, the surrender of Azov and consequent loss of the Black Sea fleet in 1711 (see pp. 271–2)— Peter I had by his death in 1725 made Russia one of the great naval powers of Europe.
His successors did not share his passion for maritime affairs; and in the 1730s and 1740s the fleet he had created was allowed to decline sharply in numbers and efficiency.
Under Catherine II it was rapidly revived; and by 1788 the Baltic fleet numbered 37 ships of the line.
Moreover the later 1770s and 1780s saw the re-creation of a powerful Russian squadron in the Black Sea which by 1791 possessed 22 ships of the line.
Russia had thus become a naval power equal to Spain and little inferior to France.
The minor European naval powers can be briefly dismissed.
Neither the Swedish nor the Danish navies were able to recover after the Great Northern War (1700–21) the importance they had enjoyed before its outbreak.
Both were now overshadowed by the superior power of Russia, a fact which was driven home by the general lack of success of the Swedish fleet in the war of 1788–90 with her great eastern neighbour.
The United Provinces, still a great naval power at the end of the seventeenth century, sank  rapidly to a second-rate position in the early years of this period.
In the War of the Spanish Succession they were seldom able to keep more than fifty warships of all sizes at sea simultaneously; and declining economic strength and the complications of their federal constitution made a recovery of their former status impossible.
Neither the decaying seapower of Venice, which after the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718 was used only in unsuccessful punitive expeditions against the Barbary States; nor the insignificant squadrons of Tuscany and Naples; nor the small and inefficient navy of Portugal, were factors of much significance in the balance of European naval power.
The Ottoman Empire possessed a substantial fleet; but its ships were poorly designed (Turkey was the last important Mediterranean State to use galleys on a large scale), often inadequately armed and until fairly late in the century very poorly manned.
Its efficiency was still further reduced by the fact that, almost alone among European navies of any size, it saw no active service between 1718 and 1769.
Efforts to strengthen and improve it in the last decades of the century had only moderate success.
Most eighteenth-century navies, like the armies of the period, were recruited by a mixture of inducements and compulsion.
In Russia the latter element was uppermost, and peasants were conscripted as sailors in very much the same way as for the army.
In France a more elaborate and complex coercive apparatus existed than anywhere else in Western Europe — the system of classement set up by Colbert in 1668–73.
It involved the registration of the seafaring inhabitants of the coastal areas of France (and later also of the population on the banks of navigable rivers) and the creation in this way of a pool of experienced sailors who could be used in manning the fleet.
Like the system of militia service it pressed heavily upon the poorer sections of the groups it affected and fell comparatively lightly on the middle classes of the French seaports.
This, coupled with the corruption and favouritism of many of the officials who administered it, made it widely unpopular and led to much evasion of the obligations it imposed.
As a result the French navy was normally short of seamen throughout the century.
In Spain, where a somewhat similar system was introduced in 1737, the same difficulties were encountered and the same disappointing results achieved.
The very moderate success of these methods did not prevent suggestions that they be copied in Britain.
Throughout the  century proposals for the creation of some kind of reserve of seamen were put forward, all of them without success.
Fear of encroachments by the government or the armed forces on the liberty of the subject, coupled with a feeling that it was unjust that one particular group should be singled out for treatment in this way, combined to defeat all such suggestions.
The British navy continued to depend on what men could be allured by bounties, snapped up by the press-gang, or recruited more or less forcibly from convicts and debtors.
Though the official figures are not easy to interpret it seems that at the outbreak of the Seven Years War about half its manpower was drawn either from the jails of London and other cities or from the crews of foreign ships.
The results were what might be expected.
‘In a man-of-war’, wrote an officer in 1756, ‘you have the collected filths of jails…
There's not a vice committed on shore but is practised here.
The scenes of horror and infamy on board of a man-of-war are so many and so great that I think they must rather disgust a mind than allure it.’
As in eighteenth-century armies, moreover, the defects of naval recruiting-systems were reflected in a crippling rate of desertion.
In 1757 only 62 British sailors were killed in battle or died of wounds; but 4,624 deserted.
A little later, in the four years 1776–80, over 42,000 men deserted from the British navy; and there is no reason to suppose that this was an unusual number by contemporary standards.
Apart from desertion the other force which continually sapped and depleted the strength of every navy was disease.
Overcrowded and insanitary warships were an ideal breeding-ground for every kind of contagion, while the lack of fresh food meant that until the 1790s scurvy continually threatened every ship's company.
In 1774–80 for every British seaman who lost his life in battle, fifteen died of disease, while in 1779 Britain was preserved from invasion partly by the scurvy which swept the French and Spanish squadrons then for a time in control of the Channel.
Both Britain and France found difficulty in obtaining sufficient volunteers for their fleets, partly because the wages they offered their sailors compared very poorly with what could be obtained by service on a merchantman, and still more so with what might be made on a successful privateer.
The pay of a sailor in the French navy in 1789 was practically the same as it had been a century before, though during that period prices had almost doubled.
In Britain the wages of an ordinary seaman remained  unchanged (at 19s. per month) during the whole of the period 1651–1797.
Moreover these inadequate wages were often months in arrears, and were paid, at least in the earlier years of the century, not in cash but in tickets which could be cashed only at the Navy Office in London.
The complaint of Admiral Vernon, in a parliamentary speech of 1749, that ‘our fleets, which are defrauded by injustice, are first manned by violence and maintained by cruelty’, was substantially justified.
In spite of efforts to give some semblance of fair treatment to the ordinary sailor (the most notable was the passage of Grenville's Navy Act in 1758) no radical improvement in the methods or rate of payment was made until after the mutinies of 1797.
Like eighteenth-century armies the navies of the period benefited from a certain amount of technical progress, but progress of a limited and evolutionary kind.
One obvious aspect of this was the elimination from naval warfare of the galley.
Its importance even in the Mediterranean, the sea which had given it birth, was rapidly declining by the later seventeenth century.
Galleys took some small part in the indecisive battle of Cape Matapan between the Turkish and Venetian fleets in 1717; but apart from the large fleets of them maintained in the Baltic by Russia and Sweden they had become obsolete long before the end of this period.
The French Corps des Galères was suppressed in 1748; and by the time of the French Revolution, except for the few maintained by the Spanish fleet and one or two in the navies of the small Italian States, galleys had disappeared from the sea which they had so long dominated.
Much was done, again, by the work of mathematicians such as Euler, Bernouilli and Borda on fluid resistance and floating bodies, to make possible an improvement in the lines of sailing-ships.
Books such as the Architectura Navalis Mercatoria of the Swede Chapman (1768) and the Examen Maritimo Teorico Practico of the Spaniard Jorge Juan (1771) show that this was beginning to have some influence on shipbuilders.
In France, where a new class of naval engineers concerned with the building and repair of ships was created in 1765, shipbuilding was perhaps carried to a higher pitch of perfection than anywhere else in Europe.
To French builders, admitted a British historian of the early nineteenth century, ‘is primarily owing the energetical improvement made in modern times in the form, dimensions, and general contour of vessels’.
The États de Bourgogne of 118 guns, designed by J.-N.
Sane and  launched in 1782, was technically the most successful ship of the age.
She was used as a model until far into the nineteenth century and was still carrying an admiral's flag in 1848.
In Britain by contrast the gap between theory and practice, between the discoveries of mathematicians and the rule-of-thumb traditionalism of shipbuilders, remained very wide.
Apart from the Treatise on Shipbuilding and Navigation of Mungo Murray (1754) no book of a scientific kind on shipbuilding or ship design was written in English during this period.
The Society for the Improvement of Naval Architecture, formed in 1791, was essentially a body of theorists and amateurs with little or no practical influence.
The result was a general and generally admitted inferiority of British men-of-war to those of France.
‘I have never seen or heard since my knowledge of things,’ wrote a British admiral in 1745, ‘that one of our ships alone, singly opposed to one of the enemy's of equal force, has taken her, and I have been in almost every action and skirmish since the year 1718, and yet we are daily boasting of the prowess of our Fleet.’
Complaints that British ships by comparison with those of France were too small, sailed badly and were encumbered by too many guns, continued to be heard to the end of the century and afterwards; while French prizes were frequently used as models for the design of new British men-of-war.
Nevertheless it was the British navy which pioneered the two inventions which did most to increase the efficiency of eighteenth-century men-of-war.
These were the copper sheathing which greatly reduced the fouling of their bottoms by weeds and the loss of speed this entailed; and the carronade which greatly increased their fighting power.
The use of copper as a protection for the underwater parts of ships' hulls had been suggested in England as early as 1708 and by the 1770s it had been generally adopted throughout the navy.
In France the new technique was first used, by copying from a captured British vessel, in 1778.
In the decades which followed it was generally diffused throughout the navies of Europe.
The carronade, a short-barrelled large-calibre gun with a low muzzle velocity, easily handled and very effective at close quarters, was first developed in 1774 and by the end of the American War was mounted on several hundred British men-of-war of all sizes.
It too was copied, first of all by France and later by other continental naval powers.
Eighteenth-century observers often argued that naval battles  between opponents of more or less equal strength were almost certain to be indecisive, that naval warfare was by its nature unlikely to produce victories of the kind which might be expected on land.
‘Do you know what a naval battle is?’ asked the French minister, Maurepas.
‘I will tell you: the fleets manoeuvre, come to grips, fire a few shots, and then each retreats…and the sea remains as salt as it was before.’
Experience seemed to justify this view, for the period saw many indecisive encounters of this kind; while the naval battles which produced some decisive result — Cape Passaro (1718); Hawke's victory over the French Admiral Du Bois de la Motte (1744); Lagos and Quiberon Bay (1759); Rodney's ‘midnight chase’ of the Spanish Admiral Langara in 1780 — were nearly all marked by a preponderance of strength on one side.
Not until the battle of The Saints in 1782 (see p. 345) did a struggle between two fleets of approximately equal size produce a clear-cut victory for one of them.
The rigidity of eighteenth-century naval tactics, embodied in detailed and restrictive fighting instructions and imbued with the idea of the importance of the line of battle and its preservation, undoubtedly discouraged initiative on the part of commanders.
It thus contributed to the ineffectiveness of much of the warfare of the period.
The very primitive signalling systems available and the extreme difficulty of ensuring that any order was understood and obeyed were equally important obstacles in the way of an original or aggressive admiral.
The improvement in signalling methods which Kempenfelt and others brought about in the British navy in the last decades of the century was a greater contribution than the idea of ‘breaking the enemy's line’ to the defeat of Napoleon.
Decisive naval battles were also made less likely by ideas which persisted throughout the century as to the way in which wars at sea should be fought.
In France and Spain, and to a lesser extent in Britain, it was widely believed that the most important function of a fleet was not to seek out and destroy that of the enemy but to protect the colonies and seaborne trade of the State to which it belonged and capture or harass those of its opponents.
The restrictions which ideas of this kind imposed on the French navy were particularly serious, and can be seen influencing France's strategy at sea throughout the century.
They underlay the division in 1744–48 of the ships at her disposal into small squadrons for commerce protection, which made impossible their  use in any true strategic way.
They inspired the efforts of Admirals D'Estaing and De Grasse in the War of the American Revolution to seize British West Indian islands and evade rather than destroy the fleets to which they were opposed.
They can also be seen in the popularity in France of the idea of attacks on British commerce as a means of forcing the traditional enemy to her knees, the belief that a guerre de course of this kind, avoiding large-scale engagements and making extensive use of privateers, would be more effective than a strategy which aimed at securing effective control of the seas.
Alone among French sailors the Bailli de Suffren showed himself willing, in his campaigns of 1781–83 in the Indian Ocean, to challenge this fundamentally defensive attitude and the emphasis it laid on minor tactical and territorial advantages.
Nor was a similar outlook unknown on the other side of the Channel.
In 1695 and 1708 Parliament, stung to action by the clamours of the London merchants, passed legislation which compelled the Admiralty to allocate specified numbers of ships to the task of protecting commerce; an unsuccessful Bill for the same purpose was introduced in 1742.
Only with the emergence in 1747, in an embryonic form, of a Western Squadron dedicated to cruising off the main French Atlantic bases of Brest and Rochefort, did strategic considerations overcome purely commercial and tactical ones in British thinking on the functions of the navy.
With its establishment in the Seven Years War as an integral part of the war effort at sea their victory became decisive.
The increase of State control which has already been seen as a feature of military organization in this period is also visible where navies are concerned.
It meant the disappearance from the line of battle of every European fleet of the converted merchantmen which had remained so important in wars at sea until the second half of the seventeenth century.
It meant an increasing tendency for all men-of-war, at least of the larger types, to be built in government dockyards rather than by private contractors.
It meant an increasingly rational and symmetrical organization of navies, the division of their ships into well-defined classes, each with relatively specialized functions and a fixed quota of men and guns.
Most important of all, it meant a decline in the relative importance of privateers and even, at least in Britain, a tendency to regard them as a hindrance to the work of the navy proper.
Throughout the century intensive encouragement of privateering  by any State was usually a result of inferiority at sea, an implied admission that the enemy's fleet could not be defeated in open combat.
War was the greatest single factor in the international history of eighteenth-century Europe.
It established Russia and Prussia as great powers.
It greatly reduced the influence of Sweden and accelerated the decline of the Ottoman Empire.
It substituted Spanish for Austrian influence in southern Italy.
It made Lorraine a French province.
Though it probably did not benefit her economically as much as has sometimes been thought, it endowed Britain with a great colonial empire and virtually unlimited opportunities of further expansion.
On the economic and social history of the period its influence was also enormous.
It meant growing State intervention in the economy, in the building of barracks, dockyards and fortifications and sometimes in the creation of entire new industries for war purposes.
The need to create powerful fighting forces had repercussions on Russian society which were almost revolutionary, and underlay almost every aspect of the development of Prussia.
It was war expenditure which brought the French monarchy by the 1780s to bankruptcy and collapse.
The governments of old regime Europe were more than anything else war-making machines; the maintenance of large armed forces absorbed more of their energies and resources than anything else.
The history of the generations which preceded the French Revolution almost as much as of that which followed it must be written in terms of warfare.
DIPLOMACY AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
By the beginning of the eighteenth century the framework of European diplomacy was well established.
From the fifteenth century onwards, first in Italy and then in Western Europe generally, States had begun to maintain representatives more or less permanently in each other 's capitals.
These representatives corresponded regularly and sometimes very frequently with the governments for which they acted; from the early sixteenth century onwards their despatches and reports, preserved in the official archives which were now beginning to be formed, are one of the most important sources of information available to the historian.
More slowly, ministers and departments of State charged more or less specifically with the conduct of foreign affairs emerged in most West European countries, though it was not until late in the eighteenth century that this process began to reach completion.
The conception of a balance of power, again originating in Italy, spread rapidly to the other States of Western and Central Europe.
From the time of the Emperor Charles V (1519–56) onwards the idea, if not the phrase itself, was part of the common currency of European political life.
In this network of institutions and ideas the eighteenth century saw no fundamental change.
It was not qualitatively different on the eve of the French Revolution from what it had been during the reign of Louis XIV.
From the beginning of the century, however, it was being extended to include large areas hitherto only on the fringes of the European system of international relations.
The greatest of these was Russia.
Until the end of the seventeenth century her diplomatic contacts with the States of  Western Europe had been intermittent and usually unimportant (see p. 256).
In 1695, when Peter I first acquired effective control of the government, Russia had no permanent diplomatic representatives in foreign capitals.
The officials chosen to represent her on intermittent and shortlived embassies were usually ignorant of the languages of the countries to which they were sent and often ‘Moscow Germans’(descendants of foreigners who had settled in Russia) rather than Russians by ancestry.
The Posolskii Prikaz (Department of Embassies) had for several generations been a part of the central administration, but Russia's relations with the outside world were still very limited.
Under Peter this position changed completely.
From 1699 onwards, when A. A. Matveev was sent as minister to the United Provinces, a network of diplomatic representatives abroad comparable in its extent and efficiency to that of any European State was rapidly created.
By 1721 Russia had twenty-one permanent diplomatic missions in foreign countries (including one in Pekin and another in Bokhara) a number which was not to be exceeded during the remainder of the century.
Simultaneously the number of foreign diplomats more or less permanently resident in Russia also increased.
In 1702 there were only four of these (apart from unofficial agents of the Hospodar of Wallachia and of some dissident Serbian groups).
By 1719 there were eleven, a figure which would have been higher but for the continuing war with Sweden and the very strained relations with Great Britain which then existed.
This expansion of diplomatic contacts between Russia and the other States of Europe did not end with Peter's reign.
Though the number of Russian diplomatic missions abroad tended to fall somewhat in the decades which followed his death — there were nineteen in 1779 and (largely for reasons of economy) only fourteen in 1800 — the country did not relapse into the isolation of the seventeenth century.
European diplomacy had thus extended its frontiers far to the East; a new, large, and in some ways awkwardly shaped piece had now to be fitted into the jigsaw of international relations.
A new and heavy weight was now available to be thrown on one side or the other of the balance of power.
In 1716 the French Almanach Royal for the first time listed the Romanovs as one of the reigning families of Europe, an important recognition of Russia's new status: during the next generation the completeness and irrevocability of her emergence as a great power was fully brought home to most observers.
At the beginning of this period the Ottoman Empire occupied a position akin to that of Russia.
From the end of the fifteenth century she had been a factor in European diplomacy.
She had played an important part in the long series of struggles between France and the Habsburgs which dominated the age of Charles V. By the early seventeenth century France, England, Venice and the United Provinces were all maintaining permanent representatives in Constantinople (though the English and Dutch ones were commercial rather than diplomatic agents).
Yet she was clearly not a European State, and she never became during the eighteenth century completely incorporated into the European diplomatic system.
Until far into this period there were many important States which were not represented at Constantinople (Sweden had no resident minister there until 1734, Prussia none till 1758).
More significant, it was not until after it ended that she began to possess permanent representatives of her own in the major capitals of Europe.
Nevertheless the political and diplomatic links which bound her to the rest of the continent were slowly multiplying and becoming stronger.
The importance of the role she was now, willy-nilly, being forced to play in European affairs, in spite (or perhaps because) of her increasing weakness and inefficiency, is shown by the great though indirect and unsought significance of her part in the first partition of Poland (see pp. 273ff).
In the Balkans and the Levant, as in Russia, the European diplomatic system was extending its scope.
The increasing importance of the diplomatic network which bound together the States of Europe was reflected in the eighteenth century in the development in most countries of central institutions for the direction of foreign policy.
Foreign Offices of a modern kind, specialized in their functions, subdivided (usually on a largely geographical basis) into departments with still more specialized duties and employing considerable numbers of experts of all kinds, now appear for the first time in the major European capitals.
In this development France led the way.
By the end of the seventeenth century she already possessed what seemed to many contemporaries the most efficient diplomatic organization in Europe, one which had at its disposal able negotiators, plentiful funds, expert knowledge and the prestige of past success.
In the two generations which followed the death of Louis XIV it was further extended and elaborated.
In the last years of his reign a  tendency towards the creation of specialized departments within the ministry had become visible.
A dépot des archives was set up in 1688; while the Marquis de Torcy (Louis's last Foreign Minister) had begun about the same time the creation of a rudimentary Press bureau.
Departments for the handling of current diplomatic business also began to develop, each under a high official, the premier commis, of whom there were usually two or three.
The number of departments in the ministry and their functions changed frequently during the century; but there was a general tendency for them to become more numerous.
Thus a bureau des fonds with a wide range of responsibilities including control of the ministry's finances was set up in 1725, a bureau du chiffre for the cyphering and decyphering of despatches in 1749 and a bureau des interprètes in 1768.
This organization was not always as efficient in fact as it should have been in theory.
The accumulation and arrangement of its archives, for example, was not always thorough or complete.
Thus in 1779, when it was desired to refer to Choiseul's despatches relating to the Family Compact of 1761, they could not be found and copies had to be obtained from Madrid.
Nevertheless the ministry was probably the best and most complete of its kind in Europe.
In the second half of this period, under Secretaries of State such as the Duc de Choiseul (1758–70) and the Comte de Vergennes (1774–87) it was becoming steadily a more and more effective machine.
By 1789 it had assumed in most respects its nineteenth-century form.
Even more striking was the growth in Russia of the Posolskii Prikaz and its successor the College of Foreign Affairs.
The great expansion of diplomatic contact between Russia and the rest of Europe brought about by Peter I inevitably led to an increase in the size and activity of the Posolskii Prikaz.
As early as 1705 it was one of the largest Foreign Offices in Europe, with over forty translators at its disposal.
Moreover it was becoming for the first time, as a result of Peter's administrative reforms, an institution concerned solely with diplomacy.
It no longer supervised, as in the seventeenth century, the administration of certain Russian provinces, or acted as a tax-collecting body.
This stripping away of extraneous duties continued under its successor, the College of Foreign Affairs, which began to function in 1719, and well before the end of the century this process of specialization had been completed.
The college had become a body concerned  with the formulation and execution of foreign policy and nothing else.
Like the French Foreign Ministry the Posolskii Prikaz and College of Foreign Affairs showed during the eighteenth century an increasing tendency to divide into specialized departments.
As early as 1705 there were five of these with well-defined functions each handling relations with a specific group of countries, and new departments were added as time went on (for example a Ceremonial Department which evolved in the reign of Catherine II).
The growth in the complexity of Russian diplomatic machinery can be seen in the rapidly increasing number of people employed in its control and direction, especially under Catherine II, and its still more rapidly increasing cost.
No other Foreign Office grew with the speed of those of France and Russia; but in almost every European State existing arrangements for the central control of foreign policy became more complex and efficient.
In the Habsburg territories Joseph I set up in 1709 a new permanent committee of nine officials to control foreign affairs.
This, reorganized by Charles VI in 1721, continued to be one of the most important organs of government until the rise of the dominating figure of Kaunitz in the 1750s.
Almost equally important was the ending, by a series of agreements in 1745, 1773 and 1790, of a struggle for influence which had been going on for generations between the Reichskanzlei (Imperial Chancery) under its hereditary head, the Elector of Mainz, and the Hofkanzlei (the Chancery of the Habsburg hereditary lands).
In Sweden arrangements for the control of foreign affairs were complex and unstable during the period 1720–72; but strenuous efforts were made to improve them and Gustavus III's coup d'état in the latter year increased their efficiency.
Britain, sheltered by the sea and the strength of her navy from the necessity of having a good diplomatic organization, never attempted to compete with the great continental States in this respect.
Even in the 1780s the Foreign Office had probably fewer than twenty employees in all; and throughout the century the efficiency of British diplomacy was hampered by the lack of effective arrangements for preserving correspondence and by a shortage of translators.
Nevertheless an important step forward was taken in 1782 by the creation of the office of Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
This concentrated in the hands of one individual the control of foreign policy which had hitherto been entrusted, together with a vast range of other business, to the Secretaries of State for the Northern and Southern Departments.
Even in Poland some attempt to improve existing arrangements for the control of what foreign policy the country had becomes visible after 1775.
This period therefore saw the culmination of tendencies already visible in previous generations which made the diplomatic services of Europe more technically efficient than ever before.
It also saw frequent proposals that diplomats should be given some systematic training to fit them for the posts they were to occupy.
The best-known effort of this kind was that made by Torcy in 1712 to prepare a small number of young men for the French diplomatic service by the creation of a ‘Political Academy’.
This however lasted only until 1720.
A generation later, in 1747, Frederick II set up a training school for the Prussian diplomatic service, again on a small scale.
This came to an end during the Seven Years War; and although it was refounded in 1775 it seems to have been designed merely to produce men capable of filling such relatively minor posts as those at Warsaw and The Hague, where it was not necessary for the Prussian representative to be of high social rank.
A similar effort can be seen in the ukaz of 1797 by which the Tsar Paul ordered the admission to the College of Foreign Affairs of thirty young men who were to be trained there for diplomatic careers.
None of these schemes had much practical importance.
In almost every European State the majority of the more important diplomatic posts were filled by aristocrats, sometimes great aristocrats, who were unwilling to submit to the drudgery of specialized training and often unable to acquire large amounts of specialized knowledge.
Moreover it was widely and probably correctly felt that good diplomats were formed by experience rather than by study, by mixing in good society and watching negotiations in progress rather than by poring over documents in archives.
Would-be ambassadors thus continued to be trained, in so far as they were trained at all, by the time-honoured method of acting as secretaries to older and more experienced diplomats, or by being attached in some subordinate capacity to one of their country's embassies abroad.
Secret diplomacy, though in itself perfectly legitimate and indeed essential to the functioning of the European diplomatic system, on various occasions during the century complicated and stultified the policies of a number of European States.
This was  particularly marked in France, where from 1745 onwards Louis XV created a complex mechanism, the Secret du Roi, designed to give effect to his personal policies.
This functioned side by side with the official diplomacy controlled by the king's ministers.
Though completely ineffective in obtaining the results at which Louis feebly aimed, in particular the strengthening of Poland, it did much, until his death, to confuse and weaken French policy, particularly in Eastern Europe.
Moreover diplomats, as in the seventeenth century, were frequently corrupt; and the attitude of contemporaries to short-comings of this kind remained remarkably casual by modern standards.
Perhaps the most striking case of this is J. A. Thugut, Austrian representative at Constantinople in 1769–75, who was throughout these years an agent in French pay regularly transmitting confidential information to his French colleague, the Comte de Saint-Priest (though it is true that French and Austria were at that time allies, at least in name).
This fact, which was well known in his own lifetime, did not prevent his succeeding Kaunitz as Chancellor in 1792.
Espionage continued to be an essential and sometimes very important ingredient in the conduct of international relations.
The most obvious example of the significance it could have is Frederick II's invasion of Saxony in August 1756.
This attack, which made inevitable the outbreak of a great European war (see p. 298) was in part provoked by the contents of documents which a Saxon government clerk had been bribed to betray to the Prussians.
On a lower level of importance there are numerous examples of the prevalence and occasional success of political espionage.
For five years (1770–75) the entire correspondence of John Murray, British Ambassador to the Porte, was copied by one of his servants and the copies sent to his French colleague and rival; simultaneously the Cardinal-Prince de Rohan, French Ambassador at Vienna in 1772–74, obtained through an anonymous intermediary a great amount of confidential correspondence relating to the policies of Austria and many other States.
The interception and copying of the despatches of foreign diplomats by official organizations created for the purpose (cabinets noirs) was also a regular practice in many States.
The Habsburg government in particular had a great reputation for its skill in this respect and maintained offices for the purpose in Liège, Brussels, Frankfurt and Regensburg, as well as in Vienna.
The Thurn und Taxis family, which had since the sixteenth century  controlled the postal services of the smaller German States, maintained on behalf of the Emperor similar establishments in many cities of the Holy Roman Empire.
France too possessed a very efficient cabinet noir, and down to the fall of the Duc de Choiseul in 1770 most of her Foreign Ministers also held the post of Surintendant-Général des Postes, thus maintaining effective control over so valuable an auxiliary.
By the 1780s it had twelve employees; and complaints against its interference with the correspondence of private citizens figured in a number of the cahiers presented to the States-General in 1789.
In Britain the position was somewhat similar.
It had been established by the Post Office Act of 1711 that private letters could be opened on the warrant of a Secretary of State; and in 1730 the Duke of Newcastle ordered the Postmaster-General to make copies of all correspondence passing through his hands addressed to any of a list of 112 people, including the sovereigns and leading statesmen of Europe.
After 1765 lists of this kind were replaced by general warrants ordering the copying of all diplomatic correspondence passing through London.
By 1741 the British version of the cabinet noir, the ‘Secret Office’, was employing nine people; and its cost tended to increase in the second half of the century.
It was at least as successful as its French equivalent in intercepting the correspondence of foreign diplomats, and far more so in keeping its activities secret.
Secret diplomacy, bribery, the interception of correspondence — none of these was in any way peculiar to the eighteenth century.
They had existed long before it: they were to exist long after it.
They were the result, not of some unique wickedness of the age, but of the natural exigencies of a system of competitive States.
It could indeed be argued with some force that international morality was tending to improve slightly during this period.
There was at least no example in Western Europe in the eighteenth century of the premeditated murder by secret agents of one country of a diplomat belonging to another, a thing which had been seen under the rule of Louis XIV.
The traditions and attitudes of the seventeenth century were also continued in the importance attached, particularly in the first half of this period, to questions of diplomatic precedence.
To ensure that his sovereign's dignity was not slighted by any infringement of the precedence claimed by his representatives continued to be one of the major tasks of the European diplomat; and the continuing importance of questions of precedence is shown by the continuing production of books which claimed to elucidate them.
‘Points of honour, rank, precedence, are the most delicate aspects of political life’, wrote the author of one of these.
‘Princes will cede towns, even provinces, but all the ability of the most adroit negotiators cannot persuade them to give up a rank to which they believe themselves entitled.’
The great peace congresses which punctuated the history of the period gave particular scope, by bringing together in one place the representatives of a large number of different States, for disputes of this kind.
Seating arrangements at conferences, forms of address and other issues of this kind remained a continual source of potential difficulty.
It is a sign of the slowly increasing political maturity of the age that serious negotiations were less frequently impeded by such quibbles than in the previous century.
Even so, the attention devoted to questions of precedence, though declining, remained great until late in this period.
In particular the assumption of the title of Emperor by Peter I of Russia in 1721 set off a series of complicated controversies (notably with the Holy Roman Emperors who claimed a monopoly of the imperial title) which dragged on intermittently for decades.
The relations of the European States continued to be influenced in the eighteenth century, almost as much as in the age of Louis XIV, by the idea of the balance of power.
Theoretical justifications of such a balance were frequent; and by the middle decades of the century it was being discussed more widely than ever before.
By then Europe was clearly becoming a single State-system.
The localized ‘inferior balances’— between Sweden and Denmark in the Baltic, between France and the Habsburgs in Germany and Italy — in terms of which many writers and politicians had hitherto thought, were becoming merged in a general balance which covered the whole continent.
In the first half of the century this continental balance was envisaged as essentially one of France, supported at times by Spain and some of the German States (above all Bavaria), against the Austrian Habsburgs, supported in general by Great Britain and the United Provinces.
The apparent symmetry of this arrangement was rapidly shown to be superficial and delusive.
A number of diplomatic episodes (notably the Anglo-French alliance of 1716 and the Austro-Spanish combination of 1725: see pp. 328, 315) made it clear that in this respect the presumptions of the previous century were no longer valid.
Moreover the fact that after 1713 no State in Western Europe was in a position to dominate the area, as France had done during much of the reign of Louis XIV, introduced into the politics of the period an element of flexibility which had previously been lacking.
Most important of all, traditional conceptions of the balance of power were now being undermined by the rapid emergence of great new political forces in East and East Central Europe, those of Russia and Prussia.
However the full significance of this went unperceived until the 1740s; and even then habit kept the minds of most observers running in the old channels of Bourbon-Habsburg rivalry till the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756.
Louis XIV had seen in the last days of his reign the growing pointlessness of the traditional Franco-Austrian antagonism, but his efforts to achieve some agreement with the Habsburgs were not followed up by his successors.
It was the Seven Years War which broke up completely and decisively the old system of balance four decades later.
With France and the Habsburgs now allies (see p. 296) the pivot on which the old system turned had disappeared.
The tradition of Anglo-Austrian co-operation against France, wearing thin in the time of Walpole and strained unbearably by the peace settlement of 1748, was also submerged by the events of the 1750s.
Prussia had established, at least for the time being, her position as one of the great European powers; and the personal prestige of her ruler stood higher than that of any other European monarch.
The Habsburgs had been stung by the loss of Silesia into a series of far-reaching administrative reforms, while Russia had once more displayed her military strength and had consolidated her dominant position in Poland.
The result of these changes was to move the centre of gravity of European diplomacy sharply to the east after 1763.
The growth in the importance of Prussia and Russia, the renaissance of Habsburg power, now contrasted sharply with the isolation and internal divisions of Britain and the financial weakness and diminished military prestige of France.
The main problems of European politics after the Seven Years War were Eastern ones, those of Poland and European Turkey, not, as a generation earlier, those of the Netherlands, the Rhineland or Italy.
The inability of the States of Western Europe to play a decisive role in the solution of these  new questions was shown clearly by the impotent resentment with which the French government had to watch the first partition of Poland in 1772 and the Russian annexation of the Crimea in 1783–84.
The European balance of power was thus after the Seven Years War a more subtle problem in many ways than in the first half of the century.
It now covered a greater geographical area and involved a greater number of powerful States than ever before.
Side by side with this European aspect of the balance of power went another and increasingly important one — that constituted by events on the oceans and in Europe's colonies overseas.
Most contemporaries realized that the two aspects were intimately connected.
In particular they believed that a State which could dominate the sea and Europe's trade with the outside world would have gone far towards making herself mistress of the continent.
Defoe proclaimed that ‘to be Masters of the Marine Power is to be Masters of all the Power and all the Commerce in Europe’.
Similarly a French pamphleteer in the middle of the century argued that ‘the power which is strongest at sea must necessarily be the strongest commercially and thus the most formidable…dominance of the sea would give a nation universal monarchy’.
From these assumptions there naturally followed the idea that a balance between the maritime strengths of the European States must be safeguarded in the same way as that between their territories in Europe.
Such an idea was beginning to be put forward at least as early as the 1720s.
In this naval and colonial struggle the main protagonists were Great Britain and, in opposition to her, France normally supported by Spain.
In most of the continental States this aspect of the balance of power aroused anti-British feelings.
To them it was essentially an effort, on the whole an unsuccessful one, to restrict and if possible reverse the enormous growth of Britain's maritime strength and overseas possessions.
The vigour, sometimes amounting to brutality, with which she utilized her seapower in time of war, by wholesale interference with neutral shipping carrying contraband or trading with her enemies, did much to increase the hostility with which she was now widely regarded.
It meant that merchants and public opinion in the United Provinces, Sweden, Denmark or the Hanse towns were easy targets for French propaganda stressing the dangers of British seapower and the need for Europe to combine to restrain its use.
Propaganda of this kind was particularly marked during the Seven Years War, and spread the idea of a trade balance which must be defended against the excessive strength of Britain just as the territorial balance in Europe must be safeguarded from the overgrown influence of any continental State.
The English, alleged the Duc de Choiseul, ‘while pretending to protect the balance on land which no one threatens…are entirely destroying the balance at sea which no one defends’.
Nor were these arguments without practical effect.
The approaches made in 1759 by the Danish government to the United Provinces for the creation of a maritime union to defend neutral rights were only one of a series of proposals for some anti-British combination of this kind which culminated in the Armed Neutrality of 1780.
Analyses of the working of the balance of power, whether continental or colonial, became increasingly numerous and elaborate in the eighteenth century.
It was now no longer sufficient to accept it as the more or less automatic result of the existence of a number of completely sovereign States bound together by geographical contiguity.
More and more it tended to be regarded not merely as a useful political device but as something with a moral value and justification of its own.
Arguments of this kind normally started from the assumption that the powers of Europe were still in a ‘state of nature’ with respect to each other and that each of them was engaged, consciously or not, in a ceaseless struggle to increase its influence at the expense of its neighbours.
‘Each nation in its natural state,’ wrote a widely read commentator in the 1740s, ‘must be considered as the enemy of all others; or as disposed to be such.’
‘We cannot rely on virtue; it is weak and equivocal, or hidden and unknown;…we must thus take as our starting-point only the possible and even probable abuse of power,’ wrote another two generations later.
If these pessimistic assumptions were justified, how could the smaller States protect their interests or even their existence?
Only by a tacit but effective agreement to combine against any power which threatened them, in other words by the creation of a balance of power.
A balance of this kind, it was contended, was an essential condition of the functioning of the European State-system.
It was even argued that a State could justifiably be compelled, by the other members of that system, to sacrifice for the common good territory to which it had every legal right, just as it in its turn could compel one of its subjects if necessary to sacrifice some of  his wealth to its needs; for ‘the most legitimate rulers must sometimes renounce their rights in order to maintain the balance’.
Such theories were exposed to obvious practical objections.
In particular they assumed that it was possible, at any given moment, to make reasonably precise comparisons of the real strength of the States concerned, to estimate accurately the advantages of Britain's wealth as against Russia's population or Prussia's efficient bureaucracy.
The power of the various European States was in practice estimated by commentators largely in the crude terms of the extent of territory each possessed.
This, however, was seen by some of them to be an unreliable criterion.
Spain under her last Habsburg kings, it was pointed out, had controlled far more territory than any other European country and had none the less been a victim-State on the point of internal collapse.
It was also possible to classify the States of Europe according to their ability to wage war, whether on their own or with the help of subsidies and other encouragements from their more powerful neighbours.
This, though a more realistic standard of judgement, was also not entirely satisfactory.
Discussions of how the relative strength of States should be evaluated were common, but none of their authors succeeded in finding a clear or universally applicable solution to the problem.
It is easy to find in the political writing of the eighteenth century, and especially in its vast pamphlet literature, frequent rejection of the idea of the balance of power.
On closer examination, however, most of this turns out to be the product, not of reasoned consideration and reflection, but merely of some political manoeuvre or party attitude.
Fundamental criticism of the idea of safeguarding the rights and interests of individual States by means of some form of balance came only from the authors of the various peace projects produced during this period.
These writers, like the theorists whom they criticized, started from the assumption that the governments of Europe were still in a ‘state of nature’ and that some means must be found of restraining their innate propensity to attack and injure one another.
They agreed in rejecting the balance of power as a hopelessly inefficient mechanism for this purpose.
It was, wrote the best-known and most influential of them, the Abbe de Saint-Pierre, ‘that vain Idol to which the Nations have Sacrificed so blindly, so fruitlessly, and for so long a Time, so much Blood and Treasure’.
Peace and security, they argued, could be achieved  only by the creation of some effective international authority able to override the selfish or aggressive impulses of any individual ruler and to persuade him, if necessary by force, to respect the rights of his neighbours.
In other words what was wanted was something equivalent, on the international level, to the ‘social contract’ from which the States themselves were thought to have originated.
Just as men had at some remote date in the past surrendered some of their individual rights to a sovereign and thus created civil society, so now each State must surrender some of its sovereignty to a supranational authority.
The suggestion of a ‘social contract’ between States had already been made in the first half of the seventeenth century by Grotius.
It had been repeated at the end of that century by Leibniz, who attempted in the collections of treaties and other documents which he published, the Codex Juris Centium Diplomaticus (1693) and Mantissa Codicis (1700), to provide a basis for it.
The form which this idea normally took, that of a federation of States ruled by some central body which included representatives of all of them, was probably encouraged by the great political and economic success achieved in the seventeenth century by the new federation of the United Provinces.
Its practicability was also sometimes alleged to be proved by the existence of the Holy Roman Empire or the Swiss cantons, both of which could be considered as types of loose federation.
Various more or less precise suggestions as to the structure of such a federation were put forward by different writers in the earlier years of this period — by the Quaker William Penn in his Essay towards the Present and Future Peace of Europe (1693), by another Quaker, John Bellers, in his Some Reasons for an European State (London, 1710), by the author of the anonymous Cardinal Alberoni's Scheme for reducing the Turkish Empire to the Obedience of Christian Princes (London, 1736) and by Saint-Pierre himself.
Similar proposals continued to be made in various forms in the second half of the century, though none was elaborated in as much detail as that of Saint-Pierre or attracted as much attention.
Thus the English radical Richard Price suggested in very general terms in 1776 the creation of a senate in which all the States of Europe would be represented and which would have power to intervene in disputes between them.
A decade later a greater radical, Jeremy Bentham, suggested that the armed forces of all the European States should be reduced to low fixed levels, that  all colonies should be freed (one of the first recognitions in schemes of this kind of the importance which overseas possessions were now assuming in European politics) and that a ‘common court of judicature’ should be set up to settle international disputes.
More original, though hardly more practical, was the proposal of Thomas Pownall, a former Governor of Massachusetts, for the creation of ‘a Council of Commerce, for all Europe and North America (absolutely exclusive of all and every point of politics)’.
This he hoped would enforce freedom of the seas and promote freedom of international trade.
It might also, he modestly suggested, tend to prevent wars, and would at least help to codify and enforce maritime law in time of war.
Pownall's suggestion exemplified an approach to the problem of international peace which, from the 1770s onwards, increasingly supplanted schemes of the essentially traditional sort typified by that of St Pierre.
This involved most notably a stress on the power of economic forces to overcome existing divisions between States.
Free trade, it was argued, would at last give effect to the natural harmony which should exist between peoples and end the  artificial and destructive tradition of political and dynastic division which had hitherto kept them apart.
Hopes of this kind owed much to the influence and example of the Physiocrats in France; but their power in the English-speaking world on both sides of the Atlantic was considerable.
Associated with them was the potentially much more radical assumption that the foreign relations of States were indissolubly bound up with the structure of their internal politics.
It followed from this that real international peace could be attained only through far-reaching political reform within the European States and the weakening or destruction of the monarchical, aristocratic and military influences which had hitherto dominated them.
If this could be achieved, wrote the English radical Tom Paine in the early 1790s, ‘the intrigue of courts, by which the system of war is kept up, may provoke a confederation of peoples to abolish it’.
But ideas so uncompromising as this could hardly be voiced, at least on the eastern shores of the Atlantic, until after the French Revolution had broken out.
No eighteenth-century peace plan had the slightest chance of being put into practice.
Not only the statesmen of the age but also public opinion, partly sheltered from the realities of war by the employment of mainly professional armies, were untouched by  the enthusiasm for peace which usually prompted such schemes and indifferent to the dreams which they embodied.
The only political figures of importance to be even slightly influenced by ideas of this kind were the Marquis d'Argenson, who controlled French foreign policy, with small practical success, in the years 1744–47, and perhaps the Comte de Vergennes, who occupied a similar position in 1774–87.
Eighteenth-century plans for universal peace were also weakened by the fact that, in an age in which the relative strengths of the European States were rapidly altering, they shared the conservative bias, the desire to maintain the status quo, which seems inherent in any scheme of this kind.
All of them tended to assume that the territorial division of Europe as it stood at the moment of their publication was, or could be made, permanent and sacrosanct.
In some cases their authors avowed openly their desire to perpetuate the distribution of territory which existed when they wrote.
Thus Saint-Pierre specified that existing frontiers were not to be changed in any way, and that no exchanges of territory were to take place or treaties between States to be made except with the consent of the federation which he wished to create.
Eighty years later Immanuel Kant, in his Zum Ewigen Frieden, ein philosophisches Entwurf (1795) proposed as one of the preliminary conditions of a lasting peace that no State should ever pass under the control of another by any means — inheritance, exchange, purchase or donation as well as conquest.
To generations which had seen Russia's expansion in the Baltic, the Black Sea and the Caucasus, Frederick II's attacks on Silesia and Saxony, and the partitions of Poland, such ideas appeared utterly unrealistic.