

The monetary sector
In section 1.1, we looked at a number of general principles which we said were common to the behaviour of all types of institution.
However, the financial system consists of many types of institution, differentiated by the services that they offer to lenders and borrowers.
Table 3.1 provides a classification of such institutions.
In the remainder of this chapter, we shall focus attention upon the Bank of England and upon the rest of the monetary sector.
In Chapter 4, we shall focus upon the behaviour of NBFIs.
In both chapters we begin with descriptive material and then move on to issues of economic importance involving the institutions.
3.1 The Bank of England
The Bank of England stands at the centre of the UK financial system.
When commentators refer to ‘the authorities’ they frequently mean the Treasury and the Bank of England.
On a simple view, the Treasury, as a government department, formulates the financial policy which it wishes to see pursued  and the Bank of England decides upon the appropriate technical means of carrying out that policy and is responsible for putting it into effect.
This is a simplification of the truth since the Bank clearly now offers advice upon what policy it sees as feasible in given circumstances and is bound by some of its responsibilities to represent the interests of some areas of the financial system.
Equally, the Treasury has preferences for the way in which policy is carried out, resisting interest rate changes for example when the Bank might otherwise think these desirable.
The powers of the Bank to influence conditions in  financial markets and the behaviour of institutions are considerable and derive principally from three functions.
These are:
1.
Its supervisory role;
2.
Its management of the National Debt;
3.
Its function as banker to the government and to the monetary sector.
We shall look at each of these in turn.
3.1.1 The Bank's supervisory role
Firstly, under the 1987 Banking Act it is responsible for the supervision of those institutions comprising the monetary sector.
Since the 1979 Banking Act it has done this by licensing institutions to take deposits and requiring regular statistical returns from such institutions.
From these figures it monitored key ratios which indicated the capital adequacy, liquidity and degree of risk for each firm.
The adequacy of this supervision was, however, questioned following the collapse of Johnson Matthey Bank in 1984.
The 1987 Act is therefore partly a response to lessons learnt at that time.
It gave the Bank additional power by creating a board of banking supervision; by making the provision of misleading information to this board a criminal offence; by taking powers to consult with the auditors and accountants of individual banks; by defining the circumstances in which it would not consider an individual a ‘fit and proper person’ to run a bank; and by taking powers to limit individual shareholding in a bank.
In trying to understand its other functions we shall be helped by looking at the Bank's balance sheet as set out in Table 3.2.
Notice firstly that for accounting purposes the Bank's function as the issuer of currency notes is shown separately from its banking activities.
This is a requirement of the Bank Charter Act of 1844 but has no practical significance and need not detain us here.
3.1.2 Management of the National Debt
The second function which gives the Bank power to influence financial markets derives from its management of the National Debt.
In almost every year since 1945 the government has spent more than it has been willing or able to raise via taxation.
The deficit has then to be financed by borrowing in one of a number of ways.
One method is the issue of ‘marketable debt’ or government securities: treasury bills and government bonds.
Bills mature in ninety-one days from the date of issue (and are therefore very liquid) while bonds can mature at anything from five years from their date of issue to never.
The Bank is responsible for the administration   of sales of both types of instrument and, in the case of bonds, for maintaining the register of holders.
In addition to the financing of each year's new borrowing requirement, the Bank has also to consider the refinancing, by the issue of new debt, of that part of the existing National Debt which matures each year since the way in which this is done can affect both the liquidity of financial markets and the structure of interest rates.
For all these reasons, therefore, the Bank has to make frequent and substantial decisions about the type of government debt to issue bearing in mind the consequence of its choice.
For example, treasury bill finance has the effect of creating extremely liquid assets which are very close substitutes for money.
Issuing them as a substitute for bonds shortens the maturity structure of the National Debt and makes financial markets generally more liquid.
Concentrating finance at the ‘short’ end of the spectrum will also tend to raise short-term interest rates relative to long.
By contrast, selling long-term debt on a sufficient scale will lengthen the maturity structure of existing debt and will cause long-term rates to rise relative to short.
Note that a sale of debt which shortens the maturity structure is sometimes known as ‘unfunding’ the National Debt while a sale which lengthens its maturity structure is sometimes referred to as ‘funding’.
The latter usage in particular is unfortunate since the same term is used to describe the financing of government borrowing by selling debt (of any maturity) to the non-bank private sector rather than to banks.
Thus a government borrowing requirement financed wholly by the sale of debt to the non-bank private sector is said to be ‘fully funded’.
3.1.3 The Bank as a bank
Lastly, its own functions as a bank combined with its size and its relationship to the government provide a third channel through which to influence financial markets.
Its first important function as a bank is as banker to the government.
Its liabilities therefore include ‘public deposits’ and these deposits are those of the Exchequer (the government's central cash account), the Inland Revenue, the National Loans Fund and the National Debt Commissioners.
Clearly, every day will see large sums being received and paid out as the public and private sectors make payments to each other.
The net flow will show as a change in the stock of public deposits.
Notice that such net flows could be the outcome of ‘spontaneous’ transactions between the government and private sectors: the private sector pays taxes and buys public services while the government buys goods and pays contractors from the private sector.
Alternatively, such flows could be ‘induced’.
For example, the government could create a flow from the private sector by selling government stock.
A flow towards the private sector could be created by the purchase of such stock.
This possibility is important and we shall return to it at the end of this section.
Secondly, the Bank of England functions as the bankers' bank.
Retail banks hold deposits of their own with the Bank.
These are the ‘bankers’ deposits' referred to in the balance sheet in Table 3.2.
One purpose of such deposits is obvious.
As customers of the retail banks make payments to each other, the greater part of the value of those payments will cancel out.
None the less, at the end of each day there will be a small net flow into some banks and out of others.
The net indebtedness of bank A to bank B can be settled at the Bank of England by a transfer of bankers' deposits from the account of A to the account of B. Notice that inter-bank settlement of this kind has no effect upon the total of bankers' deposits, only upon their ownership.
There are, however, circumstances in which banks will need to call upon their deposits and in which the total of such deposits will change.
A simple case is one where the public wishes to hold more notes and coin, as in the holiday season for example, and makes the appropriate withdrawals from its bank accounts.
The first effect is on banks' balance sheets.
Look at Table 3.3 which shows the sterling assets and liabilities of banks.
As the public draws notes and coin, banks' deposit liabilities fall and on the asset side banks' holdings of notes and coin shrink by an equal amount.
Notice, however, that although both sides of the balance sheet shrink by an equal amount, the ratio between different assets has changed.
In fact, if deposits and notes and coin fall by an equal amount, then notes and coin will shrink as a proportion of total assets because notes and coin formed such a small proportion of assets to begin with.
If we accept that the ratio of assets held by institutions is a matter of careful choice and that normally their asset portfolio is in equilibrium, then it follows that the loss of notes and coin produces a secondary effect.
Banks must rearrange their assets to restore the original equilibrium by drawing notes and coin from the Bank of England, in exchange for bankers' deposits.
The Bank's balance sheet has also contracted: the fall in liabilities (bankers' deposits) being matched by reduced assets (notes and coin).
Another situation in which the total of bankers' deposits will change arises as a result of transactions between the government and the private sector.
We have already noted that the net effect of these daily flows will be to cause a change in the volume of public deposits; but that is only one-half of the picture.
Any change in public deposits must be matched by an equal and opposite change in bankers' deposits, from which still further consequences may follow.
Imagine, for example, a net flow of payments to the government as the private sector writes cheques to settle tax demands.
The  cheques are paid into the Inland Revenue account at the Bank.
The Bank credits public deposits and debits bankers' deposits accordingly.
As far as the Bank of England is concerned, the adjustment consists this time of a rearrangement solely of its liabilities.
For banks, the immediate effect is to reduce the size of their balance sheets: deposit liabilities have fallen and the fall has been matched by an equal reduction in their deposits at the Bank of England.
However, this equal reduction has again entailed a change in proportions.
Look again at Table 3.3.
A given reduction has a comparatively small proportionate effect upon deposit liabilities; the same reduction applied to bankers' deposits (called ‘operational balances’ in table 3.3) will reduce them by a very large proportion.
The ratio of bankers' balances to deposit liabilities will be smaller than it was and if, as we have now said several times, the original ratio was a desired one, then banks will have to make further adjustments to their balance sheets to restore the ratio.
Referring to Table 3.3 again, consider some of the possibilities.
One obvious way of increasing bankers' deposits in relation to other assets would be to recall some of the overnight lending to the London discount market.
The effect of this, of course, is to shift the shortage of liquidity to other institutions, here the discount houses.
If the shortage is sufficiently severe, then discount market institutions will have to apply to the Bank of England for assistance in its role as ‘lender of last resort’.
This will always be forthcoming but the Bank can choose the manner and the ‘price’ of its assistance.
In this case it may lend to the discount houses; then the Bank's balance sheet will show an increase in advances (an asset) and in bankers' deposits (a liability).
The rate of interest at which this assistance is provided indicates the Bank's view of the appropriate level of interest rates.
It could, if it wished, provide assistance at a ‘penal’ rate, forcing institutions to charge higher interest rates to their customers and thus communicating a rise in interest rates throughout the market.
Already we should be persuaded that the Bank has considerable power to influence monetary conditions.
Even so we do not have the full picture.
At the beginning of this section we made the distinction between ‘spontaneous’ and ‘induced’flows of funds between the government and the private sector.
Suppose that the authorities wished to see a rise in interest rates in a period when forecasts suggested that there would be no net flow of funds towards the government.
Such a flow could always be induced by selling government stock.
The public pays for this stock by writing cheques and banks lose deposits and bankers' balances in equal quantity.
At the Bank of England public deposits increase and bankers' deposits decrease by the amount of the sale.
Provided that the sale of debt is in excess of what the government intends to spend, a process referred to at the moment as ‘overfunding’, then a shortage of liquidity has been created.
Banks will respond by trying to restore their desired ratios, following the course referred to earlier.
Eventually, institutions will be forced to seek help from the Bank which can then use its power to signal the level of interest rates it would like to see.
In Chapter 9 we return to the issue of regulation and the Bank of England's role within it.
And in section 5.2 we look in more detail at just how the Bank operates in short-term money markets in order to influence interest rates and the rate of monetary growth.
3.2 The monetary sector
In addition to containing the Banking Department of the Bank of England, the monetary sector includes a very large number of institutions whose principal function is to take deposits and to make loans.
In this sense they function as ‘banks’ even though, as we shall see later in this section, they differ in numerous respects.
For example, only for the ‘retail banks’ and the National Girobank in Table 3.1, is money transmission and the cheque book facility a major part of their business.
For this reason a distinction is sometimes made between ‘primary’ banks and ‘secondary’banks.
As we shall see in a moment, however, there are respects in which similarities are overwhelming.
Henceforth any reference to ‘banks’ is a reference to ‘institutions comprising the monetary sector’unless explicitly stated otherwise.
The term ‘monetary sector’ dates from August 1981 when a new set of monetary control provisions were introduced.
If the provisions were to work, there had obviously to be a clear definition of the institutions to whom they applied and the institutions chosen were mainly those for which the Bank of England had supervisory responsibility under the 1979 Banking Act, expanded by a few additions.
The monetary sector now comprises those institutions subject to the Bank's supervisory powers under the 1987 Banking Act.
The first, and possibly the most important point to be made about institutions within the monetary sector is that deposits with them count as ‘money’.
That is to say that most definitions of money include ‘bank deposits’ of some description and these are deposits with the monetary sector.
This explains why the authorities, wanting the 1981 provisions to be successful in influencing monetary growth, applied the provisions to these institutions.
Given that their deposits are ‘money’, there is an overwhelming case from an economic point of view for dwelling on their similarities (and calling them all ‘banks’) rather than on their differences.
Secondly, notice that the institutions whose deposits count as ‘money’ may change.
Indeed, what we regard as ‘money’ has itself changed with time.
At one time it was only precious metals.
Until 1989 we used M3 which includes deposits with the monetary sector.
In June 1987 building society deposits were admitted to a new ‘M4’ definition of money and the Halifax and Abbey National building societies joined the Bankers' Automated Clearing Service (BACS).
M4 is now (Sept. 1988) replacing M3 as the favoured measure of broad money.
Thirdly, the number of firms included in the monetary sector is large.
The Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin publishes a list of members, grouped in the categories of Table 3.1.
In May 1987 the number was over 400.
Lastly, there are a number of differences between groups of institutions making up the monetary sector.
The important differences are best summarised by comparing features of their balance sheets.
Table 3.4 draws some comparisons between their liabilities; Table 3.5 does the same for their assets.
The term retail bank covers the London, Scottish and Irish clearing banks.
As the term ‘clearing’ implies, these are banks whose obvious function is to provide a money transmission service using the cheque-clearing system.
For this reason, many individuals and firms find a cheque account with a clearing      bank to be indispensable, even if, for savings purposes, they prefer to hold accounts with other institutions like building societies.
The consequence of this is that clearing banks have a very large number of accounts but the average size of the accounts is comparatively small.
Also, as Table 3.4 reveals, sight deposits form a large proportion of total deposits while column 4 shows that sterling business outweighs foreign business by nearly 2 to 1.
Comparing Tables 3.4 and 3.5 we can see that sterling and ‘other’ liabilities are fairly closely matched by corresponding assets.
Look also at the last column in Table 3.5.
This shows the relationship between banks' primary source of liquid assets (notes, coin and bankers' balances in col. 2) and total asset/liabilities.
It confirms quite dramatically what we said earlier, namely, that large, skilled financial institutions will experience small and predictable net withdrawals and therefore need to hold very small quantities of non-interest-earning reserves.
However, you should notice, from column 5, that retail banks hold comparatively large quantities of treasury and commercial bills.
These are both very liquid and interest-earning assets and thus provide a valuable second line of reserves.
The same may be said about loans at call to members of the London Discount Market Association (LDMA).
These are contained within ‘market loans’ in column 3 and in March 1988 amounted to 6.2bn.
Having a large number of accounts makes for very stable behaviour among depositors but the small size of the deposits and their ‘active’ nature makes them an expensive source of funds for the banks.
Two consequences have followed from this in recent years.
Firstly, retail banks have widened the range of services offered to customers.
The major banks now provide insurance, security-dealing, trustee and executor services.
They run their own unit trusts and credit card facilities.
In 1987 they began to acquire estate agencies.
Secondly, they have looked for cheaper sources of deposits.
This was facilitated in the early 1970s following the ‘Competition and Credit Control’ arrangements.
Banks were able to bid aggressively for wholesale deposits and to take in funds in return for the issue of certificates of deposit.
The effect in both cases was the same.
Banks were able to acquire large time deposits with very low service costs and they were able to do so at very keen rates of interest since these were often negotiated for each individual deposit.
In April 1985, interest paid to bank depositors was put on the same tax footing as for building societies: tax is deducted at source at a composite rate.
This increase in the comparability of building society and bank deposits has meant that the aggressive competition for deposits which began in the wholesale markets has spread to the retail sector.
The attempts by banks in recent years to find new sources of deposit has become known as liability management , and signifies an important change in bank behaviour.
Traditionally the supply of deposits was taken as given.
For retail banks it was the result of their money transmission service.
People had to hold bank deposits in order to enjoy the convenience of a cheque book.
Bank profits then depended upon the assets which those deposits were used to acquire, in effect profits depended upon asset management .
The importance of the practice lies in its implications for monetary control and we shall mention it again in sections 4.3 and 9.1.
Notice for now one obvious result.
Prior to liability management, banks paid interest on comparatively  few deposit liabilities and where they did such rates were not always closely related to market rates.
Thus when market rates rose, as the result of government policy for example, bank deposits became comparatively less attractive.
The rise in rates was a rise in relative rates against bank deposits.
Now, when interest rates rise, so too do the rates on most bank liabilities.
They no longer become relatively less attractive.
The unique role of the discount houses is also reflected in the tables.
Their function is to act as a ‘buffer’ between the rest of the monetary sector and the Bank of England.
They take in surplus funds from other institutions and use the funds to deal in treasury and commercial bills.
This suits other banks because it means that they can earn interest on surplus funds, knowing at the same time that they can get them very quickly, at call, if necessary.
The profit to the discount houses comes from using the funds to deal in treasury and commercial bills.
Their exposure to instant recall of their liabilities is tolerable because the Bank of England stands ready to assist them in time of a shortage of liquidity.
As Table 3.4 columns 4 and 5 show, the discount houses' business is overwhelmingly in sterling and their ‘sight’ liabilities are far greater than for any other banks.
These features are also reflected in their assets.
Sterling assets very nearly match sterling liabilities; ‘other’ assets are very few indeed.
Column 5 of Table 3.5 confirms treasury and commercial bills as their principal assets.
Foreign banks are banks with head offices overseas.
Their presence in London first developed following the relaxation of exchange control in 1958 and has grown rapidly since.
The largest foreign banks are American or Japanese owned and the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin provides detailed information on each of the various sub-categories.
Their original function was to finance trade between the UK and their country of origin, to borrow funds in London for use by their governments and later to find profitable outlets for their home countries' surpluses.
In some cases overseas banks set up branches in London because banking regulations at home made expansion difficult.
But they were also attracted, initially by London's highly developed foreign exchange market, later by its development of ‘parallel’ markets and most recently because of its importance in the markets for Eurobonds and currencies.
Predictably, as Table 3.4 confirms, their liabilities are overwhelmingly in foreign currency and are heavily weighted towards time deposits.
Table 3.5 shows that sterling and non-sterling liabilities are quite closely matched by corresponding assets.
It also shows that their very small holdings of sight deposits enables them to hold very small reserves of notes, coin and bankers' balances.
Acceptance houses are an elite sub-group of what are commonly called merchant banks .
The figures in Tables 3.4 and 3.5 describe the position of these merchant banks who are members of the London Accepting Houses Committee.
Other firms engaged in merchant banking are scattered among the categories of ‘foreign’, ‘other British’ and ‘consortium’banks.
As their name implies, merchant banks' function is to finance trade.
This was traditionally done by guaranteeing or ‘accepting’(hence ‘acceptance houses’), for a fee, bills of exchange issued by merchants.
Their business now is to provide banking and financial services to the corporate as opposed to personal sectors.
Their banking function consists largely of accepting ‘wholesale’ deposits  for a fixed term and lending them in large amounts to firms, also for a fixed term.
Table 3.4 shows the low ratio of sight to time deposits allowing (Table 3.5) a lower ratio of liquid assets to liabilities than is possible for retail banks.
Sterling business slightly outweighs non-sterling business.
In addition to their obvious banking business, however, many of them advise on aspects of corporate finance, coming to public notice with large privatisations and contested take-over bids.
They also handle the issuing of shares and bonds for firms and public authorities.
Because of their traditional experience of financing trade overseas, many merchant banks developed foreign currency dealing expertise and most recently have emerged as major dealers in Euromarkets.
Consortium banks are banks which are owned jointly by other financial institutions.
One of the shareholders must be based overseas and no one shareholder may own more than 50 per cent of the bank.
Compared with other groups of banks, the consortium group is small.
Consortium banks grew rapidly in the 1960s as a means of giving the owning institutions access to London's money markets.
The advantage to the owners was that the costs and the risks were shared.
With the passage of time, however, the owning institutions have themselves grown to the point where the costs and risks are something they can manage for themselves, at which point the freedom and other advantages of sole ownership have taken over.
Also, as owning firms have expanded they have diversified and have found themselves in competition with their consortium offspring.
For these reasons they have grown very slowly in recent years, as Table 3.4 shows, and their comparative importance has declined.
The composition of their balance sheet is very similar to that of foreign banks.
Sterling assets/liabilities are heavily outweighed by non-sterling ones.
Also, the proportion of sight to time deposits is very low.
Other British banks , as one might expect, is a category which contains a variety of institutions.
It includes banks which, although British owned, conduct most of their business overseas; it also includes wholesale banking subsidiaries of the retail banks.
3.3 Banks and the creation of money
For the authorities, and for most economists too, the significance of the monetary sector lies in its ability to create money with the further possible consequence that this will affect the level of aggregate demand.
The issue arises because some 90 per cent of M3 consists of monetary sector deposits.
From this it follows that, other things being equal, an expansion of bank deposits entails an increase in the officially measured money supply.
In this section we want to look firstly at why banks have an interest in expanding the volume of deposits and thereby the stock of money.
Secondly, we shall look at how they are able to do it.
In section 3.4 we shall look at some of the factors constraining monetary expansion.
3.3.1 Why banks create money
The answer to the first, or ‘why’, question begins with a recognition that banks are private sector, profit-making organisations with obligations to  shareholders to increase profits over time.
Thus they will always be looking for ways of expanding their balance sheets provided this leads to extra profit.
Look again at Table 3.3 which shows the aggregate balance sheet of a large number of banks.
Notice that assets are composed of various forms of lending: to the personal sector, the commercial sector, the government or the Bank of England.
The liabilities side is dominated by deposits.
Notice also that we can express any class of asset as a proportion of total assets or liabilities and remember too that in section 1.1.5 we said that these ratios are arrived at as a matter of deliberate choice and are assumed to represent portfolio equilibrium.
Imagine now that a customer of an individual bank applies successfully for an overdraft.
Until he begins to write cheques, i.e. to spend, nothing has happened to the balance sheet.
As the overdraft facility is used, however, two things begin to happen simultaneously.
The figure for ‘advances’ begins to tick up as the customer's borrowing increases.
At the same time, the figure for ‘operational balances at the Bank of England’ falls by an equal amount as the recipients of his cheques pay them into their accounts at different banks and the cheques are presented for payment at the issuing bank.
When the overdraft facility is fully used, the composition of assets will have changed.
Advances will be larger by the amount of the loan and the bank's operational balances will be smaller by the same amount.
Notice that the size of the balance sheet has not changed but its composition and therefore the ratios have.
Notice also that since the bank charges interest on advances but gets none for its balances at the Bank of England, its operations are now more profitable.
Expanding its lending in this way is, on the face of it, clearly in the bank's interest.
Granted that the expansion of lending may be profitable, how does it affect the money supply?
Remember that the money supply consists overwhelmingly of bank deposits.
Clearly, as far as our lending bank is concerned, nothing has happened to the money supply.
The changes have been entirely on the asset side of the balance sheet.
But remember that this change in the composition of assets came about because the borrower used his overdraft facility.
Operational balances were reduced (and advances increased) by the fact that the borrower wrote cheques which other people paid into their accounts at other banks.
If we were to look at the balance sheets of these other banks, we should find that their customers' deposits had increased and that this increase was matched on the asset side by an increase in their operational balances at the Bank of England.
Other things being equal, an increase in lending raises profits and the supply of money.
Provided there is a demand for bank lending at a profitable rate of interest, we can see why it will always be difficult for the authorities to control monetary expansion.
3.3.2 How banks create money
In section 3.3.1 we saw that if an individual bank increases its lending, other things being equal, the money supply will expand.
When we talk of an increase in bank lending leading to monetary expansion, however, we are not normally talking about the behaviour of an individual bank but about banks as a whole.
However, the process remains essentially the same.
Imagine  bank A grants an overdraft as before, but that banks B, C…n are doing the same.
If the borrower of bank A uses the overdraft to pay people who bank with banks B, C, etc. then the increase in the money supply appears in their deposits just as it did in the single bank case.
The difference, of course, is that borrowers from banks B, C…n are paying clients of bank A and so part of the increase in money supply will appear in bank A's deposits.
Notice, however, that all the time this expansion is taking place, the composition of the aggregate balance sheet must be changing.
Each individual bank does as our single bank did.
It lends to a customer whose spending leads to an increase in ‘advances’ at the expense of ‘operational balances’.
If banks in general are doing this, however, each individual bank will be receiving additional deposits and corresponding balances.
Remember though that each bank was able to lend only by running down operational balances in order to make advances.
Therefore, each time it receives new deposits and operational balances, the additional balances serve only to replace the balances used to increase its own advances.
If we were to inspect the balance sheet at intervals as this process continued over time we should find that operational balances were oscillating around their original level while the increases appeared in deposits (on the liabilities side) and advances (on the asset side).
The balance sheet is expanding, but the ratio of operational balances to total assets/liabilities is falling.
Clearly, then, one answer to our question of how banks create money is that they do so by increasing their lending, provided that they are prepared to accept a change in their portfolio composition.
Specifically, this means provided they are prepared to work with a smaller ratio of balances/ liabilities.
But this leads us to another possible answer to the question.
Banks could create money by lending more, if the Bank of England were willing to increase the available supply of balances.
From Table 3.2 we know it could do this by lending to banks or by buying government securities from them.
The Bank would have more assets, matched by an increase in ‘bankers' deposits’.
In doing this, the Bank is increasing part of what is known as the ‘monetary base’ or sometimes as ‘high-powered money’.
In the UK we use the term ‘wide monetary base’ and define it to include ‘bankers' deposits’(i.e. operational balances) and notes and coin.
In Table 3.3 we can see that the ratio of banks' holdings of ‘base money’ to total assets/liabilities is rather less than 1 per cent.
If we assume that this ratio is stable and repeat our earlier point that banks will normally be looking to expand their lending as a source of profit, then it follows fairly obviously that a change in the availability of base money to banks must be matched by a change in the size of the total balance sheet and that this latter change must be some multiple of the change in the size of the base.
We can state this more precisely.
Suppose that  where  is the money supply, are bank deposits held by the public and  is the public's holdings of notes and coin.
Suppose also that   where  is the wide monetary base, are bankers' deposits (operational balances), is banks' holdings of notes and coin and  is, as before, the public's holdings of notes and coin.
Let that part of the monetary base held by banks be called ‘reserves’,, so that and therefore 
Suppose that banks operate with a desired ratio,, of reserves to deposit liabilities, ‘the deposit ratio’ and that the public holds a desired ratio,, of notes and coin to its deposits, ‘the cash ratio’
Then we can show that the relationship between the quantity of base money in existence and the outstanding money supply depends numerically upon the magnitude of the ratios  and .
Also we can show that a change in the supply of base will cause a predictable change in the money supply, also dependent in size upon these magnitudes.
Firstly, the ratio of money supply to monetary base is 
Dividing through by  gives 
Notice that , while  is the public's cash ratio , while  is the banks' deposit ratio,.
Thus  and therefore  and 
The expression  is sometimes represented by  and referred to as the bank credit multiplier.
Clearly, if the ratios  and  are stable then there is a precise relationship between  and  and changes in  will have a totally predictable effect upon .
Equally clearly, in these circumstances the quantity of  will be a constraint upon .
If the supply of base is fixed, banks cannot increase their lending without sacrificing the ratio,.
We shall discuss this constraint further, in section 3.4.3.
3.4 Constraints on bank lending
We have just seen that banks have the power to create money through lending and that they will frequently have a commercial interest in so doing.
Why then does the money supply not grow very much faster than in fact it does?
There are three sources of constraint: the first two we might call ‘demand’ constraints and the third we can think of as a ‘supply’constraint.
Both types of constraint can form the basis for monetary control techniques:
3.4.1 The demand for bank lending
The first limitation on banks' ability to lend is the demand for bank lending .
As we just remarked, banks charge interest on bank loans.
Conventionally, we would expect people to borrow up to the point where the utility gained from the last pound borrowed is just equal to the cost of borrowing it.
The utility of a bank loan lies not in the money itself, of course, but in the goods which can be purchased with it.
Since the marginal utility of most goods is assumed to decrease with increasing quantities of the good, then it follows that the utility associated with each addition to one's borrowing also diminishes.
In short, we should expect the demand for bank lending to vary inversely with the rate of interest charged.
This is not to say that demand is necessarily elastic with respect to the rate of interest.
We shall see in Chapter 9 that recent experience suggests it is not.
Nor does it mean that demand is stable.
Many things, for example changes in income and wealth, and expectations about future interest rates, may cause the demand curve for bank lending to move.
What we do wish to note is that other things being equal, the demand for bank lending will vary inversely with interest rates and that banks cannot lend unless people wish to borrow.
In order to understand how the authorities endeavour to influence interest rates in order to constrain bank lending, we need to look in some detail at the markets for bills and money.
This we do in section 5.2.
3.4.2 The demand for money
A second factor limiting banks' ability to expand the total stock of bank deposits is the demand for money .
Be careful to distinguish this from the demand for lending we have just discussed.
The demand for bank lending gives rise to a flow (of new bank loans).
If the flow of new loans exceeds the rate at which existing loans are being repaid, there will be an increase in the stock of bank deposits.
The question at issue here is the willingness of people to hold an expanding stock of bank deposits.
Plainly, the simplest case is that where people are willing to hold that expanding stock of deposits which results from other people's decisions to borrow.
Both sets of demand conditions are consistent.
But suppose this were not the case.
Imagine firstly that we have a demand for bank lending at some level set by the rate of interest charged on that lending, other conditions for the moment being given.
We might refer to this as the ex ante demand for bank lending.
Suppose secondly that we have a demand for money,ex ante , which is less than that required to hold the growing stock of bank deposits.
How is the position to be reconciled?
Remember to begin with that the demand for bank lending is a demand which results from a desire to buy goods or services.
Therefore, quite obviously, there is no problem about the new deposits being wanted at this stage.
Neither can there be a problem at the next stage.
The borrower passes the newly created deposit to the seller of the goods who is willing to take it in payment.
Indeed, it is worth emphasising that from the seller's point of view, he is simply receiving ‘money’; he has no way of knowing when, where or how it was created.
Momentarily at least, the deposit is willingly accepted by the seller.
Now comes the crux of the issue.
The seller has given up goods in exchange for an increase in his bank deposit.
There has been a rearrangement of his wealth.
A decision now has to be made about whether this rearrangement is acceptable for the time being or whether some further rearrangement might be more satisfactory.
The seller may be entirely happy with the position or, as we began this discussion by assuming, he may decide that he does not want to hold so much wealth in the form of money.
If this is indeed the case, he has obviously a very wide range of choices available to him.
Even limiting the choice to alternative financial assets still opens up many opportunities.
He might prefer a building society deposit or a National Savings instrument or government bonds or equities.
Buying any of these reduces his holdings of money.
Now we have to break out from this story of the individual and imagine that what we have described is general.
A general attempt to reduce money holdings in this way adds to the demand for these alternative financial assets, pushing up prices and pushing down yields.
As this process goes on two consequences will follow.
Firstly, as yields fall on these alternative assets, the attraction of money rises relative to them.
Secondly, these falling yields mean that it is becoming cheaper for firms and individuals to borrow by issuing new claims like bonds and equities or going to building societies, by comparison with borrowing from banks.
The demand for bank lending will fall, not because of a rise in the ‘own’ rate of interest on bank loans but because the fall in interest rates elsewhere has caused a relative rise in bank interest rates.
Because the cost of alternative forms of borrowing has fallen, the demand curve for bank lending shifts to the left.
We should now be able to see that an inconsistency between the demand for bank lending and the demand for the money stock created by that bank lending is reconciled by two simultaneous mechanisms.
Firstly, as yields fall on non-money instruments the demand for money will increase.
Secondly, as these yields and therefore the cost of non-bank borrowing fall, the demand for bank lending is reduced.
3.4.3 The monetary base
In section 3.3.2 we saw that with a fixed monetary base banks could increase their lending only if they were prepared to operate at lower ratios of base: deposits.
Until now we have assumed that banks decide for themselves upon the appropriate ratio in the light of their desire for profit and need for liquidity.
The ratio is said to be a matter of ‘commercial prudence’ and is said to be ‘non-mandatory’to distinguish it from the possible alternative, namely, that the ratio be written into banking law.
A non-mandatory ratio has operated in the UK for many years.
This means that, strictly speaking, banks could at any time increase their lending quite sharply provided they were happy to incur the risk in so doing.
However, under the 1981 monetary control arrangements banks have agreed to advise the Bank of England in advance of any significant change in their decision to hold operational balances.
Thus, we may repeat that if the authorities decline to increase the supply of base money, then banks are constrained in the amount of lending they can undertake.
To emphasise this point, we can look briefly at some of the steps that banks might think of taking in order to circumvent the constraint.
We shall see that they will not work.
Our first thought might be that an individual bank which was short of base money could raise the rate of interest it offered to depositors.
It would gain deposits, matched exactly of course by additional operational balances.
Since operational balances were previously only a very small proportion of deposits, this addition to both in the ratio of 1: 1 must raise the overall ratio.
The bank is then free to expand its lending until the ratio again falls to the critical level.
What is the difficulty?
It is that these additional deposits can only come from some other bank.
Any bank which loses deposits loses balances in equal measure and so its ratio deteriorates.
Thus, if the original problem was that the monetary sector as a whole was critically short of base money, then the attempt by individual banks to improve their own position by raising interest rates will be self-defeating.
The monetary sector as a whole cannot gain balances by bidding for deposits.
Attempts to do so will lead merely to higher interest rates.
The second possibility is that a bank could rearrange its assets by selling securities.
Assume that it sells to people who bank elsewhere.
When their cheques are cleared our bank will have fewer securities but more operational balances to its credit and its position will have improved.
Customers of other banks will have more securities, fewer bank deposits and their banks will have fewer operational balances.
As a solution to a general shortage of balances, however, the fallacy is already apparent because it is very similar to the previous case.
If all banks sell securities, they will all lose deposits and balances as their own customers buy securities.
Of course, they will retrieve some of those balances from their own security sales but the message is clear.
The total stock of balances will not increase.
Will anything have changed?
Since banks have sold securities to people who surrender deposits for them, then the fixed stock of balances will be larger in proportion.
The ratio will have improved but this is no solution to the original problem which was that banks wanted to expand their business by lending more.
In fact, their balance sheets are now smaller by the loss of securities on the asset side and of deposit liabilities.
Notice also that this generalised sale of securities by banks is likely to have driven down their price and therefore to have pushed up interest rates.
A third possibility also involves a rearrangement of assets.
Banks could call in funds lent ‘at call’ to the discount market.
The discount houses have no option but to repay.
Some of their operational balances are therefore transferred to the rest of the monetary sector and banks initially appear to have achieved what they want: more balances, fewer ‘call’ loans and a more favourable ratio which would allow them to lend more.
However, the shortage of liquidity is transferred to the discount houses  and the discount market.
Normally to raise funds the houses could think of selling off bills but with a general shortage of liquidity the only possible buyer is the Bank of England.
As we shall see in Chapter 5, under the present arrangements the Bank agrees always to provide assistance in such circumstances, though as a monopoly buyer of bills/monopoly supplier of liquidity it can impose its own terms.
But if we start, as we did, with the assumption that the authorities were not willing to expand the quantity of base money, then the Bank is going to refuse assistance.
The discount houses would then be obliged to pay whatever level of interest was required to prevent banks' demanding money at call, i.e. that rate of interest on call money which persuaded banks not to use this route to increase their balances at the Bank but to forgo instead their intention of increased lending.
Conceivably, interest rates could rise very high indeed.
What this discussion reveals is twofold.
Firstly, that the monetary sector can expand its assets and liabilities up to a limit imposed by its available reserves.
The desired ratio of reserves: deposits may be a matter of commercial prudence and may therefore vary in the light of circumstances (as in the UK) or it could be ‘mandatory’, imposed as a matter of regulation by the monetary authorities.
Whatever its origin, however, there will at any time be some such ratio which banks will wish to observe.
Secondly, because the reserves in question, notes and coin and balances at the Bank of England, are liabilities of the Bank of England, then the Bank is itself the sole supplier of such reserves.
The fact that all banks require some reserves in the form of bankers' deposits at the Bank of England, makes such deposits an essential input into the money creation process.
If the authorities refuse to increase the size of the monetary base, therefore, there must come a point at which further lending, and monetary growth, are inhibited.
The possibility of controlling the monetary base as a means of influencing monetary growth is discussed in section 9.1.
A guide to further reading
Classifications of institutions appear in many places.
Brown (1984) again is recommended as also is Struthers and Speight (1986, Ch. 4).
The balance sheets and the functions of various financial intermediaries are examined in more detail than they are here in Carter and Partington (1984) and Struthers and Speight (1980).
The Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin publishes balance sheets every quarter though normally without commentary.
How changes in the money supply occur is discussed in many places.
Unfortunately, many accounts give the impression that the money supply is determined in actual fact by changes in the size of the monetary base.
Struthers and Speight (1980, Ch. 3) avoid this as do Howells and Bain (1985, Ch. 3).
At a much more advanced level, the supply of assets including money is discussed in Cuthbertson (1985, Ch. 7).
Bain and Howells (1988, Ch. 5) outline a simple monetary base approach to controlling the money supply and also discuss the money market operations which stand at the centre of current methods of control.
Questions for discussion
1.
Explain what is meant by ‘overfunding’.
How does it affect (a) the balance sheet of the Bank of England;(b) the balance sheet of retail banks?
2.
Distinguish between ‘liability management’ and ‘asset management’.
3.
Why does ‘liability management’ make monetary control more difficult?
4.
Distinguish between the demand for bank lending and the demand for money.
5.
Using figures from Financial Statistics or the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , estimate the values of the ratios  and  in section 3.3.2.
What do these values suggest about the size of the bank credit multiplier in the UK?
Non-bank financial intermediaries
At the beginning of Chapter 3, in Table 3.1, we divided financial institutions into two groups: those comprising the monetary sector and those which we called non-bank financial intermediaries, now ‘NBFIs’ for short.
This latter group included building societies, insurance companies, pension funds, unit and investment trusts.
In section 4.1 we shall look at each of these in turn, devoting a sub-section to each.
There we shall look at the functions and services supplied by each and at the significant features of their balance sheets.
In section 4.2 we shall look at the economic significance of the group as a whole.
Firstly, in section 4.2.1 we shall summarise the relevant features of NBFIs revealed in section 4.1.
In section 4.2.2 we concentrate on their role as buyers and holders of marketable securities; in section 4.2.3 we shall consider their role as suppliers of ‘credit’ as opposed to‘money’and therefore their impact on velocity and money supply.
4.1 NBFIs
Let us remind ourselves to begin with that howsoever these institutions may differ from those comprising the monetary sector, they have in common the essential features of financial innovation.
They:
1.
Create assets for lenders and liabilities for borrowers which are more attractive than would be the case if the parties had to deal directly;
2.
They do this principally by ‘maturity transformation’;
3.
This in turn depends upon economies of scale which enable them to pool and diversify risk.
What distinguishes the institutions is the manner and scale in which this is done.
4.1.1 Building societies
We have referred to the activities of building societies on numerous occasions already.
Most significantly, we used their balance sheet in simplified form, Table 1.2, to illustrate the meaning of maturity transformation.
Building societies began, in the eighteenth century, as friendly or mutual societies into which members made periodic payments to finance the building of houses in their immediate locality.
The origins are important because they help explain a number of otherwise curious features of the societies.
Their friendly society status means that they have no shareholders in the  normal sense of the term.
A society has no ‘owners’ but has ‘members’who lend to the society by buying shares which are in effect deposits.
This partly explains why, although functioning for many recent years in ways similar to banks, they have been exempt from regulations applying to banks and have been supervised by the Registrar of Friendly Societies rather than by the Bank of England.
Their mutual nature also explains why, until 1983, the Building Societies' Association (BSA) was able to operate a system of ‘recommended (interest) rates’, a form of cartel which would have been illegal for public companies.
Their origins as providers of housing finance combined with the advantages of mutual status also help explain why, in spite of very rapid growth, their business remains overwhelmingly concentrated in lending for house purchase.
Until 1986, the principal legislation affecting building society business was the Building Societies Act 1962, which gave considerable powers to the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies to supervise and constrain the conduct of societies' business.
We shall refer to this at a number of points as well as to the recent Building Societies Act 1986.
As Table 4.1 reveals, at the end of 1987 building society assets totalled over 160bn.
It also shows that their assets had increased by approximately 20bn over the previous year and that this expansion was typical of their success in the 1980s.
From 1980 to 1986 the annual rate of growth averaged c .
17 per cent.
The flow of funds into the societies in 1986 and 1987 was about 19bn, two-thirds of which was received as shares and deposits.
The reasons for the success are many.
Firstly, we have to recognise that they were lending in a market which was being actively encouraged.
For many years, successive governments have promoted the advantages of private home ownership, most conspicuously by subsidising mortgage interest payments by tax relief.
Secondly, interest is received tax-paid by depositors.
For many people this has the advantage of convenience but also for those who pay income tax at the standard rate there is the advantage of a partially hidden subsidy.
Tax is deducted from all interest payments at a ‘composite rate’ which rate is calculated to yield that amount of tax which would have accrued to the Exchequer had the standard rate been applied only to the interest received by those liable to pay tax.
Since some proportion of interest recipients would not be liable for tax, the composite rate is always less than the standard rate.
For example, when the standard rate was 30 per cent , the composite rate would be about 25 per cent .
Thirdly, we have to give some recognition to the societies' success in competing with banks, through their traditional friendly and comparatively informal image and their flexible operating hours.
By the end of 1986 building society shares and deposits were almost as large as the total sterling deposits of the retail banks and if we confine our attention to deposits of the personal sector alone, then personal sector building society deposits outnumber personal sector ‘bank’ deposits by almost 2: 1, and have been increasing much more rapidly.
Table 4.2 shows the distribution of liquid assets held by the personal sector and the year-by-year increases in those holdings for the period 1980–87.
The importance of building society deposits as assets of the personal sector is very clear.
The fact that shares and deposits of the personal sector feature so largely among building society liabilities is partly the result of their origins but also of the way in which building society interest is taxed.
As we noted above, taxing interest at source and at a composite rate has positive attractions for personal savers but it is not attractive to commercial depositors who, because of their varying tax positions prefer payment gross.
Until 1983 building societies were prevented from so doing.
The 1983 Finance Act, however, permitted societies to issue certificates of deposit (CDs) for sums in excess of 50,000 and to pay interest gross on these as well as on time deposits of over 50,000.
Time deposits and CDs jumped from 230m. in 1982 to nearly 6bn in 1987.
In 1985 a similar change enabled societies to pay interest gross on Eurobond issues, opening up a further source of wholesale funding and reflected in the sharp rise in the ‘other’ liabilities column in our table.
Even so, as Table 4.1 shows, wholesale funding remains a comparatively small proportion of total liabilities.
Another feature of building society expansion in recent years has been the increasing concentration of the industry through merger activity.
In 1970 the top ten societies held 64 per cent of all building society assets.
In 1980 this had risen to 70 per cent and in 1986 to 75 per cent.
The reasons are not hard to find.
Firstly, as we have already commented, economies of scale are present in all financial intermediation.
Secondly, the interest rate cartel before 1983 set rates which gave a reasonable return to most societies and inevitably therefore to some who were comparatively inefficient.
With the ending of that cartel in 1983 the gap between deposit and lending rates has tended to narrow with inevitable consequences for smaller and for less efficient societies.
Thirdly, changes in tax and accounting requirements have shifted some of the administrative burden from the Inland Revenue to individual societies and smaller ones have found it hard to cope.
Until 1986, the structure and maturity of building society assets were regulated by the Registrar under his powers in the 1962 Act.
The most obvious effect was to constrain societies to their traditional role of lending for house purchase.
As Table 4.1 shows, over 80 per cent of building society assets consist of mortgage loans for the purchase of property.
Most of this is for the purchase of private houses but they also lend on commercial property.
They provide about 80 per cent of total lending for private house purchase, though this figure has fluctuated during the 1980s as banks entered, retreated from and then re-entered the mortgage market.
This concentration on long-term mortgage lending means that societies provide a good illustration of the degree of maturity transformation that is possible.
However, this should not be exaggerated.
While a new mortgage loan may typically be for twenty-five to thirty years, societies hold a portfolio of existing mortgages at various stages of maturity.
They will obviously arrange their affairs so as to ensure a steady stream of maturing loans.
In addition, very few mortgages ever last their full term.
People sell and move house frequently.
The average life of a new mortgage entered into in 1988 was about six years.
Until the early 1980s, societies commonly restricted their lending on individual purchases to 85 per cent of the estimated value of the property.
In the increasingly competitive environment since 1983, this has crept slowly upwards and 100 per cent mortgages are now quite common.
With the exception of ‘other assets’, comprising land, buildings and equipment, building society non-mortgage assets are generally very liquid.
‘British government securities’ consist of central government bonds, almost all with less than five years to maturity.
Almost one-half of ‘short-term assets’ are bank deposits.
Under the Registrar's rules, societies are required to maintain a minimum ratio of 7.5 per cent of liquid assets (roughly British government securities plus ‘short-term assets’) to total assets.
However, as can be seen from Table 4.1, in 1986 the ratio, at 13 per cent, was nearly twice the required minimum.
Indeed, societies have traditionally operated with a liquid  assets ratio in the range of 15–20 per cent.
There are several reasons for this.
The retail, short maturity, nature of most building society liabilities and the need to maintain public confidence are obviously relevant.
Less obvious, but important, is the fact that because interest rate changes are administratively expensive, building society interest rates are ‘sticky’ in comparison with those of some of their competitors like banks and National Savings.
Consequently the inflow of funds is sometimes erratic.
If the inflow falls short of mortgage lending plans a generous cushion of liquid assets can be run down in order to preserve a steady outflow of mortgage lending.
In 1987 the net inflow of funds was 19.6bn, comprising 14.4bn of new shares and deposits and 5.2bn of time deposits, CDs and bonds.
During the 1980s building societies found themselves under increasing competitive pressure.
There was competition within the industry following the ending of the interest rate cartel, already noted, in 1983.
But there was growing competition also between building societies and banks, as banks moved into the housing loan market, and from National Savings as governments used National Savings more aggressively as a means of financing their own borrowing requirements.
Societies responded with numerous innovations.
For example, they introduced new types of deposits which paid premium rates of interest for regular savings or for maintaining a minimum balance.
They introduced cheque book and ATM (automated teller machine) facilities.
None the less, it was felt, firstly by societies themselves of course but eventually by government, that the existing rules, based on ideas which dated remember from the eighteenth century, placed them at a serious disadvantage.
For example, the rules restricted societies to lending for house purchase.
This prohibition on other forms of lending meant that they could not issue cheque guarantee cards because they would then be obliged to honour cheques of depositors who overdrew their accounts thereby, in effect, giving them an overdraft.
Clearly, the absence of cheque guarantee cards limited the value of the cheque book facility.
Following pressure from the BSA and the National Consumer Council in 1983, the government published a Green Paper,Building Societies — A New Framework in 1984.
The paper conceded most of the points previously advanced by the BSA and the paper's proposals, with few amendments, were enacted by the Building Societies Act 1986.
The broad effect of the Act was to enable societies to offer the extended range of services they had been lobbying for.
More specifically, the Act made changes to the range of assets in which societies could invest, the services they could offer, and the manner of their future regulation.
With regard to assets, the Act distinguished ‘commercial’ assets as total assets minus liquid and fixed assets.
For societies with commercial assets in excess of 100m., three classes of commercial asset were identified.
Class 1 assets were mortgage loans secured on owner-occupied houses; class 2 assets were other loans secured on property, for example to house-builders and housing associations; class 3 assets included unsecured loans of up to 5,000, ownership of land and investments in subsidiaries and associates.
The Act required societies to hold a minimum 90 per cent of commercial assets as class 1 assets, thereby ensuring a continuation of the societies' traditional role, and a maximum of 10 per cent of class 2 plus class 3, subject to a maximum of 5 per cent for class 3 assets.
In February 1988, the Treasury  raised this maximum for class 3 assets to 7.5 per cent and the limit on unsecured lending to 10,000.
This increase in the range of assets available to societies was related to the extension of the services they were to be permitted to offer.
For example, that Act permits them to offer money transmission services.
As we saw earlier, societies were previously inhibited in this by the fact that they could not issue cheque guarantee cards.
The ability to provide unsecured loans, albeit on a limited scale, means that they can now guarantee to honour their members' cheques.
In a similar way, class 3 assets were essential to another service envisaged in the Act, the ownership, development and management of land.
Some of the new services permitted by the Act are simply those offered by many other financial intermediaries, requiring no especial change in the balance sheet but drawing upon societies' general financial expertise which hitherto they had been prevented from using to its fullest extent.
Among other activities, building societies are now permitted to make and receive payments as agents, to advise on and arrange insurance, to administer pension schemes, supply estate agency services and to undertake conveyancing (though not for persons to whom they are also offering a loan).
Finally, the 1986 Act gave societies the power to seek ‘incorporation’, subject to their giving adequate notice of their intention and subject to a vote by their members.
Incorporation would mean their becoming public limited companies.
They would then have shareholders, rather than members, and would be able to raise additional capital for expansion in the normal commercial way by issuing additional shares.
They would, in effect, become banks and would presumably be members of the monetary sector.
At the beginning of 1988 two societies, the Abbey National and the Halifax, announced their intention to consider incorporation.
In March, however, the Halifax decided against this course of action while it became apparent that the Abbey National was going to face some opposition from its members who feared that an incorporated society would be more interested in the welfare of its shareholders than of its depositors and borrowers.
To supervise the future conduct of societies, the Act established a Building Societies Commission, whose members are appointed by the Treasury.
The purpose of the Commission, obviously, is to determine whether or not the conduct of a society's business meets the intentions of the Act.
For the most part this involves the monitoring of ratios of various types of asset and liability but may also involve judgements about the nature of particular activities and their appropriateness.
In principle, the Commission's powers are considerable.
It can prohibit or impose conditions upon activities; it can impose conditions upon or even revoke authorisation and it could petition for a winding-up of a society's operation.
4.1.2 Insurance companies
We need firstly to recognise that insurance companies as a group are engaged in two quite distinct forms of business: long term and general.
So distinct are these forms of business that many insurance companies specialise in one or the other.
Some of the largest firms, however, deal in both.
Long-term  insurance is also sometimes referred to as life insurance, although it includes activity which is not strictly life-related, and the firms that specialise in long-term insurance are often called ‘life offices’.
We shall see in a moment why their activities are quite distinct.
What they have in common, however, and the reason that they are treated together, is the fact that they all provide insurance against financial loss.
They do this by collecting premiums or contributions from large numbers of people in return for an agreement to compensate the policy-holder in the event of a specified event occurring within a specified time.
Such an event might be theft, fire, illness or even death; within the next year, the next many years or even within a lifetime.
The level of premium paid to insure against an event depends obviously upon the likelihood or risk of the event occurring at all and the level of compensation or benefit to be paid when it does.
Alternatively, we may say that for a given level of benefit, the premium will be determined by the risk, or more briefly still, that the premium: benefit ratio is a function of risk.
However, the payment of premiums creates a pool of funds at the companies' disposal, awaiting claims to be made against it.
Provided sufficient funds are available or can be easily recovered in order to meet unexpected claims, this pool of funds can be invested in earning assets by the companies to provide a further source of income.
Thus their investment success is a second factor which influences the ratio of premium: benefit levels.
The principal legislation governing the conduct of insurance business is the Insurance Companies Act 1982.
We shall look at its provisions in more detail shortly.
Its relevance here is that it defines general insurance business (and divides it into seventeen classes) and long-term insurance business (divided into seven classes).
General insurance covers such things as accident, vehicles, goods in transit, damage to property, various forms of liability, fire and natural forces and legal expenses.
Classes of long-term insurance include life and annuity, permanent health, marriage and birth.
One class of long-term business is ‘pension fund management’.
This does not in itself involve companies undertaking insurance risks but acknowledges that the skills required for the operation of the life insurance business are similar to those needed to run pension funds.
Thus, over the years, many life assurance companies have taken on the management of pension funds on behalf of firms and other institutions.
When we come to consider the activities of insurance companies as a form of financial intermediation this distinction between the two types of business will be crucial.
Firstly, though, let us get some idea of the size of insurance business.
We can look at three magnitudes.
First of all there is their premium income, which amounted in 1987 to 38bn.
On the face of it, this is a very substantial flow of funds, being approximately twice the increase in building society funds.
However, we have to remember that offsetting a large part of this acquisition of funds is an outflow which is being used to meet claims and other expenses.
What is more significant for our purpose is that proportion of premium income which found its way into the acquisition of other financial assets.
This amounted to 13.3bn in 1987 of which life or long-term insurance companies contributed 11.3bn.
This 11.3bn is the life assurance companies' contribution to the figure shown in Table 2.1 at line 33.
At the end of 1987 total assets were 208bn.
Of these, 34.5bn had been accumulated   from general insurance business; 73.4bn belonged to long-term funds.
Figure 4.1 shows the distribution of assets in some detail.
Figure 4.1(a) shows the assets held at the end of 1986 by firms conducting general insurance business.
The two most conspicuous features are the large holdings of UK securities, amounting to over 40 per cent of total assets and  to about 60 per cent when combined with overseas securities.
Given that the purpose of a general insurance company is to provide a pool of funds from which to meet claims which are by their nature uncertain and given also that their policies are mainly short term — clients can terminate or renew annually — this proportion of long-term assets may be surprising.
However, this overlooks two points.
Firstly, while it may be true that individual clients can and do terminate contracts frequently, they do this to move from one company to another: every year each company loses existing but gains new customers.
Rather like banks, in the aggregate, premium income is fairly stable.
Secondly, during the 1980s it has been common for firms to make ‘underwriting losses’.
That is to say that their premium income has been insufficient to meet claims and the difference has therefore had to be met from investment income.
This has made the profitability of investment very important.
Thus the companies' approach to investment has been to ensure that there is sufficient availability of short-term assets to meet unforeseen contingencies and then to maximise holdings of long-dated, higher-yielding assets.
Figure 4.1 shows only the stock of existing assets.
Further research is necessary to show annual flows, that is the way in which the stock is changing.
What that would show for the 1980s is that general insurance companies have added slightly to their stock of UK company securities, years of sales being just outweighed by years of purchases.
It would also show a much more steady acquisition of UK government debt.
In 1987 government debt worth 0.7bn was bought, compared with just 0.4bn of company securities.
The implication is obviously that over time the proportion of the portfolio devoted to government securities is slowly increasing.
These figures for acquisitions mean that general insurance companies have played a significant role in channelling funds from ‘surplus’ units towards the government; they have played a significant part in recent years in financing the PSBR.
Their financing of industrial and commercial borrowing, in the 1980s at least, has been less important.
Notice, though, that while flow figures are useful in telling us the directions in which companies channel the funds they received, they do not tell us how active intermediaries are in any particular market.
In Chapter 6, for example, we shall see that insurance companies can be very important traders of company securities even if their net acquisitions are small.
Figure 4.1(b) shows the aggregate portfolio for long-term insurance companies.
The conspicuous features are like those for general insurance companies, but more so.
There is a very heavy concentration on securities of all types, amounting to nearly 70 per cent.
They also have much larger holdings of land and property and they held 15bn of units in unit trusts.
Their short-term assets form a much smaller proportion of the total.
The conclusion is obvious: long-term insurance funds hold a much higher proportion of longer-term assets than do general funds.
To understand why they do so, it is necessary to consider, at least briefly, the nature of a long-term fund's liabilities.
As we said earlier, long-term insurance contracts enable people to insure against such events as death or permanent illness or disablement.
For obvious reasons, life (i.e. death) -related contracts dominate.
These may be of various forms.
A person can insure against death within a specified period, the policy paying nothing if the insured survives.
This is known as term insurance .
Alternatively a whole-of-life policy insures against death at any time.
An endowment policy pays a capital sum to the insured at a specified time in the future, or on death if earlier.
This sum may be a guaranteed absolute amount in which case the insured has a policy ‘without profits’, or there may be a guaranteed minimum plus an entitlement to share in the company's annual profits.
On this ‘with profits’ type of policy the shares accrue as annual bonuses and are paid with the guaranteed minimum on termination of the policy.
Under an annuity policy the company pays a regular income to the insured for a specified period up until death, in return either for a lump sum payment or regular contributions earlier in life.
This cannot be an exhaustive list since, like other financial intermediaries, insurance companies are continually developing new products.
None the less it makes two features of long-term insurance policies very clear.
The first is that they are contractual .
People taking out policies of the kind just described are committing themselves to paying premiums as part of a long-term contract.
They can, of course, cease payment at any time, but they break the contract and forgo virtually all the benefits since very little compensation is usually available for the premiums which have already been paid.
Secondly, unlike general insurance, the motivation behind many life-related policies is essentially a desire to save for the future, either for one's own benefit or for the benefit of dependants.
This means, of course, that life insurance companies, while obviously offering products that are distinct by virtue of their pure insurance element, are to some extent in competition with other intermediaries whose function is mainly to attract savings.
This competition has increased since 1984.
Until then, income tax relief had been available on the premiums paid on the majority of life assurance policies.
This was abolished for all policies issued after 14 March 1984.
The nature of these policies determines the risks to which long-term funds are exposed.
Actuarial predictions of a country's mortality record are now very reliable, but it is at least a theoretical risk that the record could deteriorate unexpectedly.
Perhaps a little less improbable, and certainly a possibility, is that a change in the savings products offered by other intermediaries could cause an increase in the early termination, or ‘surrender’, of policies as savers switched to the other products.
Conceivably a company could underestimate its future operating costs.
The most serious risk faced by long-term insurance funds, however, is that future economic and financial conditions cause the future yield on their portfolio to fall below expectations.
The probability of such an event may be low, but the consequences would be serious since investment income for long-term funds is approximately half as large as their total premium income.
In the circumstances, the composition of assets is not hard to explain.
Their liabilities are long term and the probabilities of both unforeseen shortfalls of income and unanticipated paying out of benefits are low.
The need for short-term, highly liquid assets is low.
On the other hand, they are in competition with other forms of long-term saving.
For this purpose they need to maximise yield and in particular their contracts need to produce ‘real’ returns, i.e. returns which exceed the rate of inflation.
The emphasis upon company securities therefore is to be expected.
However, while a narrow range of assets may maximise yield it also increases the exposure to risk.
This can be reduced by diversifying, in particular to achieve a mix of  assets whose values would not all be expected to move in the same direction at once.
Fixed-interest securities would be immune at least to some of the difficulties that might affect companies' trading performance.
In addition, for most of the 1980s, the interest yield on UK government securities has exceeded the rate of inflation.
Between 1983 and 1987, long-term funds made net acquisitions of government and company securities at a broadly similar rate, of about 2bn per annum.
However, over the period the trends moved in opposite directions, the rate of purchase of company securities steadily increasing while that of government debt declined.
In addition, the rate of acquisition of unit trusts increased sharply in the mid-1980s: purchases were worth 2.7bn in 1987.
Clearly, if continued, this must entail some marginal adjustment to the stock proportions in Fig. 4.1.
We noted above that the major legislation affecting insurance companies is contained in the Insurance Companies Act 1982.
This made it an offence for anyone to conduct insurance business in the UK without authorisation and resulted from concern following the collapse of several (mainly general insurance) companies in the 1970s.
The power of authorisation lies with the Department of Trade and Industry and is granted to each company with respect to particular classes of insurance business.
In addition to providing authorisation, the Department subsequently monitors the performance of companies in particular with respect to solvency margins and has the power to intervene in various ways: it may require a change in investment strategy, prevent the issuing or renewing of policies and of course, ultimately, withdraw authorisation.
The ability to monitor and to intervene stems from a further requirement of the Act that companies provide specified annual information relating to the conduct of their business.
In the event that a company should fail, in spite of this scrutiny, policy-holders have some degree of protection under the Policy-holders' Protection Act 1975.
The 1982 Act also imposed regulations on the marketing of insurance products.
For example, it laid down standards relating to advertising, and specified a minimum ‘cooling-off’ period.
The fact that so many insurance products contain a substantial savings element has brought them within the scope of the Financial Services Act 1986.
This makes little difference to the behaviour of the companies so far as the production of policies and their conduct of business are concerned, but it does impose further constraints on the marketing of what are now clearly seen as forms of saving.
We shall look in more detail at the Financial Services Act 1986 in Chapter 9.
Notice that few of these regulations have any direct influence upon the direction of insurance companies' investment funds.
The degree of overseas investment has been a matter for continuous criticism from the left of British politics with occasional suggestions that a future Labour government should take steps to penalise companies with ‘excessive’ overseas investments.
4.1.3 Pension funds
After their retirement from employment, people in the UK can expect to receive some form of pension.
However, these come in various forms, only one of which strictly involves financial intermediation.
Consider firstly the flat-rate state pension.
This is paid for out of general taxation and although those drawing a pension may feel that they have contributed to its cost by virtue of their earlier contributions, the state scheme in fact operates on a ‘pay as you go’(PAYG) basis.
The current level of contributions is set at whatever level is necessary to pay for the current number and level of pension payments.
Each generation of workers is in effect paying for its predecessors' pensions, in the confident hope that the next generation will pay for theirs.
Crucially, no pool of investible funds is created.
Rather more than half of current employees, however, contribute to an occupational pension scheme which will provide them with substantially greater benefits than the state pension.
But some of these too are financed on a PAYG basis and no pool of investible funds is created.
This is generally true for public sector occupational schemes like those for teachers, the Civil Service and NHS employees.
However, such a system would not be suitable for private sector occupational schemes.
In the public sector the government can be relied upon always to raise through taxation the funds necessary to honour its pension obligations.
Private firms, by contrast, might find their existing workforce too small to pay for its existing pensioners or it might even go bankrupt.
Therefore, the practice with the private sector is for employers and employees to make contributions to a fund at a rate which, combined with judicious management of the fund, should be sufficient to meet obligations to current employees at some point in the future.
Since the fund is kept strictly separate from the firm's own assets, employees' pensions should remain secure even if the firm ceases trading.
From this description it should be obvious that a pension fund can be confident of the source and scale of its contributions since these are a contractual obligation for employer and all employees.
The contract will also specify the future level of benefits for those currently contributing to the fund.
For example, most schemes award a pension equal to some proportion of ‘final salary’.
‘Final salary’ might be defined as the average salary of an employee's last three years of employment.
The contract might then specify that each year of service entitles the employee to one-eightieth of that figure.
There may or may not be a provision for periodic inflation-related reviews or even for index-linking.
Given then that the fund's future obligations per retired employee are known, its total obligations are a matter of actuarial calculation, involving the current size of the workforce, its age distribution, the average life expectancy after retirement, and other factors.
As with other intermediaries, the nature of these liabilities influences the composition of the asset portfolio.
If the purpose of the fund is to collect ‘lifetime’ contributions in order to pay a pension that is related to final salary or earnings, it is obviously a fundamental requirement that an employee's contributions be invested in a manner which keeps their value at least in line with rising real earnings.
As we saw with long-term insurance funds this inevitably means an emphasis upon company securities.
Figure 4.2 shows the composition of pension funds' portfolios in 1987.
Notice firstly that at 196bn the market value of pension fund assets at the end of 1987 was larger than that of any other class of financial intermediary.
Of this total, UK company securities accounted for over 50 per cent, and overseas securities, by far the   greater part of which are also company shares, accounted for 13 per cent .
UK government securities and UK land and property also formed a significant proportion at 14.8 and 8.0 per cent respectively.
The rate of acquisition of these various classes of assets has varied from year to year but with the exception of overseas securities holdings, which have tended to rise as a proportion of the total since 1980, there are no significant trends.
The purchase of UK government securities reached a peak of 3.2bn in 1983 but became negative in 1987.
Given the behaviour of fixed-interest security prices over the period, this may reflect a desire to hold such stock mainly for its capital gain potential.
The purchase of UK company securities hit a low point in 1984 but has run at about 3.5bn for most of the 1980s.
These are figures for net acquisitions, as we have said before.
Pension funds' trading in securities is of course much larger than these net figures suggest.
In the year to the end of 1987 the value of pension fund assets grew by 6.3bn or 3.3 per cent.
Of the growth approximately 9.5bn came from the inflow of funds from contributions; the difference (-3.2bn) reflects a 2 per cent fall in the value of existing assets.
The sum of 9.5bn is a substantial inflow of funds.
Of course much of the flow is contractual and employers and employees have had little choice about contributing to such schemes.
Contributions have also been comparatively favoured by tax treatment.
Successive governments have been very careful to ensure that the benefits bought from a pension fund are taxed only once and strictly as deferred earned income.
Contributions up to 15 per cent of annual income are exempt from income tax and pension funds pay no capital gains or income tax on their investments.
The benefits paid from the fund are taxed at the rate appropriate to the pensioner's circumstances.
Just as the tax position of pension funds is straightforward so too, comparatively speaking, is the regulatory framework.
Most pension funds are strictly speaking trusts.
Their activities are therefore circumscribed by the terms of a trust deed and this deed itself must comply with legislation governing the conduct of trusts.
Any member of the scheme who felt that the terms of the trust were being abused could seek redress under trust law.
To be exempt from taxation the trust must meet Inland Revenue conditions relating to contributions and benefit entitlement.
This leaves pension funds with a very wide range of powers over the selection and management of investments and this has attracted a degree of adverse attention in recent years.
The first worry was noted by the Wilson Committee (1980).
This was that pension funds, like life insurance companies, were too willing to invest in overseas companies, by implication ‘starving’ British industry of capital.
The Wilson Committee found the case unproven but the Labour Party and the trade union movement have since suggested that tax concessions available to pension funds should be made conditional upon the repatriation of some of their overseas investment.
More recently, concern has grown in many quarters about the ethics of certain types of investment.
With hindsight, the beginnings can be seen with the British Rail Pension Fund's purchase of paintings in the mid-1970s.
Although their capital appreciation might eventually benefit pensioners, it was felt inappropriate by some that a fund should invest in ‘unproductive’ assets.
More recently, investments in South Africa, in tobacco and drug companies and in firms using animals for experimentation have been the subject of protest and workers have tried to influence their pension fund managers away from these.
In 1984, the National Union of Mineworkers fought an unsuccessful legal battle to prevent their pension fund managers from investing in alternative, i.e. competing, energy sources.
4.1.4 Unit trusts
The purpose of a unit trust is to accept funds from individuals or companies and to invest those funds in a wide variety of assets.
Contributors to the trust then have a share in the income and capital appreciation of the underlying assets.
To understand the mechanism whereby contributors share in the benefits of belonging to the trust we need to understand the concept of a unit .
Imagine that a newly formed trust advertises units for sale to savers.
It must advertise those units at a price.
The price is not important except in so far as it determines the number of units to be created after subscriptions have been received.
Prices of 50p and 25p are common for units in a newly established trust; we will choose 50p for our illustration.
The advertisement will give some indication of the objectives of the trust.
These might be capital growth or income or ‘general’— a combination of both.
It will also give some indication of the range of assets in which it expects to invest: ‘famous names’, ‘recovery situations’, ‘European’ are examples.
Suppose now that the trust receives 5m. of subscriptions.
Ignoring the question of expenses for the time being, it will create 10 million 50p units which will be distributed to savers in proportion to the funds they subscribed.
As the price of the underlying assets changes, the value of the units will change and will be calculated (again ignoring expenses) by dividing the  current value of the assets by the number of units in existence.
Such calculations are normally done daily and are published in financial and other quality newspapers.
The income generated by the assets is accumulated and paid out at intervals, the amount paid on each unit again (roughly) corresponding to total income divided by the number of units in existence.
However, the number of units need not remain fixed.
Unit trusts are ‘open-ended’ and this is one feature which distinguishes them from investment trusts (see section 4.1.5).
This means that new savers can join the trust at any time, and that existing savers can increase their holdings of units.
Indeed, many trusts encourage regular saving through fixed monthly contributions.
If, as is usual, the inflow of funds exceeds the rate at which people wish to relinquish their units, the trust creates new units at the going price.
If the value of existing units has risen to 75p for example, new subscribers will ‘buy’ newly created units at 75p and the number they purchase will be equal to the amount they wish to invest divided by 75p.
The attractions to savers are several.
Firstly, a small saver is able to minimise risk by investing quite cheaply in a much wider range of assets than would be possible by direct investment.
Suppose, for example, that one wished to hold company shares.
To reduce the risk of selecting an adverse portfolio of shares one would probably need fifteen to twenty different shares.
Brokerage and other fees make the direct purchase of shares worth less than 2,000 expensive.
Thus the minimum cost of a reasonably diversified portfolio would be 30,000–40,000.
The minimum investment in a unit trust is commonly 500 as a lump sum, and 20 as a regular monthly contribution.
And for this, a saver can have a very small share in the performance of over 100 companies.
Secondly, holdings of units can be liquidated quite quickly.
After purchasing units, the owner receives a certificate stating the number of units purchased.
This certificate normally carries on the reverse side a form of renunciation.
The sale of units merely requires the completion of this form and its return to the trust.
A seller would normally expect to receive the current market value of the units within fourteen days.
Notice that the buying and selling of units can only take place between the trust and the original purchaser.
They cannot be transferred by the purchaser and thus there is no secondary market and the market value of the units is determined solely by the performance of the underlying assets themselves; the demand for the units has no effect upon their price.
Each individual trust is always the responsibility of two companies.
Firstly, there is the company responsible for the day-to-day management of the trust.
This may be a specialist unit trust company or it may be part of some other large financial grouping, a subsidiary of a retail or merchant bank for example.
The management company will make the detailed investment decisions, accept funds from investors, issue certificates of unit ownership and pay income to investors as appropriate.
In 1986 there were 146 management companies, managing over 800 unit trusts.
Total funds under management were 31bn.
The companies varied substantially in size, however, the ten largest being responsible for 55 per cent of all funds under management.
In addition to its managing company, each trust has a trustee.
There were eleven trustee companies in 1985, mainly specialist subsidiaries of major  banks.
The job of the trustee is to see that the fund is managed within the terms of its ‘trustee deed’.
This deed specifies the objectives of the trust and lays down broad conditions governing the management of the funds.
There is an obvious sense, therefore, in which the trustee company is acting as guardian of the unit holders' interests.
For simplicity we have so far ignored the expenses of running a unit trust.
However, both the management and the trustee companies will expect a reward for their services.
For the management company, this comes from two sources.
Firstly, there is the ‘spread’, the difference between the bid (the trust's buying) and offer (the trust's selling) prices.
Unit trusts are permitted to operate a spread as wide as 15 per cent of the net asset value of the fund.
Thus in our example above, where we calculated the unit price at 75p, the bid price could be as low as 64p while the offer price could be 86p.
However, competition between management companies normally keeps the spread to within 6–7 per cent.
In addition, the management company may charge an annual fee of 0.5–1 per cent of net asset value.
This would normally be deducted from dividend income before calculating the income available for distribution to unit holders.
The trustee company will also be paid an annual fee, normally calculated as a very small percentage on the net asset value of the trust.
The rate of growth of unit trusts has been erratic.
The first unit trust in the UK was established in 1932, by the M & g management company.
Growth was slow until the early 1960s.
Between 1960 and 1970, however, total assets grew sevenfold.
In the 1970s, assets grew only fourfold and there was a sharp setback in 1973 and 1974.
From 5bn in 1980, assets have grown, as we saw above, to over 35bn by 1987.
This pattern of growth suggests quite clearly, and quite reasonably, that the growth of unit trusts depends on the performance of stock-markets and on the public's perception of the benefits of equity investment.
Sales of units fell sharply after the crash of October 1987.
Figure 4.3 shows the distribution of unit trust assets at the end of 1987.
At the end of 1987, over 80 per cent of unit trust assets were company securities.
After holdings of short-term assets (mainly cash and bank deposits), only British government securities formed a significant category.
What the figure does not reveal is the shift in the balance that has occurred during the 1980s towards overseas securities, prompted initially by the relaxation of exchange controls in 1979 and encouraged subsequently by the strong performance of some overseas economies and stock-markets.
Neither does it reveal the decline in holdings of short-term assets, from over 10 per cent of the total in 1978.
It will be interesting to see whether the growth of high-interest bank deposits in the last two years and the recent increased volatility of stock and foreign exchange markets leads to a reversion of liquidity levels to those seen in the late 1970s.
At the end of 1986 there were 3.4 million individual holdings of units.
Since many people have holdings in more than one trust, however, the total number of unit holders was far fewer, probably not more than 1 million.
As we saw above, assets in 1987 amounted to over 35bn.
This was an increase over 1986 of 4bn.
In 1987 unit trust management companies sold 14.5bn of new units and repurchased units worth 8.2bn.
The flow of new funds for whose direction unit trust managers were responsible was therefore 6.3bn.
Remember though what we said about the flow of funds through insurance companies.
The purchase of assets with new funds is no reliable indication of the total scale of buying and selling activity.
Unit trust managements are continually rearranging their portfolios with the aim of maximising performance.
In the UK a distinction is made between ‘authorised’ and ‘non-authorised’unit trusts.
Authorisation is in the hands of the Department of Trade and Industry and depends upon a trust's deed meeting at least the following conditions:
(a)
there must be no investment in property or commodities;
(b)
the trust must not hold more than 10 per cent of the total capital of any one company;
(c)
the trust must not normally invest more than 5 per cent of its portfolio in any one company;
(d)
at least 75 per cent of the portfolio must be invested in shares quoted on a recognised stock exchange.
Responsibility for seeing that these conditions are complied with post-authorisation lies in the first instance with the trustee company.
However, under the Financial Services Act 1986 complaints about any aspect of the conduct of a unit trust can be referred to the Securities and Investments Board.
The Unit Trust Association, a professional body to which most authorised trusts voluntarily belong, also exercises a degree of supervision of its members.
Those unit trusts which are ‘unauthorised’ normally owe their status to the fact either that they invest in unauthorised assets such as property or commodities, or that they are managed from an offshore location and therefore are not subject to UK regulation.
Unauthorised trusts are prevented from advertising units for sale to the general public although they may write privately inviting subscriptions from a very limited range of institutions.
4.1.5 Investment trusts
Investment trusts differ from all the other institutions we have discussed in this chapter, in a number of significant ways.
The chief of these is that while all previous intermediaries are ‘open ended’, investment trusts are ‘closed’.
By open ended we mean that any number of customers, savers or subscribers can lend any volume of funds to the intermediary at any time.
For example, people can increase their aggregate building society deposits, or buy more life assurance or more unit trusts without any limit, except that which they themselves choose having regard to their wealth, the return on saving and so on .
Furthermore, any increase in this lending will mean more funds are made available to ultimate users.
In the case of investment trusts, however, what savers buy is shares in a trust which is in effect a company whose business happens to be holding stocks and shares.
At any moment, the total number of a trust's shares in issue is fixed.
Thus new savers can buy shares only from existing holders.
When we hear of a sustained flow of funds ‘into’ investment trusts, we must recognise that extra funds do not go into the trust at all(except in one case we shall come to in a moment).
There is no increase in lending by the trust to ultimate users; all that happens is that the market price of the trust's shares rises.
Equally, if savers decided to ‘move out of’ investment trusts, this would simply mean a fall in the market price of the trust's shares.
It would not mean that the trust itself had to make payments to savers.
As we shall see, this immunity from savers' redemptions is reflected in the composition of trusts' assets.
The fact that investment trusts do not continually take in new funds and channel them to ultimate borrowers obviously raises the question of whether they should be considered as financial intermediaries at all.
The reasons for doing so are twofold.
Firstly, there must at least once have been a flow of funds from savers to the trust and on to borrowers, when the trust was first established.
Also, of course, a trust is at liberty to raise new capital by an issue of additional ordinary or debenture shares.
When trusts are popular among investors and the market value of their shares is ‘high’ then raising new capital is comparatively cheap (we look at the reasons for this in Ch. 6).
Thus a flow of funds into trusts' shares, pushing up their price, may result in new issues and a flow of additional funds into the trust itself.
This is the case we anticipated in the last paragraph.
Secondly, even with only sporadic injections of new funds, investment trusts may still be active traders in the markets for financial assets.
With all the previous intermediaries we looked at, we warned that we cannot judge the volume of buying and selling of assets which an intermediary carries out just from looking at the inflow of new funds.
In the case of investment trusts, this warning needs repeating with force.
Even without an inflow of funds from savers, trusts have income from dividends and interest on their assets and from capital gains (about 150m. in 1986).
After the deduction of operating costs and payments to shareholders, this is put to reserve.
From this reserve and from the immediate disposal of existing assets, trusts can make acquisitions of new assets.
Investment trusts are in fact very active in the market for new issues of shares and in this respect are channelling funds to ultimate borrowers.
Although their business is not one of short-term speculation, they are, however, active traders in stocks and shares.
As we shall see in Chapter 6, trading in existing stocks helps to maintain their liquidity, makes them attractive to savers and thereby lowers the cost to borrowers of raising new capital in this way.
Their ‘closed’ nature is one feature which distinguishes investment trusts from other types of intermediary.
Their legal status and their regulatory framework are another.
They are not trusts at all in the sense that unit trusts are.
There is no trust deed, no trustee and the saver's claim upon the assets of the trust is only the very general claim that any shareholder has upon a company.
Indeed, being a limited company makes an investment trust subject to the relevant Companies Acts and it is these which principally constrain the trusts' conduct of business.
In addition, the Stock Exchange imposes conditions on companies wanting a listing.
These extend to very broad guidelines on the nature of investments and would also affect trusts considering merger.
Lastly, the Inland Revenue ‘approves’ investment trusts for purposes of tax treatment (principally their exemption from capital gains tax on disposal) and this approval is conditional upon very limited portfolio requirements being met.
The first trust was established in 1868.
By comparison with other intermediaries growth has been slow, at least until the 1980s when the value of investment trusts' assets almost doubled (1981–86).
A feature throughout their history has been a very high level of investment in overseas securities.
The reason for this seems to have been that until 1914, the return on UK securities was very low, rarely more than 3 per cent, and better returns could almost always be obtained abroad.
However, these were generally riskier and since many savers lacked the necessary information and confidence to invest overseas, it seemed a natural role for investment trusts that they should provide an indirect route into overseas markets for small investors who would benefit from the trust's professional management.
The overseas weighting fell from the end of the First World War until the early 1950s, since when it has grown steadily, increasing sharply again in the 1980s after the removal of exchange control in 1979.
At the end of 1987, aggregate investment trust assets amounted to 15.5bn and the number of trusts to about 160.
The number of trusts has been falling, though only slowly, mainly as a result of mergers.
As a company, each trust has a board of directors responsible for the broad outline of investment policy.
The day-to-day administration, however, is often left to professional management companies.
Some of these companies manage several trusts.
As Fig. 4.4 shows, the assets of investment trusts are overwhelmingly company securities; there are very few government securities.
Overseas company securities take almost as large a share as UK company securities.
The small holdings of government debt and of net short-term assets (mainly bank deposits) is a reflection of the point we observed earlier, namely, that investment trusts are not subject to savers' redemptions.
We noted earlier that the immediate effect of increased investment in investment trusts would be to push up the price of their shares without resulting in any extra flow of funds from savers to borrowers.
This obviously amounts to saying that the market value of investment trust shares is determined by the demand for them and not (as with units in a unit trust) by the performance of the underlying assets.
Even so, we would expect the resulting market valuation to pay some attention to the underlying assets since the reason for buying investment trust shares is to participate in the income and capital gains resulting from the managers' investment performance.
None the less, it is a general and interesting phenomenon of investment trust shares that they stand ‘at a discount’ to the net asset value of the trust.
On the face of it, this offers a potential bidder the opportunity to acquire a complete portfolio of assets at a discount to their value by taking over the trust by buying up all its shares.
To understand how such a discount can persist we have to consider the value of a trust's shares from a buyer's point of view.
Consider firstly the ordinary investor who wants shares in a trust so as to have a claim on a much wider portfolio of shares than he could afford by investing directly.
He has this advantage, but set against it he has to accept that management charges and corporation tax will be charged against trust income.
This obviously reduces the income below what it would have been had he been able to hold the assets directly.
Now consider the shares as seen by a potential bidder for the whole trust; most likely this would itself be a financial institution.
If it held the shares intact it would  suffer the same disadvantage that our ordinary investor encountered.
If it liquidated the trust, however, in order to hold the underlying assets directly, it would face liquidation costs including compensation to the existing management.
4.2 NBFIs and the flow of funds
Having looked briefly at some features of particular NBFIs in section 4.1, we want now to reflect on the extent to which they fulfil some of those functions which we said in section 2.3 a financial system is expected to fulfil.
In doing so we also try to relate some of the magnitudes we have encountered for individual NBFIs to the flow of funds matrix in Table 2.1.
We start by bringing together in a compact and comparative form the key data for the various groups of intermediaries, in Table 4.3.
In Chapter 1 we said that it was the job of a financial system to channel funds from surplus to deficit sectors.
The specific contribution of intermediaries was to do this by creating assets (for lenders) and liabilities (for borrowers) which were more attractive than would be the case with direct lending.
The effect of this would be to lower the cost and increase the quantity of lending and borrowing.
Table 4.3 shows at a glance the magnitude of flows for which various classes of NBFI were responsible in 1987.
It gives us also an indication of where those flows went.
One very obvious feature indeed is the magnitude of building society net receipts, 19.4bn in 1987.
Further inspection of the data would reveal that of this inflow 7.5bn was in the form of new shares and deposits while 6.9bn came from interest paid by borrowers and credited to existing deposits.
This 14.4bn, therefore, came mainly from the personal sector and this is confirmed in line 22 of Table 2.1.
The balance was raised by the issue of CDs, bonds and time deposits and by interest received by the societies but credited to their reserves.
Table 4.3 tells us where the funds did not go.
Building societies do not buy company or overseas securities and in 1987 were actually net sellers of government securities.
Most of their funds were lent back to the personal sector.
We can check this with Table 2.1. where (col. 8/line 27.1) shows the personal sector increasing its mortgage indebtedness by 15bn in 1987.
In fact we can tie up this lending for house purchase with the personal sector's purchase of ‘real’ capital goods in column 8/line 3.
The entry there shows 20.5bn.
Most of this involved house purchase.
In short, what the figures confirm is that the major achievement of building societies is to take funds from surplus units within the personal sector, to supplement these with lending from other sectors and to lend to personal sector units who wished to go into deficit to buy houses.
Consider now the behaviour of pension funds in 1987.
The major contrast with building societies is the destination of the funds.
As the table shows, securities of all kinds feature largely among their assets.
Of a net inflow of 9.5bn, 8.3bn went into UK company securities.
There were small net sales of overseas securities and UK government securities.
Notice, however, that this does not mean that pension funds (and indeed other NBFIs) played no part in financing the public sector's deficit.
Cell 4/31 shows that a substantial issue of company securities was in fact made by the government in 1987 and the same picture would be revealed in the 1986 flow of funds matrix.
This    reflects the substantial privatisation programme of the mid-1980s.
Without the sale of company securities, other things being equal, the public sector would have had to issue government securities.
Some part of NBFIs' purchase of company securities in 1986, therefore, should be regarded as a contribution to public sector financing.
The transfer of funds via pension funds therefore was substantially from the personal sector to the industrial and commercial sector, and, to a lesser degree, to the public sector.
It is not easy to trace all these flows in the matrix, Table 2.1.
The inflow to pension funds is combined with the inflow of funds to life assurance companies and is shown in cell 6/3.
Moreover, because the matrix groups together all ‘other financial institutions’ in column 6 of Table 2.1 it shows only the net sale/acquisition of financial claims for the sector as a whole.
It cannot show the change for individual classes of intermediary.
The inflow to life assurance companies in 1987 was 11.3bn.
This would provide the balance of the figure in cell 6/33.
Of this, 4.0bn was used to buy UK company securities, 1.1bn went into UK government securities and about 0.6bn went into overseas securities.
Not shown in Table 4.3 is 2.5bn which was used to buy unit trust units.
This last figure is important in reconciling the flow of funds into unit trusts, 6.4bn in table 4.3, with the apparent issue of unit trusts by ‘other financial institutions’ in cell 6/30 of Table 2.1.
The figure there is only -3.7bn (the + sign is an error).
This is another example of the matrix's inability to show transfers within a sector.
The figure of-3.7bn is the issue of new units to destinations outside the sector and cell 8/30 shows these were bought by persons.
The balance of 2.8bn was retained within the sector, almost entirely by life assurance companies.
Smallest of all our NBFIs, of course, are the investment trusts.
Their net inflow of funds in 1987 was 0.9bn.
This 0.9bn was combined with funds raised by selling overseas securities (=1.1bn) to buy 0.4bn of UK company securities and 0.4bn of UK government securities.
The remaining 1.2bn was switched into short-term assets, particularly cash and bank deposits, presumably at the time of the October stock-market crash.
Briefly then, what we found in section 4.1 and have summarised here, is that building societies form the largest group of intermediaries but their function is almost exclusively one of channelling funds between surplus and deficit units within the personal sector.
Insurance companies and pension funds are the NBFIs mainly responsible for transferring funds between sectors.
In this they were followed on a much smaller scale by unit trusts and on a very small scale by investment trusts.
4.3 NBFIs, velocity and the money supply
We know that the volume of financial intermediation in an economy could have an effect upon aggregate demand by changing the quantity of money in circulation or the ‘velocity’ with which it is used or both.
In section 2.3.2 we made a distinction which is often made between the activities of banks or, more strictly, ‘institutions comprising the monetary sector’ and the activities of NBFIs.
An expansion of the former, other things being equal, we said would cause an increase in the supply of money.
An expansion of  the latter would enable a given stock of money to be used more intensively and would therefore tend to raise velocity.
This is a simple view, commonly held, and may well accord with long-term experience.
However, events in the 1980s suggest that the picture is a good deal more complex.
Firstly, we now recognise that it is possible, in certain circumstances, for the activities of NBFIs to cause changes in the size of the money stock.
Secondly, the deregulation and expansion of financial activity generally, have been held responsible for a sharp fall in velocity since 1981.
We will look at the simple case first and follow it with these more recent arguments.
4.3.1 NBFIs and rising velocity
The argument that increased non-bank financial intermediation will tend to raise velocity and therefore the amount of spending that can be undertaken with a given stock of money, is simple enough if we once recognise in velocity the importance of the demand for money.
Remember that velocity stands for the ratio of total spending over a period of time to the stock of money available.
In the aggregate, this will be the average of individual and firms' velocities.
Think of the individual's case.
He or she will receive a flow of income over the year and will engage in a flow of spending over the same period.
The spending need not exactly match income; we can each save or enter into debt.
Whatever the decision on saving, however, there is a flow of spending of some given magnitude.
In principle we could record and measure this.
At the same time, there is another magnitude we could record and measure.
This is the average quantity of money which this person had available (i.e. ‘to hand’ or ‘unspent’) over this same period.
On the usual definition of money, most of this measurement would involve monitoring the size of his or her bank balance over the year but we should also need to make some allowance for notes and coin.
The important point to grasp is that this magnitude will be nowhere near so large as the level of total spending.
Why?
The answer is that it simply is not necessary to hold a stock of money equal to the flow of spending.
We need only hold enough to finance our spending between receipts of income, or pay-days'.
For many people now these are monthly.
The more frequent they are, the smaller the required holdings of money; the less frequent, the more money has to be held.
In addition to money held for this ‘transactions’ purpose some additional money will be held for ‘precautionary’reasons and perhaps also some will be held as a form of saving or as an ‘asset’.
Clearly, the more money people wish to hold in relation to their spending, the greater is their demand for money and the lower is velocity.
The smaller the proportion, the lower the demand and obviously the higher is velocity.
What aspects of NBFI behaviour could cause velocity, or the demand for money, to change?
Consider the assets created by NBFIs as substitutes for money.
They are substitutes in the sense that they are highly liquid: they can be converted to money quickly, cheaply and with high, but varying, degrees of capital certainty.
These substitutes also pay interest or have some other form of income attraction while we shall assume that money does not.
(We shall see in section 4.3.3 that the non-interest-bearing nature of money is critically important.)
Building Society deposits, for example, are not yet money on official definitions.
Holdings of unit trusts plainly are not holdings of money, neither are the periodic bonuses accumulated on a with-profits life assurance policy.
None the less, they are in some degree substitutes.
In the case of building society deposits the closeness is considerable.
They can be turned into money on demand in most cases; even where notice might originally have been specified this can usually be waived for a small interest penalty.
Units in a unit trust are less immediately convertible to money and their money value cannot be guaranteed.
None the less, liquidation can be rapid and the transaction costs are negligible.
Although bonuses on a life policy cannot be realised until the termination of the policy, life companies will normally lend money to clients against the security of those bonuses, quickly and at very competitive rates of interest.
What is being alleged here is that NBFIs create assets which are in some close measure substitutes for money and which have their own advantages, interest perhaps or long-term capital gain, which money does not have.
This being the case, people will feel able to hold smaller money balances in relation to their planned spending than would have been the case without such substitutes.
Suppose they did not exist.
The risk that payments might exceed existing money holdings for some unforeseen reason could prove very embarrassing.
Households might have to sell domestic property at a substantial discount because there is no ready second-hand market.
Firms, more seriously, could go out of business.
In a world like this, generous holdings of money, more than enough to cover any conceivable crisis, and a bit more perhaps, would be essential.
With readily available liquid assets, however, the risk of the occasional shortage of money is worth taking.
Partly because there is a reward in the form of interest for taking the risk; partly because the consequences are not so dire when a trip to the building society can quickly put things right.
The conclusion then is that the greater the volume of NBFI activity, the greater the range of products, the more substitutes will exist for money in its precautionary and asset roles.
The existing stock of money, being less in demand, will be able to support a greater flow of spending.
Velocity will be higher than it would otherwise be.
4.3.2 NBFIs and the money supply
How can the behaviour of NBFIs cause changes in the stock of money?
Remember, we said that increases in bank activity are likely to lead to increases in the supply of money because their liabilities, customers' deposits, are included in official definitions of money.
The liabilities of NBFls are not and so we plainly cannot use that argument here.
The first step is to think back (there is no need to look) to the flow of funds matrix.
It shows a very complex and interrelated flow of funds.
Sectors and units borrow from each other in many different ways.
If there is a significant change in the pattern of flows at one point, it is quite likely that this will cause further changes in contingent flows.
Some of these changes may eventually affect institutions comprising the monetary sector.
It is almost impossible to generalise about the sorts of disturbances which will necessarily reach back to affect  the monetary sector and the flow of bank lending.
Each case has to be examined on its merits.
But it is quite possible to think of plausible cases.
Take for example a sequence of events involving building societies.
Because of their apparent similarity to banks and their rapid expansion of recent years, there has been much discussion about their impact on banks, as competitors, and upon the money supply.
In section 4.1.1 we saw that one of the reasons for building society success was their ability to attract deposits, comparatively cheaply.
Where do these deposits come from?
Some may be notes and coin but the vast bulk will come from people writing cheques drawn on bank accounts.
On the face of it, therefore, societies draw deposits away from banks.
But remember what societies do with these funds.
Initially, the society pays the funds into its own bank.
Over 85 per cent are then lent out to borrowers on mortgage, part of the remaining 15 per cent is used to buy liquid assets, a small part stays with the society's bank as an increased holding of immediate liquidity, against the increase in deposit liabilities.
Notice that in lending on mortgage and buying liquid assets, the society is authorising transfers from its own bank account to the accounts of the borrower and the sellers of the liquid assets.
The original deposit, transferred from a bank, is returned by the society.
Subsequently, it authorises its splitting up and its transfer to other people's banks.
On this view, the original deposit is merely shuffled around, split up and shuffled around again.
It does not disappear from the monetary sector.
The money supply is unchanged and banks still have the original deposit.
Of course, the shuffling and splitting may have some consequences.
In accepting a building society deposit as a substitute for a bank deposit, the customer may well have put that bank deposit into more active circulation.
This is exactly the case of NBFIs increasing velocity that we discussed above.
But nothing, in this case, happens to the total stock of money.
To say that building societies' deposits come from bank deposits is not saying much of interest, however.
This must be true except, as we said, where the deposit is a surrender of notes and coin.
Of much greater interest is where that bank deposit comes from.
Is it simply a transfer from the customer's bank account to building society account of money that was lying idle?
If so, the outcome will be close to that we have described in the last paragraph.
However, it may be part of a larger portfolio revision.
Suppose that our customer had decided to hold more building society deposits and fewer National Savings instruments.
On selling his National Savings certificates, he would be paid by cheque and his bank deposit would increase.
It would fall to its previous level when he later made the transfer to his building society.
The society still gains a deposit ‘from a bank’ but the true origin, and the consequences, are quite different from the previous case.
Imagine that the incident we have just described is repeated on a significant scale.
This might be because building societies have developed some new product which personal savers prefer to National Savings certificates or it may simply be that interest rate differentials have changed in favour of the societies.
Whatever the cause, the immediate consequence is that personal sector lending to the public sector has fallen.
The government now faces a financing problem.
It may be able to replace the funds it has lost by borrowing from other parts of the non-bank private sector, but if it fails, then it will have  to resort to residual finance from the monetary sector.
In effect, its own demand for bank lending will increase and with it the money supply.
Of course, this consequence follows because the building society is in effect attracting funds from the public sector and channelling them to the borrowers that we identified in section 4.1.1.
If the building society had used the additional deposit to buy public sector debt, then the consequence would have been avoided.
In fact, some small part of the new funds might indeed have been used for this purpose as the societies' balance sheet shows, but it will be only a very small proportion of the total funds received.
The opposite could also happen.
Suppose that the fall in equity prices in October 1987 causes a fall in the flow of funds to unit trusts and increases the attractiveness of building society deposits.
The immediate increase in those deposits will come from transfers from banks but the ultimate origin will be a diversion of funds away from the destinations to which they had been channelled by unit trust managements.
To the extent that the destination of building society lending is different, as we know from section 4.1.1 it is, then the flow of funds will have materially altered.
If we now add to this the possibility that those units or sectors experiencing a fall in supply switch to borrowing from banks, the money supply will increase.
And we can recognise that this is true for a change involving any form of intermediation.
If the change causes a change in the pattern of borrowing and lending, the interconnected nature of financial flows may involve the monetary sector and then changes in the money supply will occur.
4.3.3 NBFIs and falling velocity
We observed in section 2.3.2 that long-run historical evidence that velocity was stable, tending to rise only very slowly over time, had led some economists to argue that there was thus a close causal connection between changes in the stock of money and the level of aggregate demand.
Since real output could also change only slowly over time in response to changes in aggregate demand, it followed that the rate of monetary growth would in the long run be correlated with the rate of inflation.
The Conservative government elected in 1979 also took this view and promised to reduce the rate of inflation which was then running at about 12 per cent by reducing the rate of growth of M3.
The intention was to reduce it to that rate which would constrain aggregate demand to grow at a rate which could be met by increases in real output.
In the long run, this was thought to be about 3 per cent per year.
However, since inflation was well established in people's expectations and was therefore reflected in their price-setting behaviour it was thought that a sudden reduction in monetary growth might cause demand to fall short of nominal output and cause a rise in unemployment.
What emerged, therefore, was the ‘Medium-Term Financial Strategy’ in which annually decreasing targets were set for monetary growth.
For reasons we shall look at in Chapter 9, it proved almost impossible to limit monetary growth to these target ranges and yet inflation still fell.
This raised the obvious question of why, if the money supply was expanding so rapidly (it averaged 12 per cent p.a. 1981–87), inflation was not running at  9 per cent or more.
The answer had to be that aggregate demand was not expanding in step with the money supply, i.e. that velocity was falling.
In fact in 1981 when GDP at current prices was 254bn, M3 was 85bn, giving a velocity of 3.0.
By 1987 nominal income was 408bn, while M3 was 186bn.
Velocity had fallen to 2.2, an annual rate of decline of nearly 5 per cent.
This was much more rapid than the sorts of changes observed in long-run studies and indeed was in the opposite direction.
The consequence of this decline was that the government was able to say by the autumn of 1986 that the behaviour of M3 was no longer a reliable guide to monetary conditions and monetary targets were dropped in favour of discretionary interpretations of several ‘indicators’ including the exchange rate and the growth of nominal income itself.
Of particular interest here are the reasons for this decline in velocity.
Speaking at the University of Loughborough in October 1986, the Governor of the Bank of England explained it as the outcome of ‘deregulation’ and subsequent ‘structural changes’in financial markets.
The process of deregulation dates in the UK from 1971 and the introduction of the measures known as ‘Competition and Credit Control’.
This abolished the interest rate cartel between banks and at the same time removed quantitative restrictions upon the level of bank lending.
Henceforth, the Bank of England would set short-term interest rates and banks would be free to compete to supply whatever quantity of lending was demanded at that rate.
This freedom was suspended after 1974 when the Supplementary Special Deposit Scheme (see Ch. 9) was introduced but restored when the scheme was ended by the Conservative government in 1979.
Competition was further boosted with the lifting of exchange controls in 1979, and by 1981 the competition that had grown within the monetary sector spilled over to confront building societies as banks moved into mortgage lending.
As we saw in section 4.1.1, building societies benefited in 1983 by being allowed to bid for wholesale deposits in order to maintain their share of the mortgage market and benefited further by the liberalising Building Society Act in 1986.
These are only some of the landmarks in the deregulation process but they are enough to enable us to understand the Governor's argument.
The argument has, in fact, two strands.
The first is that deregulation has increased competition within and more recently between types of financial market and institution.
An obvious feature of this competition is the practice of ‘liability management’.
Instead of passively accepting whatever inflow of funds they happened to receive and relying on their skill at selecting assets for their profit, institutions began to ‘bid’ for funds.
This can be seen in the proliferation of interest-bearing bank deposits.
For many years banks offered no interest on sight deposits and only a token rate of interest on time deposits.
Fifteen years ago they began to offer market-related interest rates on wholesale deposits, deposits in excess of a large minimum, made for a fixed period of time.
The attractions of market-related interest rates were further supplemented with the issue of CDs.
These enable the original owner of the deposit to sell its ownership to a third party if the need arises and make the time deposit instantly realisable, albeit at a price.
By 1980, market-related interest rates were payable on ‘retail’ time deposits and in 1983 the first ‘high-interest cheque accounts’appeared, offering market interest rates  on what were in effect sight deposits subject to a high minimum credit balance.
The effect of this competition for funds is, of course, that an increasing proportion of the money supply now yields interest and, what is more, these interest rates vary with market interest rates.
This has immense significance for the authorities' ability to control the money supply, as we shall see in section 9.1.
Its relevance here though is that ‘money’ has become an increasingly attractive means of storing wealth.
A decision to save by building up money balances no longer carries with it the high opportunity cost that it once did.
Put another way, there is no longer the incentive to economise on every spare pound and penny in order buy interest-earning assets.
A rise in people's money balances is no longer an indication of a future burst of spending.
The second strand of the Governor's argument is that deregulation has helped the overall growth of financial markets and institutions and in particular the growth of NBFIs.
Their growth rate in the 1980s has been twice as rapid as the growth in the economy's real output.
This growth itself increases the demand for money.
As we have seen throughout section 4.1, whatever their major business, all NBFIs maintain some stock of liquid assets.
We also noted that out of this stock a high proportion consisted of bank deposits.
Let us suppose that NBFIs maintain a stable proportion of bank deposits to total assets and that their assets are growing at twice the rate of nominal income.
It follows that their demand for bank deposits is also growing at twice the rate of growth of nominal income.
But these bank deposits are being held as a form of instant security against sudden withdrawals.
They are not being used for spending, much less for spending on newly produced goods and services.
The quantity of money held once again grows more rapidly than spending and velocity falls.
A guide to further reading
On the activities of NBFIs by far the most authoritative and recent account is Goacher and Gurwen (1987).
Also useful but much less detailed are Gilbody (1988) and Struthers and Speight (1986, Ch. 5).
The CSO monthly publication Financial Statistics contains the balance sheet and acquisition data for each group of NBFIs we have examined.
Each is allocated a table and all the figures quoted in this chapter, unless otherwise specified, come from this source.
The table numbers are as follows: building societies 7.7; insurance companies 7.13; pension funds 7.14; unit trusts 7.11 and investment trusts 7.12.
Each group of intermediaries also has its own representative body which usually publishes an annual report of activities.
See for example, the Building Societies' Association,Bulletin; Unit Trust Yearbook ; Association of Investment Trust Companies,Yearbook .
The tendency of NBFI activity to raise velocity is covered in many books.
Howells and Bain (1985, appendix to Ch. 4) is one example.
Possible effects on the money supply are most clearly set out in Llewellyn (1979) and Howells (1988).
The Bank of England's views on falling velocity are published in the BEQB , December 1986.
Questions for discussion
1.
Why do building societies hold a higher proportion of liquid assets than do pension funds?
2.
What arguments can you think of in favour of NBFls increasing their holdings of UK assets and reducing their holdings of overseas assets?
3.
How would you expect the February 1988 changes in building society regulations to affect their sources and destination of funds?
4.
Through what processes might a further increase in non-bank financial intermediation cause velocity (a) to rise, and (b) to fall?
The money markets
In Chapters 3 and 4 we have been looking at the major groups of institutions that participate in the financial system.
In this chapter and in Chapter 6 we shall look at the markets in which these institutions operate.
The markets do not exclude other participants: commercial and industrial firms, the government and ‘persons’ have direct access to most of them.
But we shall see that the behaviour of financial institutions is often dominant.
It is common to talk of two groups of financial markets: the ‘money’ markets and the ‘capital’markets.
In one sense this is misleading.
In both markets what is offered for sale is ‘debts’ or claims', in exchange for money.
In both markets it is money that is being borrowed.
The difference which justifies the labels is the period to maturity of the debts, or to put it the other way round, the length of time for which the funds are borrowed.
In the ‘money’ markets, funds are borrowed for a short period, i.e. less than one year; in the ‘capital’markets funds are borrowed for long-term use, in some cases indeed with no promise of ever being repaid.
Although the distinction is useful and well recognised, it does not of course constrain people's behaviour.
Some institutions, discount houses for example, are accustomed to working in money markets, others, like pension funds, are accustomed to capital markets, but these boundaries are occasionally crossed when commercial circumstances require.
Certainly, ultimate borrowers and lenders are free to switch as the advantage of doing so presents itself.
Firms may, as a rule, prefer to raise ‘capital’ by issuing long-term bonds but, as we shall see in Chapter 6, there may be circumstances where it is preferable to raise short-term ‘money’instead.
It is sometimes the practice to divide these markets even further.
In the case of money markets, for example, we sometimes distinguish as follows:
(a)
the discount (or ‘traditional’) market;
(b)
the inter-bank market;
(c)
the certificate of deposit market;
(d)
the local authority market;
(e)
the Eurocurrency markets.
In this list (b)—(e) are known as the parallel markets.
Clearly, the divisions among this group of short-term markets will be even less watertight than they are between these and the capital markets.
However, it is a distinction we are going to maintain in this chapter because it has the effect of separately identifying the discount market.
This is the market in which the Bank of England conducts its monetary control operations and therefore, whatever its importance as judged by the magnitude of funds flowing through it, it is of immense significance to the behaviour of the rest of the financial system and to the rest of the economy.
We shall look at it in some detail in this chapter, devoting two sections, 5.1 and 5.2, to it.
Section 5.3 examines the parallel markets.
5.1 The discount market: characteristics
In the discount market funds are raised by issuing ‘bills’, ‘at a discount’ to their eventual redemption or maturity value.
We shall look at the characteristics of bills more carefully in a moment.
Transactions in the discount market are normally very large, enabling profits to be made from deals involving differentials in discount rates of small fractions of 1 per cent.
The market has no physical location, relying almost exclusively on telephone contact between operators and, therefore, upon verbal contracts.
As with any market, we can think in terms of a source of supply and a source of demand.
In theory, bills can be issued by anyone but in practice they are issued mainly by large corporations (commercial bills) and by the Bank of England on behalf of the government (treasury bills).
The main buyers and holders of bills, sometimes called the ‘market makers’, are the nine discount houses, members of the London Discount Market Association (LDMA), whose characteristics we described in section 3.3.
Discount houses' holdings of bills are financed by money lent to them ‘at call’ by the rest of the monetary sector.
‘At call’ means that it is repayable on demand.
This has two consequences.
Firstly, since the discount houses pay interest on call money, the banks are provided with an interest-earning source of readily available funds.
As we said in section 3.3, this is one of the reasons that they can manage with such a low ratio of bankers' deposits to customer deposits.
Secondly, it means that any liquidity shortage initially suffered by banks will be instantly transferred to the discount market.
Clearly, the houses will then be put in a position of having to sell bills (or to borrow) to meet the other banks' demands.
In a situation, such as we have assumed, of general liquidity shortage, the only source of help will be the Bank of England.
Notice, because it is important, that in these circumstances the Bank has switched sides.
From being a seller of bills, it has become a buyer.
As we shall see in section 5.2, this is only one of several curious features we come across when we try to think of the discount market in conventional terms.
What is traded in the discount market is ‘bills’.
Bills are certificates containing a promise to pay a specified sum of money to the holder at a specified time in the future.
They may be issued to a creditor in exchange for goods and services received, or in exchange for money.
After issue they can be traded (they are thus ‘securities’) and so the holder at the time of redemption need not be the person to whom the bill was originally issued.
Compared with other financial instruments, bills have a number of distinctive features.
Firstly, bills are issued in large denominations.
The minimum is 5,000 but few treasury bills are issued for less than 50,000 and most bills are much larger than this, up to a maximum normally of 1m.
Secondly, they are a highly liquid form of asset.
This is due firstly to their short maturity (treasury bills are normally issued for ninety-one days) together with the fact that they can be quickly bought and sold before maturity in a highly organised market.
It is reinforced further by the fact  that they have a low default risk.
In the case of treasury bills the reason for this is obvious but commercial bills can acquire a similar status.
We saw earlier that commercial bills are frequently ‘accepted’ by a bank at the time of issue.
Accepting bills was once the principal function of those merchant banks who are still referred to as acceptance houses (see section 3.3); it is now carried out by a large number of banks.
Bills which have been accepted by one of the major banks, recognised for this purpose by the Bank of England, acquire the ultimate standing, along with treasury bills, of being ‘eligible’ bills.
The immediate significance of this is that they are eligible for discount at the Bank of England.
The wider significance will become apparent later in section 5.2.
Thirdly, the reward to the lender for holding a bill to redemption comes in a form which resembles a capital gain rather than a conventional rate of interest.
This is because bills are issued ‘at a discount’ to their redemption value.
For example, the government might make an issue of 100,000 ninety-one-day bills, each at a discount of 1,000.
This would mean that a buyer would pay 99,000 and receive 99,000 plus 1,000 in three months' time.
However, it is obviously essential to have some way of comparing the cost and reward of borrowing and lending in this way with other methods which pay interest.
This is done by calculating a rate of discount.
The appropriate formula is  where  is the rate of discount, the redemption value, the initial price of the bill and n the time to redemption in years.
In the present example, therefore,
Although comparable with an annual rate of interest, however, this rate of discount is not identical.
Notice that this calculation features the reward (1,000) as a proportion of the redemption value (100,000).
In calculating a rate of interest, by contrast, we would normally express the reward as a proportion of the outlay, here 99,000.
The formula would be 
In the present case r would take the value 4.04 per cent p.a.
It is important to remember, therefore, when comparing returns on short-term instruments that a rate of discount will always be slightly less than the rate of interest giving the corresponding reward.
Fourthly, since the return for holding a bill to redemption is known at the time of issue, bills are fixed-interest securities .
In common with all fixed-interest securities, therefore, their price will change with any change in market or current interest rates.
We shall see more formally why this is the case when we discuss bonds in Chapter 6, but it is a relationship which is easy to grasp intuitively if we just consider the position of a holder of existing bills.
These will have been issued with a fixed redemption value and we must assume that the holder calculated that this would give him a return equal or similar to alternative returns currently available.
If market rates now rise, there will be instruments newly available with the higher return.
Indeed, newly issued bills will have to carry a larger discount to match the higher market rates.
In the circumstances, ignoring transaction costs, it will pay existing holders to sell their old bills in order to buy the new, higher-yielding, instruments.
The price of existing bills will therefore fall.
As their price falls, however, a larger differential between their current and redemption price emerges.
Eventually such a differential will be found at which buying the existing bills yields a rate of return similar to that available on new ones.
Lastly, with no change in interest rates, the market price of a bill will approach its redemption price as the period to redemption shortens.
Again, this may seem intuitively obvious.
The redemption value is fixed.
If the price were to remain constant then the gain received on redemption would be constant.
However, with the period to maturity diminishing this would represent an ever-increasing rate of return.
It can be seen clearly by considering the expression for the rate of discount above.
If market interest rates are unchanged, then  is given.
is given also.
As redemption approaches, the value of n diminishes.
With  diminishing and  constant, the value of the denominator will fall.
If the value of the whole expression,, is to remain constant then the value of the numerator must also fall.
With  given, this can only happen if  rises.
5.2 The discount market: operation
We said in section 5.1 that when we came to analyse the operation of the discount market from a conventional point of view, we should find that there were a number of curious features.
The first of these is that what we refer to as the ‘supply’ of bills is in fact a stock, rather than a flow.
There is, more or less continuously, a flow of newly issued bills and a flow of bills maturing (i.e. ceasing to exist) and the relative sizes of these flows will cause the stock to expand or contract.
But we cannot in this case take the flow of newly issued bills, or even the net flow (new issues minus redemptions) as the supply and learn anything useful from it about the operation of the market.
We have to take the supply of bills to be the existing stock because, as we said above, bills are securities which can be traded.
People can buy and sell existing bills.
What is more the stock of existing bills is much larger than current flows and therefore most transactions will involve existing bills.
In Fig. 5.1 we have the price of bills on the vertical axis and the stock of bills on the horizontal axis.
Because we are treating it as a stock, the supply of bills is drawn vertically, at .
However, as we said earlier, this stock may expand or contract depending upon the net flow of newly issued bills.
As the stock expands, the supply curve will shift to the right, to , and as it contracts it will shift to the left to .
In Fig. 5.1 we also have a demand curve for bills,.
This expresses the willingness of buyers of bills to hold the existing stock.
It is negatively sloped with respect to price because of the inverse relationship between bill prices and rates of discount.
At low prices, i.e. at large rates of discount,ceteris paribus , holders will be willing to hold more bills than they would at low rates of discount, i.e. at high prices.
What factors would we expect to cause changes in the supply and demand for bills?
On the supply side we can identify long- and short-term influences.
Bill finance is just one form of borrowing.
As the economy expands, as income and wealth increase, it is likely that people and firms will wish to increase their indebtedness.
On the assumption that nothing happens to change the relative attractiveness of different methods of borrowing, then we would expect the stock of bills to increase over time.
However, in the short run, numerous factors may operate to cause changes in supply.
Remember that bills are a method of short-term finance.
If borrowers perceive medium- and long-term interest rates to be high and likely to fall in future then they will prefer to borrow short and refinance the loan later at lower rates of interest.
In the case of the government, treasury bills are issued as a form of ‘residual finance’.
This is to say there is a weekly issue designed to match short-term fluctuations in income and expenditure.
For reasons we shall see in a moment, discount houses are always prepared to buy such bills.
Thus unforeseen shortfalls in government revenue will cause a surge of new bill issues.
Lastly, consider the effect of changes in demand.
If demand is high, prices will also be high (and discounts low, remember).
The higher the demand and the lower the discount the cheaper bill finance will be.
At low discounts, the supply curve in our figure will shift to the right more rapidly than it would if prices were low.
Notice, this is a second deviation from conventional market analysis.
In the normal diagram, a shift of the demand curve causes a movement along the supply curve.
In this case, the supply response is shown by a shift of the curve.
What might cause the demand curve to shift?
Again, we can expect long-term influences such as increasing income and wealth to cause a rightward shift of the demand curve.
In addition, there may be short-term causes of increased preference for bills.
We emphasised in section 5.1 that bills are a very liquid form of asset.
They carry negligible risk, a known rate of return if held to their redemption which occurs always in the near future and there is a ready market for them.
It is a reasonable supposition, therefore, that anything that increases the community's demand for liquid assets relative to other forms of wealth will cause a rise in the demand for bills.
Uncertainty about the future value of other financial assets, or about the timing of important receipts and payments are examples.
Most important of all, however, will be changes in the factors determining discount houses' willingness and ability to buy bills.
Remember that in section 5.1 we said their purchase of bills was financed by funds lent ‘at call’ by other monetary sector institutions.
If, for any reason, these other institutions find themselves short of liquidity their first resort will be to the discount market for repayment.
Discount houses will have to sell bills.
Conversely, excess liquidity elsewhere in the monetary sector will cause a flow of funds into the discount market and the demand for bills will increase.
A third curiosity of the discount market is the one we hinted at in section 5.1 when we referred to the Bank of England's appearing on both sides of the market, as a seller of treasury bills on the government's behalf and as a buyer.
The reason for this is that it is in the discount market that the authorities conduct those operations which they hope will influence monetary conditions in the economy.
In recent years, of course, the target of this influence has been the rate of growth of the money supply.
It is time now to look at this in some detail and the rest of this section is devoted to an analysis of the Bank of England's ‘money market operations’ as they are called.
We need to proceed in steps.
Rapidly at first.
Recall that ‘money’ consists overwhelmingly of bank deposits.
Recall also (from section 3.4) that the quantity of bank deposits changes,ceteris paribus , as a result of flows of new bank lending.
For example, a flow of net new bank lending will cause an increase in the supply of money.
Remember too, that banks generally have a commercial interest in expanding their lending.
In section 3.4, we listed three constraints upon this expansion.
One of those, the supply of base money, could be made to act, we said, as a supply constraint.
Remember two further points.
The government banks with the Bank of England, therefore the daily flows of funds between the private and public sectors are reflected in equal but opposite changes in two of the Bank's liabilities, a flow towards the government, for example, causing a fall in bankers'  deposits and a matching rise in public deposits.
On the assumption that there was some desired ratio of bankers' deposits (part of the monetary base) to customers' deposits below which banks would not wish to fall, then limiting the base by controlling these flows must limit the scope for deposit expansion and therefore for lending.
All of this may be possible in theory, but it is not an approach which has ever been used in the UK.
This is worth emphasising since monetary control regulations often include references to ratios of various sorts.
‘Cash’, ‘liquid assets’, ‘eligible assets’ have all appeared as specified ratios at various stages over the last forty years.
They have none of them anything to do with attempts to specify a ratio for monetary base type control purposes.
Since 1971, though the scheme was temporarily abandoned, and more determinedly since 1981, the control of monetary growth has depended upon the Bank's willingness and ability to manipulate short-term interest rates and upon changes in interest rates' ability to influence the demand for bank lending.
This is how it works.
For many years the discount houses have agreed to buy each week  whatever quantity of treasury bills were offered for sale by the Bank.
In return, the Bank has guaranteed always to provide funds to the houses if, either as a result of these purchases or as a result of the rest of the monetary sector demanding repayment, the houses should find themselves short.
The Bank has thus always operated as ‘lender of last resort’ guaranteeing to supply whatever quantity of funds was necessary.
Notice that this is in effect a guarantee to supply the quantity of monetary base necessary to support the existing level of bank lending.
Provided this agreement exists there can be no pretence at a system of monetary base control.
However, while guaranteeing to provide the funds, the Bank was free, and plainly had the power as the monopoly supplier of funds in the circumstances, to impose its own rate of interest.
This is a long-standing arrangement.
In August 1981, however, some detailed changes were made to the way in which this assistance would be forthcoming.
The intention of the changes, it was said, was to make interest rates in future ‘more market-determined’.
Firstly, the Bank of England ceased to announce in advance the rate at which it would provide assistance.
Previously, a ‘Minimum Lending Rate’(MLR) had been continuously posted.
The ability to reintroduce an MLR in extreme conditions was, however, retained and this in fact happened for just one day on 14 January 1985.
Secondly, the Bank gave notice that it would make its own forecasts of daily flows in the market so as to be ready to provide assistance but that when the need arose the houses would have to offer bills for sale to the Bank at prices of their own choosing.
This contrasted in two ways with previous practice.
Previously, the Bank had been willing to lend to the houses, leaving their bill holdings intact; also, of course, the houses knew the lending rate they would have to pay.
Under the new arrangements each house would have to offer bills at a price which the Bank hoped would reflect the degree of difficulty it was in.
Thirdly, the stock of outstanding bills was divided into four bands according to maturity as follows:
Band 1 0–14 days
Band 2 15–33 days
Band 3 34–63 days
Band 4 64–91 days
and the Bank announced its intention to deal only in bands 1 and 2.
Thus, it was argued, whatever effect upon the market the authorities might have, it would be confined to a very narrow spectrum of assets and interest rates.
Elsewhere, it would be market forces that determined prices and interest rates.
We are now in a position to show formally how this approach is intended to work.
Remember that the money stock expands at a rate determined,ceteris paribus , by the flow of net new bank lending and assume that the demand for bank lending is inversely related to the rate of interest charged on that lending.
This is shown in the right-hand quadrant of Fig. 5.2.
For simplicity, we are going to assume that the rate charged on bank lending is identical to the rate of interest set by the Bank's bill market operations, though in practice the lending rate is determined by a mark-up on money market rates.
The Bank's bill market operations are shown in the left-hand quadrant.
In the left-hand quadrant we have the rate of interest (discount) on bills on   the vertical axis and the quantity of bills on the horizontal axis.
Notice that the quantity of bills increases as we move to the left along the axis, away from the origin.
Remember that the demand for bills will vary inversely with their price, i.e. the lower the price (and the higher the discount) the greater the quantity demanded.
This is shown in the left-hand quadrant of Fig. 5.2 by the upward-sloping demand curve for bills,.
The stock of bills is shown by  and this stock is willingly held at an average rate of discount of .
At that rate the flow of bank lending is , and the money supply is expanding at a corresponding rate.
Now imagine the case where the authorities wish to see a reduction in this rate of expansion.
Suppose that the Bank's forecast is for a shortage of liquidity in the monetary sector, that the monetary sector will recall some of its discount market loans and the houses will be forced to offer bills for sale to the Bank.
It wishes to exploit this situation in order to raise interest rates.
In Fig. 5.2, the discount market is no longer willing (is no longer able) to hold the existing stock of bills.
Its falling demand for bills is shown by an upward shift of the demand curve to .
If nothing else happens, we are in the world of monetary base control.
The Bank does not provide assistance and interest rates could rise very high indeed.
They would have to rise to that level at which the monetary sector was forced to find some other solution to its liquidity shortage, perhaps by calling in advances to customers and reducing the stock of its outstanding deposits.
However, in the existing UK system we know that the Bank will provide help.
It will absorb some of the bills offered for sale by the discount houses, albeit at interest rates of its own choosing.
By its purchase of bills, it makes funds available to the market and banks can be repaid call money to rebuild bankers' balances.
In effect, the Bank is making available that quantity of monetary base  necessary to support the flow of bank lending at the rate of interest of its own choosing.
In Fig. 5.2, we show the Bank's purchase of bills by a rightward shift of the supply curve (the stock of bills being reduced), from  to  '.
As drawn, a new rate of interest (discount) is established at  and the flow of net new bank lending is reduced to .
Clearly, by tailoring its willingness to accept bills and reduce the stock, the Bank is able to impose whatever rate of interest it chooses.
From this analysis, it should be clear that the authorities have considerable power to determine interest rates.
But since 1981 it has been commonly said, and positively emphasised by the authorities themselves, that interest rates in the UK economy are largely ‘market determined’.
In the remainder of this section we shall look at what this means and just how true it is.
Plainly, short-term interest rates are not market-determined in the usual sense in which textbooks present markets as producing an equilibrium price and quantity.
In Fig. 5.2 the shift in the demand curve from  to ’ shows a reduction in the demand for bills and simultaneously an increase in the demand for liquidity .
The shift of the curve  to ’ shows a reduction in the stock of outstanding bills, but also an increase in the supply of liquidity.
The market in which short-run rates are being determined, therefore, is one in which there is a monopoly supplier of liquidity (the Bank) and nine buyers (the discount houses).
For a time at least the Bank as monopoly supplier can charge any rate it chooses.
Events in March 1987 illustrate this very clearly.
During the first week in March, market sentiment was anticipating a cut in base rates.
This was due mainly to the very high value of sterling against other currencies.
Part of the recent rise in sterling's value had been brought about by the purchase of sterling by overseas investors wishing to buy UK government bonds.
Consequently bond prices were rising and their yields were falling.
In other words, long-term interest rates were already beginning to fall.
However, in the face of market expectations, the Bank took advantage of a money market shortage on 5 March to buy bills at a rate of discount of 11.75 per cent, 0.5 per cent higher than the previous day's dealings and about 1 per cent above what markets were anticipating.
As the Financial Times headline said on 6 March, ‘Bank imposes penal interest to hold line on base lending rate.’
On 9 March, however, the Bank lowered its dealing rate to 10.75 per cent and banks cut base rates to 10.5 per cent.
Once again, the market was surprised.
What had caused the change?
Most likely it was the continued upward pressure on the sterling exchange rate over the weekend.
Foreign investors continued to buy sterling and UK assets.
As the ‘new’ sterling was deposited with banks, their deposits and bankers' balances increased by equal absolute amounts.
The ratio of balances to deposits was becoming more favourable and this was bound to increase the supply of call money to the discount market.
If this continued for long enough, conceivably the situation would arise where there would be no daily shortages for the Bank to monitor and operate on.
Eventually, the existing form of monetary control would be rendered useless.
Remember that we have so far shown the Bank taking advantage of a ‘natural’ or autonomous shortage of funds.
As we know, however, the Bank can ‘induce’ such a shortage.
By selling government debt to the non-bank  private sector, for example, the Bank will cause a reduction in bank deposits, matched initially by an equal reduction in bankers' deposits at the Bank and a consequent deterioration in the banks' liquidity ratios.
As they try to restore their original position by recalling discount market loans, we shall have the same circumstances as those described above but now deliberately engineered by the Bank.
In Fig. 5.2 the demand curve will shift upwards and the Bank will have to respond in its purchase of bills, i.e. it will have to decide on the new position for .
This has now become a very curious market indeed.
If we continue with our analogy, introduced a moment ago, of the Bank as the monopoly supplier of liquidity and the discount houses as the buyers, we can now see that the discount market is one in which (by debt sales) the monopolist is able to determine the position of the demand curve!
Of course, it might still be said on behalf of the 1981 arrangements that making houses bid for bills, when buying or selling, is a genuine step towards market pricing of bills.
But this too can be overstated.
The Bank offers to deal twice each day.
The rates at which it has dealt, therefore, become quickly known in a market with comparatively few practitioners who are in continuous contact with each other.
Even outsiders have the crucial information within twenty-four hours via the Financial Times daily money market report.
However ‘competitive’ the discount houses' offer to sell bills to the Bank may look superficially, we can be certain the houses will not make offers which are very far from either the price the bank desires or from each other.
Indeed, the setting of money market interest rates often appears to happen by convention with no visible sign of the intermediate stages we have described.
This is because the market and its practitioners know the sequence very well and also because profit can be made (or losses minimised) by anticipating events.
For example, markets will always have a view about the government's policy on monetary growth.
Against this, they will be making continuous assessments of the scale of current bank lending.
Suppose the feeling is that current bank lending figures are ‘high’ in relation to targets.
This will be widely discussed in the financial press and by market practitioners.
Some people will take the view that a rise in interest rates is at least probable.
They will sell at least some of their bill holdings to avoid an anticipated capital loss.
This selling will cause bill rates to ‘edge up’.
The Financial Times money markets report will carry this information.
Nervousness will grow.
More selling and a further marginal increase in rates may occur.
The question then becomes one of the Bank's view of this ‘pressure for a rise in interest rates’.
At what rate of interest will the Bank provide assistance when next it is asked?
It may raise its rate, thereby ‘sanctioning’ the market's anticipation or it may resist the rise by continuing assistance at the original rate.
Furthermore, when it comes to the diffusion of short-term interest rate changes through the rest of the financial system, convention and administrative rules appear again.
Recall that the authorities may have an interest in seeing interest rates rise in order to discourage bank lending and monetary growth.
Plainly such action is only relevant to the objective if the rise in rates is passed on to would-be borrowers in the commercial and personal sectors.
The interest rates charged by banks to their customers are determined  by applying a set of administrative rules to a base rate of interest.
Thus, a favoured commercial organisation doing large business with a bank might be charged interest at ‘1 per cent over base’ while an individual client might be paying 4 or 5 per cent over base for an overdraft.
Changes in the level of interest rates charged on borrowing, therefore, depend almost wholly upon movements in the base rate.
Clearly, if ‘market’ interest rates move up (as in our example), there will come a point at which banks will have to pay more for their deposits and, with the marginal cost of funds rising, they will eventually have to raise the rates charged to clients.
However, although base rates move roughly in line with money market rates, the changes to base rates are both less frequent and, when they occur, larger.
As the events of March 1987 show, banks are reluctant to follow movements in market interest rates unless and until the authorities have confirmed that they wish to see a change.
In the Financial Times ’ words of 10 March, ‘Britain's leading banks cut their base lending rates yesterday…after Bank of England signalled that it was ready to see borrowing costs fall…’(our italics).
Indeed, this reluctance has been so marked that on occasions, as in 1985, it was said to produce ‘round-tripping’.
This becomes possible when money market rates edge above banks' base rates enabling favoured customers, paying very little over base rate, to borrow from banks and then to lend the funds in the money markets.
Except that their role is more obscure to the public eye, the authorities' influence over short-term interest rates is not very different from what it used to be when they announced an MLR each week and expected institutions to comply.
5.3 The ‘parallel’ markets
The parallel markets are also markets for short-term money.
They therefore share many of the characteristics of the traditional market.
Deals are done for very large sums at very small rates of profit.
Some of the participants, banks and discount houses, are common to both the traditional and parallel markets.
In this section we shall provide a brief description of each of the markets and follow that with a discussion of the significance of the parallel markets as a group.
5.3.1 The inter-bank market
As its name suggests, the inter-bank market is a market through which banks lend to each other.
Like the discount market this provides individual banks with an outlet for surplus funds and a source of borrowing when their reserves are low.
It is a wholesale market.
Deals of over 1m. are commonplace.
The market developed in the 1960s, involving firstly overseas banks, later merchant banks and discount houses.
Now it is used by all types of banks and it is not uncommon for NBFIs to lend surplus funds through this market.
The loans are normally for very short periods, from overnight to fourteen days, though some lending for three and six months occurs.
Naturally, given the degree of overlap, there is some connection between inter-bank interest rates and rates in the traditional market.
If banks are short of liquidity they  will lend less to both markets and rates will rise; if the Bank of England readily provides funds to the discount market, houses will offer less attractive terms to other banks who will deposit instead with the parallel markets causing rates there to fall.
However, inter-bank rates are generally slightly higher and certainly more volatile than rates in the traditional market.
Loans are unsecured and there is no lender of last resort.
Also, the range of participants is much wider than in the traditional market.
Lesser banks will expect to pay slightly more for funds than the major retail banks.
In periods of great shortage of liquidity, the needs of banks which do not have sufficient funds with the traditional market have driven overnight rates to more than 100 per cent.
Interestingly, operating in the opposite direction, the oversubscription of several new share issues in 1987 saw seven-day rates dip.
While they were completing the administration of the sale, issuing houses deposited subscribers' money in the inter-bank market.
The rate of interest paid on inter-bank loans is known as London Inter-Bank Offer Rate or LIBOR.
It is an important point of reference to banks because it is probably the best indication to them of the cost of raising immediate marginal funds.
Numerous bank interest rates are therefore tied to LIBOR, particularly to the rate for three-month deposits.
5.3.2 The market for certificates of deposit
A certificate of deposit (CD) states that a deposit has been made with a bank for a fixed period of time at the end of which it will be repaid with interest.
This explains, incidentally, why CDs appear in definitions of the money supply such as M3.
It is not the certificate as such that we wish to include but the underlying deposit, which is a time deposit just like all other time deposits that appear in such definitions.
An institution is said to ‘issue’ a CD when it accepts a deposit and to ‘hold’a CD when it itself makes a deposit or buys a certificate in the secondary market.
From an institution's point of view, therefore, issued CDs are liabilities; held CDs are assets.
A CD might be described thus, ‘50,000 three-month CD at 10 per cent’.
This would mean the holder would receive 50,000 plus 0.25 x 10 per cent, i.e. 51,250, at the end of the period.
The advantage to the depositor is that the certificate is tradable so that, although the deposit is made for a fixed period, he or she can have use of the funds earlier by selling the certificate to a third party at a price which will reflect the period to run to maturity and the current level of interest rates.
The advantage to the bank is that it has the use of a deposit for a fixed period, but, because of the flexibility given to the lender, at a slightly lower price than it would have had to pay for a normal time deposit.
Certificates of deposit are another means of short-term, wholesale lending and borrowing.
Three- and six-month maturities are common.
Some CDs are issued for one year and even for two years but the market for these is comparatively thin.
This has led to the practice of banks issuing ‘rollover’ CDs, i.e. six-month CDs with a guarantee of further renewal on specified terms.
The minimum value is 50,000.
A market in CDs first began in 1966 with dollar certificates.
The first sterling CDs were traded in 1968 when foreign banks, some merchant banks  and discount houses began issuing and holding CDs.
They were quickly joined by other banks including the clearing banks in 1971.
During the 1970s the market developed dramatically.
As we saw in earlier chapters, CDs are now issued by a wide variety of banks and since 1983 by building societies.
It is quite common for a bank both to have issued and to hold CDs, though normally of differing maturities.
It will issue CDs with a maturity expected to coincide with a liquidity surplus and hold CDs expected to mature at a time of shortage.
Tables 3.3 and 3.5 show the importance of CDs on both sides of banks' balance sheets.
5.3.3 The local authority market
As its name implies, this is a market in which funds are lent to local authorities.
Strictly speaking, we are interested here only in one part of the market, that part which supplies local authorities with short-term ‘money’ through bills and deposits.
We need to remember that local authorities are also active in the ‘capital’ markets where they borrow by the issue of stocks, bonds and mortgages.
Bills are issued with maturities of three and six months.
They are in most respects similar to treasury bills, including the eligibility for rediscount at the Bank of England.
Consequently they are held and traded by those active in the traditional bill market and yields are always very close to treasury bill yields.
However, deposits are a much larger source of funds than are bills.
They are normally short and fixed term though some are overnight (‘at call’) deposits and some are for 364 days.
As we must now expect, the size of the deposits is large, usually over 50,000 with 1m. quite common.
The deposits once made cannot, unlike CDs, be traded.
The sources of deposits range from banks lending their own surpluses, to large firms and other financial institutions and to institutions arranging deposits for overseas depositors.
Given the size of the deposits and the other terms and conditions, local authority deposits are bound to function for lenders as an alternative to deposits in the inter-bank market.
5.3.4 The Euromarkets
All the markets we have so far discussed are markets within the UK which offer opportunities for borrowing and lending sterling, the domestic currency.
Alongside these markets, using in some cases quite literally parallel instruments, are markets for lending and borrowing other currencies.
Because the activity is taking place in London, rather than in the home countries of the currencies in question, the markets are referred to as Euromarkets.
A ‘Eurocurrency’ is any currency being traded outside its country of origin.
Thus there are Eurofrancs, Euromarks, Euroyen.
Similarly, ‘Eurosterling’ is sterling which is traded in other financial centres, outside the UK.
By far the most plentiful form of Eurocurrency is the Eurodollar.
Eurocurrency markets began to develop in the 1950s and grew most spectacularly in the 1960s and 1970s.
Between 1975 and 1983, Eurodeposits grew fivefold and doubled again by 1986 to about $3,000bn.
Since the mid-1960s the growth rate of Eurodeposits has been more than double that of the world  money supply and London has emerged as the major centre for Eurocurrency business.
According to Podolski (1986, pp. 112–13): ‘The development of the Eurocurrency system was perhaps the most important financial innovation of the post war period…comparable to that of coke smelting in the development of iron and steel, the steam engine in the development of railways…‘.
There were several reasons for the rapid development of this market and a brief summary may help us to understand why Eurocurrencies exist.
At the end of the 1950s the US balance of payments was in deficit and foreigners earned more dollars than they spent.
In many such cases earners of the foreign currency might be expected to exchange it for their own.
But the dollar was regarded as a strong currency and was therefore popular in international trade.
One option for holders, of course, was to leave the dollars on deposit with a US bank but this was discouraged by US banking regulations which prevented interest from being paid on deposits of less than thirty days and limited the rate payable on longer deposits to less than that obtaining elsewhere.
There were thus good reasons for holding dollars but not for holding them in the USA.
The growth of multinational corporations provided a second spur to Eurocurrency business.
Doing business in several countries meant holding a variety of currencies while good communication between the ‘local’ branches meant that these holdings could be moved to wherever the return was at its best.
The rise in oil prices in the 1970s was a third factor.
Oil producers found themselves with large dollar surpluses which they did not wish to deposit in the USA, partly as we have seen because of the prevailing regulations but also for political reasons.
These dollars were therefore placed with banks outside the USA.
As we said above, the instruments traded for Eurocurrencies parallel those for sterling.
There are Eurobonds, for example, which are issued for periods normally over five years.
Paralleling the UK money market instruments, however, are Eurodeposits, EuroCDs and even Eurobills or as they are more commonly called ‘Europaper’.
Eurodeposits are fixed-term deposits on which a variable interest rate is paid, normally linked to the rate paid on sterling inter-bank lending or LIBOR.
Maturities range more widely than those of sterling inter-bank loans, from overnight to one year and occasionally more.
Depositors are commonly financial institutions and multinational firms looking for a more profitable or convenient outlet for dollar deposits that they have acquired in the USA.
Some governments of countries earning dollar surpluses supply Eurodollar deposits as a matter of policy.
Their central bank accepts deposits from residents in exchange for domestic currency.
The dollars are then deposited with banks outside the USA.
The users of Eurocurrency are multinational firms, central banks and governments and other public authorities.
Countries with balance of payments deficits have bought and borrowed Eurodollars.
The West German government has occasionally ‘neutralised’ the effect of a dollar surplus by using the market.
When a central bank buys a surplus of foreign currency it exchanges it for domestic currency, here Deutschmarks.
This increases the domestic money supply with possibly inflationary consequences.
To offset  this, the central bank persuaded commercial banks to buy the dollars back in exchange for marks, in effect reversing the original transaction, and then to lend the dollars in the Eurodollar market.
Obviously, the existence of this market and a profitable outlet for the dollars was an essential incentive.
It also cost the German central bank a guarantee of a fixed future rate of conversion of dollars into marks.
Local authorities in the UK have also used the market, exchanging for sterling the Eurocurrency borrowed.
As in the sterling markets, EuroCDs are tradable certificates indicating ownership of a fixed-term deposit.
The range of maturities is wider, however, ranging from three months to five years.
5.3.5 The significance of the parallel markets
We spent some time discussing the operation of the traditional or discount market because, we said, it was in that market that the Bank of England tried day by day to influence monetary conditions in the domestic economy.
As we shall see in a moment, one significance of the parallel markets is that they make the Bank's monetary control operations, at least in principle, more difficult and they do this in at least two ways.
A second feature of these markets is their widening of the range and reduction in the cost of lending and borrowing facilities.
We shall look at each of these in turn.
Firstly, the development of parallel markets has diminished the impact of the Bank of England's discount market operations.
In the discount market the Bank of England takes advantage of day-to-day flows of funds between the public and private sectors to indicate the way in which it wishes to see short-term interest rates move.
It is able to do this because the market is a front-line source of liquidity to banks in the event of a shortage.
When banks withdraw funds, the Bank of England relieves the resulting discount market shortage at that rate of interest which it thinks appropriate, nudging rates upwards perhaps to reduce the demand for bank lending or lowering them to counteract a rising exchange rate.
With the growth of the parallel markets, however, the discount market is no longer the only source of immediately available funds to individual banks.
What is more, the Bank of England need no longer be the immediate source of funds to individual discount houses.
As we have seen above, discount houses and other members of the monetary sector have substantial short-term funds lent to each other.
In Table 3.3 these are shown under assets as ‘market loans’ and ‘CDs’.
In these markets the Bank has no direct control over interest rates.
Individual banks and discount houses can alleviate liquidity shortages through these markets without the Bank having an opportunity to influence rates.
Some indication of the relative importance of the parallel as opposed to  traditional markets is the widespread use of LIBOR, rather than treasury bill rate, by financial institutions as a basis for calculating their lending and deposit rates.
Furthermore, in a period of a domestic monetary squeeze, it will be possible, and may be cheaper, to borrow in Eurocurrency markets.
With a well-developed sterling spot market and no exchange control, it is then a simple and cheap operation to swap foreign currency for sterling from the Exchange Equalisation Account.
Unless the authorities react by selling government debt to the non-bank private  sector on a sufficient scale (with whatever interest rate consequences may follow), the money supply will increase.
Of course, a general liquidity shortage cannot be alleviated by banks withdrawing loans from each other .
Eventually the Bank will be required as lender of last resort.
But the existence of numerous alternative markets for short-term funds means the opportunity for intervention may be subject to a time-lag.
To ensure that the Bank can maintain an acceptable degree of influence over short-term rates, the monetary control regulations introduced in 1981 required that banks maintain with the discount market funds equal to a daily minimum of 4 per cent and a monthly average of 6 per cent of their ‘eligible’ liabilities.
(Eligible liabilities are sterling deposits with two years or less to maturity held by UK residents, plus a number of other items.)
At the same time, and as we saw in section 5.1, the regulations increased the range and number of bills which institutions could offer for discount at the Bank by recognising as ‘eligible’ bills commercial bills accepted by certain leading banks.
Both of these measures were intended to ensure that banks continued to regard the traditional discount market as an important outlet for surplus funds and source of liquidity in the event of shortage.
Granted that the parallel markets may reduce the ability of short-term interest rate changes to influence monetary growth, by changing the relationship between money and spending (i.e. velocity), they may also alter the significance of any monetary growth which does occur.
For example, imagine a situation of a ‘tight’ domestic monetary policy, in which UK banks are operating at or near the limit of their desired balances: deposits ratio.
An overseas bank then raises its interest rate to attract (Euro) sterling deposits.
These are withdrawn from a UK bank by the non-bank private sector (NBPS): NBPS bank deposits, the UK money supply and bankers' balances all fall by an equal amount.
The foreign bank gains the sterling deposits.
Suppose now that it lends 90 per cent of that deposit in sterling to a UK resident who spends it in such a way that it is redeposited with the UK bank; also that the remaining 10 per cent is held by the overseas bank as an interest-bearing sterling deposit with the UK bank.
The UK bank's deposits and balances are restored, it continues as before.
However, the original stock of bankers' balances has financed an additional round of spending.
In actual fact this has been achieved even though the measured money stock has fallen!
Remember, when the sterling was redeposited with the UK bank only 90 per cent of it was credited to the NBPS; 10 per cent was deposited in the name of the overseas bank and is not included in normal definitions of the money supply.
This shows how intermediation via Euromarket banks can increase the volume of spending for a given monetary base.
Since it does this without increasing the money supply, it is raising the velocity of the existing stock.
To this extent it is the same process that we encountered with NBFIs in section 4.2 and is a further indication of the way in which continuous innovation affects the ‘information content’ of key indicators.
Here, the recorded money supply falls while spending increases.
Another difficulty for monetary control is posed by the very narrow ‘spread’(between borrowing and deposit rates) that exists in these competitive markets.
Given that borrowed funds can always be placed on deposit the spread could be regarded as the real cost of borrowing.
Granted that  there is always an advantage in having liquid funds available, if the spread is low enough customers may choose to hold large volumes of funds on deposit rather than repay outstanding borrowing.
The demand both for money and for bank lending is increased at any absolute level of interest rates and the recorded money supply figures rise accordingly.
This increase is clearly associated with an increase in liquidity but it is no longer clear what this implies.
It may be a preliminary to higher levels of spending or may be simply a shift in portfolio preferences towards more liquid forms of wealth.
The second and obvious consequence of the growth of the parallel markets is the widening of lending and borrowing opportunities that have been created.
As we said in section 2.3, we should expect this to reduce the cost and increase the volume of lending and borrowing with possible consequences for both the balance between consumption and saving and the level of aggregate demand.
The consequences are difficult to prove quantitatively.
The ratio of saving to aggregate income changes for several reasons; the level of aggregate demand generally increases over time, again for reasons other than the volume and cost of financial transactions.
All we can say is that ceteris paribus we should expect consequences of these kinds and then look at specific developments which would seem to illustrate the possibilities.
One obvious example is the market for (sterling and Eurocurrency) CDs.
We said earlier that CDs brought clear advantages to both sides of the market.
Lenders could get a rate of interest very close to that available on corresponding time deposits knowing, none the less, that they could recover use of the funds by selling the CDs.
Banks, and eventually borrowers, had the advantage that the rate of interest they paid for the deposit would be slightly less than that on a conventional time deposit.
A second example is provided by the inter-bank market.
Before the development of the inter-bank market, there were significant gaps in the maturity structure of many banks' asset portfolios.
Put simply, it was difficult to find outlets for short-to medium-term lending whose self-liquidation at a definite time could be relied upon.
It was possible to lend overnight to the traditional market and in theory at short term through overdrafts.
However, the termination of overdrafts is a painful process.
The development of the inter-bank market enabled banks to lend for specified periods of time, repayment to coincide with what they expected to be periods of shortage.
They could match their lending more closely with their borrowing, much of which was for specified periods of time.
This ‘maturity matching’ reduces risk (as we saw in section 1.1.4) and therefore the need for low- or zero-yielding reserves.
Once again, the tendency is to reduce costs and expand the flow of business.
This growth of alternative markets for short-term money and the instruments that go with them has made the supply and demand for short-term money extremely competitive.
As we have said many times in this section, ‘wholesale’ deals are often done on extremely small commissions or to profit from extremely small interest rate differentials.
With such a variety of similar instruments and competitive rates it is difficult and costly in time for all participants to know exactly the best terms and rates.
This has stimulated the development of two professions.
The first is that of ‘money brokers’, firms who offer for very small commissions on very large deals to put lenders  and borrowers in touch with their most advantageous counterparts.
Indeed, it is normal practice for money brokers to search out, by phoning round, those institutions with funds to lend and borrow.
It has also encouraged ‘interest arbitrageurs’.
Arbitrage involves making a profit by borrowing from one source solely to lend to another to take advantage of interest differentials.
Notice that, in contrast to speculation, no gamble is being taken on future events.
The rate of interest on the borrowed funds is known, as is the rate at which the funds can be lent.
The only possible risk is that one or both might change while the deal was being made.
By directing funds from low-interest source to higher-interest outlets, interest arbitrage, like money broking, should help to remove anomalous interest rate differentials.
A guide to further reading
The characteristics and behaviour of the short-term money markets are described in Struthers and Speight (1986, Ch. 6) and in Peasnell and Ward (1985, Ch. 6).
By far the best account of the Bank of England's daily operations in the discount market appears in Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , March 1982.
Llewellyn and Tew (1988) also discuss the Bank's discount market operations and the question of who sets interest rates.
The importance of the parallel market is touched on in the first two sources above, and also in Podolski (1986, Chs 5.2 and 6.2), Llewellyn et al.(1982, Chs 4 and 6) and in Goodhart (1984, Ch.
V).
Daily reports of money market events, prices and yields are carried in the Financial Times .
Questions for discussion
1.
Why would you expect the yield on treasury bills normally to be rather lower than on government bonds?
2.
If the current rate of discount on treasury bills is 11 per cent, calculate the price of a 50,000 ninety-one-day bill with sixty days to redemption.
What will its price be in four weeks' time if interest rates remain unchanged?
3.
Suppose the government makes a large issue of bonds to the non-bank private sector.
Outline the effects upon the relevant institutions and markets and the Bank of England's possible responses in the discount market.
4.
Do markets determine interest rates?
5.
How does the existence of ‘parallel’ markets affect the Bank of England's influence over the monetary sector?