

1 Introduction
The general theory of relativity proposed by Einstein in 1915 imposed a new view of the space–time we inhabit: instead of matter moving through a passive space–time continuum the general theory of relativity (GR) asserts that the presence of matter should distort space–time.
This distortion causes the deflection of material particles and of light from their classical paths.
Einstein predicted on the basis of GR that starlight which passes the limb of the Sun on its way to the Earth should be deflected by 1.750 arcsec — not a great deal, but measurable.
Soon after, in 1919, Eddington organized an expedition to the island of Principé which photographed the star field around the Sun during a solar eclipse.
When comparison was made with night photographs of the same star field the predicted general relativistic deflection was confirmed.
The curious properties proposed for space time, apparently correctly, helped turn this result into a popular news item.
Since that moment the hold of the general theory on the imagination strengthened as each new successful test enhanced confidence in it and as its potent implications were gradually worked out.
Warps in space time and black holes are now the stuff of science fiction; this assimilation into popular literature shows in one way how strong the impact of Einstein's ideas has been.
The general theory of relativity links the gravitational force and the structure of space–time, and so we should begin with a few remarks on the gravitational force and then explain how it was that the classical or Newtonian view of gravitation came to be seen as unsatisfactory.
The gravitational force dominates our Universe on the large scale, binding matter into stars, stars into galaxies, and galaxies into clusters of galaxies.
The classical theory of gravitation is based on Newton's law of gravity which states that two masses m, and m2 separated by a distance r feel a mutual gravitational attraction , where G is the universal gravitational constant.
Calculations based on this equation predict the motion of the planets with great accuracy.
The most significant feature not explained is a tiny (43 arcsec) component in the precession of the perihelion of the orbit of Mercury (532 arcsec per century).
However, despite its successes, Newton's law of gravitation is fundamentally flawed: it is time independent, which would mean that the gravitational force  could act instantaneously at all distances.
Such behaviour is in flat contradiction to the special theory of relativity (SR) which requires that no signal should travel faster than the speed of light, c.
This conceptual flaw is one which is shared by Coulomb's law of electrostatics, and the solution in that case suggests a possible approach in the case of gravitation.
In the electromagnetic case the difficulty is resolved by using Maxwell's equations, which are consistent with SR; Coulomb's law is then seen to be the limiting form of one of these equations when the charges are slowly moving (quasi-static limit).
One of Einstein's aims following his development of SR was to find a set of equations to describe gravitation that would be consistent with SR, and his search was crowned with success in 1915, just ten years later.
Einstein realized that there is a vital interplay between matter and the structure of space–time.
The presence of matter causes the curvature of space–time and in turn this curvature influences the paths of matter and of light, a view which goes beyond both classical and special relativistic mechanics.
Gravitation is then built into the theory from the outset through a key equation, proposed by Einstein, that links space–time curvature to the matter distribution.
In the resulting general theory of relativity gravitational effects propagate with the speed of light.
The bending of light near a massive body is one prediction of GR, and this was checked crudely by the expedition of 1919.
More spectacular has been the recent observation of twin images of the same quasar source seen through a gravitational lens made up of galactic material nearer to the Earth.
In the limit of low velocities and small gravitational effects GR reduces to Newton's law with small corrections, and these corrections account precisely for the small residual advance of perihelion in the case of Mercury.
A similar effect of GR has been observed for the orbit of the binary pair containing the pulsar 1913+16: the advance of the periastron (the line joining the stars at their point of nearest approach) of the pulsar orbit is, at 4° per year, considerably larger than for Mercury's orbit.
The curvature of space–time also means that identical clocks at different gravitational potentials must run at different rates.
In turn this implies that the frequency of light travelling away from a star should grow less in the process, giving it a gravitational red shift.
Only since 1960 have we possessed the technology to test the prediction locally.
For example the rate of atomic clocks, one on Earth and one 10 000 km above the Earth in a rocket, have been compared and the difference is successfully explained by GR.
Another prediction of GR concerns the fate of massive stars.
Initially the gravitational self-attraction of the stellar material leads to large internal pressures and temperatures which can ignite thermonuclear burning.
Eventually the fuel is used up and our naive expectation would be that the star should contract to a size at which pressure and gravitation are in balance.
However, Chandrasekhar showed that for a sufficiently massive star the gravitational collapse continues until the star shrinks to a point.
What is left behind is that mysterious entity, a black hole.
Anything approaching within a distance  2GM/c 2 of the centre is inevitably trapped by the intense gravitational field: space–time is so warped that not even light can escape.
GR also predicts the existence of gravitational waves which travel with the velocity of light.
When they cross a region of space–time it is space–time itself that vibrates.
Space-time is remarkably rigid, so that the amplitude of the strain is only 10 18 when the pulse from a supernova collapse at the centre of the Galaxy reaches the Earth.
Detectors are only now approaching the sensitivity required to detect such tiny oscillations.
However, there is indirect evidence that the orbit of a binary pair, one member of which is the pulsar PSR 1913+16, is collapsing at exactly the rate expected due to the loss of energy in gravitational radiation.
In cosmology GR has been crucial in providing a framework for discussing the structure of the Universe, for example the way that the energy content of the Universe, its expansion rate, and the curvature of space–time are related.
It is also worth mentioning how Mach's principle is explained in this context.
One observation which illustrates this principle is that a Foucault pendulum at the North Pole swings in a plane fixed relative to the frame of the distant galaxies; however, an earthbound observer sees the plane of swing rotate through 360° every 24 hours.
Somehow the matter in the Universe seems to determine the existence of an inertial frame in which Newton's laws of motion are valid.
This idea has been reinforced by observations made on the cosmic background radiation (CBR).
The CBR is black-body radiation at 2.74 K that bathes the Earth's orbit and presumably permeates the whole Universe.
There is an anisotropy in the radiation which is explained as a Doppler shift due to the Earth's motion relative to the frame of the distant galaxies; the radiation would appear isotropic in that frame.
As far as the CBR is concerned the distant galaxies provide a preferred frame, something that is anathema to SR or classical mechanics.
In modern cosmology a preferred frame emerges naturally (the comoving frame) for universes whose behaviour is consistent with GR.
It is interesting to contrast gravitation with the other long-range force of nature — electromagnetism.
The long range of each force is attested in one case by the operation of the solar system and in the other by the presence of the Van Allen belts of charged particles trapped in the Earth's magnetic field.
Of the two the electromagnetic force is intrinsically far stronger: for instance the electric repulsion of two protons is 10 36 times stronger than their gravitational attraction.
It seems surprising that the gravitational force should dominate in the Universe.
However, all matter (and anti-matter) exerts a gravitational attraction, while positive and negative electric charges exert opposite effects.
In an atom the electrons effectively screen the nuclear charge so that a feeble van der Waals force penetrates outside a neutral atom, and this falls off with distance as r -6 .
The very fact that the gravitational attraction dominates tells us that matter on the large scale must be net electrically neutral to very high precision.
1.1 Outline of contents
Physical concepts are made the basis for this text on the development and achievements of GR.
The reader should realize that Einstein did not give a rigorous mathematical proof of GR and neither has anyone else.
His approach involved physical insight and the use of simple arguments.
Einstein learnt the mathematical techniques he needed from his friend Marcel Grossman over a number of years when they both lived in Zurich and regarded the techniques primarily as useful tools.
Some differential geometry and tensor analysis is needed in order to appreciate the full flavour of the theory.
In the text below an attempt is made to restrict the discussion of these techniques to those features essential to the understanding of GR.
Einstein's starting point was the equivalence principle and this concept is made the subject of Chapter 2.
Briefly, the principle states that physics appears the same to any observer in free fall whatever the magnitude of the gravitational field.
In the observer's frame the physics is described by SR.
When the equivalence principle is applied to photons they are predicted to undergo a gravitational red shift when they leave a star, whilst a deflection is expected for light passing near to a massive body.
These effects are interpreted as arising from the distortion of space–time in the presence of matter.
In Chapter 3 examples of the geometry of curved spaces are discussed, beginning with two-dimensional surfaces.
Techniques for handling curved space–time are discussed in Chapter 4, which ends with a presentation of the Schwarzschild solution for space–time outside a spherically symmetric mass distribution.
This is a key result because it covers the cases of most interest: the solar system effects and simple black holes.
In developing the formal mathematical structure of GR Einstein made use of the existing theory of curved spaces discovered by Gauss, Riemann, and others in the nineteenth century.
This employs the techniques of tensor analysis which are introduced in Chapter 5.
The general theory is then developed from this basis in Chapters 6 and 7.
A major feature is that real space time is Riemannian, that is to say it is curved yet locally looks like the flat space time of special relativity much as a portion of a spherical surface of linear extent much smaller than the radius looks flat.
In each local region of space–time a frame in free fall can be selected in which SR is valid.
Riemannian space–time is a patchwork of such regions.
One of Einstein's insights was to infer that because mass generalizes to mass/energy in SR it must be this mass/energy that causes the curvature of space–time.
The most compact description of mass/energy is provided by the stress-energy tensor.
Einstein proposed a simple relationship   but it took him a number of years to identify the precise form of the curvature tensor involved.
In the limit of slowly moving bodies and weak gravitational fields this equation will be shown to reduce to Newton's law of gravitation.
Further tests of GR are described in Chapter 8: one involves the anomalous precession in the orbits of Mercury and of the binary pulsar 1913+16, another concerns delays of planetary radar reflections passing near the Sun, and finally there is the gravitational lensing of a quasar image by galactic matter.
Chapter 9 is devoted to black holes.
We follow a probe into the interior of a black hole and find that space and time interchange some of their characteristics under the intense gravitational field present there.
The formation of black holes and evidence for their existence are also covered.
In Chapter 10 we discuss the prediction of the existence of gravitational waves, which are transverse and travel at the speed of light in empty space.
Gravitational waves are quite simply the vibration of space–time itself.
The gravitational constant G determines the strength of the coupling of these waves to space–time; its value is small and we shall see that this implies that space–time is very stiff.
Modern detectors which should be capable of detecting the gravitational waves from a supernova collapse in our Galaxy are described.
One variety uses a freely suspended massive bar cooled to 4 K and another variety uses a large Michelson interferometer monitored with laser beams.
The observation of slowing down of the orbital rotation of the binary pulsar 1913+16 is also discussed.
There is no classical explanation for the slowing down; however, the rate of energy loss is exactly that expected via gravitational radiation.
In chapter 11 the impact of GR on cosmology is described.
Robertson and Walker proposed a model for the Universe having uniform curvature; this framework works very well and leads to the locally preferred comoving frames noted above.
In the present epoch the systematic red shift of galactic spectra indicates that the Universe is expanding.
Applying Einstein's equation to the Robertson-Walker model of space–time in which the Universe is pictured as filled with an ideal fluid permits us to follow the dynamics of this model Universe.
For example, we can relate the density of matter in the Universe to the rate of its expansion.
Only general conclusions can be drawn at present because not enough is known about the parameters involved in this model; whether the Universe will expand forever or whether it will finally contract is not yet clear.
Chapter 12 contains a discussion of the possibility of quantizing the gravitational force in the same way that the electromagnetic and other forces are quantized.
Special difficulties arise because the structure of space–time becomes quantized.
The problems and possible schemes for their resolution mark the end of the story so far.
1.2 Summary of results in special relativity
The two basic postulates of SR are as follows: firstly the laws of physics take the same form in all inertial frames, i.e. in all frames which are moving with constant velocity with respect to the frame of the distant galaxies; secondly the velocity of light is a constant c.
A point in space–time (which we shall call an event) has coordinates x, y, z with respect to a rectangular Cartesian set of space axes at time t.
These four space–time coordinates form a four-vector with components .
We also write r for the spatial three-vector.
In another inertial frame moving with relative velocity v = βc parallel to the x axis (x  axis) the new (primed) coordinates of the same event are given by the Lorentz transformation  where .
The interval between two events P 1 and P 2 with coordinate separation () is defined to be  and is easily shown to be invariant under Lorentz transformations.
If a clock travels from P 1 to P 2 then the time interval it measures between these events is called the proper time Δτ, with .
Note also that the components of Δr transverse to the velocity vector are not affected.
There are other important four-vectors, for example the four-momentum with components  where E is the total energy and p is the relativistic linear momentum.
The Lorentz transformation takes the same form for all four-vectors: in the case of the four-momentum we can take the formulae (1.1) given above for the coordinates and replace x by p throughout.
Each four-vector has an invariant, which in the case of the space–time interval P 1 P 2 is Δs 2 .
The invariant of any other four-vector is formed in the same way by taking the difference of the squares of its time and space components.
Hence the four-momentum vector has an invariant   where m is the rest mass of the body involved.
Like Δs 2 this is invariant under any Lorentz transformation.
The four-momentum is related to the four-velocity whose components are .
Here, v x , v y , and v z are the standard components of velocity, meaning that in time dt the distance travelled along the x direction will be v x dt.
Also , where .
The invariant of the velocity four-vector is c 2 .
For a body of mass m the relation between the momentum and velocity four-vectors is  as in the classical case.
There is also a four-vector force F defined by using the relativistic equivalent of Newton's second law of motion  where we note that the differentiation is with respect to the proper τ time which is a Lorentz scalar.
Then  where f x , f y , and f z are the components of the classical three-dimensional force.
Thus the four-force is   
The interval Δs 2 can be positive, negative, or zero.
If Δs 2 is zero, so that cΔt exactly equals Δr, then a light ray can travel from event P 1 to event P 2 and the interval P 1 P 2 is called light-like.
When cΔt exceeds Δr, the interval is positive and P 2 can be reached from P 1 by travelling at a velocity less than the speed of light; the interval is called time-like because we can choose an inertial frame such that r 1 = r 2 leaving only a time separation between the two events.
Finally if the interval Δs 2 is negative CΔt is less than Δr.
Then no information can pass from P 1 to P 2 because it would need to travel faster than light itself.
Such a separation is called space-like, and in this case it is always possible to find an inertial frame such that t 1 = t 2 with the separation being a spatial distance.
In this case whatever happens at P 1 can have no influence on P 2 , and vice versa.
Figure 1.1 illustrates these different types of interval; time is the upward axis and the others are spatial (one spatial direction is suppressed).
The cone is drawn with  and marks out all the possible light paths through P 1 ; it is called the light cone at P 1 .
Inside the forward light cone (t > 0) lie all the space–time events with time-like separation from P 1 which can be influenced by what happens at P 1 .
Outside the light cone are events at space-like separations from P 1 , and these cannot ever communicate with P 1 .
Inside the backward light cone (t < 0) are the events that influence what happens at P 1 .
2 The equivalence principle
A number of experiences familiar to modern man indicate that there is a close resemblance between the gravitational force and the effects of acceleration.
High-speed centrifuges generate large inertial forces which are used to separate materials from liquid suspensions that would sediment only slowly, if at all, under gravity.
Pilots of jet aircraft making tight turns feel forces that are labelled ‘g forces’, and in the realm of space exploration proposals exist to build giant wheels that would rotate to provide an artificial gravity.
These are all examples of centrifugal acceleration.
Linear acceleration is less readily sustained and has fewer familiar applications.
However, the parallel between a linear acceleration and gravitation is conceptually simpler.
Einstein realized that this parallel is a principle of nature, the equivalence principle, which states that a region of uniform gravitational field and a uniformly accelerating frame are equivalent (Section 2.1).
That is to say, there is no way to distinguish between them provided that measurements do not extend beyond the region of uniformity.
One conclusion that will be drawn from this principle is that gravitational fields affect electromagnetic radiation: light leaving a star is red shifted, and light passing near a star is deviated from a classical straight-line path (Section 2.3).
These effects and their experimental verification are also described.
2.1 The equivalence principle
The origin of the equivalence principle goes back to the experiments of Galileo.
When Galileo compared the rate of fall of different materials he was attempting to answer a fundamental question: he wanted to know whether the gravitational attraction on different materials was the same.
Even now it is not at all obvious that it should be so.
Matter is constructed from very different particle species and the proportions of these vary from material to material.
Each atom contains a nucleus which is made from nucleons (i.e. neutrons and protons) with electrons circulating around the nucleus.
Nucleons feel the strong nuclear force whereas electrons do not; thus it is reasonable to ask whether nucleons and electrons feel the same gravitational attraction.
The nucleon-to-electron ratio varies from unity for hydrogen to about 2.5 for elements with high atomic number, so that any difference in the gravitational force felt by nucleons and electrons would appear as a difference in the gravitational acceleration of elements of high and low atomic number.
Such a hypothetical difference would be tiny because the electron mass is only th of the nucleon mass.
Another significant feature of matter is that the nuclear mass is smaller than the sum of the nucleon masses by the binding energy due to the nuclear force between them.
This nuclear binding energy is zero for hydrogen where the nucleus is a single proton and rises to 0.7 per cent of the mass x c 2 of the constituent nucleons in the case of iron.
Hence if the gravitational force depended, like the strong force, on the number of nucleons rather than mass there would be a difference of 0.7 per cent between the gravitational acceleration of iron and hydrogen.
The analysis of experiments like Galileo's proceeds as follows.
The force acting on a mass m g in a gravitational field g is .
Then according to Newton's second law of motion the acceleration a of this mass is given by .
A distinction is made here between the gravitational mass m g , on which the gravitational force acts, and the inertial mass m i .
Inertial mass appears in the expressions for kinetic energy () and momentum (m i v), so that its definition can be made independent of any weighing process.
Eliminating F from the last two equations gives the acceleration .
Tests from Galileo's time up to the present reveal no variation in the rate of fall from material to material.
Therefore m g /m i has the same value for all materials, and by choosing units appropriately we make this ratio equal to unity.
Einstein interpreted this result as follows: the motion of a neutral test body released at a given point in space–time is independent of its composition.
This statement is known as the weak equivalence principle (WEP).
Einstein next considered the implications of the equivalence principle for motion in free fall, that is to say motion under gravitational forces alone.
One modern example is a space capsule in orbit around the earth; another is a capsule falling radially toward the Earth.
What is essential for free fall is that the capsule is not powered and that the atmospheric drag is negligibly small.
Alternatively the capsule might be drifting in the weak gravitational field of intergalactic space.
Einstein posed a searching question for such systems which we put in modern dress: can an astronaut inside the capsule determine his state of motion without looking out of the capsule?
When the astronaut is in a uniform gravitational field he is incapable of determining his motion by any mechanical means.
If, for instance, he drops a ball it accelerates at the same rate as the capsule and will remain at rest relative to the capsule, whatever their shared acceleration.
However, if the capsule is in a region where  the gravitational field is not uniform he can detect his motion.
To give a concrete example, consider the capsule to be falling radially toward the Earth.
Then dropping not one, but two balls will be an effective strategy because the gravitational forces acting on them converge toward the centre of the Earth as in Fig. 2.1.
The astronaut could measure the resultant movement of the balls towards each other, given a large enough capsule and a long enough time interval.
Such effects owe their origin to gradients in the field and are called tidal effects.
The weak equivalence principle can now be restated as follows to exclude tidal effects: the results of local mechanical experiments in a state of free fall are independent of the motion.
‘Local’ is a technical term used here to express the restriction to a region sufficiently small that the gravitational field is effectively uniform.
Einstein then generalized this form of the equivalence principle to cover both electromagnetic and mechanical experiments.
It becomes the strong equivalence principle (SEP) which states the following:
1 the results of all local experiments in a frame in free fall are independent of the motion;
2 The results are the same for all such frames at all places and all times.
In a nutshell, physics is the same in all freely falling frames.
Notice that one frame in free fall can have a very different velocity and acceleration from another such frame.
For example we can compare the frames of satellites in free fall around different stars.
The SEP can be viewed as a replacement or extension of the first postulate of SR.
SR requires that the result of an experiment is the same for all inertial frames; the SEP requires that the result of local experiments be the same in all freely frames.
In the special theory of relativity it is assumed that a single inertial frame can be applied to the whole Universe, but at the cost of neglecting acceleration!
In the general theory of   relativity the natural frame anywhere is chosen to be a frame in free fall, but we cannot cover the whole Universe with one frame.
Space-time as a whole is then seen to be a patchwork of such freely falling frames.
The vast body of experimental data which has been accumulated in support of SR can be reconciled with the SEP by making the inference, as Einstein did, that physics in free fall must be consistent with SR.
Thus we should add a rider to the SEP:
3 the results of local experiments in free fall are consistent with SR.
2.2 Experimental comparisons of m g /m i 
The equivalence principle is so central to the development of GR that very refined tests have been carried out to check the equality of m g /m i for different materials.
An experiment of Roll, Krotkov, and Dicke (1964), which compared the gravitational attraction of the Sun on different materials, is extremely precise.
The apparatus consisted of a delicate torsion balance from which were hung masses made of the two materials under comparison (e.g. 30 mg masses of gold and aluminium).
The balance had a triangular frame to reduce the effect of gradients in the gravitational field.
Here for simplicity we shall take the frame to be a single arm suspended at its centre as shown in Fig. 2.2; Fig. 2.2(a) shows a view from above the North Pole, and Fig. 2.2(b) shows a side view.
The forces acting on the 30 mg masses along the Sun-Earth axis are the gravitational attraction of the Sun (), the centrifugal force due to motion around the sun (), and a pull from the balance (F).
We first write the equation for the balance of forces on the Earth itself: where M is the Sun's mass, m(e) is the mass of the Earth, v is its orbital speed and R is the Earth-Sun separation.
Simplifying this gives  where .
The equation for the balance of forces acting on the gold mass is similar: where the additional term F is the pull from the arm of the balance.
Then  with a corresponding expression for the aluminium mass.
To simplify matters  we assume that  and that the arms of the balance are of equal length l.
At 0600 hrs the torque on the balance is  where .
Only if Δ is non-zero will there be a net torque, and this torque would be reversed 12 h later at 1800 h.
Roll, Krotkov, and Dicke searched for any sign of a 24 h oscillation of the torsion balance which such a time-varying torque would stimulate, but with a null result.
The apparatus was operated remotely in a vacuum and in a temperature-controlled chamber.
All magnetic material was excluded, and the insulating elements of the balance were plated with metal to eliminate any electrostatic effects.
With such care it was possible to obtain an upper limit of 
The way that the rotation of the Earth is put to use in reversing the torque is a key feature.
Earlier experiments had compared the Earth's gravitational attraction with the centrifugal force from its own rotation.
The forces are larger than in the experiment of Roll, Krotkov, and Dicke but the torque can only be reversed by bodily rotating the apparatus, which gives large and irreversible effects that vitiate the method.
They note that for a deviation Δ of 10 -11 the accumulated effect over a year would only amount to a relative velocity of 1 µm s -1 towards the Sun!
The experiment of Roll, Krotkov, and Dicke does not entirely close the door on the possibility that gravitational and inertial mass are not equal.
It has been proposed that the gravitational force has a short-range component  that varies from material to material, with a suggested range of about 10 6 m or less.
At the distance of the Earth from the Sun this force component would not contribute and would not be detectable in the experiment.
One form proposed for the total potential, including the gravitational potential, is  for masses m i and m j a distance r apart.
B i and B j are factors which make the mass per nucleon exactly one atomic mass unit; ζ specifies the strength of the new potential relative to gravitation and, l is its range parameter.
The hypothetical new force has been called the fifth force.
Its presumed dependence on the number of nucleons mimics the behaviour of the other three forces of nature (weak nuclear force, strong nuclear force, and electromagnetism) in showing a dependence on the number of particles rather than on mass.
At the surface of the Earth, which is assumed to be a sphere of radius R and uniform density p, the relative acceleration of two objects towards the Earth as a result of such a fifth force would be  if  is the usual gravitational acceleration and Δ (B) is the difference between the values of B for the two bodies.
Experiments performed since 1986 appear to rule out any fifth force.
For example, Kuroda and Mio (1989) have measured the relative acceleration in free fall of pairs of test bodies: aluminium/copper and aluminium/carbon.
The two bodies labelled A and B in Fig. 2.3 carry corner cube mirrors C A A and C B while B also carried a beam splitter S. These optical components are used as elements of a Michelson interferometer; the source is a stabilized He-Ne laser and the detector is a p-i-n photodiode.
If the velocity of fall of object A is V A , then the frequency v of the light reflected from A undergoes a Doppler shift to a frequency  with a similar expression for light reflected from B. These reflected beams interfere at the detector giving beats of frequency in the amplitude.
Therefore the intensity of the photodiode signal is modulated at twice this frequency:.
If there is no relative acceleration between A and B, then Δv remains constant during the time that A and B are in free fall.
This fall is over 60 cm and takes   0.35 s.
The output from the photodiode is amplified and sampled by an analogue-to-digital convertor (ADC) every 4µs IS, and these values are stored in a microcomputer memory.
A and B are made in the form of a saddle and rider so that their centres of mass lie within 0.3 mm on release.
Each weighs about 0.1 kg.
Magnetic material is excluded and the bodies are earthed before release.
Residual gas (2 x 10 -10 atms) produces a repulsive force between A and B. There is also a mutual gravitational attraction between A and B. These effects are calculated to produce relative accelerations of order 3 × 10 -9 m s -2 , After correction for all such effects the observed acceleration difference found for aluminium/carbon is  which is a null result at the level of precision achieved in the experiment.
Experimental tests are therefore fully consistent with the equality of inertial and gravitational mass.
2.3.
The gravitational spectral shift and the deflection of electromagnetic radiation
The first important consequence of the SEP pointed out by Einstein is the prediction that gravitational fields affect radiation.
Consider a capsule of height Δr in free fall towards the Earth with acceleration g.
A pulsed light  source is located on the floor of the capsule.
According to the SEP light will travel at a velocity c in any direction in the frame of the capsule, so that light will reach the roof after a time Δr/c.
If the capsule is assumed to start from rest at the moment that the light flash is emitted, then the capsule will have attained a velocity  relative to the Earth when the light reaches the roof.
An external observer at rest who detects the flash at the moment that it reaches the roof would see it Doppler shifted to a lower frequency than observed in the source frame.
The effect of the relative velocity v of the source frame away from the external observer is to give a  fractional change in frequency (to first order in v/c).
Note that the relevant velocity is that of the source frame relative to the external observer at the instant that the light is detected.
The crests of the waves emitted by the source can be regarded as the ticks of an atomic clock, and if the rate of ticking v increases, the same time interval t would contain more ticks.
Hence the frequency shift implies that time intervals measured in the two frames by identical clocks would differ, i.e. time is distorted.
The interval I between ticks emitted by the source when it is at rest at height r is given by .
The interval between ticks measured by the external observer also at rest, but at a height r + Δr, is given by  where M is the Earth's mass.
Thus to a first-order approximation .
By integrating this last equation from r to infinity the time interval measured at a remote point where the gravitational potential is negligible can be compared with the same time interval measured at r: Re-expressing this result in terms of the gravitational potential  gives .
Notice that because the gravitational potential is always negative t(0) is always larger then t( φ).;
The time interval t(0) measured remotely is called the coordinate time and the time t( φ); measured where the gravitational potential is–is called the local proper time.
The remote observer measures time intervals to be dilated and light to be red shifted.
Later we shall need to relate the squares of time intervals in different frames.
and so we write .
The derivation leading to eqn (2.1) is only valid for low velocities and only accurate to order 2GM/rc 2 .
However, eqn (2.1) itself is taken to be an exact result in GR We rewrite eqn (2.1) for later use as  where dτ is the proper time and dt is the coordinate time.
A precise measurement of the gravitational spectral shift was made by Pound and Rebka (1960) using photons that travelled the length of a tower 22.6 m tall at Harvard University.
The predicted spectral shift is only .
Pound and Rebka exploited the contemporary discovery by Mössbauer that the linewidths of certain gamma emitters, in particular 57 Fe*, were exceptionally narrow and much closer to the resolution required to detect the gravitational red shift than for any other type of source.
The distinguishing feature of a Mossbauer transition is that, whereas in a normal gamma decay the nucleus recoils against the photon, in a Mössbauer transition it is the crystal lattice as a whole that recoils against the photon.
In a normal decay the photon and the nucleus share the energy release Q, so that the photon energy is less than Q. Similarly, when a photon is absorbed in the reverse process  the nucleus recoils to take up the photon momentum and so acquires some kinetic energy.
Thus the photon must have energy greater than Q if it is to be absorbed.
Suppose that in a decay the recoil momentum is p; then the kinetic energy of the nucleus is p 2 /2M where M is its mass.
It follows that in a Mössbauer transition the recoil energy is drastically reduced because M is now the mass of the crystal.
Consequently the laboratory energy of photons in emission and for absorption become effectively identical.
A second important  consequence of the Mössbauer effect is that the impact of thermal excitation on the width of the emission and absorption lines is reduced.
Any thermal energy is shared by the whole lattice rather than a single nucleus.
As a result, in the Mössbauer transition a 57 Fe* source emits 14.4 keV photons with a fractional linewidth of only 10 -12 .
However, this is still about 500 times larger than the gravitational red shift that is to be measured.
Pound and Rebka placed the 57 Fe* source at one end of the tower and a thin 5 7Fe absorber at the other end.
The absorber covered a scintillator which was viewed by a photomultiplier.
It was arranged that the source could be driven slowly to and fro at a low velocity using a transducer; this motion produced a small Doppler shift in the frequency and energy of the emitted photons.
The Doppler shift was used to compensate for the gravitational spectral shift of photons travelling along the tower.
When the compensation was exact the absorption of the photons by the thin layer of 57 Fe was maximized and the counting rate on the photomultiplier behind it was minimized.
Pound and Rebka were able to scan across the very narrow line profile by varying the source velocity and in this way achieved a large gain in sensitivity for locating the line centre.
Their procedure enabled them to make a very precise measurement of the gravitational spectral shift: which agrees, to within the small quoted error, with the prediction obtained from the SEP.
Other more recent tests involve direct comparison of the time-keeping of atomic clocks or of masers.
Vessot et al.(1980) compared the rate of a hydrogen maser launched to a height of 10000 km in a rocket with the rate of an identical maser kept in the laboratory.
Two-way telemetry was used to compensate both for the atmospheric effects and for the first-order Doppler shift due to the relative velocity of the masers.
The comparison gave a rate difference that agreed with the prediction from the SEP to parts in 10 4 .
An extension of the above arguments based on the SEP leads to the conclusion that light can be bent in a gravitational field.
We start with the observation that a photon climbing a distance d against the Earth's gravitational pull loses energy  where h is Planck's constant.
The kinetic energy lost by a body of mass m rising through the same distance is remarkably similar:.
Therefore it appears that a photon of energy E = hv behaves in a gravitational field as if it possessed an inertial mass E/c 2 !
To this extent, then, a photon feels the gravitational force and it can be argued that a photon should travel along a curved path in a gravitational field.
This inference is reinforced by the  following thought experiment.
Imagine a space capsule in free fall near the Earth: inside it an astronaut strapped to one wall shines a beam of light horizontally at the opposite wall.
Figure 2.4(a) shows the light path as seen by the astronaut; his frame is in free fall so that the light travels in a straight line to the opposite wall.
An external observer at rest sees things quite differently.
At emission the lamp is at one height, but by the time the light reaches the other wall the capsule has fallen a little.
This view is shown in Figure 2.4(b) where the light path is seen to curve.
Einstein calculated the deviation of starlight passing near the Sun's surface on its way to the Earth; his result was 1.750 arcsec.
We should note that a calculation using just the SEP gives exactly half this value; we shall look at the complete calculation in Chapter 8.
The success of the 1919 measurement has already been discussed.
Higher precision is obtained by studying the apparent motion of radio-sources that pass near to and behind the Sun's disc, a technique which is not restricted to times of solar eclipse.
In Fig. 2.5 a widely spaced pair of radio-telescopes are shown receiving signals from the same source.
If the source direction makes an angle θ with the baseline, which is of length d, then the path difference to the two dishes is d cos θ and the phase lag between their signals is  at a wavelength λ, and in terms of frequency v this becomes .
Measurement of the phase difference leads to a determination of θ.
Fomalont and Sramek (1976) used radio-telescopes on a 35 km baseline at Green Bank, West Virginia, to study radio-sources close to the Sun at frequencies of 2.7 and 8.1 GHz.
This is an example of very long baseline interferometry (VLBI).
They found a mean deviation due to the Sun's gravitational field corresponding to 1.760 ±0.016 arcsec at the Sun's limb, which is in excellent agreement with Einstein's prediction.
3 Space curvature
The experimental observation of the gravitational spectral shift and of the bending of light passing close to the Sun indicate that space–time is distorted by the presence of matter.
In Section 3.1 the basic concepts of curvature are introduced, based on two-dimensional examples.
The fundamental point to be grasped is that the inhabitants of a curved space can determine its curvature from intrinsic measurements, i.e. from measurements confined to the space itself.
All the geometrical information about a space is quantified by the equivalent of Pythagoras' theorem which relates the distance between nearby points in space to their coordinate separations.
This fundamental equation is known as the metric equation.
Straight lines, in the usual sense, cannot be drawn on curved surfaces or in curved spaces.
Their place is taken by geodesics which are the straightest lines that can be drawn between a pair of points in a curved space and as such have no component of curvature in that space.
The definition of curvature and ways to measure it are described in Section 3.2.
Local vectors and how to compare local vectors at different places in a curved space are the topics of Section 3.3.
The relationships between curvature and the metric equation is described in Section 3.4.
In Section 3.5 there is a discussion of three-dimensional spherically symmetric spaces, which prepares the way for the later treatment of the space–time curvature in isotropic homogeneous cosmological models.
3.1.
Two-dimensional surfaces
The initial difficulty with discussing curvature in our three-dimensional world is best appreciated by referring to the analogous case of a two-dimensional being living in a curved two-dimensional surface.
This being believes that he is able to look and measure in all directions, whereas his observations are really limited to directions contained in the two-dimensional surface.
He would receive two-dimensional light signals that had travelled within the surface and he would not be directly aware of any curvature.
From our three-dimensional vantage the curvature that eludes him is obvious.
However, there are intrinsic properties of any curved space which enable beings confined to that space (as we are confined to three-space dimensions) to detect and measure that curvature.
These properties were first appreciated and investigated by Gauss.
Two-dimensional spaces are particularly easy to visualize and so make an  ideal vehicle for introducing the concepts that will be used later in discussing curvature in space–time (three spatial dimensions plus one time dimension).
Figure 3.1 shows one two-dimensional surface, a spherical surface; and Fig. 3.2 shows another, a cylindrical surface.
Although both look curved there exists a fundamental difference between them.
The cylindrical surface can be slit along its length (at AA) and unrolled to lie flat on a plane; however, there is no way that the sphere can be unrolled so that it lies flat.
Maps of the whole Earth show that this can only be achieved by stretching some parts of the surface and shrinking others.
A related property of the cylinder is that if the shortest paths between pairs of points, such as BC, are drawn on the surface then these become straight lines when the cylinder is unrolled.
The cylinder is therefore called intrinsically flat, although not planar, and the spherical surface is intrinsically curved.
Here we ignore topological subtleties in the case of the cylinder by considering only paths that do not cross the cut.
Suppose that rectangular Cartesian coordinates are drawn to cover a rectangular sheet of paper and it is then rolled up to form a cylinder.
Distances s measured over the surface between a pair of points whose coordinate separations are x and y will be given by Pythagoras' theorem 
By contrast, an attempt to construct a set of rectangular Cartesian coordinates to cover the spherical surface runs into irretrievable difficulties.
Taking the example of the Earth's surface, which we assume to be a perfect sphere, we could place the origin at the North Pole N as in Fig. 3.1.
The x axis runs toward Quito (Q, along longitude 80° W) and the y axis runs toward Libreville (L, along longitude 10° E); both cities lie close to the Equator.
On travelling along the x axis to Quito a traveller would find that Libreville lies in the y direction.
If instead the traveller goes along the y axis to Libreville, Quito is found to lie in the x direction.
Such inconsistencies make it impossible to cover a spherical surface using Cartesian coordinates.
Although this is so, it does not trouble anyone surveying a piece of land.
Cartesian coordinates work well enough for regions with linear dimensions small relative to the radius of the surface.
We say that locally the surface is Euclidean and distances are given by the differential Pythagoras equation  where dx, and dy are the coordinate separations of nearby points on the surface.
One set of coordinates that can be used to cover the surface of the whole sphere are the polar angles (θ, φ).
With the origin at the centre of the Earth θ runs from 0° at the North Pole to 180° at the South Pole, and is related to the latitude.
φ is essentially the longitude and runs from — 180° to + 180°.
Locally, that is to say on a scale small compared with the radius of curvature r of the surface.
the distance between two points at (θ, φ) and () is  in latitude and  in longitude.
Then the total separation is given by the quadratic equation 
This equation and the preceding one are called metric equations.
It is easy to see that the metric equation is an essential property of a surface.
For, suppose an attempt is made to reconstruct the geometry of the Earth using only the information available in the index of an atlas.
Each town appearing in the index has two coordinates (latitude and longitude) which range from — 90 to + 90 and from — 180 to + 180 respectively.
If these locations are plotted on a sheet of paper treating the coordinates as Cartesian coordinates the result would not resemble the Earth's surface.
A distance scale is needed in interpreting the coordinates and this is what the metric equation provides.
For example, the metric equation above indicates that near the poles () changes in longitude φ produce only small displacements.
The properties of a spherical curved surface which have been highlighted above are common to other curved two- and higher-dimensional spaces of interest.
First of all, in order to cover the whole of a curved surface or space it is necessary to use generalized or Gaussian coordinates; rectangular Cartesian coordinates are inadequate.
A second property is that the local distances are given by a metric equation in the Gaussian coordinate separations.
The spaces of interest to us here belong to a category called Riemann spaces which are distinguished by having metric equations that are quadratic in the coordinate separations.
We now introduce a key property of Riemann spaces, namely that it is always possible to match any arbitrary region of such a space by a flat space provided that the region is taken small enough.
This is rather like being able to draw a straight line tangent at any point on a smooth curve.
A first step is to consider a two-dimensional Riemann surface with metric equation  where (v, w) are some Gaussian coordinates.
The coefficients  are functions of position and contain all the information about the geometry of the surface.
g 11 is taken to be positive (which can be achieved by multiplying throughout by -1 if necessary).
A point P on the surface is selected and coordinates (x, y) are found for which the metric equation is locally Euclidean around P. A general definition of new coordinates is   Then  where  and 
We are free to choose not only the values of A, B, C, and D at P, but also the values of their derivatives at P. The values of A, B, C, D, and their six independent first derivatives provide ten free variables.
There is just enough flexibility to arrange that at P  and in addition that the first derivatives of the metric components vanish .
It follows that a Euclidean surface with metric equation  will match the curved surface locally at P. In other words a plane can always be drawn at any arbitrary point on a two dimensional Riemann surface so that it is locally tangential to the surface.
This result agrees with our experience for surfaces embedded in three space.
Notice that the conditions on the metric components and derivatives only make up nine equations, whereas there are ten degrees of freedom.
The residual degree of freedom amounts to the choice of orientation of the x and y axes on the plane.
A similar procedure can be followed in higher dimensional spaces.
Some coordinate transformation can always be found which converts the metric equation to a sum of squares.
The Cartesian coordinates which result from this transformation describe a space which is tangential to the curved space at the point selected.
Because a flat tangent space can always be drawn locally to any point in a Riemann space, Riemann spaces are said to be locally flat (or locally Euclidean).
It is not possible to arrange that the second derivatives as well as the first derivatives of the coefficients  all simultaneously vanish, because there are insufficient free variables.
One point which we have chosen to overlook so far is highly relevant.
The original metric equation can be rewritten   from which we can obtain  by making the substitutions .
This presumes that  in the original metric equation is positive.
On the other hand if  is negative the quadratic form obtained is 
The space involved is still locally flat as it has a metric equation that reduces to a difference of squares.
Its tangent space is called pseudo-Euclidean and the space itself is called pseudo-Riemannian.
For most purposes we can ignore the distinction and include the pseudo-Riemann spaces with the Riemann spaces.
Referring back to Section 1.1, we can see that the space–time of SR is pseudo-Euclidean, which indicates the reason for our interest in such spaces.
The shortest paths joining points a finite distance apart on a curved surface are generally not simple straight lines.
However, they are the straightest lines that can be drawn on the surfaces between the points under discussion.
Such paths are called geodesics and naturally on a flat surface a geodesic is a straight line.
Geodesics on a spherical surface are the well known great circle routes which are frequently used by airlines on  intercontinental flights.
Figure 3.3(a) shows a great circle path drawn to touch a line of latitude θ at P; Fig. 3.3(b) shows a diametral plane section of the sphere through P and the North Pole N. D is the centre of curvature of the line of latitude while C, the centre of the sphere, is the centre of curvature of the geodesic.
The geodesic has curvature 1/r and the line of latitude has curvature 1/ (r sin θ).
Resolving the curvature of the line of latitude perpendicular and parallel to the surface gives ; while for the geodesic great circle the corresponding components are 1/r and 0.
This illustrates a very important property of any set of lines through a point on a surface which are tangential (share the same direction) at that point.
The component of curvature perpendicular to the surface is the same for all of them, and in the case illustrated this is 1/r.
Among these lines one, the geodesic, has only this component of curvature.
It has no component of curvature lying in the surface, which makes it the straightest path possible over the surface.
This characteristic is quite general and holds for geodesics in spaces that are less symmetric than that of a sphere, and in spaces of hi–her dimension.
3.2.
Measurements of curvature
Intrinsic methods by which an observer in two dimensions can make qualitative and quantitative measurements on the curvature of the surface he inhabits will be described next.
A quantity called the Gaussian curvature quantifies the local curvature of any two-dimensional surface and can be generalized in the case of higher dimensions.
One simple measurement reveals whether a two-dimensional surface is curved and determines the sign of curvature.
The observer pegs one end of a string of length r to a fixed point O and then makes a circuit round O so that the string is all the while fully stretched, but of course confined to lie in the surface.
He then measures the circumference C of one complete circuit around O. The result for the flat surface F drawn in Fig. 3.4 is .
However, if the surface is dome-shaped like the surface P the circumference is shorter and .
In the case of the saddle-shaped surface N shown in Fig. 3.4, the circumference is longer and .
Now P is a surface of positive curvature like a spherical surface, while N has negative curvature, and so the difference  fixes the sign of curvature.
The reader will find it hard to picture the surface N continuing everywhere with equal negative curvature.
The reason is that surfaces of negative curvature cannot be imbedded into our (nearly) flat and Euclidean three-space.
The inhabitant of two dimensional space could also refine the use of his measurement  to make a quantitive determination of curvature.
We specialize to the case of a spherical surface whose cross-section is shown in Fig. 3.5.
C is the centre of curvature and R is the radius of curvature.
The angle subtended by a string of length r at the centre of the sphere is θ, and so  where R is the radius of the sphere.
Then  i.e. .
In the limit as r tends to zero we obtain 
This procedure certainly provides an intrinsic method for measuring the radius of a spherical surface.
In fact it provides more because it yields the curvature K of any two-dimensional surface.
For the case of the sphere K is simply .
In order to extend the discussion beyond the sphere we must introduce a definition of curvature valid for any such surface.
A portion of a more general two-dimensional surface is pictured in Fig. 3.6.  are geodesics across the surface which intersect at right angles; ON is the local normal to the surface.
Rectangular Cartesian coordinates can be assigned at O using the tangents to  plus ON itself.
These will be called the v, w, and z axes respectively.
An expression for z which is valid for a point (w, v, z) on the surface close to O such that both w and v are small can be obtained by a Taylor series expansion:.
The first two terms vanish because the v, w plane is parallel to the surface at O. Therefore to second order in v and w we have .
This expression can be converted to a sum of squares simply by rotating the Cartesian frame around ON through an angle .
In the new Cartesian frame with coordinates (x, v. z) the surface has the equation .
Now consider the line along which this surface intersects the plane xOz.
It has the equation  and its radius of curvature R 1 is given by the formula relating the sagitta z to the chord length 2x for a circular arc: Thus the curvature of the line of intersection is 
Similarly in the orthogonal section with yOz the curvature is K 2 .
It is not too difficult to prove that K 1 and K 2 are the minimum and maximum curvatures for any plane section through the surface at O containing ON.
K 1 and K 2 are called the principal curvatures of the surface at O. Their product is an invariant for the surface at O called the Gaussian curvature K; thus 
A sphere has Gaussian curvature  at any point on its surface.
In the case of a cylinder one principal plane bisects its length along a straight line; hence one principal curvature is zero, and the Gaussian curvature is also zero.
Finally, for the saddle-shaped surface of Fig. 3.4 one of the principal planes lies along the length of the saddle in the direction of the horse's spine, and the other lies transverse to the saddle in the direction of the horse's ribs.
The centre of curvature of the first section lies above the saddle, whilst the centre of curvature of the second section lies below the saddle.
Therefore K 1 and K 2 have opposite signs and the Gaussian curvature K is negative.
The method already described for measuring the curvature of the sphere generalizes so that for any other two-dimensional surface the curvature is given by 
Two other intrinsic methods of measuring K are worth discussing as they are methods that carry through to the analysis of space time curvature in Chapter 7.
The first method is based on the way that the separation of geodesics grows with distance.
In the case of a plane the separation between a pair of geodesics (straight lines) through a point increases linearly with the distance from this point.
In contrast the separation of the pair of lines of longitude shown diverging from the pole N in Fig. 3.7 does not vary linearly with the distance s measured from the pole.
The difference in longitude is (p and so the separation after a distance s is  where R is the radius of the sphere .
Thus .
Differentiating this expression gives .
This relation generalizes for all two-dimensional surfaces to become  where K is again the Gaussian curvature.
Another effect of intrinsic curvature is revealed when a vector is transported round a closed path in such a way that it is moved parallel to itself at each step of the journey.
3.3 Local vectors and parallel transport
Vectors are often drawn as extended lines with arrowheads.
This convention requires careful interpretation for local vectors, i.e. vectors measured at a given point in space.
Two examples will be considered.
First, wind velocity is measured at a given observation point and refers solely to that point, for all that it may be convenient to show it on a chart as an arrow apparently extending for a long distance.
In a like manner the force on an electron in an  electric field has magnitude and direction but only exists at the coordinates of the electron.
Wind velocity and force are both local vectors.
A simple and most useful local vector in the present context is the tangent vector to a curve in space.
The comparison of local vectors at different places is easy in flat space.
First a Cartesian coordinate system is set up with one vector a at a position A and the other b at position B; a and b will be equal if their components are equal.
Equivalently we can imagine picking up b and carrying it to A without changing its length or direction and then examining whether it fits a exactly.
In this procedure b is said to be parallel transported from B to A. Comparison of local vectors in a curved space is less straightforward because it is no longer possible to set up a single Cartesian coordinate system to cover all space.
Once more it is helpful to consider the situation of a two-dimensional being who lives on a spherical surface embedded in our three-dimensional space.
Suppose that he starts at the pole in Fig. 3.8 with the local vector a shown there.
His only strategy is to take small steps and to carry the local vector parallel to itself over each step.
Without any reference frame to check the parallelism even this seems difficult.
However, he can start by moving off in the direction of the local vector itself, and in this case parallel transport is well defined.
What the being is doing in this case is to trace out a geodesic — a great circle on the sphere, e.g. NA shown in Fig. 3.8.
After this he can carry any other vector parallel to itself by travelling along a geodesic and keeping the local vector at a constant angle to the geodesic.
In cases where the route does not follow a geodesic it would be necessary to split the path into infinitesimal steps.
Then, because the space is locally flat, each such path element is part of some geodesic.
Emboldened by his success, the being could go on to parallel transport the vector a along the closed path NABN in Fig. 3.8.
Each path segment is a geodesic.
Starting from the pole the local vector is carried along the direction it points (a line of longitude) to the equator (A).
From A it is parallel transported along the equator to B and then returned along another line of longitude to the pole.
As a result the vector is seen to rotate through an angle φ which is the separation in longitude between A and B. In general the rotation of a local vector when carried round a closed path on any two-dimensional surface is given by the expression  which is easily checked for the route discussed.
An equivalent view of this effect is that the result of parallel transport in a curved space depends on the path taken.
Instead of carrying the vector a round the closed path NABN, the being could compare the result of carrying a to B along one path NAB with the result for the direct path NB.
Again the difference in angle would be φ.
The effect of parallel transporting a local vector round a closed path on a cylinder is shown in Fig. 3.9.
There is no net rotation because the surface is intrinsically flat and has K = 0.
3.4 Curvature and the metric equation
It has been remarked that the metric equation contains the full information on the geometry of that space.
One consequence of the primacy of the metric equation is that the Gaussian curvature is a function of the coefficients  in the metric equation.
This relationship was discovered by Gauss who recognized its importance by referring to it as the ‘Excellent’ Theorem.
For the present we shall derive the relation using an azimuthally symmetric two-dimensional surface.
Later, in Chapter 7 and Appendix B, the theorem will be presented in tensor form.
The space has a metric equation  where g rr is a function of r only.
Figure 3.10 shows a radial section through this surface embedded in a three-dimensional space, with the additional dimension lying in the paper perpendicular to r.
The tangential dimension is perpendicular to the paper.
The distance along the curve is .
In the figure the curvature in the section shown is  whilst the orthogonal line in the surface (a circle around the axis of symmetry) has curvature .
The surface normal lies along the line PC so that .
Then from the definition of Gaussian curvature .
Now    and therefore .
Differentiating this last expression with respect to s gives .
Therefore .
Spaces with more than two dimensions require more than a single parameter to describe the Gaussian curvature at a given point.
The exact count of curvature parameters analogous to K is easy enough to make.
First a pair of geodesics a and b are drawn through a point in the space.
From these a geodesic surface can be formed which contains all the linear combinations , all of which are geodesics.
In the case of a two-dimensional spherical surface it would simply reproduce the sphere.
Such a surface has a definite Gaussian curvature K ab .
Next a geodesic e orthogonal to a and b is selected.
From a and e a second geodesic surface can be constructed whose Gaussian curvature is K C and is entirely independent of K ab .
Continuing in this way we find  such independent Gaussian curvatures for a space of n dimensions.
A more complete and compact description of curvature in n dimensions is embodied in the Riemann tensor.
This is defined in Chapter 7 and its relationship to the Gaussian curvature is also discussed there.
3.5 Three-dimensional spaces
A simple example, and one of interest because it introduces ideas of value in thinking about cosmological models, is a space which is both homogeneous and isotropic.
In an isotropic space all geodesic surfaces at a single point have by definition identical Gaussian curvature: in a space that is homogeneous as well the curvature is the same everywhere.
Polar coordinates (r, θ, φ (p) are indicated, where θ is the polar angle and φ is the azimuthal angle.
(With the origin at the centre of the Earth θ would run from 0° at the North Pole to 180° at the South Pole, while φ (the longitude) runs from -180° to + 180°.)
Small changes in r, θ or φ individually give movements that are mutually orthogonal.
First consider displacements in a flat three-dimensional space, which is one sort of isotropic homogeneous space.
A change of dr in r moves a radial distance dr, a change dθ moves a distance r dθ along a line of longitude, and a change of dφ moves a distance  along a line of latitude (is the radius of the line of latitude).
The overall interval moved is   which is the metric equation of flat space in polar coordinates.
In shorthand this can be expressed as .
Next consider a curved space.
A sphere in this space centred on the origin and passing through the coordinate r will have an area  and a circumference .
However, the distance from the origin to the sphere is no longer r but rather  where g rr changes with the distance r.
Thus the metric equation is .
Let us now take an equatorial section through this space.
in this section and .
This surface has the metric equation that we met earlier in Section 3.4.
There the curvature of this surface was shown to be .
Rearrangement gives .
At this point we make use of the homogeneity and isotropy of the space.
K will have the same value for all geodesic surfaces and at all points.
This makes the integration simple; it gives  where C is the constant of integration.
C can be determined by considering the limiting case of a flat space for which g rr is unity and K is zero; hence in turn C must be unity.
Thus .
We are now in a position to calculate the radial path length to the surface labelled by r: for the case when K is positive.
In terms of s the area of the spherical surface  (at coordinate r) is .
An observer moving out from the origin would find that initially the area of the spherical surface he reached would grow steadily with s until he had travelled a distance .
Beyond this point he would observe something very strange: the area of the spherical surface would decrease, until when he had travelled twice as far to  he would find that it had shrunk to nothing.
This paradox can be understood by reference to the analogous two-dimensional situation.
A two-dimensional observer moving out across the surface of a sphere starting from the north pole would note that the lines of latitude get longer and longer as he approaches the equator.
Once into the southern hemisphere the lines of latitude would become shorter and finally vanish at the south pole.
Beyond this point the observer would be returning to the north pole.
In a like manner the traveller in a three-dimensional, homogeneous, isotropic, positively curved space would eventually return to his starting point.
Such spaces with positive curvature are therefore closed spaces of finite size.
The situation is very different in a homogeneous, isotropic, curved space with K negative.
Then the expression for the area of the spherical surface labelled by r is  which expands indefinitely as the distance s from the origin increases.
A traveller who moves out radially from his origin will never return to his starting point.
Spaces with negative curvature are the
4 Space-time curvature
The analysis carried out in Chapter 3 for curved spaces will be extended here to the curved space–time that we inhabit.
This extension is straightforward because the curved space–time we inhabit bears the same relation to the Minkowski space of SR that a curved space does to the Euclidean space of Newtonian mechanics.
One situation is of particular interest: the empty space–time around a spherically symmetric mass distribution.
It was the first case for which the exact solution of Einstein's equation was obtained, and this was done by Schwarzschild in 1916.
The practical importance of this solution is that it is adequate for use in calculations of the general relativistic effects observed in the solar system, and of the properties of the simplest type of black hole.
Section 4.1 is used to introduce the metric equation of space–time.
In Section 4.2 a physical interpretation is provided for a geodesic in space–time, namely the path of a body in free fall.
Then the curvature of geodesic surfaces in space–time around a spherically symmetric mass distribution are calculated or inferred.
These results are combined with information from Chapter 2 on the distortion of time by the Earth's gravitational field to yield the Schwarzschild solution (Section 4.3).
This simplistic approach gives a first conceptual view of the Schwarzschild solution, free of mathematical detail.
Later, in Appendix D, the Schwarzschild metric will be obtained directly by solving Einstein's equation of general relativity.
4.1 The metric equation
The space–time of SR is flat and one Cartesian coordinate system (ct, x, y, z) can be used throughout all space–time.
Intervals of proper time between events with coordinate separation (c dt, dx, dy, dz) are given by  which is the metric equation for this space–time (Minkowski space).
This metric equation differs from a metric equation valid for Euclidean space in having both positive and negative terms on the right-hand side.
The set of coefficients on the right-hand side (in this case ) is called the signature of the space and labels the properties of the space.
A space with some coefficients negative and some positive is called a pseudo-Euclidean space.
The coefficients can always be reduced to + 1 or -1 by appropriate choices of the length and time units.
With the notation of Chapter 1 the metric  equation can be rewritten  where .
A more compact way of writing this is  where the components  form a square matrix: is called a metric tensor.
Subscripts and superscripts are introduced in eqn (4.1) so that the notation is consistent with that used from Chapter 5 onwards.
For the present the reader can take superscripts and subscripts to be equivalent.
In cases for which the system has spherical symmetry, such as space–time around a spherical star or planet, it may often be better to use polar coordinates; then  where .
This equation has a different, but still diagonal, metric tensor .
The notation can be greatly simplified by adopting the Einstein summation convention in which we sum over repeated indices.
With this convention the metric equation of Minkowski space–time simplifies to .
It is useful to distinguish between Roman and Greek suffixes.
When Greek letters are used, as above, the summation is to be made over time and space coordinates.
With this interpretation the right-hand side of eqn (4.3) is identical with the right-hand side of eqn (4.1).
However if Roman letters are used the summation is only made over space coordinates (1, 2, 3).
The metric equation for three-dimensional Euclidean space with Cartesian coordinates  is then  where 
The observations of gravitational red shift and the deviation of electromagnetic waves passing near the Sun shows that real space–time is curved.
Therefore flat Minkowski space provides an inadequate description and our analysis of curved space–time will need to proceed along the lines mapped out in Chapter 3 for analysing curved space.
Gaussian (generalized) coordinates  can be used to cover curved space–time.
The proper time interval ds between events in space–time with coordinate separation  is then given by the quadratic metric equation  where the components of the metric tensor  are functions of the position and time.
At this point the strong equivalence principle supplies a key ingredient to understanding curved space–time.
This principle requires that on transforming to a freely falling frame all local experimental measurements give results in accord with SR.
What this means in geometric terms is that a Minkowski frame matches the structure of real space–time locally, but not globally.
In the same way as discussed in section 3.1 that a plane can be found which is tangential to a curved two dimensional surface, a Minkowski space can always be found to match space–time locally.
That is to say we can select any event in space time and always be able to find some frame for which .
This frame is in free fall and so our space–time belongs to the category of spaces which have a quadratic metric equation and are locally flat.
Such spaces, known as pseudo-Riemann spaces, were introduced in Chapter 3.
Riemann, who was a student of Gauss, initiated the analysis of curved spaces with more than two dimensions in 1846.
By the early years of the present century the mathematical properties of Riemann spaces had been extensively studied and this material was available for Einstein to use.
Einstein was fortunate in having a friend Marcel Grossmann who introduced him to Riemannian geometry and who worked with him until Einstein left Zurich in 1914.
The formal development of GR will be outlined in Chapters 5, 6, and 7  while in the remainder of this chapter a simpler approach will be used to infer one particularly important solution of Einstein's equation.
This is the solution for empty space outside a spherically symmetric mass distribution.
4.2 Geodesics, tidal acceleration and curvature
One of the ways discussed for determining the curvature of a two-dimensional surface is to measure the deviation between nearby geodesics; in a higher-dimensional space the measurement would yield the Gaussian curvature of the two-dimensional surface containing these geodesics.
This technique is equally valid in curved space–time, provided that we can first identify what a geodesic in space–time might be.
A geodesic in flat space (a straight line) is the path of a free body as described by Newton's first law of motion.
Equally, a time-like geodesic in Minkowski space–time (also a straight line) is the path of a free body.
The equivalence principle indicates a way of transferring the definition of a geodesic to curved space–time.
If a time-like geodesic in Minkowski space is the path of a free body then, to be consistent, a time-like geodesic in curved space time should be the path of a body in free fall.
This then constitutes the physical interpretation of a geodesic in curved space–time, namely the path of a body in free fall.
Having identified geodesics in space–time, let us consider the geodesic deviation between the paths of two nearby test bodies in free fall towards a spherically symmetric star.
Figure 4.1 shows two such bodies A and B, both having mass m and both at a radial distance r from the star of mass M, A and B are a tangential distance ζ apart.
If m is sufficiently small we can ignore the mutual attraction of the two masses.
Resolving the gravitational force due to the star tangential to OA gives zero for A, while for B the force has a component  towards A. Therefore there is a relative acceleration between A and B given by    which is independent of the masses of A and B. Such an acceleration is called a differential or tidal acceleration; it is unaffected by the choice of reference frame.
Transforming to the frame in free fall of B, for example, does not remove the relative acceleration between A and B. Tidal accelerations are non-local and are characteristic of a curved space time.
They could be avoided only if the gravitational acceleration were the same everywhere.
Then a single transformation to a frame with this acceleration would enable us to impose a frame in free fall everywhere; this is the situation described by SR.
Let us take the motion of A and B to be non-relativistic, so that .
Then the tidal acceleration can be written .
This expression can be compared with eqn (3.2) for the geodesic deviation over a curved surface.
However, we must take account of the sign change for the spatial components of the metric equation on going from three-space to space–time, and so  where K is the Gaussian curvature.
The tidal acceleration is thus related to space–time curvature.
In the case considered the motion is transverse to OA, and so the curvature is that of the geodesic surface defined by the time direction and the spatial direction transverse to OA.
Without any loss of generality we can take AOB to be in the equatorial plane of the parent star so that the acceleration is purely in the coordinate φ.
From the comparison between the preceding two equations, the Gaussian curvature of the geodesic surface (φ, t) is deduced to be 
4.3 The Schwarzschild metric
The analysis of the gravitational red shift led to the relation (eqn 2.2).
From the present viewpoint this can be regarded as the time component of the metric equation for space–time round a spherically symmetric mass.
What is needed in order to complete the metric equation is information about the spatial terms.
A first step would be to determine the curvature of a purely  spatial surface and then apply eqn (3.4) to obtain g rr .
Unfortunately the method described in the last section for determining curvature fails in the case of purely spatial surfaces.
Their curvatures can only be obtained rigorously from the solution of Einstein's equation.
For the present we need to proceed by inferences.
Firstly, the curvatures are likely to depend linearly on mass; otherwise a single mass  would produce a different effect from that produced by two separate masses  brought into contact.
Secondly, the only other relevant quantities on which the curvature might depend are G, r, and c.
Dimensional analysis then shows that the simplest combination of these quantities which has the dimensions of curvature is , and indeed the curvature  has just this form.
An inference is that the curvature of the spatial equatorial surface  is  where the negative sign has been selected so as to reproduce the experimentally observed deviation of light.
At this point we need to make use of another result from the preceding chapter, namely that the Gaussian curvature of an equatorial surface is related to the radial component of the metric tensor.
From eqn (3.4) we have .
Substituting the value inferred for  into this expression gives .
Integrating this equation gives  and taking limits of integration to be  gives .
This suggests that the spatial separation of nearby points in a spherically symmetric space is .
This can be rewritten as  with the notation .
The complementary expression for  the effect of the mass distribution on time has been given in eqn (2.2).
Equations (4.9) and (2.2) can now be combined to give the metric equation for empty space outside a spherically symmetric mass distribution:.
Note that the relative signs of the spatial components with respect to the time component are set negative, so that in the limit of zero mass eqn (4.10) reduces to the Minkowski metric equation of SR:.
Equation (4.10) is known as the Schwarzschild metric equation for which the metric tensor is .
Note that the components of eqn (4.11) do not depend on time, and so the Schwarzschild metric is static.
Birkhoff proved that this metric equation is the unique description in GR for space–time outside a spherically symmetric mass distribution (carrying no charge or angular momentum).
It follows that even when the mass is undergoing spherically symmetric motion the external structure of space time is described by the Schwarzschild metric and hence is static.
This result would apply in the case that a stellar core collapsed to a neutron star or to a black hole while maintaining perfect spherical symmetry.
The Schwarzschild metric will be used in calculations of the observable effects of GR in the solar system (Chapter 8) and of the properties of non-rotating neutral black holes (Chapter 9).
It is important to retain a firm grasp on what the coordinates appearing in eqn (4.11) are and what they are not.
Referring back to eqn (2.2) we recall that dt is the interval of time between two events measured by an observer using a clock which is in a region remote enough that space–time is effectively flat; dt is called the coordinate time interval.
However, dr is the proper time interval measured on a clock carried by someone moving from .
The coordinate r is different from the radial distance measured from the centre of the mass M, which we shall call a.
The relationship between a and r is   The area of the spherical surface labelled by r is  and not , and its circumference is  and not .
From the form of the Schwarzschild metric equation it is clear that the factor  is an important measure of the effect of mass on the curvature of space–time.
When  is small compared with unity, the curvature is small and general relativistic effects are negligible.
Conversely, if  approaches unity the curvature is severe and general relativistic effects dominate.
Space-time in the vicinity of a star whose radius shrinks to a value less than  becomes so warped that the region inside radius rO is effectively isolated from the rest of the Universe.
This is the phenomenon called a black hole and is the subject of Chapter 9.
The metric components can also be rewritten in terms of the gravitational potential  so that .
Then if gravitational forces are interpreted as the consequence of space–time curvature there is a correspondence between the single gravitational potential of Newtonian mechanics on the one hand and the metric components on the other hand.
5 Elementary tensor analysis
In the preceding chapters a simple presentation has been made of the properties of curved space–time.
Now the general theory of relativity will be developed formally using tensors.
Equations between tensors have the property that they remain valid under the general transformations between Gaussian coordinate systems in curved space–time.
Therefore physical laws when expressed in terms of tensors will retain their form under these general transformations, in particular under changes to accelerating frames.
It is this property which is relevant for building GR.
Those elements of tensor analysis which are required for assimilating GR are presented in this chapter.
Scalars and vectors are in fact the simplest types of tensors, and from SR it is well known that if an equality can be proved between vectors (or scalars) in one inertial frame then the equality remains true under Lorentz transformations to other inertial frames.
The new feature for curved space–time is that the permitted transformations are quite general and not simply linear, as in the case with Lorentz transformations.
For example the acceleration in a constant uniform gravitational field yields a quadratic relation between position and time of the form  while acceleration in realistic gravitational fields which depend on position and time will give more complicated transformations.
Space time derivatives, such as momentum, which behave as vectors under Lorentz transformations need redefinition in order to behave as vectors under general transformations.
The method for recasting all space–time derivatives so that they are all tensors under general coordinate transformations is described in Chapter 6.
At that stage a simple procedure can be defined for writing physical laws in a form compatible with GR.
Take a physical law valid in SR, which is thus true in a frame in a free fall, and recast this in tensor form.
The resulting tensor equation is automatically valid under all general transformations.
This technique fails for the central question of how to write the relativistic law of gravitation because Newton's law of gravitation is not compatible with SR and so we lack a starting point.
Put another way, SR is only valid locally in a frame in free fall, which neatly disconnects it from any gravitational effects.
What Einstein did was to suggest that there exists a tensor identity between space–time curvature and a tensor, the stress-energy tensor, describing the distribution of matter.
This identity provides the relativistic law of gravitation and forms the  keystone of GR.
The curvature and stress-energy tensors, and Einstein's equation that links them, will be discussed in Chapter 7.
5.1 General transformations
General transformations in curved space–time are non-linear.
Suppose that one set of Gaussian coordinates which covers space–time is  and a second set is .
The  are more or less complicated functions of the :.
Equally the  are functions of the :.
These relations between finite coordinate distances are generally so inconvenient that it makes more sense to start calculations from the differentials which do transform linearly:.
Recall that the summation convention requires the right-hand side of this equation to be interpreted as .
Another notational simplification is to define .
In these definitions the order of the superscript and subscript is significant, because in general.
The product .
This can be expressed compactly as  where the Kronecker delta  is defined to be unity if α is equal to β but zero otherwise.
The local vectors discussed in Section 3.3 can be expressed in terms of a set of basis vectors , drawn along the local space–time coordinate directions at an event P. Here the subscript , indicates that this basis vector points in the µ direction.
For example if  is of unit length its components would  be 0, 1, 0, and 0 along the ct, x, y, and z coordinate directions respectively; we would write these components .
If  is separated from P by an infinitesimal distance  then  is the local vector .
The invariant length of  is  where  is a more general form of a scalar product.
In Minkowski space time with orthogonal coordinates ct, x, y, and z, by comparison with eqn (4.1), we have .
More generally by comparison with eqn (4.4) we have .
If the basis vectors are of unit length (and the signatures of the µ and v components are the same, i.e. both + I or both — 1), then  is the cosine of the angle between  and .
All local four-vectors at the same event in space–time can be expressed in terms of the same set of basis vectors.
Choosing the four-momentum, it can be written .
The components of the momentum (or any other local four-vector at the same event) will have to behave under general transformations just like the components ; using eqn (5.1).
This result has implications for the invariant length of a four-vector.
In the case of four-momentum this is given in a frame in free fall where SR is valid by  where m is the system's rest mass.
The expression for  in the same frame is .
Under a general transformation  does not change; in the new coordinates .
Thus, because the components of all four-vectors transform in precisely the same way, it follows that   Therefore the invariant length of any local four-vector is unaffected by general transformations.
Next some examples of transformations of interest are given, using orthonormal local coordinates.
The first is the rotation through θ around the z axis.
Locally it has the same form as a rotation in SR:.
A Lorentz transformation to a frame with velocity βc along the x axis has the form  where .
Finally, consider the transformation between frames momentarily coincident in velocity near a massive spherically symmetric body.
The first is a frame in radial free fall, and the second is a frame at rest: where the 1-axis is radial and φ is the gravitational potential.
5.2.
Vector and covector components
Thus far all vectors have been written in terms of the familiar vector components, e.g. .
Other components, called covector components, will now be introduced.
For the purpose of discussion we shall consider a conservative force in classical mechanics and we shall work in space only.
The components of a conservative force are given by  where φ is the potential, which is a scalar function of position only.
At any given location the value of φ is invariant under transformations, i.e. it remains the same.
Thus the effect of a transformation on the components of f is given by  .
This is the inverse of the transformation given in eqn (5.1); f transforms like  rather than like .
Components which transform in this new way are called covariant components; they are written with a subscript.
Components that transform in the manner of eqn (5.1) are called vector or contravariant components.
The f are the components of the gradient of φ, and so a useful physical view is that covector components make up a gradient.
Consider next a curve in space  where s measures the curve length from some reference point along it.
At any location on the curve the components  make up a tangent vector, and this transforms according to eqn (5.1).
Therefore a physical interpretation of vector components is that they make up a tangent.
Next we shall show that any vector can be expressed in terms of either its vector or covector components.
Depending on the context one set or other may be of more physical importance.
The local interval  used in Section 5.1 has .
Let us write  and then .
The quantity  is invariant under any general transformation; hence .
Comparing eqn (5.6) with eqn (5.7) it is seen that .
In other words the  are the covector components of .
The operation given by eqn (5.5) is a general way of generating covector components from vector components.
A two-dimensional example can be used to illustrate these results.
Figure 5.1   shows a local vector  in two spatial dimensions, where the local axes are inclined at an angle θ.
The vector component of  on the 1-axis is obtained by projecting from  parallel to the 2-axis, and similarly for the 2-component.
Then in terms of unit vectors e 1 and e 2 along the axes:.
The covector components are given by eqn (5.5) for two dimensions:.
Then using eqn 5.3 we obtain  and similarly .
Figure 5.1 shows that these covector components  and  can be obtained by projecting perpendicularly from  onto the relevant axis.
How this generalizes in Euclidean spaces of higher dimension is illustrated in Fig. 5.2.
The vector component of  is obtained by projecting from  onto the 1-direction using the surface through  that contains all the other local basis vectors:.
The covector component is simply the perpendicular projection from  onto the 1-direction:.
With rectangular Cartesian coordinates in Euclidean space the distinction between vector and covector components disappears, which explains why covector components are not usually used in Newtonian mechanics.
Direct visualization of vector and covector components in space–time meets difficulties with the time components because we can only draw Euclidean spaces in our three-dimensional world.
The covector components of local four-vectors are given by expressions   similar to eqn (5.5), e.g. for momentum : The invariant length can therefore be rewritten as .
Other related quantities, the scalar products of pairs of four-vectors, are also invariant.
One example is .
If the lowering property of  is applied in turn to  and  we obtain 
5.3 Other Tensors
The metric tensor appearing in eqn (4.5) is one example of a tensor with two indices.
Another such tensor which will be of great interest is the stress-energy tensor  that summarizes the energy content of matter.
Tensors having n indices are called tensors of rank n.
Vectors are rank 1 and scalars are rank 0 tensors.
The simplest examples of higher-rank tensors can be formed by taking  products of components of vectors.
Suppose that  are vector and covector components.
Then the following sets of components make up three tensors (A, B, C) of rank 2: while  has rank 3.
General transformations do not alter the invariant interval .
Thus .
In terms of the original coordinates .
Comparing these last two expressions gives .
The metric tensor requires one transformation for each of its indices.
This is also true for any of the tensors listed above; for example.
We see that each vector index brings a factor  while each covector index brings a factor .
Valid identities between tensors only connect tensors with equal numbers of subscripts and equal numbers of superscripts (the same rank).
Furthermore, if the components of two tensors can be shown to be equal in a particular coordinate system, i.e.   then because the corresponding components of  and  transform identically the equality holds for all coordinate frames including, of course, accelerating frames.
This is the vital property that makes a tensor presentation of GR so appropriate.
There are a number of other tensor properties which are needed in Chapters 6 and 7.
A frequent tensor manipulation is the process of contraction.
Consider a tensor  where the summation is implied for all values of the repeated index β i.e. the tensor in full is .
Applying the usual procedure to obtain this in another frame we obtain  so that  transforms as a rank 2 tensor.
One more contraction gives  which is a scalar quantity.
The scalar products met in vector analysis are familiar examples of contraction.
Other tensor products involving contraction are  which is a vector  which is a rank 3 tensor.
Not all collections of numbers or functions labelled with suffixes  necessarily form tensors.
Whether or not constitute a tensor can be tested using the quotient theorem.
This theorem states that if the product of  with any arbitrary tensor is also a tensor, then  is itself a tensor.
One specific case will serve to illustrate the proof of this theorem.
Suppose that  is an arbitrary vector whose contraction  is a covector .
Referred to some other coordinate choice, i.e. .
Multiplying this result by  gives .
Now subtracting the original form   from the last equation, we obtain .
The choice of A v is arbitrary so that the expression in parentheses must vanish identically.
Thus  and therefore  transforms like a tensor of rank 2.
Similar proofs can be pictured for other rank tensors.
Finally we collect here some useful properties of the metric tensor.
The metric tensor can always be chosen to be symmetric under interchange of its subscripts.
Suppose for argument that  is not symmetric; then it can be decomposed into a part that is symmetric  and a second part that is anti-symmetric .
The contribution to  from the antisymmetric part is  which vanishes identically, and so any anti-symmetric part of  can safely be neglected.
Contraction with  is used to generate associated tensors.
For example,.
The associated tensor of  itself is also of importance.
Suppose that g is the determinant of the elements of the metric tensor and that  is the cofactor of  in this determinant.
Then .
Let us write  then  must be symmetric if  is symmetric.
Now consider the associated tensors  and : and multiply by .
This gives   Hence the effect of  is to raise a subscript while the effect of contracting a tensor with  is to lower a superscript.
Multiplying eqn (5.11) by  gives .
Rearrangement yields  which shows that  and  are associated tensors.
In the case that  is diagonal (e.g. for the Schwarzschild metric), with no summation implied over α in this particular case.
Thus  again with no summation over α.
Applying these results for the Schwarzschild metric when using spherical polar coordinates gives .
For completeness the transformations of the Kronecker delta  need to be discussed.
Under a general transformation  which demonstrates that this tensor is the same in all frames.
Equation (5.11) shows that  and  are identical tensors:
6 Einstein's theory I
The main theme of this chapter is to obtain physical laws that are valid under general transformations to an accelerated frame.
According to the principle of equivalence the physical laws in any frame in free fall are consistent with SR.
In Chapter 5 we discovered that physical laws expressed as tensor equations automatically retain their form under general transformations.
These two ideas are now fused into the principle of generalized covariance, first postulated by Einstein.
This states that physical laws are expressible as tensor equations which reduce to laws consistent with SR in a frame in free fall.
Therefore a law valid in SR can be generalized to apply in any accelerating frame by expressing it in tensor form.
Most laws are already expressed in terms of vectors, which are tensors, and so this sounds as if the laws do not need any change!
However, most laws are dynamical equations containing space–time derivatives (e.g. the rate of change of momentum) which are not tensor quantities.
A new derivative called the covariant derivative is introduced in this chapter.
It is a tensor and is identical with the usual space–time derivative in a frame in free fall.
Then in order to convert physical laws valid in SR (free fall) directly into forms that are valid in accelerating frames as well, it is generally sufficient to replace all space time derivatives by their covariant equivalents.
In Section 6.1 the covariant derivative is introduced and is found to depend on entities called metric connections which quantify how local vectors change when they are transported through curved space–time.
The metric connections are evaluated in Section 6.2 in terms of the derivatives of the metric coefficients gpv Some further features of the covariant derivative are presented in Section 6.3.
Newton's second law of motion is the fundamental dynamical equation, and in Section 6.4 we rewrite it in a form valid in accelerating frames.
In the absence of non-gravitational forces the second law describes a body in free fall and we show in Section 6.5 that such a path is a geodesic in space–time.
A procedure for transforming to a frame in free fall is described in Section 6.6.
Geodesics are also ‘stationary’ paths in space–time with an integral equation that will be used in later chapters when calculating the trajectories of planets and light in curved space time (Section 6.7).
Finally the correspondence between metric connections and the inertial and gravitational forces of classical (Newtonian) mechanics is explored in Section 6.8.
6.1.
The covariant derivative
We consider the change in a local four-vector  during some physical process.
A concrete choice could be the four-momentum of a test body acted on by gravitational and non-gravitational forces.
In Fig. 6.1 the broken line indicates the path followed by the body in curved space–time, where s is the path length and  a basis vector in the µ-direction.
Changes in the coordinate frame along the path mean that the component  would change, irrespective of any physical process.
Over an element  of path between events P and P ’the change will be written .
This must be subtracted from the observed change in the µ-component between the events P and P ’which is written .
Thus the physically important change is .
Figure 6.2 shows these vectors at P and P ’and their µ-components.
A quantity called the covariant derivative can be formed by dividing this change by the path length  between P and P ’and taking the limit as  i.e. .
In the above limit the difference between the local vectors at the same point is being taken, hence the covariant derivative is a valid vector.
At this point a key question remains unanswered: what is the prescription for transporting the vector  at P through curved space–time to P ’so that its components at P ’and hence the changes in these components  can be evaluated?
It is worth recalling that in Section 3.3 the analogous question was addressed for transport over a curved surface.
There the idea of parallel transport was found to be helpful.
Application of the strong equivalence principle provides the  basis for a definition of parallel transport in curved space time.
The principle states that over a short enough path length it is always possible to transform to a frame in free fall; in such a frame, space–time is locally flat and the coordinates of SR may be imposed.
This suggests an unambiguous procedure for transporting a local vector across curved space time.
First, the vector is transformed to a frame in free fall at P and in that frame it is carried across the interval  without change of its Cartesian coordinates.
Then the resulting vector is transformed back to the relevant frame at P ' .
This procedure defines parallel transport of a local vector in space–time.
Over a finite path a different frame in free fall may be required for each path element.
Suppose the vector  is parallel transported a distance  in the p-direction.
Then if the vector initially had only a σ-component it would in general develop components in all directions, so .
This expression is linear in the displacement  and takes account of all the components of path (ρ), of all the initial components (σ) of the vector, and of all the components showing change (µ).
The new quantities  introduced   here are called the metric connections.
(Affine connections or affinities are more general terms used to encompass cases for which the space is not necessarily Riemannian).
The metric connections are clearly functions of the position in space–time.
Substituting this form for  in the definition of the covariant derivative yields   is the µ component of the covariant derivative of the vector with components .
It is quite easy to see that the connections are not themselves tensors.
In a frame in free fall the changes  will vanish and hence the connections vanish, however in other frames neither  nor the connections vanish.
Therefore the connections are not tensors.
On the right hand side of eqn (6.2) both terms alter under a general transformation but their sum is always the component of the same local vector .
Expressions for covariant derivatives of tensors of any rank can be obtained, all of which are also tensors.
For covector components (see
6.2.
The calculation of the metric connection
The full information about the structure of space–time is embodied in the metric equation, and so it is reasonable to expect that the connections should be functions of the metric coefficients .
Replacing  in the previous equation by  and multiplying throughout by  gives .
Now let us specialize to the frame in free fall.
There the connections vanish so that .
In addition the metric of the frame in free fall is locally that of special relativity.
As discussed in chapters 3 and 4 this condition is written .
Then for the frame in free fall we have  which, being a tensor equation, must hold in all frames.
Thus in general.
Now define  and the previous equation can be written .
For convenience we introduce the subscript comma notation to represent a derivative: Then the previous line becomes .
Equation (6.4) is inverted in Appendix C to give .
The reader can check this result by substituting for  in eqn (6.4).
This expression is called the fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry.
It is clear that the connections are symmetric
6.3.
More on the covariant derivative
The covariant derivative can be used to describe the differential change of any local vector along a given path, because local vectors all transform in the same way.
There are a number of useful forms equivalent to eqn (6.2).
Firstly s can be replaced by  where π is the proper time measured on a clock travelling the same path.
When the path is that of light some alternative parameter to π can always be defined to specify the path length consistently.
Thus the covariant derivative can be rewritten in terms of a general path parameter, λ which is linearly related to π when the path is non light-like:.
For covector components .
Multiplying eqn (6.2) by  gives another form:.
This can be written more compactly by using the subscript comma notation  and introducing the subscript semicolon notation for the covariant derivatives:.
Then eqn (6.8) becomes   When a vector is parallel transported along a path it remains the same at each point on its path; thus  i.e.  i.e.  is consistent with eqn (6.1).
6.4.
The principle of generalized covariance
This principle postulated by Einstein has two components.
Firstly, physical laws must be expressible as tensor equations so that they remain valid under transformations to any accelerated frame.
Secondly, when specialized to a frame in free fall the physical laws should reproduce the established laws consistent with SR.
Fundamental to any study of dynamics is Newton's second law.
It was expressed in a form consistent with SR in eqn (1.2), i.e.  where  is the four vector force.
Although the right hand side is not a valid tensor, we have just learnt how to write a covariant derivative that is a valid tensor.
Replacing the derivative on the right hand side of eqn (1.2) by a covariant derivative yields .
This is a valid tensor equation and reduces to eqn (1.2) in a frame in free fall, so that it satisfies the principle of generalized covariance.
Any other physical law consistent with SR in a frame in free fall can be converted into a physical law valid in accelerating frames by replacing space time derivatives by the equivalent covariant derivatives.
Clearly we have here a very powerful tool.
Using subscript comma and subscript semicolon notation a standard space–time derivative is written  whilst a covariant derivative is written .
Hence the procedure for converting an equation so that it becomes valid in accelerating frames can be expressed pithily as: ‘replace commas by semicolons’.
6.5.
The geodesic equation
The simplest dynamical question that can be posed for curved space–time is to ask what the motion of a test body is in free fall, i.e. under gravitational  forces alone.
The gravitational forces are the manifestation of space–time curvature due to the presence of matter.
Therefore in eqn (6.11) must be set to zero:.
Referring to Section 6.3 we see that  is being parallel transported.
In addition, being the test body's momentum, points along the path.
is therefore being parallel transported along itself, which is the prescription given in Section 3.3 for generating a geodesic!
Hence the geometric view of the path of a body in free fall is that it follows a geodesic in space time.
Equation (6.12) is known as the geodesic equation.
It can be converted to a useful equivalent form by making the replacement  where m is the rest mass of the test body.
Then the geodesic equation becomes .
If we wish to extend the equation to describe geodesics followed by light, we write  where λ is the path parameter discussed in Section 6.3.
Notice that the geodesic eqn (6.13) does not depend on the mass of the test body.
This shows that the weak equivalence principle is already built into the very structure of Riemann space–time.
In Section 3.3 an alternative definition given for a geodesic was of a curve across space with no component of curvature in that space.
This property of a geodesic is inherent in the geodesic equation, as we now show.
The differential  is a valid vector so we can write .
Then the geodesic equation becomes .
In geometrical terms the  are the gradient components and the  the curvature components of the path.
Therefore the geodesic equation implies that a geodesic has no component of curvature in space time.
6.6.
Transformation to a frame in free fall
It has been argued that the space time we inhabit is a Riemann space, and that locally space–time in free fall is the space time of special relativity.
In this section we check that starting at any event y in space–time it is always possible to transform to a frame for which locally and  where  is the Minkowski metric of eqn (4.1) or (4.2).
Taking the Gaussian coordinates to be  at y we assert that the coordinates  for which eqn (6.16) holds are given by a transformation  where the  are some constants.
Differentiating this expression with respect to and then again with respect to gives  and .
We can choose y to be the origin of the  coordinates so that .
Now  which when differentiated with respect to gives .
When the values of the differentials at y are substituted in this expression we have at y .
If locally at y the second part of eqn (6.16) is to be satisfied after transforming  to the unprimed coordinates we must therefore have .
Referring to Section 6.2 it is clear that the required transformation can be achieved if we set  equal to the value of  at y.
The unprimed  will not necessarily be diagonal as it should be if it is to satisfy the first part of eqn (6.16).
However some linear transformation to new coordinates  with constant coefficients  will achieve this result at y; without affecting .
Thus we have verified that a transformation to a frame in free fall is always possible.
6.7.
Geodesics as stationary paths
From the geometric view geodesics are the straightest paths between space–time events; physically they are the paths of test bodies in free fall.
A third equivalent property of geodesics is that they are ‘stationary’ paths between space–time events.
This final property is useful because it simplifies the calculation of general relativistic orbits.
In flat space a straight line is the shortest path between two points: as in Fig. 6.3(a).
The corresponding case for Minkowski space is shown in Fig. 6.3(b) for AC being time-like.
A suitable Lorentz transformation makes the time axis lie along AC and then  where x is the spatial coordinate of B. Then .
The straight-line path is therefore the longest path in Minkowski space.
A description that covers both cases is to say that geodesics are stationary paths; this means that any small deviation of path from a geodesic produces no change in the length to first order in the deviation.
Expressed formally this requirement is  where the integrated path length is .
If the path length is parametrized by the proper path length ds then    This integrand is unity all along the path so that if s is stationary then so too is a simpler integral  where .
Equations (6.18a) and (6.18b) set a variational problem that is solved in the standard way in Appendix A. It is shown in Appendix A that eqn (6.18) is the integral form of the geodesic equation, and is entirely equivalent to the differential form of eqn (6.8).
It is as well to appreciate that a body in free fall from a fixed starting event will follow different geodesics if it is given different starting velocities.
These geodesics will lie inside the forward light cone through the starting event; they are time-like with .
When the test body is a photon the path integral  which defines a null geodesic.
Finally the space-like geodesics that have  would correspond to motion with velocity greater than c.
Neither material particles nor light can follow space-like geodesics; however, these geodesics are useful in setting up coordinate frames that span spacetime.
6.8.
Familiar examples
In this section some familiar examples of gravitational and inertial forces will be used to bring out the correspondence between these forces and the metric connections.
First let us establish how the geodesic equation simplifies when the motion can be described approximately by classical mechanics.
Then the  velocities must be small compared with c, the gravitational fields will be small and their rates of change must be slow.
The geodesic equation is .
If the velocities are small.
then .
Therefore  is much larger than the derivatives of space components and in addition.
Thus the dominant components of the geodesic equation are  provided that the  are not all negligible.
The time component  is negligible in the classical limit of fields which vary slowly with time.
Thus, provided that the  are not negligible the dominant components of the geodesic equation in the classical limit are .
Now if there is a constant acceleration g in the i direction we would write classically .
A comparison of the last two equations yields  and shows the equivalence between an inertial force of classical mechanics and the metric connections.
Both can be made to vanish by an appropriate coordinate transformation.
If g is taken to be the local gravitational acceleration then we can see that the metric connections correspond to the components of the gravitational acceleration.
This is a reasonable result when it is recalled that the metric components correspond to the classical gravitational potential (Section 4.3).
More generally, if there is a gravitational potential φ, we have classically .
Comparison with eqn (6.19) shows that  
When the linear acceleration is unimportant or zero then the  are negligible.
In this case components of the geodesic equation other than those given by eqn (6.19) become the most important.
So we come to another familiar example: the inertial acceleration observed in a frame rotating at constant angular velocity Φ.
It is well known that the absolute velocity is given by  where  is the velocity measured relative to the rotating frame at a vector distance r from the axis of rotation.
This equation can be interpreted as an expression for the covariant derivative .
Of course in the Newtonian limit of low velocities t can be replaced by π.
Making a term by term comparison of these last two equations we have .
All the other metric connections vanish.
The geodesic equation for the rotating frame  therefore reduces to .
Substituting for  (the absolute velocity) gives .
Therefore .
The 1-component of this equation is .
Collecting this and the other spatial terms (2, 3) into one equation gives   The terms on the right-hand side are just the standard expressions for the Coriolis acceleration and centrifugal acceleration in a rotating frame.
This again shows how the metric connections correspond to the inertial accelerations and forces of classical mechanics.
This example illustrates another useful point, i.e. that a frame in free fall as generally understood must be a frame free of any rotation about the geodesic path; clearly metric connections can only vanish if both linear acceleration and acceleration due to rotation vanish.
This is not quite the end of the matter.
It is always possible, even in free fall, to obtain non-vanishing metric connections by choosing Gaussian rather than Cartesian coordinates.
A simple example which illustrates this point is to choose polar coordinates (r, θ) to describe motion in a plane.
The metric equation for free fall is    so that .
One derivative does not vanish: whence .
Substituting these connections into the radial and θ components of the geodesic eqn (6.13) yields:.
In the Newtonian limit of small velocities  and so these equations become .
These geodesic equations are quite familiar.
On the left-hand sides are the well-known expressions for the radial and tangential components of acceleration.
As expected both are zero for motion in the absence of any external force.
It is emphasized here that there is no rotation in a frame in free fall.
Throughout what follows either Cartesian or spherical polar coordinates are used when analysing motion in free fall; the latter choice is made whenever the system studied has spherical symmetry.
Figure 6.4 is based on the comments of the last paragraphs.
7 Einstein's theory II
The general technique for converting an equation valid for SR into one valid in all frames, namely replacing normal derivatives by covariant derivatives, cannot be applied to gravitation.
It cannot be applied because we lack the starting point — a law of gravitation consistent with SR.
Newton's law of gravitation has no explicit time dependence, implying that gravitational effects are transmitted instantaneously to all parts of the Universe; however, it is a basic postulate of SR that signals travel no faster than the speed of light.
There is an underlying difficulty of principle in asking for a law of gravitation consistent with SR: SR applies to flat space–time while gravitational forces are a manifestation of its curvature.
Einstein perceived that there must be a direct link between the distribution of mass/energy and the curvature of space–time and that this link must be expressible in tensor form.
Einstein also recognized that the stress-energy tensor provided the appropriate tensor description for the distribution and flow of energy in space–time.
Later he identified a curvature tensor (the Einstein tensor) having formal properties which match those of the stress-energy tensor.
Einstein simply equated these two tensors, making ‘curvature’ at a given point in space–time proportional to ‘energy density’at the same point.
This is the essence of Einstein's equation.
In Section 7.1 the Riemann curvature tensor is introduced; this is a tensor which provides a complete description of curvature in multi-dimensional spaces.
Its relationship both to the Gaussian curvature of two-dimensional surfaces and to tidal forces is discussed.
In Section 7.2 attention is focused on the stress-energy tensor  and its properties.
The conjecture that the stress energy tensor is proportional to some curvature tensor leads to the selection for this role of a unique contraction of the Riemann tensor (Section 7.3) called the Einstein tensor .
Then the Einstein equation is The choice of the constant of proportionality  will be justified in Section 7.4 by taking the classical limit and showing that Newton's law of gravitation is then obtained.
In Appendix D Einstein's equation is applied to the region outside a spherically symmetric mass distribution, yielding the Schwarzschild metric.
7.1.
The Riemann curvature tensor
The curvature of a two-dimensional surface is quantified by giving the value of the Gaussian curvature at each point.
However, in higher-dimensional spaces each geodesic surface has its own Gaussian curvature and the description of curvature in terms of Gaussian curvatures becomes unwieldy.
Riemann developed more elegant techniques to analyse curvature in these higher-dimensional spaces.
A full description of curvature at a given point in such a space is provided by a rank 4 tensor called the Riemann curvature tensor.
It is not difficult to infer where the information on curvature must come from.
First we note that by going to a frame in free fall at an event (point in space–time) x the space time is made flat locally, and we have (eqn 6.16).
In these circumstances neither the metric coefficients nor their first derivatives have anything to say about curvature.
What distinguishes curved space–time from flat space–time is this: the frame in free fall at x differs from the frame in free fall at an event a small distance away, at .
The metric tensor and its derivatives at  can be obtained by Taylor expansions around : and .
The change in  depends only on the second derivatives  at x, and so these derivatives must embody the curvature information.
In Section 4.3 the correspondence between the metric components and the Newtonian gravitational potential was noted, and later in Section 6.8 it was seen that the metric connection and hence the first derivatives of the metric components correspond to the gravitational acceleration.
A tidal acceleration is the difference between gravitational acceleration at different locations so that the corresponding parameters in curved space–time are the second derivatives of the metric connections.
There is therefore a fundamental link between the curvature of space–time and the existence of classical tidal forces.
The curvature tensor can be identified by using an approach that was introduced in Chapter 3.
A vector is parallel transported around an infinitesimal closed path and the change that this operation produces in the vector is calculated.
Figure 7.1 shows the route.
AB is a vector path element da and BC is a vector path element db; the return path consists of the vector elements da (CD) and db (DA).
Parallel transporting a vector  around the loop  ABCDA induces changes which are calculated using eqn (6.10).
The changes induced over each of the four segments of path are respectively  and   and  are evaluated at the location indicated within parentheses.
Collecting these terms yields the overall change suffered by : Using eqn (6.10) again we obtain .
In writing the last line use has been made of identities such as which result from changing a repeated suffix, in this case .
The expression for dva can be written compactly as  where  is defined by   All the vectors v, da, and db appearing in (7.2) are quite arbitrary; dv is the difference between local vectors at the same place and is also a vector.
Consequently we can use the quotient theorem to prove that  is a tensor.
This, the Riemann curvature tensor, quantifies space–time curvature.
Specializing to a frame in free fall causes all the connections to vanish but not their derivatives, and eqn (7.3) collapses to .
Other associated forms of the Riemann tensor are also of interest, e.g. .
Appendix B contains more details on the mathematical properties of the Riemann tensor.
One useful result established there is that eqn (7.4) can be written as  in which the anticipated dependence of curvature on the second derivatives of the metric coefficients is made explicit.
If space–time is flat everywhere these derivatives, and the Riemann tensor, will all vanish.
The behaviour of the Riemann tensor is contrasted with that of the metric connections in Fig. 6.4.
A suitable choice of frame can always be made such that the connections and the acceleration vanish locally.
This is not the case for the Riemann tensor: it vanishes wherever space–time is flat, whatever generalized coordinates are chosen.
The Riemann tensor for space–time has 4 4 components; in Appendix B it is shown that thanks to the symmetry of this tensor only 20 components are linearly independent.
Another property of curved spaces is that two nearby and initially parallel geodesics do not continue parallel indefinitely, but converge or diverge depending on the local curvature.
For example, a pair of lines of longitude are parallel at the equator but converge toward the poles.
Suppose that a vector ζ is drawn in curved space–time linking points on two nearby geodesics at x and x + ζ.
The two geodesics have equations  and   The difference between these equations.
to first order in ζ, is  where the connections and their differentials are all evaluated at x.
Specializing to a frame in free fall at x, so that the connections vanish, we have .
Also for the frame in free fall .
Eliminating  from these last two expressions gives .
Then using eqn (7.4) this becomes, after rearrangement, which, being expressed entirely in terms of tensors, will hold true under general transformations of coordinates.
Equation (7.6) is known as the equation of geodesic deviation.
We shall now briefly bring out the relationship between the Gaussian curvature and the Riemann curvature tensor.
First a geodesic surface is constructed in space–time according to the prescription given at the end of Section 3.4.
The geodesic surface is spanned by geodesics tangential to the 1 and 2-axes at a given point, and for simplicity the frame at this point is taken to be one which is in free fall.
Then the equation for the geodesic deviation in the 1-direction resulting from a displacement in the 2-direction is .
Recalling that  we can rewrite this last line as .
In free fall the coordinates can be chosen to make the metric diagonal, in which case  reduces to   and .
Therefore the previous equation becomes .
Again with a diagonal metric, the metric determinant .
Thus in free fall we have .
Equation 7.7 can be compared with the earlier expression for geodesic deviation: taking account of the sign change in the spatial components of the metric when passing from Euclidean to Minkowski space.
Therefore the Gaussian curvature of the geodesic surface under discussion is .
This is the tensor form of Gauss's ‘Excellent’ Theorem applied to one geodesic surface.
The experimental determination of components of the Riemann tensor involves measuring the gradient of the gravitational field.
A device to do this is called a gravity gradiometer.
Very sensitive devices based on technical developments stimulated by attempts to detect variations of  between different materials are now in prospect.
The next stage along our road toward Einstein's general theory will be to discover how to present the density of mass/energy in a way compatible with SR, i.e. as a tensor.
Once this result is in place it will be possible to discuss how to relate space–time curvature mathematically to mass/energy.
7.2.
The stress-energy tensor
In SR the energy and the linear momentum are two aspects of a single entity, the four-momentum.
They are connected to the rest mass through the relation given in Section 1.3: This intimate connection of mass, energy and momentum suggests that a general law of gravitation will contain not just mass but energy and momentum as well.
In order to proceed we need to convert Newton's law of gravitation to its differential form.
The attractive force on unit mass a distance r from a body of mass M is just .
Integrating the flux of F out through a sphere centred on the mass gives .
Now Stokes's theorem relates an integral over a closed surface to another integral over the volume enclosed:.
Making this replacement gives: where p is the density of the material inside the volume.
This result is valid .
In terms of the gravitational potential defined by  this becomes  where ρ is the rest local density of matter and θ is the local gravitational potential (gravitational potential energy per unit mass).
In order to see how ρ can be generalized in SR we consider a simple sample of matter, namely a dust cloud.
A cloud of dust in its rest frame S has energy density  where m o is the rest mass of the average dust grain and n o is the number of dust grains per unit volume.
Viewed in a frame S ’moving with velocity  with respect to the cloud, each grain becomes more massive, and the volume containing a fixed number of grains is Lorentz contracted along the direction of motion.
Explicitly  and  where .
Thus .
Obviously  is neither a scalar nor the component of a four-vector: if it were the first it would remain constant under the Lorentz transformation to S ' if it were the second the change would be linear in γ.
The behaviour of ρ is, however, exactly that of the time-time component of a second-rank tensor : where  is the four-vector velocity of the cloud.
In the frame S only the time-time component of this tensor is non-zero; it is .
Under the transformation from S to S ' .
The tensor  is called the stress-energy tensor.
A definition of its components that applies equally to dust clouds or more complex systems is the following: is the flow of the µ component of the four-momentum along the v direction.
Some examples should help to make this clearer.
(a) is the energy density.
(b) is the energy flow per unit area parallel to the i direction.
In the case of the dust cloud this would constitute heat flow.
(c) is the flow of momentum component i per unit area in the i direction, i.e. the pressure across the i plane.
(d) is the flow of the i component of momentum per unit area in the j direction.
This is another way of describing a component of the viscous drag across the j plane.
(e) is the density of the i component of momentum.
It is apparent that in SR the stress-energy tensor embodies a compact description of energy and momentum density.
In contrast, the underlying connection between the energy, momentum, pressure, and heat flow is only latent in the classical (Newtonian) view.
Referring to the dust cloud it can be seen that if a Lorentz transformation is made to another frame, the spatial components of  generally receive contributions from : thus the spatial components must also affect the curvature of space–time.
Consequently all the terms appearing in the stress-energy tensor must help to warp the fabric of space -time!
Herein lies a paradox for the classical view.
It is well known that the pressure inside a star resists the gravitational collapse, and yet it now looks as if pressure can, by virtue of contributing to a component of the stress-energy tensor, hasten gravitational collapse.
This is indeed the  case, and pressure contributes to the contraction of sufficiently massive stars to black holes (see Section 9.4).
Conservation laws for energy and momentum take particularly simple forms when expressed in terms of the stress-energy tensor.
The conservation of energy offers a good example of the way that this happens.
Figure 7.2 shows a cube of edge length l with its edges parallel to the axes Ox, Oy, and Oz in a medium whose stress-energy tensor is .
The rate of change in the energy content of the box is .
This change is produced by the net energy inflow through the six faces of the cube.
The energy flow through the faces at , and  is respectively .
The net flow inward from these two faces is .
There are similar contributions from the other pairs of faces:.
Summing the three contributions gives the total inflow, and so we have   which can be rearranged to become  that is,.
This last result can be expressed in a more compact form using the subscript comma notation for space–time derivatives:.
This type of derivative is known as the divergence of ; the derivative is taken with respect to the same space–time component as appears in the tensor (here α), and the sum over the expression on the left-hand side is made for all values of α.
A parallel procedure applied to the conservation of linear momentum yields the three equations .
Finally the conservation laws (7.11) and (7.12) can be combined into a single .
This equation summarizes all the conservation laws of four-momentum in SR.
Put into words they require that the divergences of the stress-energy tensor vanish everywhere.
This result from SR can be converted to a form of general validity in curved space time if the simple derivatives are replaced by covariant derivatives.
Thus the laws of conservation of energy and momentum in curved space–time take the form  where the subscript semicolon indicates a covariant derivative.
This can be written in more detail as .
The last line illustrates that in the covariant derivative of a tensor of second order or higher there is one term for each index.
The properties of the energy momentum tensor are now summarized:
(a) it vanishes in the absence of matter;
(b) it is of second rank;
(c) its divergences all vanish;
(d) it is symmetric, i.e. 
7.3.
Einstein's equation
Einstein identified the stress-energy tensor as the source of space–time curvature and suggested the simplest possible relationship between it and the curvature: where  is a tensor describing space–time curvature and K is some scalar constant whose magnitude determines how effective the energy density is in distorting space time.
An immediate consequence of this ansatz is that  should be a symmetric divergenceless second-rank tensor to match the stress-energy tensor.
The Riemann curvature tensor (rank 4) quantifies space–time curvature, and so it is reasonable to expect that  should be a contraction of the Riemann curvature tensor.
A second-rank tensor can easily be constructed by contraction: which is called the Ricci tensor.
Using Appendix B it can be shown that the contractions  and  give equivalent results: the Ricci tensor is thus the unique contraction of the Riemann tensor.
The Ricci tensor has a non-zero divergence which can be removed by a simple subtraction.
The result is the divergenceless second-rank Einstein tensor  where R is the Ricci scalar .
The proof that the Einstein tensor is both symmetric and divergenceless is given in Appendix B. Like its progenitors, the Riemann and Ricci tensors, the Einstein tensor vanishes in the absence of any material to warp space–time.
Referring to the summary of the properties of the stress-energy tensor given at the end of the previous section, we see that the Einstein tensor matches these precisely.
With this tensor we can now rewrite Einstein's ansatz as .
The value of the constant  is fixed by the requirement that, in the limit of weak slowly varying gravitational fields, the Einstein equation should reduce to Newton's law of gravitation.
This will be shown explicitly in Section 7.4.
Note that the G appearing on the right-hand side of (7.16) is the usual gravitational constant and not some contraction of a tensor.
As with all such tensor equations the equality will remain true if we simultaneously raise one or more indices on both sides of the equation.
When Einstein's equation was applied to calculate the behaviour of the Universe on the large scale it was apparent that it favoured an expanding  Universe; however, this conflicted with the prejudice, then current, that the Universe was static.
Einstein found that he could extend his equation in only one way, by adding a term  so that where A is a universal constant called the cosmological constant.
As we can see, it would lead to curvature of space–time in the absence of all matter and radiation ().
It is therefore possible by choosing A appropriately to obtain a static Universe.
By 1931 Hubble and Humason had convincingly demonstrated that the Universe is currently expanding and Einstein was then happy to disown the cosmological constant.
Curiously, the cosmological constant is once again in vogue.
Quantum theory has taught us that the vacuum is not a featureless void but is continuously disturbed by particle-anti-particle pair creation and annihilation and that this endows the vacuum with energy.
A non-zero cosmological constant no longer seems at all unreasonable.
. An alternative form of Einstein's equation is also useful.
Rewriting eqn (7.17) we obtain .
First we raise one index and contract it with the remaining covector index to give .
Now  is a scalar and will have the same value in all frames including that in free fall; explicitly we have .
Thus .
Substituting for R in eqn (7.18) gives .
We can see that in empty space–time Einstein's equation simplifies to  and that  vanishes there if the cosmological constant is zero.
This result  will be useful in later discussions of the passage of gravitational waves through otherwise empty space–time.
7.4 The Newtonian limit
It is instructive to check that in the limit of weak slowly-varying gravitational fields Einstein's equation reduces to Newton's law of gravitation.
This will show how the new variables of Einstein's general theory are related to the more familiar classical variables.
The starting point is Einstein's equation (7.19).
In the classical limit when the gravitational field is weak and slowly varying  where all the components of the tensor h are much less than unity.
If we choose Cartesian coordinates .
In the same limit velocities are small () and the spatial components of momenta are much less than energies.
The dominant term in the stress-energy tensor is therefore the energy density Too.
Thus the important part of Einstein's equation in the classical limit is .
In evaluating this expression we first note that the metric connections are linear in h; hence to a first approximation in h the form (7.4) or (7.5) can be used for the Riemann curvature tensor rather than(7.3).
Then the corresponding approximation for the Ricci tensor is that given in eqn B.7:.
In the classical (slow-moving) limit it is possible to ignore the time compared with spatial derivatives so that the last equation reduces to .
The result of the gravitational red shift experiment determines : from eqn (2.2), for instance, where (p is the gravitational potential.
If this assignment is carried through here, then  Suppose that the rest density of matter is ρ then .
It is a sufficient approximation to take  on the right-hand side of eqn (7.20), so that .
Finally, substituting on both sides in eqn (7.20) gives .
This reproduces eqn (7.9), the differential form of Newton's law of gravitation, if A vanishes.
The comparison verifies that the constant appearing in Einstein's equation has magnitude ; any other choice would spoil the agreement with Newton's law in the classical limit.
We can take the last equation and use it to calculate the classical force per unit mass due to the cosmological constant.
This requires us to reverse the steps which led to eqn (7.9).
We obtain the force on unit mass:.
The experimental limit on A given later in Section 11.5 is so that on Earth the acceleration due to the cosmological term is about 10–22 times that due to the gravitational pull of the Sun.
Only over cosmologically large distances could the effect of the cosmological term become significant.
At this point the equivalences between classical and general relativistic quantities are collected and reviewed.
Making use of the result of the gravitational red shift experiment we have shown that  so that the metric coefficients replace the classical gravitational potential.
However,(and ) have six independent components compared with a single classical potential.
In the Newtonian limit, and , so that the geodesic eqn (6.13) reduces to eqn (6.19).
where the  are the important metric connections in the Newtonian limit.
To first order in h,(with no summation over i).
We can reiterate the conclusion drawn in Section 6.8 that the metric connections replace both the inertial and the gravitational forces of classical mechanics.
Finally, eqn (7.5) permits an interpretation of the Riemann curvature tensor in classical terms.
In the Newtonian limit all the time derivatives are small compared with spatial derivatives, and so eqn (7.5) reduces to  which is a component of the tidal force.
Table 7.1 summarizes the correspondence between general relativistic and Newtonian kinematic quantities.
8 Tests of general relativity
Since 1960 very precise tests of GR have become possible thanks to advances in technology.
The experiments have made use of space probes, atomic clocks, very large radio-telescope arrays, laser-ranging measurements of the Earth-Moon distance and radar-ranging measurements of the distances to nearby planets.
Collection and analysis of the data have required fast electronics, high-speed data links and of course powerful computing facilities.
The measurements made on GR effects observed within the solar system are described first: the excess advance of the perihelion of Mercury is described in Section 8.1, the deflection of radiation by the Sun in Section 8.2 and the time delay of radar signals passing by the Sun in Section 8.3.
Taken together with the measurement of the gravitational spectral shift these measurements make up the classical tests of GR.
More recently, tests have been made to check that orbits calculated according to GR simultaneously fit the planetary orbital data from a wide range of measurements (Section 8.4).
Beyond the solar system the possibilities for tests dwindle away: for example, radar echoes from nearby stars are undetectably weak and anyway return years later!
However, Einstein predicted that a galaxy could act as a gravitational lens bending light from a more distant source.
Recently, several examples have been discovered where multiple images of a single quasar are seen.
This qualitative evidence for a GR effect on the cosmic scale is discussed in Section 8.5.
More surprisingly, several effects due to GR are in evidence for the binary pair containing the pulsar PSR 1913 + 16.
How these effects have been unravelled from measurements of the arrival times of the pulsar pulses is recounted in Section 8.6.
8.1 The perihelion advance of Mercury
Mercury, the innermost planet, follows an elliptical orbit at a mean distance of 58 million km from the Sun.
Other planets attract Mercury and perturb its orbit so that the long axis of the ellipse slowly rotates in its plane with respect to the frame of the distant galaxies.
The point at which the planet is nearest to the Sun is called its perihelion, and so this motion is known as precession of the perihelion.
Calculations using Newtonian mechanics predict a precession of 532 arcsec per century.
However, the observed precession is 43.11 (45) arcsec larger; this notation means 43.11 arcsec with an error of 45 in the last two digits, i.e. an error of ± 0.45 arcsec.
The discrepancy was recognized in  1859 by Leverrier and it was proposed that a small undetected planet was the cause.
Careful scrutiny by telescopes and space probes reveals no trace of any such object.
Venus and the Earth also show smaller unexplained residual advances of their perihelia.
Three centuries of telescopic measurements of the planets have been supplemented by decades of radar echo detection which determine the distance of Mercury and other planets directly (Shapiro et al.1971).
Figure 8.1 illustrates recent techniques (Hellings 1984) using one of the 64 m antennae of the Deep Space Network (DSN).
A radar carrier of 1 ms duration (300 km long) is phase modulated with a random 255 bit code.
When the pulse echo  returns it is cross-correlated with the pattern transmitted T(t) by forming the sum of products .
The delay t o is only known approximately, and so the cross-correlation is repeated for 3µ steps in t o (i.e. every 1000 m).
If the echo and pulse patterns match, then the correlator output is large; otherwise, even for a 3µs offset, the output is small.
In practice the output rises sharply when the echo returns from the nearest point on the planet but dies away slowly as echoes arrive from surrounding regions of the planet's surface.
The delay until the initial sharp rise in output from the correlator gives the distance to the planet.
Corrugations of terrain limit the accuracy to ± 1 km.
The analysis of Mercury's motion commences with the statement that Mercury follows a geodesic in the Schwarzschild space–time around the Sun.
Perturbations to Mercury's orbit due to other planets can be ignored because these are nearly independent of the GR-induced precession.
Orbits in Schwarzschild space–time are of general interest, and so the opportunity will be taken to include a number of comments not directly relevant to the calculation of Mercury's orbit.
We assume that the orbital plane has  so that the metric eqn (4.10) becomes    where , M is the Sun's mass, and r is the distance of Mercury from the Sun.
Then .
Dividing eqn (8.1) by  and then multiplying by the square of the planet's mass  gives .
In flat space–time eqn (8.2) reduces to  where v r and  are the radial and tangential components of the velocity v and .
This last equation is the standard SR formula relating rest mass to four-momentum: and eqn (8.2) is its equivalent in Schwarzschild space–time.
The geodesic equation for Mercury in its integral form is given by eqn (6.18):.
General solutions for such equations are discussed in Appendix A. In particular if the integrand L in square brackets is independent of a coordinate , then the quantity  is conserved (A.3).
Here the integrand is independent of t so that one conservation law is  so that .
Re-expressing this result in terms of the momentum component p, we have  where E is a constant.
Thus for a body in free fall E is a constant of motion, and in the absence of gravitational forces E reduces to , which is the usual SR energy.
In SR E would be constant in the absence of any forces, while in  Schwarzschild space–time E is constant for a body in free fall.
The integrand given above is also independent of φ so that .
Equation (8.4) is the equivalent of the classical law of conservation of angular momentum for Schwarzschild space–time.
Replacing  in eqn (8.2) by  gives Multiplying this by Z and dropping a factor m throughout we obtain  which can be rearranged as  where T is also a conserved quantity.
Equation (8.6) is the equivalent of the classical conservation of energy equation for Schwarzschild space time.
There is a ‘radial kinetic energy term’, a ‘transverse kinetic energy term’, and a gravitational energy term .
Together, eqns (8.3),(8.4), and (8.6) fully describe the motion of Mercury or for that matter any test mass in free fall in Schwarzschild space–time.
The quantities  and  are invariants of the motion.
We next go on to solve these equations of motion.
Using eqn (8.4) gives  and putting  this becomes .
Substituting this expression for  into eqn (8.6) gives .
Differentiating this with respect to φ and cancelling a factor , we obtain  .
Rearrangement gives .
This result can be compared with the Newtonian equation for orbits in the gravitation potential of a mass M:.
The solution of eqn (8.7N) is well known to be  where .
Figure 8.2 shows a bound orbit: an ellipse with eccentricity .
At aphelion ; at perihelion,.
Hence the long (major) axis is 2a in length.
In addition although less easy to prove,.
A solution of eqn (8.7N) is clearly a very good approximate solution of eqn (8.7) because Mercury's orbit is nearly Newtonian.
Consequently we can rewrite the small term on the right-hand side of eqn (8.7) as   and make an entirely negligible error.
With this substitution eqn (8.7) becomes .
The solution of eqn (8.7') is similar to that for (8.7N) with extra particular
It is worth noting that if the Sun were an oblate spheroid (squashed at its poles), this would also have the effect of causing the orbit of Mercury to precess.
Measurements on the shape of the Sun are difficult to interpret (see  Dicke 1983), but it appears that the taking of the small oblateness does not spoil the agreement between the observed precession and that calculated according to GR (see Claverie et al.1981)
8.2 The deflection of light by the Sun
Measurements of this deviation were discussed in Chapter 2.
The calculation of the orbit of a photon in Schwarzschild space around the Sun follows the same steps as that for material particles given in Section 8.1.
For a photon the left-hand side of eqn(8.1) and the equivalent of eqn (8.7) is  for light rays travelling in the equatorial plane.
The approximate solution of this equation, when the small term on the right-hand side is neglected, is  where b and α are constants of integration.
This is the equation of a straight line with distance b of closest approach to the Sun.
Usually b is called the impact parameter.
A simple rotation of the axis defining  can be used to eliminate α (see Fig 8.3):.
Then, following the approach of Section 8.1, we substitute this value for µ on the right-hand side of (8.10) to give .
Equation (8.120 has a particular integral  and its full solution is   .
At distant points  and eqn (8.13) becomes .
Also cos  at distant points; therefore the  term can be omitted giving .
As a result φ tends asymptotically to  in one direction and to  in the other.
This makes the total deflection  which for light just grazing the Sun's limb () is 1.750 arcsec.
At any larger impact parameter b, the deflection  is scaled down by .
This prediction of GR is confirmed by both the optical and radio measurements discussed in Chapter 2.
If the same calculation is made taking into account only the time distortion implied by the equivalence principle, the resultant deviation is only half as large.
If the contribution of frame and time  distortion are to be separated explicitly, the calculation of the deflection of light becomes more involved.
This instructive calculation is presented in Appendix G.
8.3 Radar echo delays
Along the path of a light ray travelling in the equatorial plane in Schwarzschild space eqn (8.1) reduces to  where Z is .
The tangential and radial coordinate velocities are obtained by setting dr and dφ to zero in turn.
Then  showing that as light approaches the origin its coordinate velocity falls.
The delays in travel time of radar reflections from the planets have been measured by Shapiro et al.(1971) as the planets pass behind the Sun (i.e. at superior conjunction).
Figure 8.4 shows a radar beam travelling from Earth (E) to Venus (V) and passing a distance b from the sun.
Using eqns (8.3) and (8.4) we can eliminate φ from eqn (8.15): where W is a constant of motion.
Then eqn (8.15) becomes .
At the point nearest to the Sun,, so that this equation reduces to    With this value substituted for W in the previous equation we have .
Integrating eqn (8.16) gives the travel time from Earth to N as .
The integrand can be expanded to first order in :.
The first component of tE is the journey time in flat space–time; hence the excess time taken is .
There is a similar expression for the time delay from N to Venus.
Adding this in and multiplying by a factor of 2 produces the delay for the round trip Earth Venus-Earth:.
A round trip to Venus requires 1300 s at superior conjunction while the delay predicted with eqn (8.17) is only 220µs.
Figure 8.5 shows measurements of over 600 days of the radar time delay for reflections from Venus (Shapiro et al.1971) using a radio-telescope at the Haystack Observatory, Massachusetts, at 7.84 GHz and one at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, at 430 MHz.
The excess time delay is the difference between the observed travel time and that calculated in flat space time for the observed orbits of Venus and the earth.
The solid curve in Fig. 8.5 is the GR prediction and fits the changing delay as Venus moves through superior conjunction extremely well.
One experimental difficulty is that the solar corona has a finite refractive index (varying as 1/ (frequency)2 ) and the effect of the corona is to increase the delay.
A correction for this effect has already been included in the comparison made in Fig. 8.5.
A second difficulty lies in the uncertainty in our knowledge of the topography of Venus; the precision is only ± 1500 m which leads to an uncertainty of 10 µs in timing.
Both these difficulties were overcome in a later experiment (Reasenberg et al.1979) to measure the time delay for reflections from Mars over a period of 14 months.
First of all the radar signal was received and retransmitted by the Viking Lander sitting on the Martian surface.
This eliminated the uncertainty due to topography.
Secondly, the effect of the solar corona was determined by studying the delay at two frequencies (2.3 and 8.4 GHz) by means of other transponders on a Viking Orbiter spacecraft in Mars orbit.
Knowing the way that the refractive index of the solar corona depends on frequency (), it was possible to determine the magnitude of the effect from the delays measured at the two frequencies.
Timing uncertainties were reduced to below about 0.1 µs.
The ratio found between the delay observed and the delay expected according to the general theory was 1.000 ± 0.002, which is another clear success for Einstein's theory.
8.4 An overall test in the solar system
A recent study by Hellings (1984) goes beyond the test of separate GR predictions in isolation.
He describes how a large body of data concerning planetary motion has been used to make an overall test.
For this test a parametrization of the metric is chosen which is general enough to include  deviations from Newtonian mechanics which are wider than general relativistic effects (this post-Newtonian parametrization has also been applied to analysing individual effects).
The overall fit tests how unique the explanation provided by GR for the observed departures from classical behaviour may be.
The data sample contained the following:
(1) 44000 measurements of transits across the meridian (at Washington) of the Sun, Moon and planets (accuracy ± 1 arcsec);
(2) 3000 laser measurements to a corner-cube reflector placed on the Moon by Apollo astronauts (accuracy ±0.1 m);
(3) 3000 radar range measurements to Venus and Mercury (±1 km) and to Mars (part ± 100 m; part ± 7 m);
Orbits were fitted to this data set using a metric with  for isotropic coordinates.
w k is the velocity of the Earth relative to a preferred frame defined by the cosmic background radiation (see Chapter 11).
In GR , β, and γ would be exactly 0, 1, and 1 respectively.
Hellings' fit yielded  and  which confirms the unique consistency of GR with measurements in the solar system.
The reader can refer to Will (1981) for more details concerning the post-Newtonian parametrization of solar system data.
8.5 The discovery of gravitational lenses
Einstein pointed out that if a galaxy lay between the Earth and a distant source of light, the light would be focused by the gravitational field of the galaxy.
Two or more images would then be seen, with cases of high symmetry producing a ring image.
Recent studies of quasars have identified multiple images produced in this way.
Quasars are very luminous sources of small angular size which were first discovered with radio-telescopes.
Their optical spectra show large red shifts z, where   being the wavelength of a spectral line from a source on Earth and  the wavelength of the same line observed in the quasar spectrum.
This shift is  proportional to the distance d from Earth: where H is the Hubble constant and is a measure of the rate of expansion of the Universe.
At present,, and has probably fallen since the creation of the Universe (see Chapter 11).
Quasars have red shifts ranging up to 4.5, making them the most distant distinct sources so far detected.
Quasars are widely believed to be the cores of young galaxies.
Several pairs of quasars have been detected which have virtually identical red shifts and are separated by small angular intervals: these pairs are now interpreted as twin images of a single quasar.
One case reported by Surdej et al.(1987) provides unequivocal evidence for this interpretation.
The quasar pair UM673A and UM673B both have red shifts of 2.72 and are separated by 2.2 arcsec.
Figure 8.6 shows the spectra of UM673A and UM673B; these are evidently identical in all features, with one being somewhat brighter.
The red shifts of these spectra give values of zc which differ by only .
It seems inescapable that two images of a single quasar have been observed.
Many similarly convincing examples have been reported recently.
The experimental evidence of gravitational lensing is strong qualitative evidence that GR applies over the whole of the Universe and not just locally in our solar system.
8.6 PSR 1913 + 16
The pulsar PSR 1913 + 16 is one member of a binary pair located 5 kpc from the Earth in the constellation Aquila.
Both the pulsar and its companion have masses close to  and move in tight orbits which would almost fit inside the Sun (is one solar mass).
For such a configuration the parameter  is large, and therefore general relativistic effects are expected to be important.
Indeed precision measurements of three general relativistic effects have been possible: namely, the orbital precession, the gravitational red shift, and the decay of the orbits due to gravitational radiation.
It is remarkable that such detailed information can be extracted for such a remote system.
This information is only retrievable because nature has provided an extremely precise clock on one star, namely the pulsar itself.
Pulsars are compact stars a few kilometres in diameter with masses around .
They are the final active phase in the lives of many intermediate mass stars: the core has by then contracted to a neutron star and in the same process the outer layers of the star have rebounded as a supernova explosion.
Contraction leads to a compression of the magnetic field which can then attain very high values ().
The pulsar is also spinning rapidly with a period between I ms and a few seconds, but its magnetic dipole axis is not aligned with the spin axis.
By some plasma mechanism intense coherent beams of radiation are produced along the magnetic axis; these beams swing round like searchlights as the neutron star rotates.
A beam from a favourably located pulsar can illuminate the Earth once per cycle and this behaviour is detected, usually with radio-telescopes, as pulses of radiation at regular intervals.
The stability of isolated pulsars rivals that of atomic clocks; for example PSR 1937+21 has a period P of 1.5578 ms with a rate of change of only .
It is this property of long-term frequency stability that makes precision measurements on general relativistic effects possible in the case of PSR 1913+16.
PSR 1913+ 16 was discovered by Hulse and Taylor (1975) using the 305 m radio-telescope at Arecibo.
The signal is a regular train of radio-frequency pulses with a spacing between pulses of 59 ms.
Hulse and Taylor found that the period changed by as much as 80 µs with a 7.75 h cycle, which is uncharacteristic behaviour for a pulsar.
They deduced that the pulsar must be in orbit round a companion with the result that the pulse frequency was being Doppler shifted by the pulsar's motion in orbit.
This fixes the orbital period to be 7.75 hs.
Unless the companion is vastly more massive than the Sun, this also indicates that the stars have small orbits.
Neither optical nor radio signals have been detected from the companion, and so it is also likely to be a compact star.
However, it cannot be very much lighter than the pulsar, otherwise the pulsar motion would not produce such a large Doppler shift.
Figure 8.7(a) shows the variation of the line-of-sight velocity of PSR 1913 +   16 over a complete orbit at three different epochs.
At epoch 1974.8 the curve is symmetric about the mid-point; hence the orbit must be symmetric with respect to the line of sight n.
The inferred orientation of the orbit is shown in Figs. 8.8(a) and 8.8(b) with the major axis AP lying perpendicular to n and the orbital plane tilted with respect to n.
O is the centre of mass of the binary.
The portion of its orbit over which the pulsar approaches the Earth (negative radial velocity) is indicated by heavier lines in Fig. 8.8(b).
Corresponding points on Figs. 8.7(a) and 8.8(b) are labelled by the same letter (P, N, A, and N').
Another simple deduction from Fig. 8.7(a) is that the orbit is quite eccentric; had the orbit been circular, the velocity curve would be sinusoidal with a mean radial velocity of zero.
In summary the binary consists of two compact stars of not dissimilar mass moving in tight eccentric orbits.
Reference back to Section 8.1 reminds us that these conditions will maximize the general relativistic precession of the pulsar's orbit.
The angular velocity of precession of the periastron (point of nearest approach of the pulsar and its companion) is given by eqn (8.9): where a is the semi-major axis length, e is the eccentricity, τ. is the orbital period, and M is the mass of the companion.
Comparing the pulsar orbit with the orbit of Mercury; a,, and τ are now all smaller, and so the precession ought to be much more rapid for PSR 1913+ 16.
The effect is plain to see in the way that the velocity curves change with time in Fig. 8.7(a).
By the epoch 1981.1 the symmetry seen at 1974.8 is lost, which indicates that the orbit has turned substantially.
Figure 8.8(c) shows its orientation at epoch 1984.5, with a periastron advance of over 40° since 1974.8.
Pulse arrival times have been recorded by Taylor and his colleagues over extended periods during the last 15 years.
The accuracy with which the pulses can be timed is such that the phase (Fig. 8.7(b)) can be carried across gaps in the data with an accuracy to better than 20 µs; that is to better than .
Weissberg and Taylor (1984) have summarized the results of a full analysis of the data to that time.
A simplified account will be given here.
More details can be obtained from Shapiro and Teukolsky (1983).
In the Newtonian approximation the rate  at which the radius vector (from O to the pulsar) marks out the area of the orbit is a constant (see Fig. 8.8(b)).
At apastron (A), when the stars are furthest apart, where  v a is the pulsar velocity and a (1 + e) its distance from O. Similarly at periastron (P) Taking the ratio of the last two equations, we obtain .
Measurements of the Doppler shift at periastron and apastron only give the line of sight components of vp and va.
However, their ratio is exactly Vp/Va, so that the measured ratio yields the eccentricity.
Measurement of all pulse arrival times makes it possible to calculate the change in pulse delay due to the change in the distance of PSR 1913 + 16 from Earth.
This delay is shown in Fig. 8.7(b) and reveals that the orbit is about 4 light-seconds across.
The path difference across the orbit in Fig.8.8(a) is (NN') sin i or a(le2)l/2 sin i.e. is already determined, and so the delay measurements yield a sin i.
Thus far the full analysis gives .
Now, applying Kepler's third law to the pulsar orbit, we obtain  where a' is the semi-major axis of the partner's orbit and M' is its mass; M is the pulsar mass.
Also we have  which can be used to replace  in the previous equation: Multiplying both sides by sin 3 i gives  which is a quantity known to astronomers as the mass function.
Equation (8.18) shows that the measurements of τ: and a sin i determine one function of the three physically interesting quantities M, M, and sin i.
The next step in the analysis is to exploit a second general relativistic effect.
Note that the orbit is only as large as the Sun's diameter and in addition the separation r of the stars varies by a factor  over any orbit.
There should therefore be a significant and fluctuating gravitational red shift of the pulsar period P: which numerically has an amplitude of order .
In addition the pulsar velocity v is so large that the time dilation of SR must be taken into account.
When this is done the last equation becomes .
From Fig.8.7(a) the variation of v/c over one orbit is seen to have an amplitude of order 10 -3 , and so the SR time dilation of the period is also of order 10 -6 .
Together the SR and GR effects should lead to a time delay variation of amplitude of about 4 ms over one orbit.
This expectation is confirmed: the purely Newtonian analysis leaves an unexplained residual cyclic variation in the delay of the expected magnitude.
Here then is confirmation of the gravitational red shift in a  system 5 kpc from Earth.
In the full analysis the measurements of a sin i, τ φ, and the gravitational red shift suffice to determine M, M, a, and sin i uniquely.
The results of this analysis are .
It is worth emphasizing that a fit is made to pulse measurements extending over more than a decade, i.e. over 3 x 10 8 s, with an accuracy to 10 7minus4 S or better!
The results, which are in excellent agreement with GR, lend considerable weight to the argument that Einstein's theory applies universally and not just locally.
A potential complication of the analysis could have come from the influence of the partner on the pulsar, had it been comparable with our Sun in size as well as in mass.
Intense searches have revealed no optical or other signal from the partner, nor does it eclipse the quasar.
It is therefore another compact star, perhaps even a pulsar.
The full analysis produces one further surprise.
When the orbital period is plotted as a function of time it shows a steady decrease:.
This is small but exceedingly well measured.
According to Newtonian mechanics the orbital decay for an isolated binary consisting of compact stars is expected to be immeasurably small.
In contrast, GR predicts that any such binary should radiate energy continuously in the form of gravitational waves.
The predicted energy flux of gravitational radiation (calculated in Chapter 10) leads to a decay rate for the orbit of PSR 1913 + 16 of .
The excellent agreement between the predicted and observed orbital decay rates has a double significance.
It offers further confirmation for GR outside the solar system and it provides the first evidence, albeit indirect, for gravitational radiation.
This will be discussed further in Chapter 10.
9 Black holes
The general theory of relativity provides a very precise and well-tested description of space–time within the solar system a region, however, where space–time is nearly flat, with the parameter  reaching a value of only 10 -5 at the Sun's surface.
At the opposite end of the scale, when  approaches unity, general relativistic effects are dominant.
Such a regime may hold at the centre of galaxies or close to collapsed stars.
Because the strong curvature isolates these regions from the rest of the Universe it is not possible to observe them directly.
The Rev. J. Michell in 1784 was the first to notice the implications of the gravitational potential GM/r becoming numerically large (Michell 1784).
We write the energy condition for a body of mass m starting with velocity v to escape to infinity from the surface of a star of mass M and radius r.
It requires the initial kinetic energy to exceed the gravitational binding energy:.
Escape is only possible for velocities greater than .
As the radius of the star is reduced the escape velocity increases until eventually it reaches the velocity of light.
At this state the radius is
Michell argued that not even light would be able to escape from any more compact star, and that such a star would become invisible.
At the surface of radius r the term () in the Schwarzschild metric becomes zero; the curvature of space–time is so severe that we can only hope to give a consistent account of conditions using GR.
For light travelling radially in a region described by the Schwarzschild metric, eqn (4.10), with , becomes   Then if a star shrinks to a radius less than r the time taken for light to emerge from the spherical surface at r becomes infinite, which confirms Michell's conjecture.
However long an observer outside the radius r waits he will never receive any light emitted from a source inside the radius rO.
For external observers this surface constitutes what is called an event horizon.
The radius  is known as the Schwarzschild radius of the star.
Therefore any star that shrinks within its Schwarzschild radius becomes invisible and is then described as a black hole.
The simplest (Schwarzschild) black holes have no angular momentum or charge.
In Section 9.1 the space–time structure of Schwarzschild black holes is investigated, and the orbits for massive bodies circulating around them are calculated.
The properties of black holes possessing some angular momentum are discussed briefly in Section 9.2.
A paradoxical property of black holes is that they can radiate through a quantum field effect discovered by Hawking (1974).
This Hawking radiation is discussed in Section 9.3.
A star that is 1.4 times heavier than our Sun has a Schwarzschild radius of only 2 km, and if such a star were to shrink to this size it would attain a mean density of , far beyond the density of nuclei.
It seems difficult to imagine how this could come about.
However, Chandrasekhar (1931) deduced that the gravitational self-attraction of a sufficiently heavy star () leads inevitably to its collapse to a point.
Other physical processes can only check this collapse temporarily.
This analysis is reviewed in Section 9.4.
The nature of black holes makes them difficult to detect; all we may ever have is indirect evidence for their existence.
However, the available evidence that accretion onto a black hole powers the X-ray source Cygnus X-1 is compelling, and this case will be presented in Section 9.5.
9.1 The space–time structure
The event horizon at the radius  is a fundamental feature of a black hole.
Electromagnetic radiation originating within the horizon can never escape, so that space–time inside the horizon is effectively isolated from the rest of the Universe.
In order to obtain a first idea of how space–time behaves across the horizon, consider an instrumented space probe falling along a radial path into a black hole.
This black hole is taken to be a neutral non-rotating black hole (Schwarzschild black hole).
Then space–time outside the parent body as it collapses to a point is described by the Schwarzschild metric: this region includes all space–time outside the horizon and all spacetime down to the surface of the parent body inside the horizon.
According to Chandrasekhar's analysis the parent star collapses completely to zero radius, and we shall generally take this to be the case.
Equation (8.6) is the appropriate orbital equation.
If the probe moves along a radius with , then   For simplicity it can be imagined that the probe would have been be at rest if it had started at an infinite distance from the hole; then the kinetic energy parameter T vanishes and the equation reduces further to  where, as usual,.
Taking the negative sign for travel inward and then integrating gives  where  is the proper time at which the probe reaches the centre (r = 0).
This path is plotted in Fig. 9.1 as the solid curve.
What is important to note is that the proper time τ as recorded by an on-board clock would change smoothly on crossing the horizon.
Once across the horizon the probe soon reaches the centre of the hole; in the case of a hole of 10 M, 3 this interval  is .
In practice instruments could not survive such a journey; they would be torn apart by the increasing gravitational field gradients.
Now consider how the same journey appears to a distant observer.
The coordinate time t measured by this remote observer is related to the proper time through eqn (8.3):.
Imposing the initial conditions, with the probe at rest and remote from the black hole, gives K = 1.
Thus .
Equation (9.1) can now be used to replace dτ: in eqn (9.3); we have  .
Integration for the inward journey yields .
At large distances from the back hole this reduces to .
By choosing t suitably it is possible to arrange that t and τ are equal at some large distance R. This choice is .
From eqn (9.4) it is quite clear that as r tends toward rO then t tends to infinity.
The world line described by eqn (9.4) is shown as the broken line in Fig. 9.1.
The very different behaviour of coordinate time t and the proper time τ when the probe approaches and crosses the horizon illustrates vividly how spacetime curvature makes it impossible to cover all space–time with one set of Cartesian coordinates.
If the probe emits signals at constant frequency (using, for example, an on-board quartz crystal oscillator), then, as it approaches the horizon, the photons travelling to the distant observer become less frequent and are increasingly red shifted.
Both effects diminish the energy received so that eventually the signals are undetectable.
By calculating the arrival time of photons reaching the distant observer it is possible to show that the energy in the signal fades away quickly.
The photons in question follow radial paths for which the time elapsed between emission and detection is  where the probe is at radius r and the observer at radius R. As far as the observer is concerned the arrival time T is measured relative to some fixed event, which can be the departure of the probe.
This time interval is the sum of the times given by eqn (9.4) and (9.5).
The expressions simplify a good deal once it is noted that the most significant contributions come from terms containing  which are important when the probe passes across the region where .
Firstly from eqn (9.4.) where terms like  and  have been treated as negligible compared with .
Next from eqn (9.5).
Thus the total elapsed time is .
Now the energy L(T) received per unit time contains a factor  due to the increase in time interval between photons and another factor  due to their red shift.
Thus .
Using eqn (9.6) this becomes .
In the case of a star of mass  the time constant  is of the order , which means that when the signals from the probe begin to fade they do so quickly.
This analysis applies equally well to a star in the act of collapsing through its horizon: it grows redder and fades on a time-scale of 
The critical difference between space–time inside and outside the horizon lies in the sign reversal of the metric coefficients  at the surface .
In tabular form we have  Therefore if a small change in t is made at constant radius inside the horizon , This is opposite in sign to the effect of a similar small change in t outside the horizon, namely 
Inside the horizon a separation in coordinate time has become space-like .
Similar considerations show that inside the horizon a separation in radial coordinate only has become time-like .
The curvature is so intense that if we insist in using coordinates appropriate to distant flat space — time, then we find that space and time inside the horizon interchange the properties normally associated with them.
This has many significant consequences.
One is that if the coordinate r is held fixed for any length of time the interval  is negative and space-like.
This would require a massive body taking such a path to follow a space-like geodesic.
Such a situation is logically impossible, and therefore static equilibrium inside the horizon must be impossible.
Viewed from inside the horizon the external universe would appear equally strange.
It is worth remembering here that space time as seen from free fall would locally be a Minkowski space.
However, the region over which this Minkowski frame matches actual space time would be small because of the intense curvature and would become smaller as the centre of the black hole is approached.
The absence of any indication in the world line of the on-board clock that it is crossing the horizon was illustrated in Fig.9.1 and shows that the horizon is not a physical singularity; rather, it is a mathematical singularity.
What then is the import of the mathematical singularity with g, diverging to infinity as r goes to r?
The mathematical singularity arises because the set of coordinates imposed everywhere is best suited to regions of small curvature.
A set of coordinates more appropriate to the locale of the black hole was invented by Eddington (1924) and rediscovered by Finkelstein (1958); the time coordinate t is replaced by such that and .
In terms of this new time coordinate the Schwarzschild metric becomes .
The metric coefficients of eqn (9.7) are no longer mathematically singular at the horizon.
We shall show next that Eddington's coordinates (also called  Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates) provide the basis for a clearer physical understanding of space time structure close to the black hole, although such coordinates would be a strange choice in a region remote from the black hole.
The radial path of a light ray in these new coordinates is  which has two solutions:.
These solutions describe the paths of ingoing and outgoing rays respectively, and in the absence of the black hole would become .
Light cones constructed according to eqn (9.8) are drawn in Fig.9.2 at various points on the trajectory of a source falling into a black hole.
The maximum inward component of the velocity of light is c throughout, while the maximum outward component varies with the radial distance.
When the source is far from the horizon  for light directed outwards.
Then as the source  approaches the horizon  increases until, at the horizon, it points along the time axis; the maximum outward component of velocity of light therefore falls to zero at the horizon.
When the source goes inside the horizon  becomes negative for ‘outgoing’ as well as ingoing rays so that the whole light cone is tilted inward.
Although the velocity of light remains equal to c the future lies inward.
This also means that once the horizon is crossed the source will inevitably head toward the centre of the black hole.
However powerful the rocket power available may be, the probe's velocity vector must lie inside the light cone, and this seals its fate.
There exists an equally valid alternative choice for Eddington coordinates with .
With this second choice for eqn (9.8) is replaced by solutions Now the light cone of a source within the horizon tilts so that it points outward.
The physical situation is that of a ‘white’ hole ejecting material from the singularity at r = 0 into space–time.
Gravitational collapse may create a black hole, but there is no physical process to generate its converse, the ‘white’ hole, although mathematically the situations are on an equal footing.
The alternative coordinate choices show that space–time described by the Schwarzschild metric has many subtle properties.
These were discussed further in a short seminal article by Kruskal (1960) and can be studied in the book by Misner, Thorne, and Wheeler (1972).
Conditions at the centre of the black hole (r = O) cannot be described in any sensible manner as yet.
The theory of general relativity predicts an infinite curvature, but whether such a physical singularity can really occur is not known.
It is possible that quantum effects inhibit the formation of physical singularities (see Chapter 12).
The analysis of stable orbits developed in Chapter 8 can also be applied when the parent body is a Schwarzschild black hole.
Combining eqns (8.4) and (8.5) to eliminate  gives  where E is a constant of motion equivalent to the classical energy, and the angular momentum J per unit mass is another constant of motion.
Rearrangement of the above equation gives   which is the one-dimensional energy equation for radial motion.
In eqn (9.9) the final term is an equivalent potential energy squared:.
This function is drawn in Fig.9.3.
At energies between E 1 and E 2 bound elliptic orbits are possible.
For example, at an energy E, the orbit has a semi-major axis of length r B and a semi-minor axis of length r A .
When the energy is exactly E 1 or E 2 the orbits are circular of radii r 1 and r 2 respectively, but only the orbit at radius r 1 is stable.
r 1 and r 2 are the radii at which  where .
r 2 is the smaller root and r 2 is the larger root.
The radius of the smallest stable circular orbit is found by taking the factor under the square root sign to be zero:.
Then .
The energy of this smallest stable circular orbit is given by eqn (9.9) as .
Therefore the binding energy amounts to a fraction  or 5.72 per cent of the rest mass energy.
This quantity is extremely important.
It is the   energy release when material accreted around a black hole spirals into the stable orbit with lowest energy.
By comparison the maximum energy release in thermonuclear fusion when hydrogen burns to 56 Fe is only 0.9 per cent of the rest mass energy.
Gravitational energy release is therefore potentially the most important energy source in stellar processes.
When a body orbits a rotating black hole the gravitational energy release can go much higher, reaching 42 per cent of the rest mass energy in favourable cases.
9.2 Rotating black holes
Anyone outside a black hole cannot follow what happens to material once it crosses the horizon.
This raises the question of whether it is possible to make any distinction between black holes, beyond differences in mass.
Hawking (1972) and others have proved rigorously that a full description of any black hole requires just three parameters; these are the total mass M, the total charge Q, and the total angular momentum or spin J of the black hole.
In a neat phrase black holes are said to ‘have no hair’, which means that they have no detailed features.
As far as we know, matter on the large scale, and in particular stellar matter, appears to be nearly neutral.
Therefore only neutral rotating black holes are considered here.
The space–time around such a star is described by the Kerr metric.
There are two important interfaces around a Kerr black hole.
The first is the event horizon which is smaller than in the case of a non-rotating black hole; the radius is  where .
The larger the angular momentum J of the star, the smaller the radius of the horizon becomes.
In the limit that J/Mc exceeds r /2 the horizon would vanish and it would be possible to see the physical singularity at the centre of the black hole.
What precisely would happen in the case of such a ‘naked’ singularity is not clear.
Penrose has suggested that there is some physical principle (‘cosmic censorship’) which guarantees that all singularities lie safely within horizons.
The second important surface defines a region outside the event horizon from which escape is possible but within which static equilibrium cannot be maintained.
Any material in this intermediate region, which is known as the ergosphere, will rotate in the same sense as the black hole.
The outer surface of the ergosphere is in fact a spheroid of revolution with a radial coordinate r+ which is dependent on the polar angle θ with respect to the axis of rotation: At a radius r+ (θ) it is just possible to remain at rest.
This surface touches the event horizon at the poles () which is of course exactly where the effect of rotation vanishes.
Penrose (1969) suggested a technique to extract energy from a rotating black hole.
In one form this involves scattering radiation from the ergosphere; some energy from the rotation of the black hole is then transferred to the scattered radiation.
The arguments given above when taken together seem to lead to a contradiction.
How is it, one may ask, that the electrostatic field due to the charge on the black hole penetrates through the horizon?
After all it is well known that every type of electromagnetic effect is carried by photons, and we have seen that photons cannot escape from within a black hole.
The answer to this question takes the discussion deep into the realm of quantum field theory.
Usually we picture photons as transversely polarized; however, photons can equally well be polarized in the time direction or longitudinally along their direction of motion.
When studying the propagation of electromagnetic waves (radiation) the effects of the ‘longitudinal’ and ‘time’polarized photons cancel so that they can be ignored.
However, they contribute to the electrostatic field and are not restrained by the horizon.
Hence the charge within a black hole can exert an electrostatic field outside it.
A similar view needs to be taken of the external gravitational field of the black hole if this is carried by massless field particles (gravitons) analogous to photons.
9.3 Hawking radiation
In 1974 Hawking made the astonishing discovery  that black holes, previously regarded simply as absorbers of radiation, do in fact themselves radiate.
This Hawking radiation has its origin in a quantum effect hitherto neglected in the previous discussion of black holes, namely that the vacuum is in a state of constant activity because of the creation and subsequent annihilation of particle-anti-particle pairs.
For example a pair of photons can be created close to the black hole with four momenta (pc, p) and (pc, p).
The net four-momentum is zero, but the negative energy photon violates the requirement that real photons have positive energy:.
According to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle this ‘virtual’ photon can only exist for a time .
For some directions of emission the negative energy photon will cross the horizon.
Once across the horizon and inside the black hole the space-like components of four-vectors become time-like, and vice versa.
Thus the photon's negative energy converts to an acceptable spatial momentum and its momentum converts to an acceptable positive energy.
Its lifetime is no longer restricted and so it travels quite freely within the black hole.
The positive energy partner, which is a normal photon, travels freely outward, and such outgoing photons make up the Hawking radiation.
A simple estimate of the temperature of this radiation can be obtained as follows, again using the uncertainty principle.
The position of a photon emitted from the surface of the black hole is uncertain to .
Accordingly the uncertainty in the photon momentum is .
This momentum can be expressed in terms of a thermal energy kT at temperature T where k is the Boltzmann constant:.
Combining the last two equations gives .
Thus 
This result can be compared with the exact expression obtained by Hawking.
He has shown that a black hole of mass M radiates like a black body at a temperature  which only differs by a factor of 4π from the temperature deduced above.
Putting in numbers we have .
The rate at which a black hole loses energy by Hawking radiation is  where σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant.
Small black holes therefore have higher temperatures and radiate their energy more rapidly than larger black holes.
The lifetime of a black hole is approximately given by .
Thus any black hole of one solar mass would not have had time to evaporate since the origin of the Universe; however, very small black holes could have formed early in the life of the Universe and subsequently evaporated.
9.4 The formation of black holes
Two processes seem likely to lead to the formation of black holes.
First, a star with a mass of roughly  will end its cycle of thermonuclear burning with an iron core which is massive enough to collapse under its own gravitational self-attraction.
Second, the stars at the centre of galaxies may coalesce to form massive stars whose end product would be a super-massive black hole of mass .
Experimental evidence on both processes is patchy, but there is at least one impeccable candidate for a black hole formed by the first mechanism, namely Cygnus X-1.
Only the first mechanism will be discussed in detail.
A few comments will be made first about the life cycle of a star of mass roughly 20 ,.
Stars are initially formed from gas, mostly hydrogen, and contract under their own gravitational attraction.
Eventually the internal pressure and temperature rise sufficiently for thermonuclear fusion to begin.
The energy thus released sustains the star against collapse.
Hydrogen is converted to helium, but once the core is completely converted further contraction takes place.
This again raises the temperature and pressure, until the thermonuclear burning of helium to carbon is ignited.
Subsequent stages of burning finally terminate with the star having an iron core.
Iron nuclei have the largest binding energy per nucleon; hence neither fission nor fusion can release further energy.
Burning at earlier stages continues in shells around the core, like the layers of an onion.
By then several million years have elapsed since the birth of the star and its iron core contains several solar masses and has a density of about  and a temperature of about 109 K. Further collapse is inhibited by the electron degeneracy pressure: this pressure is the direct consequence of the Pauli principle requirement that two electrons cannot occupy the same quantum state.
However, Chandrasekhar (1931) showed that the degeneracy pressure is inadequate to resist collapse if the core mass exceeds 1.4 ,.
The argument can be understood as follows.
Suppose that a stellar core of mass M and radius R contains N electrons; their average spacing is thus .
The uncertainty in the individual electron momentum must be at least.
Therefore if nearby electrons are to be in distinct quantum states their momenta must differ by at least p.
This momentum is a measure of the average electron momentum if the gas of electrons is in its lowest energy state, i.e. it is degenerate.
When the electrons are moving relativistically their individual energies are  while if their motion is non-relativistic their individual energies are .
The gravitational energy of the core is due almost entirely to nucleons of mass m n .
Therefore, assuming one nucleon per electron, the gravitational energy per electron is .
It is now easy to determine the degeneracy pressure due to electrons.
The first law of thermodynamics gives for adiabatic contraction .
Calculating dE/dR from eqn (9.18) we see that, for relativistic electrons, the degeneracy pressure acting outwards is  where p is the density of the core.
However, using eqn (9.19) for non-relativistic electrons the degeneracy pressure acting outwards is .
Finally, using eqn (9.20) to calculate dE/dR we find that the gravitational pressure inwards is .
Equations (9.21),(9.22), and (9.23) allow us to  contrast two regimes.
In a core with low density the distinguishable electron quantum states are closely spaced in a momentum so that the degenerate electron gas is non-relativistic.
Therefore eqn (9.22) holds, and because P NR increases more rapidly with density than P G it is evident that at large enough density the pressures would reach equilibrium; the star would then stop shrinking.
However, if the core mass is made larger, a condition is reached where the density and temperature are so large that the degenerate electron gas becomes relativistic.
The electron gas is now described by eqn (9.21) which is a ‘softer’ equation of state.
Contraction gives similar changes in P R and P G because they now both vary as .
Consequently once equilibrium is lost the contraction goes on indefinitely.
The equilibrium state has .
Using equations (9.18) and (9.20) we obtain  or .
Equilibrium against collapse can only be maintained if the number of electrons (and hence nucleons) is less than .
The mass of a core at this limit of stability is .
Heavier cores continue to collapse with consequent rises in pressure and temperature.
Then, when the mean electron energy reaches about 1 MeV, it is possible for electrons to initiate neutronization reactions such as which requires a threshold energy of 3.7 MeV.
Neutronization is swift, taking about 1 s, and is accompanied by further core collapse.
When the pressure reaches about , the nucleons are mostly free neutrons.
The closely packed neutrons form a degenerate gas and, being fermions, they can also exert a degeneracy pressure.
A repetition of the analysis just given shows that stellar cores of mass less than M(Chandrasekhar) are stable against further collapse and form neutron stars.
Heavier cores inexorably collapse to form black holes.
The critical core size can be estimated by making the approximation that the fermions of mass mf are just becoming relativistic:.
Substituting this value for E R in eqn (9.18) gives;.
Taking  gives an estimate for the limiting size of an iron star (white dwarf) as 5000 km.
Taking  gives an estimate of 3 km for the limiting size of a neutron star.
This is about a factor of 3 smaller than current best estimates of the neutron star radius.
Thus far the history of the core has been followed.
The most spectacular external manifestation of the process occurs when the collapse is checked by the stiffening of the core due to nuclear repulsion.
Then the imploding outer layers of the start strike the core and rebound under the shock.
These layers are ejected as a type II supernova explosion, of which SN1987a was a recent example.
Much effort has gone into refining the calculation of the limiting mass for a stable core with calculations being made in the framework of GR.
In addition the effects of changing the equation of state relating pressure p to density ρ  have been explored.
Oppenheimer and Volkoff(1939) assumed a spherically symmetric metric and a stress-energy tensor for the fluid core of the form  where , is the four-vector fluid velocity (see Section 1.2).
In free fall with Cartesian coordinates  has no off-diagonal elements and hence the fluid has no viscosity or thermal conductivity; it is an ideal fluid.
The solution of Einstein's equation in this case is the Oppenheimer-Volkoff equation: where M is the total mass given by .
In the Newtonian limit  and  so that eqn (9.24) becomes:.
Equation (9.25) can be obtained by equating the net radial pressure on a shell of thickness dr to the gravitational attraction  per unit area of the shell.
Note that pressure as well as density contribute to the gravitational term in eqn (9.24) because pressure has a dual role in GR.
It opposes collapse, but, as a component of the stress-energy tensor, it also contributes to hastening the collapse.
The effect is to reduce the maximum stable mass a little.
When rotation is taken into account the maximum stable mass is found to increase.
In this case Friedman, Ipser, and Parker (1984), using the stiffest plausible equation of state for a star, obtain a maximum stable mass of 3.5 .
A radius of 10–15 km is predicted for such stars.
It is highly relevant to ask what values have been measured for neutron star masses; do they fall in with expectation?
Only seven measurements, all on binary pulsars, have been made.
These mass measurements cluster around 1.5 with errors of about 1 .
None demonstrably exceeds the mass limit of 3.5 for neutron stars obtained by Friedman et al.
Cygnus X — 1
The observation of black holes must rely on indirect methods and hence an isolated black hole offers no prospects at all.
A proportion of the X-ray pulsars, which are near relations of the black holes, are members of binaries, and so it is reasonable to expect that some stellar black holes should be bound to a  visible star.
Then the likelihood for detection is quite promising, as the case of Cygnus X- 1 illustrates.
Cygnus X-1 emits X-rays and radio waves strongly with no signs of the regular time structure that marks out pulsars.
An optical star HDE 226868 is located within the 1 arcsec error box defined by the radio measurements of the position of Cygnus X-1.
This star has a spectrum that identifies it as a star of the type called blue supergiants, whose masses range from 20 to 100 .
It has been deduced from its apparent brightness that HDE 226868 lies about 2.5 kpc from the Earth.
However, blue supergiants are too cold to be the source of the X-rays.
Finally the wavelengths of the lines in the spectrum of HDE 226868 change with time following a regular cycle that repeats every 5.6 days.
An economical explanation of the features just presented is that HDE 226868 and Cygnus X-1 form a binary pair with an orbital period of 5.6 days: the time-varying spectral shift of the optical partner is then simply the Doppler shift produced by its orbital motion.
Material from the blue supergiant can be transferred as shown in Fig. 9.4 to form an accretion disc around the black hole, a process that also occurs in binaries containing neutron stars.
The accretion disc is drawn into the compact star by gravitational attraction with a large energy release (see Section 9.1).
This process easily heats the accretion disc to a temperature at which it can emit X-rays.
The motion of HDE 226868 has been analysed by techniques similar to those already described in Section 8.6 for the pulsar 1913 + 16, this time using the Doppler spectral shift of HDE 226868.
When this Doppler shift is converted to relative velocity it turns out that the velocity varies sinusoidally with time.
As noted in Section 8.6 this shows that the orbits are circular.
Suppose that the orbital radii are rx and rG for Cygnus X-1 and the blue supergiant respectively, and that the normal to the orbital plane is tilted at an angle i with respect to our line of sight.
Then the maximum velocity of HDE 226868 toward us is   where τ is the orbital period.
Measurements by Ninkov, Walker, and Yang (1987) give .
Using eqns (8.18) and (9.26) we can now determine of the mass function:.
A lower limit on the mass of Cygnus X-1 can now be obtained by setting m G to 20 and τ: to 90°; then  which is already above the upper limit (3.5 ) for the mass of a neutron star.
In fact i has to be less than 90° for the simple reason that the supergiant does not eclipse the X-ray emission from Cygnus X-1 at any part of the orbit; if τ were 90° the orbits would be seen edge-on and eclipsing would be unavoidable.
Making plausible assumptions about the size of HDE 226868, a limit can be imposed on i, and hence an improved lower limit obtained for m x .
This limit is 15 :, which makes it highly probable that Cygnus X-1 is indeed a black hole.
Two other good candidates for black holes are also X-ray binaries: LMC X-3 and A0620-00.
McClintock (1988) quotes the most probable mass values for these three cases as 16 , 9 and 9 respectively.
It is worth nothing that the X-ray emission from Cygnus X-1 is irregular and flickers on a millisecond time-scale.
This is at least consistent with the source being less than one milli-light-second (i.e. 300 km) across.
To have accumulated only a few examples of candidate black holes might sound rather a thin result.
It should be remembered, however, that among the few hundred pulsars detected only a few are binary pulsars; binary black holes may therefore form a comparably small proportion of all black holes.
Added to this the partner of the black hole must have swollen to the giant stage in order that material can be transferred rapidly enough to give an accretion disc that produces detectable numbers of X-rays.
Finally there is the complication that X-ray emissions can only be detected from above the Earth's atmosphere.
Small wonder then that there are only a few candidates!
10 Gravitational radiation
Einstein showed that the existence of gravitational radiation is a natural consequence of the general theory of relativity.
He considered small disturbances from a flat space–time, which is appropriate for the waves likely to reach Earth.
In this limit the Einstein equation reduces to a linear wave equation.
This has plane wave solutions which are transverse waves travelling with velocity c, properties that electromagnetic waves also possess.
During the passage of gravitational waves it is the structure of space–time itself which oscillates.
Putting this more precisely, the proper time taken by light to pass to and fro between two fixed points in spaces oscillates.
There is no effect at a single point, only a change in the separation of points in space.
In contrast, the electromagnetic E and B fields measured at a point oscillate when an electromagnetic wave passes.
Electromagnetic radiation from a source small compared with the wavelength is predominantly dipole in character with higher multipoles becoming progressively weaker.
For gravitational radiation the same effect is present, but because dipole radiation is forbidden by conservation laws, the dominant gravitational waves are quadrupole.
The constant  appearing in Einstein's equation can be interpreted as the force per unit area required to give space–time unit curvature, that is  for a curvature of .
Space-time is therefore an extremely stiff medium, and by the same token small-amplitude waves carry large energies.
The most energetic waves likely to be observed on Earth are those due to stellar collapse in our Galaxy.
Gravitational waves emanating from such events are predicted to produce stresses in space–time of amplitude about 10 -18 .
This represents a displacement of under one nuclear diameter in a length of 1 m.
The measurement of such a tiny strain is a challenge to which experimentalists have vigorously responded.
Two designs for detectors of gravitational radiation are discussed below.
Weber, who initiated experimental searches in 1960, used a freely suspended massive bar whose suspension is isolated from external mechanical vibrations.
A gravitational wave at the natural frequency for longitudinal oscillations of the bar would set it ringing like a tuning fork.
Any ringing would be detected by transducers (e.g. piezoelectric crystals) which are mechanically connected to the bar.
Such bar detectors are called resonant detectors.
The other class of devices are designed to detect the relative movement of freely suspended massive blocks.
If their suspensions are isolated from external disturbance the blocks will respond faithfully to the horizontal component of any incident gravitational wave.
A  preferred method for detecting the relative movement is to build a Michelson interferometer with the mirrors mounted on these freely suspended blocks.
Quadrupole radiation incident with a favourable polarization should cause the two arm lengths to expand and contract in anti-phase.
The difference between the two optical path lengths would oscillate and produce an oscillation of the interference fringe pattern, and this is what the experimentalists aim to detect.
To date there has been no direct detection of gravitational waves by either method.
The sole observation is indirect; the orbital period of the binary pulsar 1913 + 16 is measured to be slowing down at a rate which agrees well with that expected if the system is emitting gravitational radiation.
Properties of gravitational waves are treated in Section 10.1, and the effects of gravitational waves in Section 10.2.
PSR 1913 + 16 is discussed in Section 10.3.
In Section 10.4 estimates are given for the intensity of gravitational radiation on Earth from various sources; finally in Section 10.5 current detector designs, which appear capable of detecting waves from supernovae in our Galaxy, are described.
10.1 Properties of gravitational radiation
The basic equation to describe empty space–time is eqn (7.19) with the right-hand side set to zero:.
When the space–time curvature is small, a linear approximation can be made to the metric  where  is the Minkowski metric and all the components  are very much less than unity.
and  are symmetric tensors, and hence  is also a symmetric tensor.
What we shall do is solve  where only terms linear in  are retained.
The metric connections can be obtained from eqn (6.5), while noting that the differentials of  are zero:.
To first order in  we obtain with the help of eqn (7.3) excluding the products in Γ because they are of order h 2 .
Then to the same approximation Substituting this value into eqn (10. la) yields   where we have used the fact that  raises the subscripts of h.
From any solution of this equation we can generate equivalent solutions by changing coordinates; they are equivalent because the measurable tidal effects are determined by the difference in h at two places and remain the same whatever the choice of coordinates.
One simple solution which is easy to interpret is obtained by requiring that each term in the wave equation is separately zero.
Our simplification is to have .
Equation (10.3a) requires the trace to vanish and (10.3b) requires the divergence to vanish, so that any solution of eqn (10.3c) is a solution of (10.3) provided that it is traceless and its divergence vanishes.
One final requirement can be made on the coordinate choice .
The physical significance of this choice will be apparent when a solution of (10.3c) is written down.
The condition (10.3b) contains four constraints.
Equation (10.3a) plus (10.3d) impose four additional constraints when allowance is made for the symmetry of .
In general has ten independent components so that when these eight constraints are imposed there remain just two independent components of .
These emerge below as the two polarization states of eqn (10.11).
Equation (10.3c) is simply  i, e.
. Equation (10.4) is the familiar wave equation for waves with velocity c.
A plane wave solution for a wave travelling along the direction given by the unit vector n in n is  where k is the wave number.
Substitution for  in eqn (10.4) gives  so that  is light-like, and hence .
Specializing to a wave travelling along the z axis,.
Here  is the wavelength and  is the angular frequency of the wave.
These solutions must satisfy the subsidiary conditions of eqns (10.3a),(10.3b), and (10.3d).
Now .
Thus making use of eqn (10.3b) we have  which, for a wave travelling in the z(3) direction, becomes .
Equation (10.3d) then gives .
Combining the last two results, we have .
Finally we can use the fact that  is symmetric, giving .
Therefore the wave only has non-zero components along the x(l) and y(2) directions and is transverse to the direction of motion z(3).
The trace condition of eqn (10.3a) gives .
Using the symmetry of  again we also have .
It is now easy to rite  in full using eqns (10.7),(10.8), and (10.9):.
The choice of coordinates has made the wave amplitudes  both transverse and traceless; therefore the restriction on the coordinates is called the transverse-traceless gauge.
Notice that eqn (10.3d) has the effect of requiring the wave to be orthogonal to the time axis as well as to the direction of propagation in space.
The general solution of the form used in eqn (10.6) is made up of a linear combination of the two orthogonal states: and  where φ is an arbitrary
10.2 The effects of gravitational waves
Consider what happens in the plane z = 0 to two nearby bodies located at  and .
Their proper separation .
Thus applying eqn (10.11a) the proper time interval between A and B undergoes a strain of amplitude .
Thus  the amplitude of the differential (tidal) change in lengths between nearby points along the x direction.
Suppose now that  is a large distance from .
Then their proper separation will be  Using eqn (10.11a) this gives  where l is the separation before the gravitational wave arrived.
Then the change in path length .
The amplitude of this displacement is .
Therefore the strain amplitude is  which reproduces eqn (10.13) when .
Along the y direction we obtain similar results; in comparison with(10.13) the amplitude of the tidal effect along the v direction is .
Therefore test masses placed close to the origin move in the plane perpendicular to the wave direction with  for the e + state of polarization.
This motion is shown on the left of Fig. 10.1 for a set of test masses originally at rest in a circle in the xy plane: their displacements are followed over a complete cycle.
There are two orthogonal symmetry axes and so the motion is quadrupole.
The movement obtained with the orthogonal polarization state of eqn (10.11b) with  is    which can be manipulated to give  and .
A complete cycle of movement is drawn on the right of Fig. 10.1.
It is not possible to construct the e + pattern from the e x pattern or vice versa; they are orthogonal polarization states.
By analogy with electromagnetic waves the e + and e x amplitudes can be added with phase differences of  to obtain right (left) circularly polarized amplitudes.
These are .
Their effects are shown in Fig. 10.2 for the test mass arrangement described earlier.
The arrows show the sense of rotation of the patterns.
We can also draw diagrams complementary to Figs 10.1 and 10.2 which show tidal accelerations.
Just two examples are given in Fig. 10.3: for e + and e x when the phase  is zero.
Not surprisingly these force patterns resemble the pattern of magnetic field lines across the aperture of a quadrupole magnet.
A revealing difference between gravitational and electromagnetic radiation is that dipole radiation is absent in the gravitational case.
To understand why this should be we start by making a comparison between potentials: one is an electrostatic potential due to charges  at , and the other is a gravitational potential due to masses  at .
For simplicity we take the nearly Newtonian case of slowly moving masses/charges.
At a vector distance R from the centre of mass  which can be expanded if  as  where  are components of .
Similarly, the gravitational potential is    The radiation is proportional to and the second term in the expansion is responsible for dipole radiation.
In the gravitational case the dipole term contains a factor  which equals the net force, and this vanishes for an isolated system.
It is quite the opposite for a charge distribution which can easily have a non-zero oscillating electric dipole moment .
Similar considerations can be applied to ‘magnetic’ dipole radiation which is important when the charges are in rapid motion; it also vanishes identically in the gravitational case.
This makes the next term in the potential, containing the quadrupole moment of the source , the important one in generating gravitational waves.
Gravitational waves carry energy which is used to deform space–time.
Therefore eqn (10.1a) needs to be modified in the presence of such waves, even though space–time is empty: where  is the stress-energy tensor carried by the waves.
Then .
This result is equivalent to the expansion of (10.1) to second order in , namely .
Thus to a good approximation we have   This expression is evaluated in Appendix E. In the transverse traceless gauge  and the energy flow per unit area per unit time is .
It is misleading to assign energy to a point in space–time because only relative displacements are meaningful.
Furthermore it is not even possible to specify whether the energy is in the peaks or valleys of the waves.
For these reasons eqns (E.7),(E.8), and (E.9) only apply when averages are taken over several cycles and wavelengths.
This averaging is indicated by the angular brackets.
Solutions of Einstein's equation will be sought for sources that are nearly Newtonian, which means firstly that within the source the curvature and strain are small and secondly that the velocity v of the material within the source is very much less than c.
A linear approximation can be made to the metric in these circumstances.
It turns out that the intensity of gravitational radiation predicted by this linearized theory generally only differs by small numerical factors from the results of more exact calculations (Davis et al.1971).
In Appendix F the contribution due to quadrupole motion of the source is evaluated.
At a distance r from a source  where  is the transverse-traceless part of the quadrupole moment of the source (see eqn (F.3)).
Equation (F.4) is a retarded solution: gravitational disturbances propagate at a velocity c, and hence the amplitude at r at time t is determined by the source behaviour at an earlier time .
This argument will be omitted from hereon in order to simplify the presentation.
The energy flow in the gravitational waves is obtained using eqn (E.9), giving .
As before the angular brackets indicate the expectation value averaged over several cycles.
The total energy flow through a sphere at a distance r from the source is the total energy output of the source, which is also called its luminosity L. In Appendix F it is shown that   where  is the reduced quadrupole moment of the source  with ρ being the density in a volume element .
The range of integration is over the volume of the source.
In the above equation  is the Kronecker delta, with a value + I when i = j and zero otherwise.
10.3 PSR 1913+16
The pulsar PSR 1913+16 and its compact companion form a binary pair whose orbital parameters are well known, thanks to the work of Taylor and his colleagues (see Section 8.6).
It is therefore possible to calculate the quadrupole moment of this system and to infer its output of gravitational radiation.
For orientation, consider two point masses M in circular orbits at a separation 2a.
Take the centre of mass as origin and the orbit to lie in the xOy plane with the masses along the x axis at time zero.
Then the quadrupole moment has an xx component (see Question 10.1) where ο is the angular frequency.
Similarly .
Working in two dimensions (x, y) the traceless or reduced quadrupole moments are .
Thus  while .
Substituting these values into eqn (F.6) for the luminosity gives .
In order to estimate the rate at which the orbit decays we need to compare this, the rate of energy loss, with the total energy of the binary pair   Using the radial equation of motion for either star  we obtain  whence .
Now, substituting for v in the expression for total energy and then rewriting a in terms of ο gives Thus where τ is the orbital period.
Then the observable quantity, the orbital decay rate.
is .
Substituting for ο gives finally .
Press and Thorne (1972) calculated the correction required for the case of an elliptical orbit of eccentricity e; the right-hand side of eqn (10.17) is then multiplied by a factor .
Inserting the values of the orbital parameters measured by Taylor and his colleagues, given in Section 8.6, yields .
The precision of measurement of the orbital period decay rivals the precision of this prediction.
Taylor and his colleagues find    in convincing agreement with the prediction from GR.
Figure 10.4 shows the decay of the orbital period measured over more than a decade, expressed as phase-lag in seconds; the prediction from GR is indicated by the solid line.
The agreement is impressive.
This result is the first, albeit indirect, observation of gravitational radiation.
We now turn to discuss the sources of intense bursts of gravitational waves which may be detected directly on Earth in the not too distant future.
10.4 Power output of gravitational sources
The sources of gravitational radiation that experimentalists hope to detect directly in the near future are supernovae occurring in our Galaxy.
It is essential that the collapse of the stellar core is asymmetric because perfect spherically symmetric motion leaves the external Schwarzschild metric unaffected.
Put another way, such motion has no quadrupole or higher moments.
In view of the uncertainties in our knowledge of stellar processes which generate gravitational waves, calculations here are limited to order-of-magnitude estimates of the power output to be expected in a favourable case.
The first approximation is to take the quadrupole moment of a body of mass M and size R to be MR 2 .
Further, the body will be assumed to oscillate at one angular frequency ο.
Then the third differential of the reduced quadrupole moment  where v is the velocity of material inside the source.
The power output (luminosity) is given by substituting this value into eqn (F.6); it yields  .
This can be rewritten as  where the factor  and r is the Schwarzschild radius of the body.
The terms  and v/c in eqn (10.19) will approach unity for stars collapsing to a neutron star or to a black hole, and so these collapsing stars are potentially important sources of gravitational radiation provided that the collapse is sufficiently asymmetric.
In the extreme case the maximum conceivable luminosity reaches the spectacular value of L or .
At the opposite end of the scale all terrestrial sources are feeble.
A massive 1000 t steel rotor with 10 m long arms could be spun so that the tips moved at 1000 m s -1 , equalling the speed of sound in steel.
The rotor tips would then be on the point of breaking up and the mounting on the verge of shattering under the centrifugal force.
The use of eqn (10.18) shows that this monster would only radiate 10 -30 W of gravitational wave power: this rules out any laboratory equivalent of Hertz's experiment for the production and detection of gravitational waves.
A type II supernova collapse leading to a neutron star occurs on average once every 30 years in our Galaxy.
The astrophysics of such events is complicated, so that it is not possible to give more than limits on the parameters of the gravitational radiation to be expected.
A burst of frequency between 10 and 10 4 Hz is expected with a duration of several cycles and an energy release of between  and  in gravitational waves from a star core of mass M. The mass M is expected to be similar to that of the pulsars, which average around  for the few cases where measurements have been made.
The more asymmetric the collapse, the larger the gravitational energy release becomes.
Pulsars are spinning very rapidly so that some asymmetry is likely.
As a point of reference it will be assumed that for a supernova collapse the gravitational waves carry off a total energy of  in a burst of milliseconds length and at a frequency of about I kHz.
Equation (E.8) can be used to convert the energy flux in gravitational waves to the strain in space–time on Earth.
When the burst length is  the strain  requires an energy flux (recall that ).
If the burst originates from a source a distance R from the Earth in which a  total mass M is converted to gravitational radiation, we have .
Thus .
The notation used here signifies that the frequency v is measured in kHz, R is the distance in units of 10 kpc, Mc 2 is the energy in units of  and  is in ms.
Thus a type II supernova occurring at the centre of our Galaxy is expected to produce a strain  under the assumption that a mass of  is converted to gravitational radiation.
Such events occur once every 30 years on average in our Galaxy, and a good proportion are not visible optically because of intervening matter.
By extending the region of interest to include the Virgo cluster which contains about 2000 galaxies the rate rises to one every few days, a more tempting prospect.
The distance of the Virgo cluster is approximately 15 Mpc, and so the signal is reduced to  for the conversion of a mass of  to gravitational radiation.
Having discussed the parameters of the signals it is time to look at the detectors.
10.5 Detectors
The direct detection of gravitational waves requires the measurement of relative displacements and their changes with time.
First a typical interferometric detector will be described.
Figure 10.5 shows a plan view of a large Michelson interferometer in which the three blocks carrying the mirrors M, M 1 , and M 2 are freely suspended.
When gravitational radiation is incident from above with its polarization axes aligned along the two arms the lengths of these arms will expand and contract in anti-phase.
The amplitude of the change in proper path length is given by eqn (10.14) as  for a wave of amplitude h and wavelength λ, where l is the unperturbed path length.
Such changes in length cause a corresponding oscillation in the fringe pattern.
Highly monochromatic laser light is split by the mirror M to travel along the two arms.
The beams are reflected at M 1 (M 2 ), return, recombine coherently at M again, and are detected by a photosensitive device.
From the   last equation it is clear that strain is maximal if the optical paths are , which for radiation of 1 kHz would be 150 km.
Multiple passes in each arm are used to increase the effective optical path length; the scheme shown in Fig. 10.5 with the beam walking across the mirror at successive reflections is known as an optical delay line.
Detectors with arms about 20 m long have been built by groups at the Max-Planck Institut, Garching-bei-München, and at Glasgow University.
These and other groups plan to construct detectors with arms about I km long and to use about 150 passes.
The optical paths are evacuated and the suspension systems are insulated against mechanical vibration by shock absorbers.
The precision of measurement is ultimately restricted by fluctuations in the fringe pattern due to fluctuations in the number of photons detected, because these simulate the effect of optical path changes.
Suppose that the wave amplitude in one arm is A, and that in the other arm is  where  is the total path difference and  is the wavelength of the laser source.
Therefore the intensity at the detector is .
The distribution of the number of photons in the fringe pattern is .
Thus the effect of a change in  on N is given by  .
The statistical error on N is , so that the achievable precision in measuring  can be estimated by replacing dN by  in this equation and rewriting it as an expression for :.
It follows that  is smallest when  is unity, and then eqn (10.21) gives  where N is the mean intensity.
Substituting these values in the previous equation gives .
The value of depends on the laser power P, the length of time taken for each measurement , and the efficiency ε of detecting photons: where  is the angular frequency of the laser light and h is Planck's constant divided by .
Inserting this value for  in eqn (10.22) gives .
We have seen above that strain will be maximal if the path length l is .
However, the time that the light remains inside the interferometer arms is then, which means that the measurement time must be equally long or longer.
Substituting this limit for Al in eqn (10.23) gives .
Hence the minimum detectable strain, or the sensitivity, is .
An idea of how good this is can be estimated by choosing a laser power of 100 W at 500 nm, ε = 0.3, gravitational waves of frequency I kHz and  of a few milliseconds; the estimate is   This implies an optical path length of 150 km, e.g. 150 passes over arms I km long.
There is therefore a good prospect in the long term of detecting supernovae in our Galaxy or in nearby galaxies.
There are plans to improve this limit by ‘recycling’ the laser light so as to enhance the beam intensities.
It is worth noting that, although an interferometer can in principle respond to any frequency, the bandwidth is restricted in practice by the photon storage time to .
The other type of detector, the resonant bar detector, was invented by Weber (1960) and has been refined by him and others.
It consists of a freely suspended bar (antenna) which has some natural frequency v for acoustic longitudinal vibrations.
An incident burst of gravitational radiation with favourable polarization and frequency will excite the bar to oscillate and the oscillations will continue long after the burst has ended.
This ‘ringing’ can be detected by transducers connected mechanically to the bar.
The fundamental frequency for longitudinal standing waves on a bar of length l is  where v s is the speed of sound in the material.
For the aluminium alloy 5056 at low temperature  so that it requires a bar of length 3 m to resonate at I kHz, an appropriate frequency for detecting a burst from a type II supernova.
As we show next, the gravitational waves from likely sources are only detectable if the bar is cooled to liquid helium temperatures.
The energy deposited by a gravitational wave in a bar of mass M and length l is  where the mean velocity v within the bar is  for a wave of strain amplitude h and angular frequency ο.
Then .
For a type II supernova at the centre of our Galaxy  and so the energy deposited in a bar of mass 2 t and length 3 m would be .
This is to be compared with the thermal energy in any mode of oscillation at 4 K:.
On the face of it the thermal noise appears to dominate.
What
Simple resonant bar devices face a limit of sensitivity imposed by quantum theory.
Present methods, as described above, are not capable of detecting a signal which produces an energy change in the mode of vibration of less than , i.e. the energy must change by one or more phonons.
Thus .
Using eqn (10.25) this becomes .
The quantum limit on detectable strain is therefore  for a modern antenna.
The sensitivity of resonant bars is thus comparable with that of interferometers.
In the longer term ways have been proposed to bypass the quantum limit.
It has been noted that the quantum limit has its origin in the following expression of the uncertainty principle.
Conjugate quantities such as the phase and amplitude of an oscillation cannot be simultaneously measured with arbitrary precision because their operators do not commute.
However, if only one variable, such as the amplitude, is measured it can be measured with arbitrary precision.
Various ways of using this loophole are under current investigation.
To summarize, it seems that detectors which will go into continuous operation in the next few years have a strong chance of detecting a type II supernova in our Galaxy provided that the collapse is asymmetric to the degree now thought likely.