

RUSSIAN FORMALISM
Ann Jefferson
History and practitioners
The earliest beginnings of Russian Formalism can be dated from 1914 with the appearance of Viktor Shklovsky's essay on Futurist poetry, ‘The resurrection of the word’.
Its final ending, brought about by external political pressure, is marked by Shklovsky's recantation published in January 1930.
But the movement had in fact been consistently under attack since 1923 when Trotsky devoted a chapter of his Literature and Revolution to a critique of Formalism.
Formalist theory emerged from the meetings, discussions and publications of two small groups of students — the Opojaz group based in Petersburg and the Moscow Linguistic Circle.
The Muscovites were primarily linguists who were interested in extending the field of linguistics to cover poetic language, and their best known member is the distinguished linguistic theorist, Roman Jakobson.
The Opojaz group, as its full title implies (The Society for the Study of Poetic Language) consisted of students of literature who were united both by a dissatisfaction with existing forms of literary study and by a positive interest in the poetry of the Russian Futurists.
Apart from its leader Viktor Shklovsky, the Opojaz group included Boris Eikhenbaum, Osip Brik and Yury Tynyanov.
Although there are differences in emphasis in the contributions of individual Formalists, the theoretical value of their work is best understood and appreciated as a collective effort to establish a coherent theoretical basis for literary studies.
After 1930 when the concerted intellectual endeavour came to an end, the work of individual participants ceased to be of any theoretical interest.
Most of them abandoned their former preoccupations and devoted themselves instead to less controversial types of literary study, such as text exegesis (Eikhenbaum and Boris Tomashevsky).
The ideas of Russian Formalism survived, however, in the work of the Prague Linguistic Circle, one of whose founders, Roman Jakobson, had left Moscow for Czechoslovakia in 1920.
This group came into being in 1926 and disintegrated, also as a result of political events, in 1939.
Two of its most important members were Jan Mukařovský and N.S. Troubetzkoy (whose Principes de phonologie , published in 1949, was to provide the model for Lévi-Strauss's structural anthropology).
The Czechs were, like the Muscovites before them, primarily linguists, and they did not significantly alter the basic groundwork of Formalist  literary theory as it had been developed by the late 1920s.
On the whole, their work can be read as a restatement of the late Formalist position.
The importance of linguistics in Prague School literary theory will be discussed in the chapter on ‘Modern linguistics and the language of literature’.
Although historical events have conspired to seal Russian Formalism off from other intellectual developments in the twentieth century and to give it the character of an isolated and localized phenomenon, it does nevertheless have connections with a variety of more recent theoretical movements.
For example, Roman Jakobson and his Prague school colleague René Wellek have had considerable influence on literary studies through their teaching and work in the United States for a number of decades, and, although it carried no explicit theoretical creed, René Wellek's Theory of Literature (co-authored with Austin Warren and first published in 1949) was for many years the only widely available explicitly theoretical account of literary studies for Anglo-Saxon students of literature.
Second, but perhaps not so much in the form of a survival as in that of a revival, Russian Formalism had a significant part to play in the development of Parisian structuralism during the 1960s (particularly in the work of Todorov and Genette).
The structuralist desire to establish a poetics distinct from other academic disciplines, their scientific ideals, and, on a more detailed level, their work on narrative theory, all owe a considerable debt to Russian Formalism.
General theoretical principles
Russian Formalism represents one of the earliest systematic attempts to put literary studies on an independent footing, and to make the study of literature an autonomous and specific discipline.
It is therefore of enormous interest to examine the means by which it did so; for it emerged not in order to correct to revise an existing literary theory, but in order to make possible the very notion of such a thing.
One may hear echoes of this kind of project in I.A. Richards or the New Critics, but they none of them have the same degree of theoretical rigour and consistency, and they do not take the emphasis on the distinctively literary to the same degree.
The Formalists would agree with T.S.
Eliot that ‘to divert interest from the poet to the poetry is a laudable aim’(1972: 22), but that agreement is expressed in their work as a theoretical system and not just as an intellectual preference.
And although they shared I.A. Richards's impatience with the existing chaos of critical theories, and his desire for some scientific order in the study of literature, they would certainly not have endorsed his view that literary theory should be concerned with experience or with value; nor would they have approved of his recourse to neuro-physiology or psychology as a means of making literary criticism more  scientific.
The Russian Formalist solution on all these issues is far more radical than the New Critical one.
Formalist theory rigorously and systematically excludes the non-literary, so that where the Anglo-American tradition devotes much of its effort to exploring the different relations between life and art, the Russian Formalists see the two as mutual opposites.
The form that literary studies had taken during the second half of the nineteenth century, positivism, was, as we saw in the Introduction, largely based on the genetic approach; critics, or rather scholars, concentrated their energies on uncovering the sources and genesis of particular works, and the role of biography, history and history of ideas in these genetic studies obviously reduced the importance of literature itself in literary scholarship.
The study of literature had become little more than a loose aggregate of philosophy, history, psychology, aesthetics, ethnography, sociology, and so on, and the Formalists felt that any specificity it might have had had been swamped by its adjacent disciplines.
As Jakobson put it, historians of literature had become practitioners of what he called ‘homespun’ disciplines based on psychology, politics and philosophy, where literature itself could only offer secondary and defective evidence; Evgeny Onegin is likely to prove a somewhat unreliable document for the people that Osip Brik called the ‘maniacs…passionately seeking the answer to the question ‘did Pushkin smoke?’’(1977: 90).
The efforts of the Russian Formalists were directed towards justifying the independent existence of literary studies, and transforming students of literature into something more than second-rate ethnographers, historians or philosophers.
This was not a simple task, for it was not just a question of choosing one approach in preference to another, but of defining the nature of the object to be studied.
Formalism, as Eikhenbaum makes plain in his summary of its principles, was neither an aesthetic nor a methodology; it was ‘characterized only by the attempt to create an independent science of literature which studies specifically literary material’(1965: 103).
So that the first question for the Formalist ‘is not how to study literature, but what the subject matter of literary study actually is’(p. 102, my italics).
The way the theory construed its object would determine the nature of the theory itself.
If the Formalist definition of its object was going to allow for the specificity of literary studies, the Formalists regarded it as necessarily entailing the exclusion of all mimetic and expressive definitions of literature.
The ‘homespun’ view of literature had tended to see literature either as an expression of an author's personality and world-vision, or as a mimetic (that is to say, realistic) representation of the world in which he lived; or, most typically, as the mixture of both which Catherine Belsey describes as ‘expressive realism’(1980).
In  regarding the literary text as an instrument of expression or representation, the specificity of its literary qualities is likely to be overlooked.
To see a literary work as an expression of the personality of the author leads inevitably to biography and psychology.
To regard it as a picture of a given society leads in turn to history, politics or sociology.
Even the Symbolist view (which held sway in Russia in the first years of the century) that ‘art is thinking in images’ cannot be admitted, because although it acknowledges that thought in art takes a different form from conventional philosophy, it will in the end lead the study of art beyond art itself to forms of knowing and feeling, to epistemology and psychology.
An alternative view might posit some quality peculiar to literature which would justify the independent existence of literary studies, but this would reduce the scope of the object of study to a considerable degree, and result in the repetitive sifting of works in search of the one magic ingredient.
The Formalist strategy for dealing with the problem of definition not only had the virtue of ensuring that literature could not be reduced to anything else, but proved also to be immensely productive in the elaboration of every aspect of Formalist theory.
The Formalist definition of literature is a differential or oppositional one: what constitutes literature is simply its difference from other orders of facts.
Indeed the object of literary science turns out not to be an object at all, but a set of differences, and the science will consist in ‘the study of those specifics which distinguish it [i.e. literature]from any other material’(Eikhenbaum 1965: 107).
The operative concept in this differential specification is defamiliarization or making strange (ostranenie).
In his early essays on the subject, Shklovsky defines it in a very wide range of terms which, broadly speaking, add up to a view that art refreshes our sense of life and experience.
In this he perhaps sounds like a member of a Leavisite ‘reverent-openness-before-life’ school, but his concept of ostranenie already has a certain edge through being defined in opposition to the habitual.
According to Shklovsky, art defamiliarizes things that have become habitual or automatic.
Walking, for example, is an activity which as we go about in everyday life we have ceased to be aware of; but when we dance the automatically performed gestures of walking are perceived anew.
‘A dance is a walk which is felt,’ says Shklovsky; ‘even more accurately, it is a walk which is constructed to be felt’(1973a: 48).
In the case of poetry (the first preoccupation in Formalist thinking) it is ordinary, or what the Formalists call practical language that constitutes the main automatized element made strange by art.
In ordinary language a word is pronounced automatically, ‘tossed out like a chocolate bar from an automatic machine’, but the effect of poetry is to make language ‘oblique’, ‘difficult’, ‘attenuated’, ‘tortuous’.
Everyday language is made strange in poetry, and in particular the physical  sounds of words themselves become unusually prominent.
This defamiliarized perception of words which in ordinary circumstances we fail to notice is the result of the formal basis of poetry.
‘Poetic speech is formed speech’ because, claims Shklovsky, ‘defamiliarization is found almost everywhere form is found’(1965a: 18).
Poetic speech does not differ from ordinary speech just because it may include constructions or vocabulary not found in everyday language (the lo! s thous and word-order inversions conventionally allowed in English poetry), but because its formal devices (such as rhyme and rhythm) act on ordinary words to renew our perception of them, and of their sound texture in particular.
In the end, the question of defamiliarization became focused primarily on the issue of language, and this is what gives Formalist theory both its power and its distinctiveness.
The examples that Shklovsky's enthusiasm for the idea makes him choose in the early essays are extremely heterogeneous, and this heterogeneity makes him come close to spoiling the unique value of his case.
For it is the importance that the Formalists give to language in their theory of literature that enables them to avoid the difficulties and the fuzziness that they had so disliked in their critical and scholarly predecessors.
The later extension of the differential principle to non-linguistic issues is modelled on its original linguistic formulation.
For the Formalists, then, the business of literary studies is to  analyze the differences implied in the opposition between practical and poetic language, relying on the concept of defamiliarization to bring those differences into focus.
It is only by concentrating on the differential element that literary studies can maintain its specific object of study.
For by remaining inside a given topic (in this case poetry) without setting it against what it differentiates itself from, the object of one's attention is likely to evaporate.
It is impossible to define poetry from within.
There are no inherently poetic themes: the poetic subjects of Romantic poetry (moonlight, lakes, nightingales, roses, castles, etc.) have given way in the modern era to the most prosaic and mundane of items.
Similarly, poetry cannot be defined just in terms of its devices because these change over time.
Poetry can be delineated as a specific area of analysis only by a comparison with what is not poetry.
With the object of literary studies circumscribed on the basis of differentiation and not on that of inherent qualities, it becomes possible both to establish the notion of literariness, and to give some kind of scientific status to the study of literature.
These two features are central to Formalist theory.
Literariness, and not this or that work by this or that author, is the object of literary studies.
Or as Jakobson put it, ‘the subject of literary science is not literature, but literariness, i.e. that which makes a given work a literary work’(O'Toole and Shukman 1977: 17).
It was as a result of studying individual literary  works that preceding types of literary study had been led astray into adjacent disciplines.
The heterogeneous nature of its object had led to a heterogeneous discipline, and it was only by making literariness the object of its enquiry that literary science could exist as an independent and indeed as a coherent and systematic type of study.
It was the notion of literariness that made Russian Formalism scientific and systematic, and more than an eclectic set of insights into the workings of literature.
And it was precisely the coherence of Russian Formalist theory that Tynyanov and Jakobson were still stressing in 1928 in their remarks on ‘Problems of research in literature and language’.
It was not simply that this or that particular topic might need revision or reassessment, but, they said, ‘It is vital for us to turn our back on academic eclecticism…, and on the tendency to turn the study of literature and language from a systematic science back once more into a miscellany of episodic and anecdotal essays’(1977: 49).
Although in actual practice the Formalists tended to concentrate on the formal qualities of literature, this was because formal devices were taken to be the means whereby defamiliarization was realized.
When Jakobson asserted that ‘If the science of literature wants to become a real science it will have to recognize ‘the device’ as its sole ‘hero’’(O'Toole and Shukman 1977: 37), it was because he was concerned with the differential nature of literariness.
‘Formalist’ was in fact a misnomer for this theoretical enterprise and the term was actually coined not by the group but by their opponents.
As Eikhenbaum says, they were ‘not ‘formalists’, but, if you like —; specifiers' (O'Toole and Shukman 1977: 30).
The Formalists' preoccupation with form derived from their preoccupation with the specificity of literariness and never constituted an end in itself.
It is important to appreciate this point when considering the way in which Formalist thinking subsequently developed.
The synonymy of literariness and form is a feature of the first phase of Formalism.
‘Art as technique’ and ‘device as sole hero’are principles which the development of the opposition between automatization and defamiliarization gradually altered and refined.
Where the early view saw a work of art as the sum total of its devices, the later view took account of the fact that literary devices themselves were subject to the automatization of perception.
This means that the habitual/made-strange opposition is now located within literature itself and is no longer co-extensive with the distinction between literature and non-literature.
Literariness is a feature not just of form as impeded speech, but more importantly, of impeded form.
As Shklovsky had already pointed out in his essay on ‘Art as technique’(although the implications of his remarks were not fully drawn out until later) form and order can themselves act as powerful automatizing factors.
The literariness of poetic rhythm, for example, cannot necessarily be ascribed to mere  rhythm, but will more likely derive from disruption of the rhythm.
‘There is ‘order’ in art, yet not a single column of a Greek temple stands exactly in its proper order; poetic rhythm is similarly disordered rhythm,’explains Shklovsky.
And furthermore, ‘Should the disordering of rhythm become a convention, it would be ineffective as a device for the roughening of language’(1965a: 24).
It was because of the possibility of literary devices losing their defamiliarizing capacity that the distinction between device and function was introduced.
The defamiliarizing effect of a device does not depend on its existence as a device, but on its function in the work in which it appears.
The same device may be used for a variety of potential functions, just as different devices may share a single function.
A given work will include passive or automatized elements which are subservient to the defamiliarizing or ‘foregrounded’ elements.
The term ‘foregrounding’ was developed (chiefly by Tynyanov) as a necessary consequence of the view of the literary text as a system composed of interrelated and interacting elements, in order to distinguish between dominant and automatized factors.
Whereas the earlier, Shklovskian view had been that form itself was a defamiliarizing agent, this subtler later development introduces a more dynamic and at the same time a more coherent notion of the literary work.
As Tynyanov puts it, ‘Since a system is not a free interplay of equal elements but presupposes the foregrounding of one group of elements (‘a dominant’) and the deformation of others, a work becomes literature and acquires its literary function through just this dominant' (O'Toole and Shukman 1977: 34).
Both sets of elements are formal, but the work's interest for the Formalist (or rather, the specifier) will lie in the interrelation between the foregrounded and the subservient elements.
In other words, the active components of a work are now differentiated not only from practical language but also from other formal components which have become automatized.
This shift of emphasis entails an alteration in the way in which individual works are conceived of.
In the earlier view a work was regarded as a more or less arbitrarily agglomerated collection of defamiliarizing devices, but now it becomes important to see it as an entity, a structure or a system where it is the system which determines what the function of a given device will be, whether it will be foregrounded or automatized.
(This view of the literary text as a system is developed in the work of the Prague School and is discussed in the next chapter.)
This formulation also allows for a rather more subtle and flexible notion of the relationship between the literary and the non-literary.
By locating the opposition between defamiliarization and automatization within the work itself, the Formalists were able to maintain the specifically literary nature of their concerns while at the  same time avoiding an intransigent art-for-art's sake position.
Since the notion of literariness was not coterminous with the art object, it allowed for the inclusion of non-literary elements in a work without ditching the specificity of literariness.
Indeed Jakobson went so far as to claim, ‘Neither Tynyanov, nor Shklovsky, nor Mukařovský, nor 1 have declared that art is a closed sphere…
What we emphasize is not the separation of art, but the autonomy of the aesthetic function’(O'Toole and Shukman 1977: 19).
It is this autonomy, the dominance of the aesthetic function over the other elements in a work, which justifies the existence of a literary science.
The notion of foregrounding within a literary work formed the basis of Formalist thinking in specific areas of literary studies, namely genre, and more particularly, literary history.
I shall be returning to these topics below, but at this stage it should be stressed again that the rather more re fined and flexible view of literariness that I have just outlined was derived from the founding principles of Formalism.
Literary studies remain a specific and coherent science; literariness still remains its object, and is still constituted by the differential strategy which opposes defamiliarization and automatization.
Implications
Before going on to examine the more detailed contributions of Russian Formalism to specific areas of literary studies, it might be worth pausing to assess the Formalist position by comparing it with the assumptions which it had set out to replace, and which to a certain extent continue to inform (albeit implicitly) critical studies still being produced today.
One could ask, therefore, what role is ascribed in Formalist theory to the author, on whom biographical criticism had been based; what had become of the reality which mimetic and historically orientated theories had placed at the centre of their concerns; and finally what function it gives to thought, which had been the focus of philosophically biased criticisms.
As we said in the Introduction, the relations between text and author and between text and reality are key elements in any conception of literature.
The question of ideas in literature could be regarded as one aspect of the question of reality, being part of literature's ‘content’, and it was an issue that the Formalists themselves were particularly keen to confront.
The distinctiveness of Formalist theory can, to a large extent, be appreciated by seeing what.place these three factors are given in it.
First, then, the author.
With literariness and not individual works of literature forming the object of literary studies, the status of the author underwent a radical change.
As Osip Brik put it, ‘Opojaz proposes that there are no poets or literary figures, there is poetry and literature’(1977: 90).
This stricture is one that has been variously repeated in a large number of literary and critical theories in this century.
For example, T.S.
Eliot's remarks about poetry being ‘not the expression of a personality, but an escape from personality’ seem to anticipate Brik's bold words.
But the way in which the New Critics developed Eliot's axiom did not entirely do away with the author: instead, by shifting his position from the outside to the inside of the text, they merely justified a shift in methodology from the biographical to the words-on-the-page approach.
The importance that the New Critics attribute to meaning and to vision necessitates the continued existence of the author.
For the Formalists, by contrast, literature has nothing to do with vision or with authorial meaning.
A given work of literature is related for them to literature in general, and not to the personality of its author.
The author becomes nothing more than an expert at his job, a craftsman, and the means whereby literature develops in a more or less autonomous way.
(This view closely anticipates that of Pierre Macherey whose work is discussed in the chapter on Marxism.)
Evgeny Onegin would have been written even if Pushkin had never existed, claims Brik, just as America would have been discovered without Columbus.
The poet is no longer regarded as a visionary or a genius; he becomes a skilled worker who arranges, or rather, rearranges the material that he happens to find at his disposal.
The author's job is to know about literature; what he might or might not know about life is irrelevant to that job.
This view is more than a particularly extreme form of the New Critics' attack on the ‘intentional fallacy’.
But it is a logical consequence of the basic principles of Formalist theory, and in particular of the Formalist view of literary history and the distinction between practical and poetic language.
Literary history will be discussed in greater detail below, but, briefly stated, a historical view of literature follows inevitably from the recognition of the fact that the perceptibility of given literary conventions or devices tends to decrease over time.
New works have to revive the perceptibility of literature either by defamiliarizing over-familiar techniques (as in the case of parody) or else by foregrounding a previously non-functional device.
In other words, changes in literature depend not on the personal circumstances or the psychological make-up of an author, but on the pre-existing forms of literature.
For the Formalists originality is constituted only by a reworking of the available devices and not by a personal vision in the lived experience of writers.
In this scheme of things there is obviously no place for the biographies and personalities of the producers of literary works.
It is ruled out equally by the Formalist opposition between practical and poetic language.
They see the ‘set’ or emphasis in practical language as being on the referent, the reality referred to, and any potentially poetic features (such as rhyme or alliteration) as remaining subservient to the communicative aim.
By contrast, in poetic language  referentiality is irrelevant and the emphasis is on the means of expression itself.
Because of this, a poetic utterance has no functional ties with the real context in which it is produced and cannot be assumed to refer to any aspect of its producer's existence.
Although there are similarities between emotionally expressive utterances and poetic language, particularly in the importance of phonic elements, there remains a fundamental difference behind the superficial resemblance of the two: emotional speech is governed by its  speaker's affect, whereas poetic language is governed by its own immanent laws.
Language in poetry does not point to an object beyond itself, nor does it carry any emotional weight from its speaker; it is entirely self-sufficient, or, as the Formalists would say, ‘self-valuable’.
So the differential gesture which constitutes literature excludes the speaker from the very outset; the object of literary science is an authorless literariness.
All this rules out any causative connection between biography and literature, but there are cases where the Formalists allow biography a legitimate literary function.
On the one hand it would be perfectly in order to write the biography of a poet as long as it is understood that it would be ‘on a par with biographies of generals and inventors’(Tomashevsky 1978: 55) and was not mistaken for literary science.
On the other hand, there are instances where biography can become a ‘literary fact’.
Although there are many periods in the history of literature where biography is quite irrelevant (Shakespeare is an exemplarily anonymous figure in literature), there are also periods where biography becomes an integral element of literary works.
One has only to think of the Romantic period where poets became their own heroes, and their lives were seen as part of their poetic output.
But in these cases the life was a product of the poetry, and not vice versa.
Tomashevsky cites Pushkin as an example of someone who ‘poetically fostered certain facts of his life’(1978: 50).
He liked the idea of a hidden and unrequited love set against a backdrop of Crimean scenery, and he developed this theme both in his poetry and in his life.
He began writing to his friends: The life is as much a fiction as the poetry and becomes a kind of secondary creation against which the primary one may be read.
Poets like Pushkin: Formalist literary science will use these legendary biographies as literary facts where relevant, but would never regard them as anything other than the by-products of a certain literary practice.
The geneticists' error was to assume that the biographies were ‘real’ and were the primary cause and origin of the written literary text.
Indeed, the biographers' determination to establish the identity of the woman Pushkin claimed to love so hopelessly has resulted in the destruction of its legendary status, and consequently of its constructive role in the reading of the poetry.
On this question, then, the Formalists reverse the traditional relationship between biography and literature, making the author a product rather than the source of literary works.
Turning now to the question of the place assigned to reality in Formalist theory.
Here again, the traditional priority of reality over literature is reversed; where it is an axiomatic principle that literature is derived from other literature and not from any non-literary source, reality becomes irrelevant to the writing and analysis of literature.
In the Formalist view, a change in literary form is not determined by a changed reality, but by the need to refresh automatized forms of literature.
The renewed perception of formal devices is an essential aspect of literariness, and the criterion of verisimilitude is irrelevant to the Formalist project.
The Formalists evaluate literary form for its perceptibility and not for its mimetic capacity.
In his early discussion of defamiliarization Shklovsky chooses a number of examples which imply that the business of art is to restore our perception of the world outside art, ‘to make one feel things, to make the stone stony’(1965a: 12).
This restoration of the sense of life may well be an effect frequently produced by techniques of making strange, but Shklovsky makes it clear that in the end the object itself is not important, but merely a pretext for art.
It is literariness and not mimesis which interests the Formalists.
Ultimately defamiliarisation is a question of form and only of form.
Most innovators in art invoke realism as a justification for a mode of writing which is primarily literary.
But realism itself is just a matter of convention; for some people it is the defamiliarized codes which seem realistic, whereas for others it is the traditional devices which convey a sense of reality, and no one device is inherently more realistic than another.
Like the legendary biographies of the Romantic poets, realism is at best a by-product of art and not its raison d'être.
The role played by reality in the construction of literature is only secondary and subservient.
It enters into the work as one of the givens  with which the artist begins.
Reality is at his disposal in the same way that ordinary language and the current literary conventions and devices are.
It is one of the components of the work and not a referent of it (literature has no referents).
As Jakobson puts it in paraphrase of Mallarmé, ‘la fleur poétique est l'absente de tous bouquets’(lit. ‘the poetic flower is not the one to be found in any bouquet’).
And where a work appears to refer to some external reality (where the flowers seem, as it were, to be present) the Formalists would regard this as a mere side-effect of the aesthetic function.
Shklovsky calls this realistic side-effect ‘motivation’, which he contrasts to the laying bare of the device.
In literature either a device is presented exclusively for its defamiliarizing effect, or else it may be motivated — that is to say its presence as a device is disguised by a veneer of realism.
This makes all realism an incidental by-product of a certain kind of writing, and not the direct imitation of reality.
Much of the same reversal of priorities applies to the third question, ideas in literature.
Meaning is not an issue that arises for the Russian Formalists, and it is here that they differ most fundamentally from the American New Critics with whom they otherwise have so many similarities.
The American New Critics and I.A. Richards before them were as anxious as the Formalists to sever literature from its historical and biographical context, and their preoccupation with form and technique has many points of analogy with that of their Formalist counterparts.
But for the New Critics art existed in order to convey a meaning, albeit a meaning that no logical discourse is capable of expressing, and attention to matters of form was regarded as the means whereby the non-rational meanings of literature could be uncovered.
But for the Formalists meaning and ideas are neither here nor there; like reality, they enter into literature as part of the available material which is then put to literary use by the functional devices of the work.
As Jakobson put it, ‘we are dealing in essence not with thought but with verbal facts’.
It seems clear then that the Formalist position on all these issues (authors, reality and ideas) is not just an arbitrary preference, but that it stems from the concepts of defamiliarisation and literariness, whose differential basis will always serve to define literature in opposition to the things that it was traditionally viewed as expressing.
The exclusion of authors, reality and thought from their central position in literature was part of a purification of the notion of literature which entails a radical alteration of one of the most deeply ingrained concepts in thinking about literature: the distinction between form and content.
Briefly put, Russian Formalism did away with the distinction between form and content, and in its interest in form succeeded in attributing a totally new function to it.
In fact the terms ‘form’ and ‘content’ceased to be operative and were replaced (in so far as it makes  sense to speak of replacement) by the distinction between ‘material’and ‘device’.
But the significance of what was at stake in this shift in terminology needs to be spelled out.
Traditionally form was considered to be a sort of ‘decorative supplement’ which provided the entertainment value while the business of instruction (associated with the content) went ahead.
Or, to use another analogy, form was a vessel into which content could be poured, the same vessel being theoretically capable of receiving a variety of different contents.
And if the form changed, it was as a response to the exigencies of content.
All this put the emphasis on the content and was consequently responsible for the heterogeneous nature of literary studies.
Formalist theory reversed the priority of content over form and devoted its attention exclusively to form.
Content then becomes dependent on form (as the discussion of biography, reality and thought will have shown), and has no separate existence in literature.
Literary analysis cannot extrapolate content from form, and form is determined not by content but by other forms.
But the crucial factor that is obscured by continuing to use these terms is the dynamic and interactive relationship that exists between material and device.
Devices act on their material and in putting raw materials to a certain use often transform their appearance.
Jakobson uses a culinary example in his discussion of the question which nicely complements the vessel-liquid image which is so often implied in the form-content distinction.
‘poeticity’, he says, is like oil in cooking; you cannot have it on its own but when it is used with other food it is more than a mere addition.
It changes the taste of food to the extent that some dishes no longer appear to have any connection with their oil-less counterparts: a fresh sardine, for example, is quite different from one which has been transformed by being preserved in oil (a point implied by the existence in the Czech language of two quite different words for the fresh and the oil varieties: a sardine in oil is called olejovka, from olej=oil).
The defamiliarizing principle in art has exactly the same effect on its material ‘ingredients’: it subordinates and transforms the way they are in non-literary circumstances.
For example, the word sardine in a poem would cease to function as a substitute for the thing itself, and instead its linguistic features would be ‘maximally foregrounded’.
Like Mallarmé's poetic flower, the fish to which the word normally refers would be lost from sight.
The dynamic principle implied in the material/device distinction means that elements of form itself can be included in the concept of material.
Outworn devices which are no longer functional in the defamiliarization process are as much a part of the work's material as ideas or aspects of real life.
The opposition between automatism and making strange which underlies the one between material and device draws a line in a quite different place from the line that separates form  from content.
Indeed, it can draw the line in such a way as to make synonyms of the terms form and content.
For example, when a work is constructed in order to lay bare all its devices form itself becomes the content.
In Shklovsky's view, Sterne's Tristram Shandy consists of a series of violations of literary conventions which draw our attention to the forms of fiction; in so doing it transforms formal questions into content.
In Shklovsky's words, ‘awareness of form constitutes the subject-matter of the novel’(1965b: 35).
This radical redistribution of the terms form and content follows logically from the principle of defamiliarization and perceptible form.
Once form is foregrounded it becomes impossible to speak of any other content except form itself.
Poetry, prose and literary history
Although the object of Formalist literary science was literariness and not individual works of literature, one of the principal consequences of the Formalists' interest in literariness was an increased awareness of genre.
Literariness being defined as the difference between automatism and defamiliarization, it was soon perceived that it was not constructed in the same way in all works, and that the devices manifesting difference in prose narrative were not the same as the devices manifesting difference in lyric poetry.
Poetry and narrative are constructed from quite different ‘dominants’ or ‘genre-markers’.
And in fact what marks the two genres off from each other is not so much the nature of the devices, but the nature of the opposition which constructs them as literature.
The operative differentiation in poetry is between practical and poetic language, but this is obviously likely to be less pertinent to prose.
Here the opposition isolated by the Formalists is between what they call fabula and syuzhet, and concerns the organization and the presentation of the narrative (more of this later).
It was in these two areas (poetry and prose narrative) that Formalism made most of its practical contributions to the study of literature.
Poetry was the starting point for Formalist literary theory, and it lent itself in a very obvious way to the differential definition of literariness.
Poetry, says Jakobson, is ‘organized violence committed on ordinary speech’(Erlich 1980: 219), and Formalist work on poetry covers three main areas where this violence is carried out.
The primary one is sound texture.
The violence here consists in the foregrounding of the phonic aspect of ordinary speech, which in normal communication remains subservient to the referential ‘set’ of utterances.
Poetry is ‘speech organized in its entire phonic texture’(Erlich 1980: 212), and not just ordinary speech with added musical embellishment.
The Formalists maintained that there are a variety of devices in poetry which have the effect of ‘roughening’ or ‘impeding’pronunciation.
An early contribution to Formalist analysis of poetry by Leo Jakubinsky  reveals a marked presence in poetry of ‘hard-to-pronounce conglomerations of similar sounds’(Shklovsky 1965: 19).
However, it is not just that poetry may differ statistically from ordinary language, but, more significantly, that the devices of poetry foreground phonic elements that are usually ignored in practical speech.
The adoption of a new metric form, for example, frequently has a roughening effect on the sounds of ordinary language: Pushkin reports that General Ermolov ended up with a stiff jaw after reading poetry by Griboyedov.
Second, the effect of the laws of rhythm in poetry is to set up a tension between two different principles of word combination: syntax, which determines it in ordinary language, and rhythm, which constitutes a second determining principle in poetry.
A full understanding of poetry requires that both principles are seen to be at work, for to analyze the laws of poetry without taking account of those of ordinary language would be to overlook the specifically verbal nature of poetry and to transform it from the domain of language to that of music.
Equally, to ignore the constraints of poetry would be to ‘destroy the poetic line as a specific, verbal structure based on those facets of the word which retreat into the background in ordinary speech’(Brik 1978: 124).
So once again the emphasis is not on poetry in itself, but on the difference between poetry and ordinary language.
The third aspect of ordinary language which is violated by poetry is semantics.
Poetry differs from ordinary language in that it activates the secondary or collateral meanings of a word simultaneously, a strategy which would disrupt ordinary communication, which depends on the absence of ambiguity through there being only one functional meaning for a word.
As Eikhenbaum puts it ‘as words get into verse they are, as it were, taken out of ordinary speech.
They are surrounded by a new aura of meaning’(1965: 129).
This seems to be familiar Anglo-American territory, and to evoke New Critical or Empsonian ambiguity.
But the Formalists did not share the New Critics' view of poetry as paradox or resolution of contradictions, since they were not interested in poetry's meaning.
And, even more importantly, the Formalists differ radically from the Anglo-Americans on the way in which they relate poetic ambiguity to ordinary language, and it is through this differential function, and not by means of mere conformity and intensification that poetry heightens and enriches ordinary communication.
The Russian Formalists would, on the contrary, want to stress the differences between the two types of language, poetic language being defined at every level (including the semantic) in opposition to practical or ordinary language.
In every case, then, the devices of poetry are studied nut for themselves, but for their defamiliarizing capacity.
Image, hyperbole, parallelism, comparison, repetition or any other trope are potentially all equally effective in committing poetic violence on ordinary  language, and it is this differential function and not any inherent quality that constitutes their interest for Russian Formalism.
The Formalists' approach to prose narrative was, to a certain extent, predetermined by their original interest in poetry.
Shklovsky's ingenious attempts to draw parallels between poetic devices and devices of plot construction show how far Formalist literary theory did indeed have its roots in poetry.
However, despite the ingenuity of Shklovsky's efforts, it became clear that the differential principle behind poetry could not be very extensively or very effectively applied to prose, and the functional opposition had to be constructed on rather different lines.
In broad terms, the Formalist study of narrative was based on a distinction between the events on the one hand and the construction on the other, between the fabula and the ryuzhet.
Fabula (the ‘story’) refers to the chronological sequence of events, and syuzhet (the ‘plot’) to the order and manner in which they are actually presented in the narrative.
Because of the difficulty of finding precise equivalents in English, I shall follow the common practice of sticking to the original Russian terms.
The relation between the fabula and the syuzhet is roughly analogous to the one between practical and poetic language.
The syuzhet creates a defamiliarizing effect on the fabula; the devices of the ryuzhet are not designed as instruments for conveying the fabula, but are foregrounded at the expense of the fabula.
These devices can vary enormously in nature and scope: from the overall presentation of narrative structure down to linguistic play.
Eikhenbaum's essay on Gogol's Overcoat is a good example of the latter.
He sets out to show that in Gogol's tale ‘the centre of gravity is transferred from the theme…to the devices’(1963: 377).
The dynamic principle in the construction of the tale is not in the events narrated but in their manner of presentation.
And this manner itself is determined not so much by the putative character of its narrator, but by puns and other verbal sound effects which result in the breaking up and displacement of the reality which may appear to be their starting point.
So that the fabula, such as it is in this tale, is the product of certain purely linguistic devices.
A more quintessentially Formalist approach to narrative is contained in Shklovsky's essay on Tristram Shandy.
This novel, with its chaotic narrative order and its prominent self-conscious authorial commentary, is an ideal example for the Formalists of the privileging of the syuzhet over the fabula.
The Formalist principle whereby ‘the forms of art are explainable by the laws of art; they are not justified by their realism’(Shklovsky 1965b: 57) is manifest in almost every aspect of Sterne's novel and does not have to be inferred from it by analysis (as perhaps it does in Gogol's Overcoat).
The constructional devices are laid bare and not motivated by the events or situations in the story.
The fabula is repeatedly disrupted by such syuzhet devices as the transposition of material (the preface does not appear until Volume III, Chapter 20), temporal displacements which reveal effects before causes, the inclusion of secondary anecdotes and the proclivity towards digressions of various kinds.
But perhaps the most striking of all the devices are the frequent self-conscious comments made by the author, laying bare his devices precisely by pointing out the differences between fabula and syuzhet, as, for example, in the following: In Tristram Shandy (and in the O. Henry stories discussed in another essay by Eikhenbaum) the devices are laid bare to such an extent that there remains hardly any motivation for the much diminished fabula.
This degree of self-consciousness is rare in literature, but it is nevertheless based on the opposition between fabula and ryuzhet, and it is on this opposition that the literariness of all prose narrative rests.
This view of prose narrative is rather different from the one implied in the Anglo-American tradition which, in its reading of fiction has systematically subordinated questions of ryuzhet to questions of realism.
Where form has been an issue in this tradition, such as with narrative point of view in Henry James, it has been subsumed into more conventional questions such as theme and moral vision: form becomes a means of conveying these other questions.
And where technical qualities are very obtrusive, as in Joyce's Ulysses, the novel is dismissed by this tradition as a ‘dead-end, or at least as pointer to disintegration’(Leavis 1962: 36).
Adopting a Formalist approach to the nineteenth-century realist novel would certainly involve a thorough-going change of mental habit, and the critic would have to work harder than s/he does when reading Joyce to see round the fabula and the realistic motivation; but this is not to say that it might not produce some interesting results.
Its applicability to the eighteenth-century novel seems, on the other hand, to be less questionable, and one can equally well see its relevance to twentieth-century writers like John Fowles.
The third area of practical contributions made by the Russian Formalists — literary history — represents a third differential opposition for the specification of the literary.
Where poetry involved the distinction between ordinary and poetic language, and narrative that between what one might call literary form and its non-literary content, literary history as conceived by the Formalists entails a distinction between automatized and perceptible form within literature itself.
This differential element in literary history marks it off quite radically from previous accounts of the historical dimension in literature.
The  genetic view might at first sight appear to constitute a supremely historical way of thinking about literature, as the literary text was explained in terms of its causes and its origins.
But the view it implied of literature as a whole was ultimately a non-historical one.
By taking only ‘the greats’ and dealing with them as isolated phenomena, conventional literary critics and scholars failed to convey any sense of the overall historical development of literature.
The conventional notion of literary ‘tradition’ does, it is true, compensate for the lack of an historical overview, but because it implies a common pool of resources repeatedly drawn on by a succession of different writers, it is profoundly antithetical to Formalism and its key principle of defamiliarization.
Indeed, for the Formalists, ‘literary language’…and its development cannot be understood as a planned development of tradition, but rather as colossal displacements of traditions’(Tynyanov 1978c: p. 144, my italics).
Literariness is a product of the deformation of the canonized or automatized elements, in other words of precisely those factors which constitute a tradition.
Form is made perceptible against a background of existing literary form, and the function of a device is determined not just by the structural hierarchy of a particular work, but by its place in the literary system as a whole.
The principle of defamiliarization simultaneously undoes the idea of tradition and reintroduces an historical dimension in the relationship between individual literary device and the overall system.
Discontinuity replaces continuity as the basis of historical progression.
The fact that the specificity of literary science is constituted by literariness means that an historical dimension is inevitably brought into play.
(n contrast both to the genetically based view of literary history which tends to ignore questions of form, and to other formally-biased approaches which tend to ignore history, the Russian Formalist view is that it is history itself which allows the specificity of literature to be established.
Roughly speaking, the Formalists see two complementary forces at work in the evolution of literature.
The first concerns the dominant devices in a particular genre and/or period.
As time goes by these devices become familiar and cease to be perceptible.
When this stage has been reached a new work will pick them up and, usually by parodic means, make them perceptible again as devices.
This is what happens in the O. Henry stories, for example.
The conventionality of particular devices is made palpable by ironic comments from the author — such as: ‘Thus, by the commonest article of the trade, having gained your interest, the action of the story will now be suspended, leaving you grumpily to consider a sort of doll biography beginning fifteen years before’(Eikhenbaum 1978: 255).
This draws attention to the formal strategies behind the opening scenes in stories and to the conventional basis of the ‘doll biographies’ that accompany the presentation of the  major characters.
It is by making form perceptible through this parodic treatment of devices that a genre evolves.
The other evolutionary principle concerns the introduction of devices from marginal or popular genres into the mainline of literary development to replace outworn ones.
Dostoyevsky, for instance, raises the devices of what Shklovsky calls the boulevard novel to the status of a literary norm, and Chekhov transfers features from comic magazines into Russian literary prose.
This too is a profoundly discontinuous evolutionary mode.
The succession passes ‘not from father to son, but from uncle to nephew’(O'Toole and Shukman 1977:.
42) in a series of defamiliarizing displacements.
Literary history is no longer a causal explanation of masterpieces in world literature, nor a continuous tradition.
It is a major enterprise in Russian Formalist poetics, because ultimately ‘the task of literary history…is precisely’ to reveal form' (Tynyanov 1978b: 132).
In stressing the ubiquity of the differential principle in all aspects of Russian Formalist thought one runs the risk of implying that the coherence of the theory is the result of an intellectual parti pris, and that the intention on the part of the Formalists was to establish a fixed dogmatic system.
However, the astonishing consistency of Formalist theory cannot in any way be attributed to the pressure of orthodoxy within the group.
Individually they were always at pains to stress the provisional nature of the conceptual apparatus, and their flexibility can be seen in the way in which the theory evolved to include new topics such as narrative and literary history.
As Eikhenbaum so firmly insists: ‘[they]were not advocates of a method, but students of an object’(1965: 131).
It is in fact this object (literariness) and the way in which it was defined that guarantees the coherence of the science.
The insistence on specificity (both of the science and of its object) and its basis in a differential strategy proved not only to be enormously productive and adaptable, but also remarkably consistent.
Moreover, a number of the major aspects of Formalist theory prove to have anticipated, if not directly influenced, some of the most important ideas in twentieth-century literary theory.
The central position of language, the devaluing of the biographical element, the notion of a science of literature, and the importance placed on the deviation from the norm constitute some of the main recurrent features of literary theory from Jakobson to Barthes.
These, then, are the strengths of the theory.
As to its shortcomings, these derive, in the main, from its exclusive concern with the literary.
The non-literary elements against which the literary is differentially defined are insufficiently theorized.
The Formalists have no developed theory of language and no theory of culture and society, and this lack poses certain limitations on their theory of literature.
The  theoretical sophistication of the literary half of their equation is not matched in the non-literary part of it.
In Formalist theory we are dealing with a very limited and pre-Saussurean view of language, and we shall see in the next chapter how much more subtlety and refinement a theoretically consistent view of language can bring to literary theory — as in the case of Roman Jakobson's six-function model.
And we shall see, furthermore, in the chapter on structuralism how far a Saussurean or semiotic theory of language in particular opens up the scope of literary theory, because it provides a means of theorising non-literary reality as well as literature itself.
Marxist criticism of Russian Formalism has concentrated particularly strongly on the absence of any social dimension in their conception of literature.
The main thrust of the interesting critique of Formalism made by the Bakhtin school (discussed below in the chapter on Marxism) is based on the claim that all use of language, including a literary use, is both social and ideological.
The advantage of this argument is that it allows one to define literature's relation to reality in a much more positive and coherent way: both literature and the reality which it represents are of the same order and, according to Bakhtin, this order is ideological.
But although literature is necessarily ideological, its qualities as literature have a distancing effect on the ideologies that it represents, and so allow the reader to become aware of them as ideologies.
The structuralist view of language also yields a much more flexible and wide-ranging view of the relationship between literature and reality.
Both literature and social or cultural reality are de fined by structuralist theory in semiotic terms, so that(as in the Bakhtinian theory) they are seen as belonging to the same order.
At the same time for most structuralist theorists, literature still retains its distinctiveness through its peculiar linguistic awareness — a premise which, again, depends on a relatively complex theory of language.
In other words, although the Formalists took a very important step in making language central to their definition of literature, their theoretical shortcomings could largely be attributed to their failure to extend a theory of language to other spheres.
Their idea of reality remains trapped in the cultural viewpoint which their theory of literature was trying to replace, and the difficulties which this led to can be most clearly seen in their theory of literary history: despite their innovatory definition of literary history as a discontinuous series, they were unable to explain how literary history related to other historical series.
Had they had a more sophisticated social and cultural theory, they would have been in a much better position to address themselves to this problem.
The vulnerability of Russian Formalism on this score seems, therefore, to suggest two important things: first, that any theory of literature, however specifically literary, needs to develop an adequate  theory of non-literary issues; and second, that an adequate theory of language is likely to be of enormous help in doing so.
MODERN LINGUISTICS AND THE LANGUAGE OF LITERATURE
David Robey
The relationship between linguistics and literature has been one of the most widely discussed issues in modern literary theory.
Indeed of the many disciplines that have contributed to the growth of modern literary theory, linguistics is almost certainly the most important.
This is a consequence of major developments in both literary practice and in the study of language.
On the literary side, in the course of the century or so that has passed since the Symbolist movement in France, both poetry and, to a lesser extent, literary prose have been characterized by a degree of linguistic innovation unknown in most earlier periods.
The language of ‘modernist’ writing is, typically, difficult and challenging; it makes considerable demands on the reader, and even greater demands on the critic.
Since the late nineteenth century it has thus become increasingly difficult for critics interested in contemporary literature to ignore problems of linguistic form.
At the same time linguistics has evolved in a direction that has increased enormously its explanatory potential for literary studies.
Nineteenth-century linguistics was mainly interested in the ways in which languages change across the ages; modern ‘structural’ linguistics prefers, in contrast, to concentrate on the ways in which they function for purposes of communication.
Since literature, whatever else it might be, is undoubtedly a form of communication, this development is obviously an extremely important one as far as literary studies are concerned.
The reason why linguistics has had such importance for literary theory, however, is not just that a change of direction has taken place in the development of the discipline.
It is also to be found in the special character of the theory of language which more than any other was responsible for this development, that of the Swiss philologist and professor of linguistics Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913).
The implications of this theory are so powerful that the impact of modern linguistics on literary studies has not been limited to problems of literary language alone, but has produced new theories of the nature and organization of literature as a whole and indeed of all social and cultural life.
With his concept of the linguistic sign Saussure created the basis of structuralism, both in linguistics and as a more broadly based movement of thought, in which all forms of social and cultural life are seen to be governed by systems of signs which are either linguistic or analogous to those of language.
Saussure explained his concept of the sign in a series of lectures given in Geneva between 1906 and 1911 and published posthumously from his students' notes under the title Cours de linguistique générale.
In view of the importance of this work for modern literary theory I shall deal with it in some detail in the pages that follow.
I shall then discuss two theories of literary language and of the literary text as a whole, which were developed under the joint influence of Saussure and the Russian Formalists.
In conclusion I shall consider four alternative approaches to problems of literary language in which the influence of Saussure and the Formalists is less strongly felt, though the impact of modern linguistics is still clear.
My aim will be to illustrate different ways of approaching literature through its linguistic form, ways involving the direct application of linguistic theory and linguistic methods of analysis in order to illuminate the specifically literary character of texts.
Later, in the chapter on modern French structuralism, we shall see how Saussure's concept of the linguistic sign can lead to theories of the non-linguistic aspects of literature as well as of its language.
There we shall be dealing not so much with direct applications of linguistic theory as with extensions or analogies of it.
Saussure: the concept of the sign
Saussure's fundamental proposal is that languages are systems, constituted by signs that are arbitrary and differential.
A linguistic sign consists in the union of two elements, a sound-image (or its written substitute) and a concept; for the first the term signifier is used, for the second signified (signifiant and signifié).
For instance, the sound ‘tree’ that I hear is the signifier, to which there corresponds a signified tree in the sense of the concept that the sound evokes in my mind.
The sign made up of these two elements is arbitrary for two reasons: because, more obviously, the association of a signifier (the sound-image ‘tree’) with a signified (the concept tree) is, except in a very few cases, fundamentally the product of linguistic convention, not of any natural link; and, less obviously, because there is also no natural or necessary relationship between the sign as a whole and the reality to which it refers.
This second postulate, the most radical and fertile feature of Saussure's thought, rests on the idea of an essential disjunction between the world of reality and the world of language.
Words articulate our experience of things, they do not just express or reflect it; they give form to what, without language and other sign-systems, would merely be a chaotic and undifferentiated jumble of ideas; instead of things determining the meaning of words, words determine the meaning of things.
Thus the signified tree is not the expression or reflection or product of the series of vegetable objects to which it is conventionally attached in English usage.
Rather, it is entirely by virtue of the sign in question that we distinguish a class of objects trees from  other objects such as bushes, etc.
It follows from this that signifier and signified are effectively inseparable, like the two sides of a single sheet of paper.
Not only can we not recognize sounds as linguistic units unless concepts are attached to them; we also cannot entertain concepts independently of their physical manifestations, without, that is, evoking in our minds the verbal forms to which they are attached.
Saussure illustrates these principles with a diagram (1974: l 12), which may help to clarify his point: The two bands of wavy lines A and B stand for what in a pre-linguistic state would be two continua: respectively an ‘indefinite plane of jumbled ideas’ and ‘the equally vague plane of sounds’.
What language does, as represented by the dotted lines, is divide or articulate these continua, thereby creating the sound-images and concepts which, when bonded together, we recognize as words.
To put Saussure's point in a different way, we can take as an illustration an area of language to which he did not pay particular attention, but which subsequent theorists have considered significant: that of colour terminology.
Clearly the colour spectrum is a continuum which is divided up into distinct units by colour terms.
If we did not have certain terms, for instance if we did not have a word ‘orange’ as well as a word ‘yellow’, it is easy to imagine that we would not have a concept of the corresponding colours; indeed the fact that there is nothing natural or necessary about colour terms is proved, as one of Saussure's successors argued (Hjelmslev 1961: 52ff.) by the fact that different languages divide up the colour spectrum differently.
We can restate Saussure's argument by saying that he is taking colour terminology as paradigmatic for all language; just as colour terms impose arbitrary divisions on the continuous spectrum of light waves, so all other words impose  arbitrary divisions on the ‘indefinite plane of jumbled ideas’ which, without language, would constitute our mental experience.
If the relationship between sign and reality is not natural but arbitrary, how are we to understand the sign's ability to signify, the capacity of language to generate meaning?
Saussure's answer is that the function of the sign depends exclusively on its relationship with, or more exactly its difference from, other signs.
‘Arbitrary and differential are two correlative qualities’(1974: 118).
We identify words not by virtue of any intrinsic qualities in them, but by virtue of their difference from one another, and it is therefore their differences which allow words to give meaning to things by dividing up the continuum of experience.
As Saussure says (1974: 120), ‘in language there are only differences without positive terms’.
We identify the sound-image ‘tree’ by differentiating it from ‘free’, ‘try’, and so forth; equally the meaning of the concept tree depends entirely on its difference from such related concepts as bush, plant, etc., that of the concept orange on its difference from yellow and red.
From this theory (often called ‘diacritical’) of language and meaning it follows that to study how a language functions we must take as our object not individual signs in isolation, but the relationships that obtain between them.
Language is not an agglomeration of separate facts but a closed system, in the sense that the function of each element depends entirely on its position within the whole.
Saussure makes a crucial distinction, in the study of language, between langue, the language-system, and parole, the individual act of communication which the system produces and conditions.
Langue, not parole must be the primary object of a science which aims to show how language functions.
In connection with these principles Saussure introduced two further oppositions, both of which have had the greatest importance for the development of modern linguistics: the opposition between synchronic and diachronic language study, and that between syntagmatic and associative relationships in the language-system.
Language study before Saussure was predominantly diachronic, in the sense that it was predominantly interested in the way languages change through time.
While accepting wholeheartedly the value of this sort of study — the discipline that goes by the name of philology in English-speaking countries — Saussure argued that it gave only a partial account of linguistic phenomena.
In practice the analysis of linguistic change meant tracing the history of individual linguistic facts across the centuries, and consequently a neglect of the properties of language as system.
Synchronic study, on the other hand, considers how a language functions as a system at a given moment in time, analyzing the simultaneous relationships between its constituent parts; it examines how a language works, not how it develops.
A tradition of language study which neglected this, as nineteenth-century philology  did, failed to account for the real nature of its object.
Saussure called for, not the abandonment of diachronic study, but the recognition that synchronic and diachronic study led to different kinds of knowledge, and that both were necessary for the true understanding of language.
The distinction between syntagmatic and associative relationships relates to this concept of the synchronic study of language as a system.
In linguistic communication terms have to be arranged in sequences.
The term syntagmatic was attached by Saussure to the sequential or combinatory relationships that a given language system permits: the relationship between the three sounds, for instance, that make up the word ‘tree’, or the syntactical relationship between the words ‘the tree is green’, and so on .
But to understand a language sequence it is not enough to recognize the relationships between the elements present in it; we also have to refer to relationships of absence, and it is these that Saussure calls associative relationships.
The concept of associative relationships is a necessary supplement to the idea of the differential nature of the linguistic sign, since difference in language can only be functional in conjunction with similarity.
In Saussure's theory we identify and attach meaning to an individual word in a sequence by placing it mentally against the background of other words, not present in the sequence, which are both similar and different to it.
The sound-image ‘tree’ is associated with ‘free’, ‘try’, etc., the signified tree with bush, plant, and the like, and the singular ‘tree’with the plural ‘trees’.
Nowadays the term paradigmatic is normally used for this type of relationship, on the model of the grammatical notion of a paradigm, a tabular representation of the conjugation of a verb or the declension of a noun or adjective.
However the term includes not only the different forms of a given verb, adjective or noun (‘tree'/ ‘trees’), but all types of association of form and meaning.
A given word can be seen as the point of intersection of a bundle of different strings of associations, all of which contribute to its function as a sign.
As a number of alternatives to and criticisms of Saussure's theory will be discussed in the following chapters, 1 shall only mention here some of its positive implications for the study of literature.
In the first place, as must already be evident, it shows some striking parallels with the Formalists' views on literature and literary studies — views which were developed for the greater part quite independently of it, for although later Formalist theory may have been influenced to some degree by Saussure, the beginnings of the movement predate the publication of his Cours.
Both theories entail a shift of attention away from considerations of origin or cause to those of function or effect; neither is as much interested in the ways in which language reflects reality, as in the ways in which it shapes our perception of things; both attach central importance to the concepts of system and difference.
But it will also be evident that Saussurean linguistics did much more  than simply reinforce the Formalists' view of literature.
Although it is worth stressing that Saussure's work is open to a variety of interpretations, and although he himself did not use the concepts structure and structural, it was his idea of the arbitrary and differential nature of the linguistic sign, and therefore of the essential disjunction between language and reality, that became the foundation of the structuralist movement.
It was from this starting-point that the structuralists arrived at the radical view that all meaning in every sphere of human activity consists of closed systems wholly independent of the material world.
The full implications of this view will emerge in the chapter on modern French structuralism.
In the next two sections I shall concentrate on ways in which Saussurean linguistics enlarged and refined Formalist theories of literature, before considering other less ambitious approaches to literary language.
The Prague School: structure and function
It was the Prague School that unified Formalism and Saussurean linguistics in a single theoretical programme, or at least— as there has been some discussion as to the exact nature of the Prague school's debt to Saussure — reformulated Formalist literary theory within the framework of a linguistics which shared most of Saussure's fundamental principles, and to which they attached the label structuralism.
It was observed in the last chapter that the Prague School's views on literature and literary study were substantially those of the Formalists, but the Formalists' influence has owed a great deal to the shape that the Prague School gave to their theory, in particular to the Prague School's use of the concepts of structure and function.
Without considering Prague School theory in detail, I shall therefore look at its use of these two concepts, both of which have played a crucial role in modern thinking about literature.
The main texts of Prague literary theory are the collective Thèses which the Prague Linguistic Circle presented (in French) to a conference in the city in 1929; and the writings of one of the Circle's leading members, Jan Mukařovský.
The terms structure and structural are crucial to the programme of research which the Thèses proposed on both literature and language.
Linguistic science should study the ‘structural laws of linguistic systems’(Vachek 1966: 34), that is, the reciprocal relations of the individual elements in them.
The poetic work too should be viewed as a ‘functional structure’(p.46), the different elements of which cannot be understood except in their connections with the whole.
As far as language is concerned, therefore, ‘structure’ is simply an alternative to Saussure's concept of relationships; to be exact, a structure is a set or totality of relationships.
In the study of literature ‘structure’ replaces the Formalist concepts of form and device.
We have seen how the Formalists challenged the  traditional form/content opposition, and proposed the pair devices and materials in its place.
Devices in a work are those elements which are defamiliarized and therefore poetically functional, materials are those which are not.
Structure, which can also be opposed to material, is a broader concept than both form, in its traditional sense, and device; it embraces all aspects of a literary text, from sound to subject matter, and it includes both those which are defamiliarized and those which are not.
To define the literary text as a structure is to view it as a set of Saussurean signs (or as a single sign, as Mukařovský (1970: 69ff.) suggested), in which both signifiers and signifieds are governed by a single complex system of relationships.
In contrast both to traditional views of form, and to some Formalist statements about the device, it calls attention to the organization of the text in its totality, the structure of the text being simply the totality of the relationships that obtain within it.
In itself this notion of structure does not necessarily distinguish literary texts from ordinary acts of communication, since these too evidently have a structure.
The Prague School explained the difference between literary (or poetic) and non-literary structures through an extension of the Formalist concept of function — hence the definition of the poetic text as a ‘functional structure’.
Whereas the Formalist concept was related to the literary devices within a text, the Prague School theory applied it to all forms of language.
The best known version of this theory of functions is Jakobson's ‘Closing statement: linguistics and poetics’(Sebeok 1960: 350 — 77) delivered to a conference in America in 1958, which builds on a set of categories proposed by Mukařovský some years earlier (1938: 100 — 1).
According to Jakobson, any message can have six different functions, corresponding to the six factors necessarily present in any act of communication: an addresser, an addressee, a context, a code, a means of contact, and the message itself.
The function consists in the message's focus on, its orientation or ‘set’ towards one or another of these factors (1960: 353–7).
The focus on the addresser, for instance a speaker or an author, constitutes the emotive function, that of expressing the addresser's attitudes or feelings; the focus on the addressee or receiver, the conative function, that of influencing the feelings or attitudes of the addressee; the focus on the context, the real, external situation in which the message occurs, the referential function; the focus on the code, as when a message elucidates a point of grammar, the metalingual function; the focus on the means of contact, as in the case, say, of expressions inserted by one party into a telephone conversation simply in order to reassure the other party that they are both still on the line, the phatic function; the focus on the message itself, the poetic function.
The advantage of this concept of function is that it avoids absolute distinctions between one kind of text and another.
All functions may  be present, though sometimes to a minimal degree, in any set of signs, constituting a hierarchy according to the relative predominance of each.
If the poetic function is dominant, then the message can be described as ‘poetic’, or ‘aesthetic’ or ‘literary’, or ‘artistic’.
This occurs, following the Formalist principle of defamiliarization, when existing linguistic or literary practice (a ‘norm’) is violated at one level or another of a text's structure, which then itself becomes dominant.
The dominant level generates an enhanced attention to the relationship between that level and all the others, and therefore foregrounds or actualizes the text in its totality.
But this does not prevent other functions from being present, lower down in the hierarchy, in texts in which the poetic function is dominant; equally, the poetic function may be present in texts which are mainly expressive or referential.
Thus, like the later Formalists, the Prague School were able to insist on the specific properties of the ‘poetic’ text, and at the same time recognize its links with the author and the social context.
For them the task of the critic was not to ignore literature's connections with the external world, but to take full account of its internal, poetic properties in his analysis.
It must be stressed, in this connection, that the ‘poetic’ text in question is not necessarily a part of what is normally described as poetry, but can be any form of literature that possesses aesthetic or artistic properties.
From what I have said so far it may sound as if the Prague School did no more than restate the Russian Formalists' theories in more systematic language.
But by integrating these theories with their version of structural linguistics, they developed them in a very important direction: they placed them within a semiotic or semiological framework, semiotics and semiology being to all intents and purposes interchangeable terms.
Saussure speaks of semiology (1974: 16) as a ‘science that studies the life of signs within society’, a science of which we shall hear more in the chapter on modern French structuralism.
When Mukařovský (1936 and 1970: 70ff.) wrote of art, literature, or poetry as semiological facts, he meant that artistic works constitute particular kinds of signs which can only be understood within the framework of a general sign-theory.
The significance of this proposition is that it provides the basis for a theory of literary or poetic meaning which both distinguishes this meaning from the external world and relates it to it.
It distinguishes it, because if the literary text is seen as a sign or set of signs in the Saussurean sense, then its meaning or content must be the product of a structure of relationships or differences whose connection with the ‘real’ world is purely arbitrary.
Literary meaning must therefore be analyzed in its own terms, in the words of the Thèses (Vachek 1966:49) as a ‘semantic composition’, and not as the reflection of external factors.
At the same time this meaning is related to the ‘real’ world by virtue of the Formalist principle of  defamiliarization.
Our everyday perception of the world is enclosed within the conventional sign-systems that we use, what Fredric Jameson (1972) has called the ‘prison-house’ of language.
Art helps us to break out of this prison-house by subverting conventional sign-systems and forcing us to focus our attention on signs themselves rather than taking them for granted.
It is through this process that art leads, as Mukařovský puts it, to a ‘renewed awareness of the manifold and multivalent nature of reality’(Garvin 1964: 33).
So we return to Shklovsky's early principle that art refreshes our sense of life and experience; but the principle is now stated in the form of a far more coherent, complex and far-reaching theory.
This semiotic version of the Formalist position is therefore what the Prague School understood by ‘structuralism’ in the study of literature.
It is worth emphasizing its major difference from the structuralism of the sixties and seventies: whereas this later structuralism is mainly interested in the structure of literature as a whole, to the extent that this too can be viewed as a system of signs, the Prague School version took as its main object the structure of the individual text and, like the later Formalists, viewed the individual text as a system.
As Mukařovský wrote (Garvin 1964: 22): The task of the structuralist analyst is therefore to identify deviations from existing linguistic and literary practice (‘norms’) occurring at one level of the text (say its syntax), and then relate the structure of this level to that of the other levels (rhythm, syllable-structure, aspects of subject matter, etc.), in order to define the structure of the text as a whole.
The analysis thus involves the exact description not only of the language of the text, but also of its content.
Prague School structuralism is a programme for the precise and systematic explanation of the aesthetic effect of a text in its totality.
There are a number of objections that can be made to this kind of structuralism, although some of them are equally applicable to other branches of literary theory.
To begin with those relating mainly to the Prague School, there seems, first, to be no objective way of determining what limits can be imposed on the description of the text's structure.
An element of focus is provided, it is true, by the concept of the dominant, in the sense of the level of the text showing the highest degree of deformation.
According to Mukařovský, all components of the text and their interrelationships ‘are evaluated from the standpoint of the dominant’, which thus ‘creates the unity of the work of poetry’(Garvin 1964: 20 — 1).
But the fact remains that, even if the dominant is  taken as the starting-point, a description of the relationships of all the components of a text would be potentially endless.
Some further criterion of selection is required, which in practice must mean the analyst's own preconceptions, or his overall impression, as to what is important or interesting about the text he is dealing with.
The constant impression given by the Prague School is that the sort of description and analysis they call for is essentially objective and scientific in character, but in practice it seems impossible to exclude a strong element of subjectivity from this kind of structural study.
Moreover while the analysis of interrelationships at the verbal level can draw on a highly-developed set of tools, in the form of the concepts and categories supplied by linguistics, the same analysis is much more difficult at the levels of content.
To maintain that the content of literature is part of a system of signs with a structure of its own, independent of the ‘real’ world, is clearly to maintain that it is in theory analyzable in the same way as its language; but in practice a ready-made set of conceptual tools is simply not available.
As we shall see, though, it is precisely such a set of conceptual tools that more recent structuralism has attempted to supply.
As for the less specific objections to the Prague School, the weight one attaches to them will depend very much on one's own theoretical position.
Clearly positivists, and, as we shall see, Marxists as well, will feel unhappy about any approach to literature which, like that of the Formalists and the Prague School, concentrates on the analysis of a text's structure rather than its genesis, and on the explanation of literary facts within a predominantly literary framework of reference.
But a more general objection still relates to any theory that defines, as theirs does, such categories as poetry, literature or art in absolute terms.
Flexible though the Formalist/Prague School approach may be in this respect, it still attaches overwhelming importance to the element of innovation in literature, thus reflecting the permanent revolution in poetic language, and in literary forms in general, brought about by the modernist movement from the later nineteenth century onwards.
Clearly innovation is a characteristic of all literature, but equally clearly it is far less prominent in, say, the classicist tradition that dominated European culture from the Renaissance to the beginning of the nineteenth century.
In the end the Formalist/Prague School principle of defamiliarization must lead to the conclusion that modernist literature, with its greater element of innovation, is more ‘poetic’ than most literature of preceding periods — a conclusion explicitly stated, for instance, in a modern French version of Formalist analysis, jean Cohen's Structure du langage poétique.
A Formalist/Prague School approach thus necessarily projects back onto earlier literature the aesthetic standards peculiar to the modern age.
This may seem perfectly acceptable so long as we are convinced of the absolute  rightness of these standards; but the question must arise whether there is any point in seeking for single comprehensive definitions of such categories as poetry, literature, art, etc., or whether it is not better to regard the definitions that may be devised as applicable only to certain kinds of literature or certain aspects of texts.
Since their different literary predilections are one of the major factors that.
distinguish literary theories from one another, this is a question that will arise frequently in the course of the rest of this book.
Roman Jakobson: linguistic poetics
Jakobson's name has already been mentioned under the headings of both Formalism and the Prague School.
But while part of his famous ‘Closing statement’ is, as we have seen, a development of Prague School theory, it also puts forward a view of poetic language in some respects markedly different from that of the Thèses and Mukařovský.
In speaking of the literary text as a functional structure, the Prague School stressed its effect as a totality, through the interaction of all its constituent parts including the subject-matter.
In his ‘Closing statement’ Jakobson does not explicitly reject this view, which after all he played an important part in developing; but speaking as a linguist he insists that the difference between poetic and non-poetic texts can be explained in purely linguistic terms.
Poetics, which ‘deals primarily with the question, What makes a verbal message a work of art?’, is an ‘integral part of linguistics’, because the answer to this question is to be found entirely in the message's verbal structure (Sebeok 1971: 350).
 Jakobson's essay thus constitutes as strong a claim as can possibly be made for the relevance of linguistics to literary study.
According to the Prague School ‘poetic’ texts distinguish themselves from others through the violation of a norm.
Jakobson, however, proposes a different ‘empirical linguistic criterion’ for the definition of the poetic function: ‘The poetic function projects the principle of equivalence from the axis of selection into the axis of combination.
Equivalence is promoted to the constitutive device of the sequence’(Sebeok 1971: 358).
This distinction between the axis of selection and that of combination corresponds to Saussure's distinction between associative and syntagmatic relationships, between relationships of absence and presence in language.
Reformulating Saussure, Jakobson had pointed out earlier (Jakobson 1956: 55ff) that every linguistic message is the product of a double process:(1) the act of selection among items not present in the message but associated in the code (i.e. in the langue or language system), and (2) the combination of the items selected into a sequence.
While the relationship between the items present in the sequence (Saussure's syntagmatic relationships) is one of contiguity, the relationship between those not present in it (Saussure's associative relationships) is one of the similarity or equivalence, in the sense that the  items perform an equivalent function and can therefore replace one another.
For instance if I take the sentence ‘I woke up late this morning’ the items present in the sequence are obviously different from one another; but according to Saussurean theory we make sense of this sentence by implicitly relating it to items which are absent from the sequence but equivalent to those in it, for instance ‘You went down early that afternoon’.
(Jakobson associates relationships of contiguity with the figure metonymy, and those of equivalence with that of metaphor, a point which need not concern us for the moment, but which will become relevant in the discussion of Lacan later.)
The thesis of Jakobson's ‘Closing statement’ is that in poetic language relationships of equivalence or similarity not only concern absent items, but also become dominant present factors in the verbal sequence — that the two aspects of what he calls the ‘bipolar structure of language’(1956: 78) in a sense merge.
He explains what this means in practice as follows (1968: 602–3): This assertion, in another conference paper (of 1960) entitled ‘Poetry of grammar and grammar of poetry’, was subsequently corroborated by a series of studies of individual poems in six different European languages, ranging in date from the thirteenth to the twentieth century.
To illustrate Jakobson's approach to these texts, let us take his analysis (with L.G. Jones) of Shakespeare's Sonnet cxxix, ‘Th'Expence of Spirit’(1970): The analysis considers in turn the following relationships of equivalence and contrast (which evidently depends on and emphasizes equivalence) in the poem (the spelling and punctuation follow the first edition):(1) those which oppose the first seven lines to the last seven;(2) those which are constant features of the text as a whole;(3) those which oppose strophes I and III to II and IV;(4) those which oppose strophes I and IV to (I and III (the outer and the inner);(5) those which oppose strophes I and II to III and IV;(6) those which oppose the final couplet to the rest of the poem; and (7) those which oppose the middle couplet (lines 7 and 8) to the rest of the poem.
Without following Jakobson's analysis in detail — it does not make for easy reading — I shall simply give examples of the sort of relationship he identifies under each of these headings.
(1) The first seven lines are each characterized by a break after an unstressed fifth syllable; the last seven by a break after a stressed fourth and/or sixth syllable.
(2) Constant features: each strophe in the poem has an infinitive construction in the second or fourth line, and each line is characterized by the repetition of a sound sequence.
(3) The odd strophes have far more nouns and adjectives than the even ones (17 nouns as opposed to 6, 10 adjectives as opposed to 1); the nouns in the odd strophes are all abstract, those in the even strophes all (more or less) concrete.
(4) The inner strophes have 11 participles and no conjugated verb-forms, while the outer strophes each have a conjugated form repeated in the form of a chiasmus (Is lust…list/is; well knowes…knowes well); to this parallel between strophes I and IV there also corresponds a set of echoing pairs within strophes II and III (Injoyd — joy; had — Had,— mad — Mad; purpose — proposd).
(5) The first two strophes have three rhymes ending in a plosive and nine occurrences in stressed position of the  diphthong /ay/, whereas both of these elements are absent from the second two strophes; strophes I and II have, respectively, one definite followed by one inde finite article, and one inde finite followed by one de finite article, in contrast to the three indefinite articles in strophe (II and the two definite articles in strophe IV.
(6) The final couplet has no adjectives, participles, indefinite articles or ‘relational’ verbs (such as is); its nouns are all concrete and ‘original’whereas those of the rest of the poem are abstract and/or derived from verbs (and it has only one plural noun).
(7) The middle couplet of the poem abandons the grammatical or syntactical parallelism which characterizes all the other lines, and also contains the only comparative construction in the text.
One may quibble with some of Jakobson's distinctions and classifications, but it must be stressed that these are only a small selection of the multitude of relationships that he identifies in the space of this short poem.
If one takes the not inconsiderable trouble of following his analysis right the way through, it is hard not to be impressed by the picture he draws of an intricate network of equivalences and contrasts, corresponding to the different possible metrical divisions in the poem, and layered one upon the other in a kind of elaborate verbal counterpoint.
Since he has shown this sort of network to be discernible in a wide range of different kinds of poetry, and since it is hard to imagine that it could also be found in non-poetic language, there seems to be a strong prima facie case for accepting his argument that the principle of equivalence provides an objective criterion for identifying the poetic function.
Yet this style of analysis must strike most readers as wholly alien to their experience of poetry.
How are the two positions to be reconciled?
It should be apparent, first of all, that the relationships of equivalence described by Jakobson include at least two different types of structure (see Todorov 1982, Ch. 10) similarities of linguistic form immediately evident to the ear or eye (in Saussurean terms, syntagmatic structures); and groupings, according to grammatical and other classifications, which depend on the reader's ability to categorize the different linguistic features of the text (in Saussurean terms, paradigmatic).
Now while there is no reason to doubt that the first kind of structure contributes in one way or another to the effect of the poem, it can be and has been argued (Riffaterre 1966: 206ff.) that the second is in most cases irrelevant to the text's poetic status, since it tends to fall well below the ordinary reader's level of consciousness.
Jakobson's answer to this argument is, however, a powerful one: all users of a language must necessarily know the system of categories into which its different elements are divided, even if only unconsciously; and his analysis of poetry does not claim to represent what goes on in the reader's mind, but to account for the special effect which the poetry, for reasons of which he may well be unaware, exercises on him.
What he is offering is a technical explanation of the total impact of poetic language, not just a description or interpretation of the reader's conscious understanding.
It is of course possible that structures of the second kind, the equivalences of category, can be found in equal quantity in non-poetic language; all that may be required, it has been argued (Culler 1975: 62) is a sufficiently flexible system of categorization.
But until this has actually proved to be possible — and Jakobson would have denied that it is — it seems reasonable to accept that both kinds of equivalence constitute a distinguishing feature, if not of all poetic language, at least of a great deal of it.
The important question, though, is not so much whether such features are or are not objectively present, but what significance and function one should assign to them if they are.
After all, rhyme and metre are forms of equivalence which distinguish a very great deal of poetry, yet nowadays few would maintain that the presence of either or both is a necessary and sufficient condition for defining a text as poetic.
Equally the mere presence of further  equivalences at other levels of the text, however intricate and profuse, may simply constitute one among many possible distinguishing features, and not necessarily the essential one, of poetry.
Jakobson's poetic analyses are mostly concerned with establishing the mere presence of relationships of equivalence, and only to a small degree with discussing their significance.
But in his theoretical essays he gives some interesting indications of the ways in which they may contribute to a poem's effect.
At a simple and obvious level, he argued fairly recently (1973: 491) that they served to satisfy our innate desire for regularity and symmetry, and also permitted effects of relief and surprise through contrast.
More fundamentally, he suggested in the ‘Closing statement’, that they were the means whereby the poetic message focuses attention on itself and thus, in accordance with Prague School theory, ‘by promoting the palpability of signs, deepens the fundamental dichotomy of signs and objects’(Sebeok 1971: 356).
While Mukařovský and the Thèses proposed that the ‘set’ towards the message was brought about by deviation from or violation of a norm, Jakobson here in his later work is arguing that it is the consequence of the peculiar symmetry or convergence of the ‘poetic’text.
Both, however, suggest that the ‘set’ towards the message leads to a renewed perception of reality, by generating a renewed awareness of the forms of signification in which reality is articulated.
What this renewed awareness of signs means in more precise terms is put by Jakobson as follows (Sebeok 1960: 370, 372): In poetry not only the phonological sequence but in the same way any sequence of semantic units strives to build an equation.
…In poetry, any  conspicuous similarity in sound is evaluated in respect to similarity and/or dissimilarity in meaning'.
That is, the parallelisms and symmetries which poetry manifests at the level of verbal form automatically cause the reader to look for corresponding parallelisms and symmetries at the level of meaning.
The consequence of this is ambiguity, since parallelisms and symmetries of meaning are imposed on sets of words not normally connected in this way in ordinary language.
‘Similarity superimposed on contiguity imparts to poetry its  thoroughgoing symbolic, multiplex, polysemantic essence…
The supremacy of the poetic function over the referential function does not obliterate the message but makes it ambiguous…’(pp. 370 — 1).
The example Jakobson gives of this process is the last stanza of Poe's ‘Raven’: The marked sound repetitions in this verse suggest, Jakobson argues (‘Words similar in sound are drawn together in meaning’) such connections of meaning as these: raven, being contiguous to and similar in sound (/r/ — /v/ — /n/) to never, appears as the embodied mirror image of this ‘never’’; the parallelism in sound between never flitting and lifted nevermore underlines the Raven's significance as an image of ‘everlasting despair’, and so on(pp. 371 — 2).
Irrespective of the merit of these particular observations (and indeed of this particular poem), it is clear that once formal patterns of equivalence are connected to relations of meaning, as they are here, they become a good deal more interesting.
But it needs to be borne in mind that such connections are not an automatic or necessary consequence of the formal structure of the poetry; they are the result of the reader's bringing his own sensibility and experience to bear on the text, and interpreting it in the light of his own conscious or unconscious idea of the nature and function of literature.
There is no guarantee whatever that all formal equivalences can be given meaning, and there is no guarantee that such meaning as can be given to them will seem interesting or important from a poetic point of view.
The interest of Jakobson's theory, then, is that — apart from the fact that it has had such wide circulation — it shows both the strengths and limitations of the linguistic approach to literature.
It can point to structural features not evident to the non-linguistic critic, but which the critic must admit may well be an important source of effect.
On the other hand the structural analysis of the language only tells part of the story; the question how structural features contribute to the text's overall effect still remains to be answered by the critic.
‘Stylistics'
If we relate Prague School theory and Jakobson's poetics to the five questions about the literary text listed in our introduction, we will find, not surprisingly, that their position in almost every respect is substantially the same.
Both, as we have already seen, propose definitions of the specifically literary or poetic properties of texts, definitions which assign a dominant role to language, and which treat the relationship between text and author and text and reality as only secondary considerations.
What should be stressed here also is their shared conception of the role of the reader, as this involves an issue that will recur in this book.
The Prague School's and Jakobson's assumption is that the structures they describe are all objectively present in literature, and can be perceived by anyone who reads with sufficient skill and attention.
No allowance is made for the separate contribution that the reader himself might bring to the text, and that might help to determine its meaning and effect.
As we shall see in Chapter 5, this is a large and complicated area of discussion about which a great deal has recently been said.
Although neither theory claims to be such, both the Prague School's and Jakobson's are frequently treated nowadays as part of the subject of ‘stylistics’.
However most of the work that comes under this heading is a good deal less ambitious in its claims; it also approaches literary texts through their linguistic form, but on the whole does not pretend to define the essential properties of literature in purely linguistic terms, making greater allowance for other factors such as the role of the reader.
The words ‘style’ and ‘stylistics’have a great many meanings, and there is little point, especially here, in arguing about which meanings are the right ones.
In accordance with the theme of this chapter, I shall simply use ‘stylistics’ as a convenient label (hence the inverted commas) for the branch of literary studies that concentrates on the linguistic form of texts, and I shall take four different examples of this kind of work as alternatives to the Prague School's and Jakobson's approach to the relationship between linguistics and literature.
By the same token, I shall use the word ‘style’ only in connection with literary uses of language.
It needs to be said, however, that ‘stylistics’ is also developing as a branch of general linguistics that studies variations in non-literary language use, notably variations connected with the different contexts in which language is used (the style of journalism, official documents, radio commentaries, etc.).
Stylistics as a branch of literary studies can draw on this kind of work, but its concerns must in general be very different, because from a literary point of view the linguistic form of texts is of interest only in certain respects.
It is possible, roughly speaking, to sum up under four main headings the different ways in which literary stylistics views the language or style of literature: as embellishment, as self-reference, as representation and as manner.
These four categories admittedly overlap in theory and in practice, but I use them since they correspond to real differences of approach in the study of literary language, and help to show in what way stylistic and linguistic studies differ.
I shall be illustrating each of these four views of style with one of my four examples of modern stylistics, but let me first say exactly what my headings mean.
To view style as embellishment is the oldest way to view it.
At its crudest this takes the form of the assumption that writing is automatically made beautiful through the addition of certain standardized linguistic ornaments (ornatus in Latin) of which the best known are the various poetic ‘figures’, metaphor, antithesis, hyperbole and the like.
Classical and classicizing treatises on rhetoric and poetics are filled with descriptions of these linguistic ornaments, most of which have been codified to a very high degree.
Injustice to these treatises, however, it must be said that at least in antiquity they rarely assumed that style was automatically improved through the use of ornament.
Rather, the use of ornament was viewed strictly in its relation to the  tone or level of style required by different kinds of writing, in accordance with the principle of decorum.
It is this principle that forms the central consideration in my example of the stylistics of embellishment, Auerbach's Mimesis, and I shall explain it further shortly.
Style as self-reference, on the other hand, has already been dealt with in the preceding two sections of this chapter; linguistic deviation, according to the Prague School, and structures of equivalence, according to Jakobson, served the purpose of focusing attention on the linguistic message as a whole, of making it refer to itself.
My further example of the stylistics of self-reference, from the writings of Michael Riffaterre, is a more recent instance of deviation-theory, but assigns to it a more restricted role than the Prague School did within the literary text.
These two views of style evidently concern the general properties of literary language more than the individual features of authors or texts, whereas it is to these features that the stylistics of representation and manner both give their attention.
By representation I mean the use of language to reflect or reinforce the content of a text, following the much-quoted dictum of pope.
‘The sound must seem an echo to the sense’(Essay on Criticism, 1.
365).
The most obvious form that this use of language takes is the device of onomatopoeia (‘the murmur of innumerable bees’).
A more widespread and less blatant kind of sound-symbolism is discussed by the many style studies that see, for instance, suggestions of gloom or obscurity in the ‘dark’ vowels o and u, feelings of speed or haste in certain rhythms, and so forth .
Such studies tend to be impressionistic and are frequently questionable, but modern linguistics, by offering more exact and subtle methods of analysis, has opened up new possibilities for the study of sound-symbolism in literature.
More importantly perhaps, it has encouraged literary criticism and stylistics to look for connections between other levels of language, such as syntax or vocabulary, and the content of literary texts.
We shall meet an interesting example of this kind of approach shortly.
To avoid confusion in this connection, it is worth stressing that while the stylistics of embellishment is also concerned with the relationship between the language and content of texts, the relationship there is confined to general questions of tone.
What I mean by the stylistics of representation concerns the connection between individual features of the language of a text and individual features of its content, an interest which is much more characteristic of modern approaches to literature.
Finally, the view of style as manner: I mean by ‘manner’ the way in which a text, or an author's work as a whole, or the work of a group of writers, or even a period of literature, may be distinguished by typical patterns of language-use, a repeated preference, for instance, for a certain kind of construction or a certain class of word.
In most cases the point of looking at style in this way is to connect it with something  outside the text.
It may be seen as expressing the personality of the author, in accordance with the famous formula of the French scholar Buffon (1978: xvii), that the style is the man (‘le style est l'homme même’); or it may be related to a literary movement or period (e.g. futurist style, baroque style).
But one can also think of style as manner irrespective of such external connections, by identifying distinctive patterns of language use in a text simply as a means of differentiating it from other texts, on the general assumption that such distinctive patterns must be a part of the text's overall effect.
This last instance of the stylistics of manner begins to merge into the stylistics of embellishment, self-reference or representation.
Even here, however, the separate heading is worth preserving, since modern style-studies can and do content themselves with the mere description of distinctive linguistic patterns, abstaining not only from relating them to external factors such as authors or literary movements, but also from attributing to them any specific literary function.
My example of the stylistics of manner will belong to this last type.
Whether or not it is properly a part of literary studies may be a matter for dispute, but it undoubtedly constitutes an important position concerning the relationship of linguistics and literature.
The example I have taken of the stylistics of embellishment, Erich Auerbach's Mimesis (written between 1942 and 1945), is a history of the representation of reality in Western literature, and in particular of the literary forms in which reality has been represented.
I include it under the heading of embellishment because its framework of reference is the classical theory of the grand, elevated or sublime style.
Following the principle of decorum (to be found, for instance, in Horace's Ars Poetica), the classical view was that the style which dealt with serious matters had to be non-realistic, in the sense of systematically eliminating references to everyday life and using a type of language much more elaborate and re fined than that of everyday usage; non-serious subjects could be dealt with realistically, in ordinary language, but on no account could the different levels of style be mixed together.
Starting with Homer and finishing with Virginia Woolf, Auerbach uses this framework to characterize the different ways in which a selection of writers represented reality across the centuries, and in so doing traces the gradual abandonment of the principle of decorum in favour of a more modern standard, according to which seriousness and realism are wholly compatible.
Mimesis has been one of the great seminal works for the study of literary style, and on that ground I am discussing it here; for a number of reasons, however, it now seems to stand on the margins of modern approaches to literature.
Its classical framework of reference evidently limits its range of applicability, especially because the view of style as embellishment has not found much favour in modern literary studies.
Apart from this, its description of linguistic structures is not as exact and analytical as modern style studies tend to be.
Auerbach prefers the more sweeping, synthesizing statement that sums up stylistic tendencies in evocative, metaphorical language rather than in technical terminology; he draws much less on modern linguistics than on the older tradition of philological scholarship.
Moreover as a history of realism the book is concerned with larger matters than the detailed description of style.
The study of the individual text is only the starting-point for a more general discussion of literary and cultural developments; it is not the major focus of interest in itself
It may already be evident that the stylistics of embellishment has much in common with the stylistics of self-reference, as both can involve the idea of deviation from some kind of standard.
The reason why I think it important to distinguish between the two is that the principle of embellishment entails deviation in a single direction — that of elevation and elaboration — and for the purpose of achieving an emotive effect — that of dignity, sublimity and so forth.
Deviation as a means of self-reference, on the other hand, can take any direction, and is not necessarily concerned with a particular kind of emotive effect, since self-reference is an end in itself.
This difference is clearly illustrated in the work of Michael Riffaterre, my example of the stylistics of self-reference, which is interesting both for this reason, and because it contains a forceful criticism of and alternative to Jakobson's linguistic poetics.
Riffaterre's criticism of Jakobson is to be found principally in an article of 1966 on Jakobson's analysis (with Claude Lévi-Strauss) of Baudelaire's poem ‘Les Chats’, an analysis which follows the same model as that of the Shakespeare sonnet.
In this article Riffaterre argues from a position already developed in a series of papers written in the late fifties and early sixties.
His principal criticism is one to which we have already referred: that Jakobson does not differentiate linguistic features which are perceptible to the reader from those which are not, and which therefore remain ‘alien to the poetic structure’(Riffaterre 1966: 207) of the text.
Since the poetic structure includes only those elements which evoke a response in the reader, it is this response that must be taken as the analyst's starting point; the linguist as such cannot tell us what is interesting or important about a work (‘No grammatical analysis of a poem can give us more than the grammar of the poem’(p. 213)).
But this emphasis on the reader's response does not mean that Riffaterre accepts that literary analysis is subjective.
He had earlier distinguished (1964) between the categories ‘poetry’ and ‘literature’on the one hand, and ‘style’on the other.
The first two are necessarily variables, in that their meaning depends on the time and circumstance in which they are used; ‘style’, however, can be defined as possessing a constant and specific property.
Like  Jakobson, he believes that literary language can be analyzed objectively and exactly, though rather than speaking of its ‘poetic’ function, he opts for the term ‘stylistic’function instead.
Like Jakobson's ‘poetic’ function, Riffaterre's ‘stylistic’function consists in the ‘set’towards the message.
But this ‘set’ is the product not of equivalences, nor of violation of an external norm, but of the violation of norms which the text itself creates.
Style consists in the establishment of a certain pattern of linguistic regularity which creates expectations in the reader that the ‘stylistic device’ then disrupts.
Riffaterre stresses the theoretical and practical problems involved in defining (as the Prague School tried to do) external literary and linguistic norms, and suggests that in any case ‘normal’ language can itself be a source of stylistic effect in a text.
By taking the ‘contextual’ norm as one of his defining factors, he avoids this difficulty and locates his framework of analysis firmly within the text itself (see Riffaterre 1959 and 1960).
But how does this allow a study of style that is objective and exact?
Riffaterre's answer (1959) was first to propose taking a group of average cultivated readers as informants.
These were to identify, but not describe or interpret, the stylistic devices present in a given text.
All they had to do was indicate the points in the text at which the language created an effect of surprise; the task of the stylistician was then to analyze the contrast, between the linguistic structure of the device and that of its immediate context, that accounted for this effect of surprise.
In the article on Jakobson this position was somewhat modified; Riffaterre proposed taking as his informants not average readers but the so-called ‘Superreader’, a figure representing the sum of reactions to the language of a text manifested in the published work of its interpreters, translators and so on.
Once again, however, it was not their analysis or explanation that counted, but the mere fact that they found certain features stylistically striking.
Why they found them striking was for the stylistician to explain.
In retrospect what Riffaterre and Jakobson have in common seems more striking than their disagreements.
Riffaterre's recognition of the variable character of the ‘poetic’ and the importance of the reader's role may well mark a step forward from Jakobson's views.
But his definition of style, like Jakobson's of poetry, fails to allow for its multiplicity and changeability, even if it points to an important possible source of literary effect; and in his claims concerning readers' responses he attributes to these a degree of regularity which to many must seem quite unrealistic.
Both therefore share the same confidence, which now seems rather questionable, but is typical of the structuralism of the sixties, in the possibility of defining and analyzing scientifically the essential features of literature.
When we pass to the treatment of style as representation we come to  an approach to literature which is less likely to make such claims to scientific status; for rather than defining style in purely linguistic terms, its purpose is to relate it to interpretations of literary content, and these must inevitably be somewhat approximative.
The best known example of this kind of stylistics, indeed the best-known example of stylistics in any sense, is the work of Leo Spitzer.
Like Auerbach a scholar of Germanic origins who finished his career in the United States, Spitzer developed, in contrast to him, a method of stylistic analysis which concentrated firmly on the individual text.
In a collection of essays published in 1948 under the title Linguistics and Literary History, Spitzer defined his method by the term ‘philological circle’.
The process of stylistic study should begin, he suggested, from any detail of the text that strikes the analyst first as deviant in relation to established modes of writing, second as potentially significant in relation to the work as a whole.
The first step, the ‘click’, is mainly intuitive.
Once it has occurred, the analyst connects the feature in question with his impression of or feeling for the whole work, and may be led to modify this as a result.
He then returns in a circular movement, a ‘to-and-fro voyage’, to other details of the text's language, with a view to relating together both details and general impression in an organic whole.
He thus arrives at the ‘common spiritual etymon, the psychological root’ of the multiplicity of linguistic features in the work, the ‘creative center’from which everything in it emanates (Spitzer 1948: 1–39).
This talk of the ‘common spiritual etymon [i.e. origin], the psychological root’ of stylistic forms sounds more like my definition of the stylistics of manner than a view of style as representation.
Much of Spitzer's work, however, does not conform to this psychological view; the ‘to-and-fro voyage’ takes place between a text's linguistic forms and an interpretation of its content taken in itself, not in relation to its author.
His analysis of Yeats's ‘Leda and the Swan’(Spitzer 1962: 3–13) is a clear instance of this kind of approach, and therefore falls under my heading of the stylistics of representation: Starting from ‘the most immediately striking, the most individual, the least ‘cataloguable’ feature of the poem, Spitzer focuses his attention on the ‘rendering of the time-place sequence’.
This conveys ‘one of the mysterious paradoxes of copulation and procreation…: the overwhelming strength of a moment engenders events whose meaning will become clear only in their result in time’.
For instance, the ‘syntactically brusque beginning of the poem’(a nominal sentence without any kind of introduction) corresponds to the violent, irrational character of Jupiter's rape of Leda in the guise of a swan.
The rapid progress of the narrative to the bird's orgasm (the ‘shudder in the loins’) and consequent loss of sexual desire (the last line) mirrors the speed of the sexual act.
The paradox is that this sudden, violent, essentially mindless process (the could in the last line underlines the ‘demoniac compulsion to which the divine bird himself is subject’) is the cause of events of enormous, tragic magnitude for the human race: the birth of Helen and the Trojan war.
The unusual constructions in lines 10 — l 1 (‘The broken wall’, etc., in the place of ‘the breaking of the wall’) enhance the impression that these subsequent events are already a fait accompli at the time of the rape.
The poem, Spitzer suggests, is a ‘protest against the gods who let sex be the effect of power uncoupled with knowledge’, and at the same time such a drastic force in human affairs.
Now this is not perhaps one of the best of Spitzer's analyses, and in any case it contains a great deal more than we have space to repeat here.
But it should be evident that it is true to his professed method, in that it executes a constant back-and-forth movement between the specific description of linguistic structures and the interpretation of the meaning of the poem as a whole.
In some respects this method has much in common with the structuralism of the Prague School; there is an apparently similar interest in elements of deviation, and an apparently similar view of the literary text as a closely knit set of interrelated features.
It is the emphasis on interpretation, however, that sets Spitzer apart from the Formalists and their successors, and brings him closer, as we shall see, to the Anglo-American New Critics; and even more so to hermeneutic theory (see Chapter 5), from which the term ‘philological circle’ is derived.
Individual points about style are always made in the context of a discussion of the feelings, attitudes or ideas that the text as a whole expresses, a discussion which is inevitably to a large extent intuitive and impressionistic.
As we have seen the Prague School were also interested in the content of texts  as well as their language, but what concerned them was the structure of the content as a self-contained system of signs to be separated out into its different levels, not the overall impression that it conveys.
Spitzer s approach may therefore seem less scientific than theirs, but it is also a great deal closer to most readers' experience, as the revelatory quality of his best studies shows.
As I have already suggested, the stylistics of representation may merge into the view of style as manner, and Spitzer's own work does move between the two categories.
However the example I have chosen of the stylistics of manner should make clear the potential difference between the two approaches, and at the same time illustrate the use of a more technically advanced linguistics than that drawn on by Spitzer, who like Auerbach belonged to the European philological tradition more than to the modern tradition of linguistics.
In an essay entitled ‘Descriptive linguistics in literary studies’, the distinguished British linguistician M.A.K. Halliday also offers a stylistic analysis of Yeats's ‘Leda and the Swan’, but one which makes points of a very different kind from Spitzer's.
The most important of these points are three in number, and I have expressed them for the sake of clarity in less technical and exact terminology than Halliday uses.
According to Halliday's analysis, Yeats's repeated use of the definite article in combination with an adjective before a noun (‘the great wings’, etc.) is unusual to the extent that, in contrast with most English usage, the article in this combination does not define anything, but instead refers back to the title (it is ‘anaphoric’ rather than‘cataphoric’).
Second, the verbal items in the poem are ‘considerably deverbalized’, in that the great majority are participles or infinitives, and only five (e.g. ‘holds, ‘put’) are in finite groups in free clauses, the most ‘verbish’ use of verbs.
Third, the less ‘verbish’ the verbs in the poem are, the greater their lexical power tends to be, lexical power being in inverse proportion to the number of different terms with which a given term is habitually associated (‘the fewer the items with which a given item is likely to collocate…the more ‘powerful’it is said to be’); and the more powerful, and less ‘verbish’, words are ‘items of violence’, such as‘staggering’.
Halliday's analysis thus differs from Spitzer's not only in using a more modern and technically advanced linguistics, but more importantly because it makes no attempt, to speak of, at interpretation.
What he has done is describe certain linguistic features of the text which distinguish it from other texts (he refers to Yeats's ‘Phoenix’ and Tennyson's, ‘Morte d'Arthur’, as well as instances of non-literary usage), and which look as if they may be of some literary significance; but he leaves it to the literary specialist to determine what the nature of that literary significance is.
This corresponds exactly to his views on the relationship between linguistics and the study of literature  (Halliday 1967: 217 — 23).
Linguistics cannot supply a key to the specific qualities of literature as such, or a guide to interpretation; all it can do is provide the means for describing a text on the basis of a general linguistic theory, and therefore relate the text to the language as a whole in which it is written.
‘Stylistics’ thus becomes an essentially comparative study of the patterns of preference shown by the writer in his selection from the linguistic resources available to him, a question of the relative frequencies of choice which distinguish the language of his text from that of others; it is an ‘application rather than an extension of linguistics’(p.217).
This suggestion, that stylistics should characterize comparatively the language or style of texts and leave it at that, would seem to constitute a sort of minimal claim for the relevance of linguistics to the study of literature.
I say minimal both because it is rather modest, in contrast say to Jakobson's, and because it seems to present a demand that it should be very difficult for modern literary studies to deny: that in describing the language of literary texts a degree of rigour is required such as has been notably absent from the work of a great many critics.
As Halliday (1964: 37) says, ‘if a text is to be described at all, then it should be described properly’.
This certainly does not mean that there is only one way of describing a text.
Modern linguistics is a field full of conflicting theories, and an external observer would be hard put to accept one as better than the rest.
Yet most modern models of language, from Saussure's onwards, give a fuller and more coherent account of it than traditional grammar ever did, and therefore offer the possibility of describing the linguistic features of texts far more exactly than was possible with the rag-bag of grammatical and metaphorical terminology on which criticism has traditionally depended.
However most practitioners of literary stylistics, including Halliday himself on a later occasion (Halliday 1971), would insist on supplementing the comparative approach just described with some kind of functional analysis — analysis, that is, that asks what the language of a text does, how it contributes to the meaning and effect of the whole.
In their different ways all the theorists discussed earlier in this chapter offer answers to this question, and all thereby come much closer than Halliday's minimalist position to the generally recognized objectives of literary study.
It should be added that some influential and interesting recent developments of linguistic or stylistic criticism, notably Roger Fowler's Literature as Social Discourse, propose a kind of functional analysis that is rather different from those we have been considering.
Fowler argues that the analyst should attend particularly to the social function of linguistic structures in literature; texts should not be viewed as self-contained systems but as process, ‘the communicative interaction of implied speakers and thus of consciousness and of  communities’(p. 94).
Stylistics has thus begun to converge with aspects of Marxist criticism, especially with the language-centred Marxist models of literature discussed in Chapter 7.
ANGLO-AMERICAN NEW CRITICISM
David Robey
The term ‘New Criticism’ is usually used for the literary theory and criticism that began with the work of I.A. Richards and T.S.
Eliot before the war in England, and was continued by figures such as John Crowe Ransom, W.K. Wimsatt, Cleanth Brooks and Allen Tate in the United States during the forties, fifties and sixties.
Although it developed quite independently of the Russian Formalist/Prague School structuralist theory discussed in the last two chapters, there are some fundamental affinities between the two movements.
Both rejected positivistic literary scholarship and called for a renewed attention to literature as literature; both insisted on the differences between literature and other kinds of writing, and tried to define these differences in theoretical terms; both gave a central role in their definitions to ideas of structure and interrelatedness, and treated the literary text as an object essentially independent of its author and its historical context.
Considering that the New Critics seem to have known nothing at all about the work of the Formalists and their successors (it is not mentioned at all, for instance , in Wimsatt and Brooks's Literary Criticism: A Short History of 1957), these affinities are really very striking.
It is the differences between the two movements, however, that will be of more interest to us here.
The New Criticism almost certainly constitutes the English-speaking world's major contribution to literary theory, and as such it has exercised until recently a dominant influence on the teaching of literature in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in Britain.
In the last few years, however, with the entry of European literary theory into British and American academic life, its prestige has definitely been on the wane.
Yet there are good reasons for continuing to read the New Critics' work.
At the very least they are interesting because they formulated a number of assumptions about literature and literary study that still play a significant part in the academic world today.
More importantly, their work still has considerable validity as a theoretical alternative to Formalism and structuralism, an alternative which may seem a great deal closer to many readers' and critics' feelings about literature and life.
For while they always emphasized the special qualities of literature, and in particular the idea that the meaning or effect of literature cannot be explained by a process of reduction to ordinary modes of expression, the New Critics also  insisted on its connections with the ‘real’ world, and on the contribution it can make to coping with the problems of everyday human existence.
In contrast to Formalism and structuralism, the New Criticism was empiricist and humanistic.
I shall try to explain further the significance of this distinction in the pages that follow.
I.A. Richards: value
The New Criticism began, as 1 said, with the work of Richards and Eliot; more exactly one can say that it began with the publication in 1924 of Richards's Principles of Literary Criticism, a radical, polemical programme for the study of literature that has had an enormous impact on British criticism and scholarship in the past fifty years.
This work, together with The Meaning of Meaning, written with C.K.
Ogden immediately before it, and Science and Poetry and Practical Criticism, which first appeared in 1926 and 1929 respectively, was published early in Richards's long career (he was born in 1893, and died in the United States in 1979), when he was teaching English literature at Cambridge.
I shall limit my discussion of Richards's views to these four books, both for the sake of clarity and simplicity, and because they were the most influential of his writings.
It must be said, however, that it is something of an injustice to him to do this, since his ideas and interests subsequently developed in a number of important ways.
Like Russian Formalism, Richards's early work turns its back on positivistic scholarship, and calls for a criticism that deals directly with the distinctive properties of literature; where he differs from the Formalists, however, is in defining these properties in terms of human experience and human value.
While the Formalists had treated them as objective features inherent in literature itself, Richards's emphasis was on the reader's response to literature and on the evaluation of this response.
The central question of criticism is ‘What gives the experience of reading a certain poem its value?
How is this experience better than another?’
(Richards 1967: 1).
As a result he has relatively little to say about questions of literary form.
What he is interested in above all is analyzing the process of reading, and formulating criteria by which to evaluate the experience that reading produces.
According to Richards, therefore, critics need two things that they did not habitually possess at the time he was writing, and usually do not possess now: a theory of communication and a theory of valuation.
Without these criticism lacks intellectual rigour, and is unable to justify itself adequately in a world in which the personal and social utility of the arts is increasingly called into question.
As its title indicates, Principles of Literary Criticism sets out to remedy this deficiency, by developing a systematic theoretical framework within which criticism can be properly conducted.
The main point on which this framework rests is the distinction, already made in The Meaning of Meaning, between two different functions of language.
The symbolic or referential function uses words to talk about the objective world, to point to things, as Richards puts it.
The emotive function uses words to evoke subjective feelings or attitudes, by means of the associations that words carry with them.
The clearest example of referential language is scientific prose, in which the evocation of feeling is as far as possible eliminated, and the writer's and reader's attention focused entirely on things.
The clearest example of emotive language is poetry, which is entirely concerned with the evocation of feelings or attitudes, and in which the writer's and reader's attention is not, or should not be, directed at any of the objective relationships between words and things.
Poetry is pseudo-statement, Richards argued; when we read it properly ‘the question of belief or disbelief, in the intellectual sense, never arises…’
(Richards 1970: 277).
He thus comes close to Formalist/structuralist theory in denying the referential function of poetry, but differs significantly from it in his identification of the emotive with the poetic use of language; for Jakobson, it will be remembered, the emotive or what Jakobson calls the conative and the poetic are quite distinct.
It is worth noting, however, that Richards's concept of poetry is similar to that which we have encountered in the previous two chapters, in that poetry for him is simply shorthand for literature that has aesthetic value; his belief was that the value of literature as a whole lay entirely in its use of the emotive function of language.
From this identification of the poetic and the emotive it follows that Richards is far less inclined than the Formalists to stress the difference between poetry and ordinary discourse.
Or more exactly, while he does stress the difference between poetry and referential language, he also stresses that the experience which poetry produces differs only in degree, not in kind, from other types of emotive experience.
Too many theorists have deluded the public by talking about one sort or another of ‘Phantom Aesthetic State’; in reality value in literature is explainable in exactly the same terms as value in any other form of human activity.
This proposition is more easily understood when one realizes that Richards's general theory of value is a materialist one.
Man ‘is not in any sense primarily an intelligence; he is a system of interests’(Richards 1926: 21).
It follows that what is good is simply the ‘exercise of impulses and the satisfaction of their appetencies’(1967: 44), an ‘appetency’ being defined as a conscious or unconscious desire in the broadest sense.
Life being what it is, unfortunately, our desires inevitably conflict, especially since we are social beings as well as individuals (Richards invokes Bentham here), and thus have to consider the needs of others as well as our own.
The problem of morality is therefore above all a problem of organization; we have to reconcile our conflicting impulses with one another, in such a way as to  allow them collectively the greatest possible degree of satisfaction.
‘States of mind,’ Richards says (1967: 45), ‘are valuable in the degree in which they tend to reduce waste and frustration.’
The difference between ordinary emotive experience and poetic experience, or any other form of artistic experience, is simply that poetry and art in general carry the reconciliation of conflicting impulses to an exceptionally high level.
In this respect Richards's theory constitutes a materialist rewriting of the famous theory of the imagination in Chapter XIV of Coleridge's Biographia Literaria (Coleridge 1817: II, 12–13).
For Richards the moment of poetic creation is characterized by an exceptional sensitivity or ‘vigilance’ towards the entire range of impulses relevant to the situation that is being expressed, and by the organization of these impulses into an ordered and harmonious whole.
The conflict which characterizes our everyday feelings usually causes part of them to be inhibited or suppressed; in contrast poetry and the other arts ‘spring from and perpetuate hours in the lives of exceptional people, when their control and command of experience is at its highest’(Richards 1967: 22).
They renovate and enhance our reactions to life by disrupting established habits of response, and creating in us a state of equilibrium of a kind that other sorts of experience can rarely achieve.
This leads Richards to a position which seems close to the Formalist principle of defamiliarization, when he says, for instance(1970: 254), ‘Nearly all good poetry is disconcerting’.
But in contrast with the Formalists his emphasis is all on experience, not on form, and on organization, not on difference.
Unlike theirs, his position is an essentially humanist one, in that it stresses the relevance of art to life.
The critic is ‘as closely occupied with the health of the mind as the doctor with the health of the body’(Richards 1967: 25).
Moreover, poetry can do for us what religion and philosophy no longer can, that is tell us ‘what to feel’ and ‘what to do’; poetry, Science and Poetry concludes (p. 82), is ‘capable of saving us.’
It is this view of the experience produced by literature that causes Richards to emphasize the role of the reader rather than the author or the text.
The difference between the critic's activity and that of the good reader is not really all that great.
The critic must study the text with the maximum degree of attention to all its parts (Richards suggests (1970: 317) that four poems may be too many for a week's reading), but his aim is to arrive at the ‘relevant mental condition’(Richards 1970: 11) associated with it, and then to judge this mental condition according to the principles outlined above.
It should be noted that in emphasizing the experience of reading Richards does not make the kind of distinctions between reader, author and text that have played an important part in a number of modern literary theories.
That is to say, the ‘relevant mental condition’ which the  critic/reader must recreate within himself is assumed also to be the mental condition of the author.
The poem is defined, technically, as the ‘experience of the right kind of reader has when he peruses the verses’(Richards 1926: 10)), and the right kind of reader is the one who manages to recreate in himself more or less completely the collection of impulses which the poet expressed in the poem or, more exactly, the ‘relevant experience of the poet when contemplating the completed composition’(Richards 1967: 178).
In contrast to those modern theorists discussed elsewhere in this book, who have insisted that the literary text is in a significant sense independent of its author, and that the author's and reader s experiences are not and should not be the same, Richards treats the text simply as a transparent medium, a mere vehicle for conveying the experience of the author to the reader.
He never doubts that it is possible or desirable for the critic to recreate in himself the mental condition of the author; he only recognizes that it is difficult.
Practical Criticism deals with the obstacles blocking the reader's approach to this ‘mental condition’.
Richards asked a sample audience in Cambridge to describe their responses to a set of thirteen poems supplied without titles or the authors' names.
The book analyzes the different mistakes of interpretation and evaluation that Richards saw in these responses, and seeks to identify their causes.
Some causes, he suggests, arise from texts themselves: the difficulty of apprehending the full range of meaning, and the inevitable differences in readers' reactions to sound and imagery.
The other causes lie in the readers alone: the habits of thought and feeling that they bring with them to the text, which distort or block their response to it.
Richards emphasizes the low degree of critical competence which, as a result of these different factors, his highly educated audience in his opinion revealed.
But the book is written in the faith that such errors in readers' responses can be corrected, and that when this is done their way will be open to the poet's mental condition, and therefore to the correct experience of the poem.
Interpretation is not really a problem for Richards, but simply a matter of approaching the text with the right kind of attention.
This aspect of Richards's work is worth stressing, because it expresses a belief which is taken for granted by a great deal of literary scholarship and criticism, and which from a more modern point of view may well seem somewhat naive.
But it needs to be said that it is not a belief that Richards himself takes for granted.
Much of his early writing is concerned with the theory of communication as well as the theory of valuation, with the result that his view of the author-text-reader relationship is placed within an elaborate and sophisticated theoretical framework.
The details of this framework need not concern us here, except in one important respect.
In The Meaning of Meaning Richard's discussion of communication takes place under the  heading of symbolism or the theory of signs.
As we have seen in the previous chapter, the terms semiotics or semiology are now usually used for the general theory of signs, which in its European structuralist versions has played an enormously important role in modern literary theory.
If we contrast Richards's symbolism with the semiotics of the European structuralists, we shall be able to clarify a fundamental difference of principle between his view of knowledge and experience and theirs.
The difference turns on the fact that his view is empiricist, whereas theirs very definitely is not.
Like Saussure's Cours, The Meaning of Meaning starts from the proposition that there is an essential disjunction between language and reality, that it is a superstition to believe that ‘words are in some way parts of things’(Ogden and Richards 1936: 14).
Words, the authors argue, are really a barrier between us and the world; we cannot escape from the structure of our language, and the structure of our language and the structure of the world are far from being identical.
From this common starting-point, however, Ogden and Richards move in a quite different direction from Saussure's.
For Saussure the meaning of words does not depend in any way on their relationship with things; it is wholly determined by the arbitrary and conventional structure of language.
Ogden and Richards, in contrast, stress that words are used to ‘point to’ things, and that their meaning does in the last analysis depend on the things they are used to point to, their referents; language may be different from reality, therefore, but it nonetheless reflects it.
For this reason they specifically criticize Saussure for ‘neglecting entirely the things for which signs stand’(p. 6).
Their position is thus an empiricist one, in that it rests on the principle that knowledge is the product of experience.
The structuralist position derived from Saussure is anti-empiricist, inasmuch as its emphasis on the arbitrary and conventional nature of language leads to the view that knowledge is not in any way the product of experience.
This aspect of Richards's thought is not so important for understanding his literary theory, since, as we have seen, he associated poetry with the emotive, not the referential, use of language.
But it illustrates a radical divergence between the Anglo-American tradition as a whole and a great deal of modern European literary theory.
In particular it is a fundamental feature of the American New Critics' work, to which I will shortly turn.
Some features of Richards's theory may now seem rather out of date: his notion that poetic language is purely emotive, his materialistic conception of literary value, his view of the author — text — reader relationship.
But other features have become established parts of the Anglo-American critical tradition, and have by no means necessarily been superseded.
These are his empiricism and humanism, and what we can call his organicist insistence on close reading, on careful  attention to every detail of a literary text, on the principle that the text, like a living organism, functions through the interaction of all its constituent parts.
One other feature of Richards's work has had little impact in this country, but a much greater impact, as we shall see, in the United States: the demand that criticism be founded on theory.
Until very recently the theoretical issues raised by literary study have been largely ignored in British academic teaching and research.
Richards's influence in Britain is thus to be found more in the practice of literary study than in the theory, in the form of undiscussed assumptions rather than systematically developed ideas.
Most of all this influence is to be seen in the practice of close reading, which has become an established part of English literature courses in Britain.
Richards's influence in this respect has been much reinforced by the work of his pupil William Empson, the author of Seven Types of Ambiguity, first published in 1930.
This is not the place for a proper discussion of Empson's views, which like a great deal of British work are more concerned with critical method than with theory (he wrote (1950: 594) that ‘a critic ought to trust his own nose, like the hunting dog, and if he lets any kind of theory or principle distract him from that, he is not doing his work’).
But his practical, analytical development of Richards's theory has been an important model for British criticism during the last few decades, and I will therefore conclude this section with a very brief indication of the difference between his and Richards's approach.
In his early works Richards outlined in a general way the different textual factors contributing to the effect of poetry; he distinguished, for instance, between the sense, feeling, tone and intention of a text in Practical Criticism (pp. 180–3), and in Principles of Literary Criticism (pp. 103–12) he offered some discussion of rhythm and metre.
But since his principal concern was with the psychological effect of poetry on the reader, he did not carry this sort of analysis very far.
His interest was to ensure that poetry was read with the right kind of attention, not to analyze or explain the textual means by which its effect is achieved.
Seven Types of Ambiguity, on the other hand, is entirely occupied with this sort of explanation, through the ‘verbal analysis’ of ambiguity in poetry, ambiguity being defined (in the second edition) as ‘any verbal nuance, however slight, which gives room for alternative reactions to the same piece of language’(Empson 1965: 1).
Empson's work thus comes close to the theories discussed in the last chapter, which approach the literary text through its linguistic form; it differs from most of these, however, in being less systematic and theoretical, and in particular in being less influenced by developments in modern linguistics.
American New Criticism: the text in itself
The American New Critics remained true to the spirit of Richards's  work by emphasizing the distinctive properties of literature or poetry, and by dealing with them in a way which was not only empiricist, humanistic and organicist, but also theoretical as well.
Their conception of literature differed from his, however, on at least one fundamental point: they were much less interested in the experience of reading than in the objective features of the medium, the literary text itself; and they therefore spent much less time on evaluation than on description and analysis.
In this respect, clearly, they were a great deal closer than Richards to the Russian Formalists and their successors.
But this shift of emphasis was not due to any direct influence from the Formalists whom, as I have said, the New Critics did not know; it was due to the influence of a figure much closer to home, the poet T.S.
Eliot.
The point is frequently made, quite rightly, that the American New Criticism is a development of Richards's and Eliot's work fused together.
Eliot's writings on poetry do not contain a systematic theory, but on two matters of principle he adopted a stance strongly opposed to that of Richards: he refused to accept either that poetry consisted in the use of emotive language, or that it was simply a vehicle for communicating the author's experience to the reader.
‘poetry,’ he argued (1920: 52–3), ‘is not a turning loose of emotion but an escape from emotion; it is not the expression of personality, but an escape from personality.’
Good poetry objectifies feeling, expressing it indirectly through the description of things — through the ‘objective correlative’(Eliot, 1972: 145).
Good poetry is also equally concerned with thought; Eliot admired particularly the English Metaphysical poets who, he suggested (1972: 286), ‘incorporated their erudition into their sensibility’.
On such grounds as these he argued that the experience of the author and that of the reader must necessarily be different, that ‘what a poem means is as much what it means to others as what it means to the author’(Eliot 1955: 130).
From these rather brief suggestions the New Critics built up a much more definite and systematic theory of the literary text, and of the relationship between text, author and reader.
The term ‘New Criticism’ seems to have come into circulation with the publication in 1941 of a book of that title by the American poet and critic John Crowe Ransom.
Like many terms of the sort, it does not have a very precise definition.
The British and American critics for whom the label is commonly used, however, can be distinguished by a common rejection of established modes of criticism and scholarship (Empson and Leavis are sometimes included among them), and in the case of the Americans by the fact that they proposed alternative methods of criticism supported by well-developed literary theories.
1 shall limit myself in the rest of this chapter to the most interesting and influential of these theories, those of Ransom and the other Southern critics Cleanth Brooks and Allen Tate, and those of W.K. Wimsatt and  his collaborator the philosopher Monroe Beardsley; all of these writers were active mainly in the forties and fifties.
More exactly, since these five writers differ not only from other New Critics but also among themselves, I shall for the sake of clarity and simplicity concentrate on two texts, Wimsatt's The Verbal Icon and Brooks's The Well-Wrought Urn, referring to the work of the others only insofar as it corroborates or develops what is said there.
One further point that is often made to explain the nature of the New Criticism is that it developed outside the ambit of the main university graduate schools, in small colleges mainly in the South.
This is particularly evident in the work of Allen Tate, who like Ransom was a poet as well as a critic, and was certainly not a scholar of the traditional type.
Tate was a fierce critic of the ‘cloistered historical scholarship of the graduate school’, with its positivistic assumption that the literary text ‘expresses its place and time, or the author's personality’ and nothing more (Tate 1959: 7 & 54).
Criticism, he argued, should be opposed to this kind of scholarship, and concern itself with the specifically literary properties of texts.
The same opposition of criticism and scholarship and the same demand that criticism should concern itself with specifically literary properties are the inspiration of two of the best-known theoretical products of the New Criticism, the essays on ‘The intentional fallacy’ and ‘The affective fallacy’written jointly by Wimsatt and Beardsley and published in the Sewanee Review in 1946 and 1949 respectively (now in Wimsatt 1958: 1 — 39).
Together these two essays are an attempt to construct the theoretical basis for an alternative to positivistic scholarships, an alternative that will deal with the specifically literary properties of texts, and deal with them with the same degree of objectivity and rigour as scholarship has traditionally claimed.
Wimsatt and Beardsley argue that a poem (short-hand, as usual, for a literary work of art) is, and therefore should be treated as, an object in the public domain, not the private creation of an individual.
The author's experience and intentions at the time of writing are matters of purely historical interest, that do not — contrary to the ‘intentional fallacy’— in any way determine the meaning, effect or function of his creation.
As far as the author's experience is concerned, what counts from the viewpoint of criticism is only what is embodied in the text, and that is wholly accessible to anyone with a knowledge of the language and culture to which the text belongs.
As for the author's intentions, what counts is only whether or not he has succeeded in writing poetry, and that too can be discerned by reference to the text alone.
Thus most of what passes for literary scholarship is excluded from the sphere of criticism: studies of authors' lives, of their immediate environment, of their ideas about writing and of the genesis of their works.
The only history that the critic must master is  the history of words; he must grasp the full historical meaning of the language used in the text, including all its associations, and of the names to which reference may be made, but only to the extent that their meaning is a matter of public record about the culture in which the text was produced.
Wimsatt and Beardsley's approach is thus not a-historical, but it severely restricts the role of history in literary study, relegating questions about ‘how the poem came to be’ to a different, and by implication inferior, branch of enquiry.
In this respect their position is not far removed from Richards's, since he too ignored the external history of texts, on the assumption that the ‘relevant experience’ of the author is entirely accessible from his work alone.
But in another respect they take issue directly with Richards, following the guidance of Eliot.
The ‘affective fallacy’, they maintain, is the fallacy of arguing, as Richards does, that poetry consists in the emotive use of language, and that the primary consideration of the critic must therefore be the effect that the poem has on the reader.
Wimsatt and Beardsley's view is that a poem is not just a vehicle for conveying feelings, but an independent object with distinctive features of its own.
To study the effect of the object rather than the object itself is to put the cart before the horse, since the cause of the effect is to be found in the object, and besides the effects of literary objects vary notoriously from one reading and from one reader to another.
It is therefore essential to distinguish between effect on the one hand, and meaning or ‘cognitive structure’ on the other.
It is with meaning, as the publicly accessible and thus objective constituent of texts, that literary criticism must be concerned; effect, being both variable and private, is much better left outside the field of enquiry.
It is on this basis that the New Critics argued that criticism was capable of the same degree of objectivity and rigour as traditional scholarship could achieve.
If we follow Wimsatt and Beardsley this far, we arrive at a position that has had a great deal of attraction for literary critics, that the object of criticism must be the literary text itself.
Moreover along with much modern literary theory, the New Critics also held that literary texts are texts of a special kind, and that the task of criticism is to give an account of this special character.
The theory developed for this purpose by Wimsatt and Brooks (and in a rather different way by Ransom and Tate) takes as its starting-point Richards's (and Coleridge's) principle of the reconciliation of opposites, though the view it arrives at differs from Richards's in a number of important respects.
From their views on the intentional and affective fallacies (Brooks seems to have agreed entirely with Wimsatt and Beardsley about these) it follows that this reconciliation of opposites must be seen not as an event in the mind of the author or reader, but as an objective fact about the text's meaning or structure.
As Brooks put it, the New  Criticism ‘is concerned with the structure of the poem as poem’(Brooks 1962: 108).
By ‘structure’ Brooks meant the organization of meaning in the text, which in the case of good literature (‘poetry’) possessed a different character from that of ordinary discourse.
The chief property of poetry is coherence, not of a logical kind, but consisting in the harmonization of conflicting meanings or attitudes; poetry is objectively characterized, Wimsatt suggested (1958: 236), by a ‘wholeness of meaning established through internally differentiated form, the reconciliation of diverse parts’.
Coherence is thus associated with complexity; the meaning of the text is the product of the interaction of its parts, but this interaction depends as much on their difference from one another as on their similarity.
For Brooks, Wimsatt and Beardsley complexity and coherence together constitute the key considerations in the analysis of literary texts.
Before illustrating the practical consequences of these principles, it will be useful to clarify further the American Critics' relationship with Richards on the one hand, and with the Russian Formalists and their successors on the other.
To take the latter first, the New Critics clearly come very close to the Formalists and the Prague School in the importance they attach to the ideas of structure and interrelatedness (they even occasionally called themselves formalists), and in their insistence on the objective character of criticism and the distinction of the author and the reader from the text.
But their notion of structure is a good deal narrower than that of the Prague School, which included all the different levels of the text and not just its meaning; and they were not much interested in the ideas of difference, defamiliarization or deviance to which the Formalists and their successors attached so much weight.
What the New Critics emphasized was convergence within the text rather than deviation from an external standard.
As a result they were far less interested in literary innovation than the Formalists tended to be.
A further important difference between the New Critics and the Formalists and structuralists emerges if we return to the question of the New Critics' relationship with Richards.
This difference concerns their conception of meaning, a conception which is crucial to their insistence on the objective character of criticism.
For the materialist Richards meaning was to be explained as the use of words either to point to things or to evoke feelings — in terms of behaviour, in the last analysis.
If, as he argued, poetry could not be seen as pointing directly to things, then to explain it as relating purely to feelings seemed to be the only alternative.
Wimsatt and Brooks, on the other hand, approached the question of meaning from a more mentalistic point of view, and for this reason were able to argue that poetry related to knowledge rather than emotions, while still accepting that its function was not, like that of ordinary discourse, to point directly to things.
Meaning for them was not to be defined in terms of use or behaviour, but as a mental entity independent in an essential sense (as ‘intension’) of the material world, although in another sense (as ‘extension’) related to it.
At the same time, we have seen, they stressed that meaning was not a purely subjective phenomenon; as Wimsatt put it (1958: 10 and 24) one can distinguish between what is public and what is private or idiosyncratic about a poem, or between its meaning, which is an objective fact about it, and its ‘import’, the reader's subjective response.
The specific property of poetry consists in the organization of the public, objective meanings of words, that is of the concepts and associations which a culture as a whole, rather than an individual, attaches to them.
Although they do not seem to have been familiar with the work of Saussure, Wimsatt and Brooks here might appear to be approaching his principle that the meaning of words is purely conventional and arbitrary.
But in fact they stopped well short of this principle, because they believed that the peculiar organization of meaning in poetry led back in the end to the ‘real’ world.
According to Wimsatt, for instance(1958: 241);, ‘poetry is a complex kind of verbal construction in which the dimension of coherence is by various techniques of implication greatly enhanced and thus generates an extra dimension of correspondence to reality, the symbolic or analogical’.
The interrelations of the meanings and associations of words within a text (‘the dimension of coherence’) is in the first place, one' might say, a purely mental event, but its effect is to modify, enrich or enlarge the reader's experience of the realities to which these meanings and associations refer.
Art, Wimsatt and Brooks wrote in their joint history of literary criticism (1957: 743), ‘ought to have the concreteness which comes from recognizing reality and including it’.
They did not believe, therefore, as the structuralists do, that structure in literature is a wholly closed system, and that language is a prison-house that shuts us away from reality.
Their position keeps much of Richards's humanism, and is in the end an empiricist one, midway between Saussure's and Richards's views of meaning, or, as some might nowadays feel, an uncomfortable mixture of the two.
To sum up what I have outlined so far, the view of Wimsatt and Brooks is that the essential property of poetry consists in the reconciliation of harmonization of opposites; that this takes the form of an objective organization of the objective meanings of words; and that although the same organization generally cannot be found in other kinds of discourse, it nonetheless contributes to our knowledge and experience of ourselves and of the world.
What specific forms, one must ask, does this organization take?
According to Wimsatt it commonly consists in the use of analogy, especially through metaphor.
In a really good metaphor, according to Winisatt (1958: 149), ‘two  clearly and substantially named objects…are brought into such a context that they face each other with fullest relevance and illumination…’.
This means that one brings to bear on the other the full range of mental associations that the culture attaches to it; it is important to note that the objective meaning of words includes, for the New Critics, not only their dictionary definition (sometimes called their ‘denotation’), but also their associations (or ‘connotations’).
An example of Wimsatt's (1958: 147 — 8) is what he calls the metaphor, and many would call the simile, in the last line of this passage from Donne's ‘A Valediction: forbidding mourning’(like Eliot, the New Critics were particularly attached to the Metaphysical poets): The comparison between the lovers' separation and the hammering of gold into leaf-form brings together two terms which are clearly quite different and therefore might justifiably be described as opposites; and the conjunction of meanings thus established creates a series of connections (the relationship between the separated lovers is like gold leaf in that it is ethereal (‘ayery’), delicate, easily damaged, but at the same time precious, pure, bright, etc.), which when related to real experience possesses considerable illuminating force.
This is the sort of procedure that Wimsatt had in mind when he said (1958: 149) that ‘poetry is that type of verbal structure where truth of reference or correspondence reaches a maximum degree of fusion with truth of coherence — or where external and internal relation are intimately mutual reflections’.
The New Critics did not believe, of course, that the value of poetry lay in isolated metaphors or similes; on the contrary, they insisted that in good literature all the components of the text contributed to the reconciliation of opposites that constitutes its poetic function.
Clearly there may well be more than an element of exaggeration in this insistence, but it makes more sense if we accept their view that a great many features of literature that might not normally be recognized, at least at first sight, as terms of a comparison, nonetheless have a metaphorical or analogical function.
For instance events or situations in narrative poetry or prose can act as metaphors for a state of mind; an obvious example would be descriptions of houses in Dickens or Balzac.
A narrative theme can be a metaphorical image of a psychological process; Wimsatt suggests that the relationship between the knight and the lady in Keats's ‘La Belle Dame Sans Merci’ can be read as an expression of the ‘loss of self in the mysterious lure of beauty’(Wimsatt 1958: 80 — 1).
In fact all good poetry, according to Wimsatt, is characterized by an intricate network of analogical  relationships created by what he calls the ‘iconic’ properties of the verbal medium.
What does he mean by ‘iconic’?
It is noteworthy that Wimsatt, like Richards, connects his view of literature to a semiotic theory.
In Wimsatt's case the theory is that of the American behaviourist C.W. Morris, whose work follows in the empirical tradition established by Ogden and Richards.
Wimsatt's use of the term ‘iconic’(and the title of The Verbal Icon) derives from Morris's distinction (1971: 37) between the ‘iconic’ and the ‘symbolic’sign; the former is that which ‘characterizes…by exhibiting in itself the properties of an object’, the latter that which does not do so, but has instead a purely conventional relationship with the object that it designates.
Pictures are obvious examples of iconic signs; individual words, on the other hand, are generally symbolic signs, except for a limited number of cases such as those of onomatopoeia.
Following Morris (1939), however, Wimsatt argued that one of the distinguishing characteristics of poetry was to exploit the ‘iconic or directly imitative’ powers of language (Wimsatt 1958: 1 15).
This might seem at first sight to express the naive view that onomatopoeia and other kinds of sound symbolism constitute essential features of poetry, but Wimsatt's conception of the iconic function of language embraces a great deal more than this.
‘Iconicity’ in poetry was to be found, he argued, in metrical structures, in various figures of speech such as antithesis, and in general in the way in which words are arranged in sequence.
Thus a disordered sequence of clauses or sentences can act as an iconic representation of material or emotional disorder.
More importantly, the different types of phonetic, metrical, syntactic and semantic parallelism in poetic language indicate iconically a connection of meaning between the terms involved, and thus point to or reinforce the analogies between disparate elements from which, in his opinion, so much of the effect of poetry derives.
A random example of this process can be seen in two lines from Wordsworth's ‘Intimations of Immortality’: Here the verse structure, especially the rhyme, together with the syntactic parallelism and the inverted semantic parallelism (visionary gleam/glory…dream), creates an exchange of effect between the two lines, whereby each illuminates the other.
Because of the force of analogy, the meaning of the couplet as a whole is greater than the sum of the separate meanings of its two halves.
This sort of analysis is substantially similar to Jakobson's discussion of Poe's ‘Raven’(Sebeok 1971: 371–2), which I referred to in the last chapter, and it may well be that the New Critics' influence lay behind Jakobson's arguments there.
It should be said, however, that Wimsatt's treatment of the iconic properties of language is as far as the New Critics went in the direction  of stylistic analysis as I have defined it; in general they were much more interested in meaning than in forms of expression, and would have undoubtedly had scarce sympathy for Jakobson's attempt to define the properties of poetry in purely linguistic terms.
Finally, for both Wimsatt and Brooks a defining characteristic of poetry was irony.
Here too they follow Richards, who used the same term to characterize the ‘bringing in of the opposite, the complementary impulse’(Richards 1967: 197), which he held to be characteristic of all great poetry.
In Wimsatt's definition irony is a ‘cognitive principle which shades off through paradox into the general principle of metaphor’(Wimsatt and Brooks 1957: 747); according to Brooks, it is the ‘most general term that we have for the kind of qualification which the various elements in a context receive from the context’(Brooks 1949: 191).
‘Irony’ here is clearly being used in a very broad sense to include the types of analogical or metaphorical relationship that we have so far considered.
It might therefore seem a rather odd choice as a label, but Wimsatt and Brooks's reason for using it is that they view these analogical or metaphorical relationships as producing effects essentially similar to those for which the word irony is more commonly used, and which they also see as an important part of poetry.
In all these cases a kind of reconciliation of opposites can be seen.
It is not easy to find a general definition of the normal meaning of irony, but it usually stands for a process by which the content of a statement is qualified either by the reader's attribution of a contrary intention to the author, or by the reader's awareness of factors that are in conflict in one way or another with what is being said.
In this sense irony is closely related to paradox, which involves the association of conflicting elements within the same statement.
Thus the term irony is used in something approaching its usual acceptance when Brooks associates it with Yeats's appeal to the Greek sages in ‘Sailing to  That Yeats should speak of the ‘artifice of eternity’ evidently undermines in a sense the appearance of passion and sincerity with which he invokes the Greek sages, and thus can be said to bring about a kind of ironic reconciliation between his aspiration of a life free from Nature, and his rational awareness of his human limitations (Brooks 1949: 173).
What is achieved by devices such as this is not a relationship of analogy, as in the preceding examples, but, in Brooks's words (1949: 189), a ‘unification of attitudes into a hierarchy subordinated to a total  and governing attitude’.
This is also what Brooks sees in Keats's poetry in his analysis of ‘Ode to a Grecian Urn’, though here the motion of paradox rather than irony is invoked (1949: 139 — 52).
Brooks emphasizes the internal contradictions of the poem: the fact that the urn is silent, but also speaks; that it is motionless, yet the scenes depicted on it seem to be alive; that unheard melodies are sweeter than those which one hears, and so on.
What these contradictions add up to is the paradoxical point that the ‘frozen moment of loveliness is more dynamic than the fluid world of reality only because it is frozen’, that art is more vivid than life only because it is not alive.
It is this paradox, according to Brooks, that is the main point of the poem.
It is interesting to compare Brooks's analysis with Spitzer's treatment of the same poem (Spitzer 1962: 67 — 97).
Brooks's may not necessarily be much better, but Spitzer's undoubtedly attributes a more prosaic kind of meaning to the text, which he sees as expressing an (unreconciled) opposition between the ‘archaeological message’ and the ‘aesthetic message’of the urn.
The contrast may therefore serve to illustrate one major merit of Brooks's criticism and of the New Criticism in general: their use of ideas such as irony may seem exaggerated and confusing, but it makes the important point that the meaning of poetry, though possibly analyzable, cannot be expressed properly in the form of a conventional prosaic statement.
‘Irony’ is a strategic term that indicates the capacity of poetry to resist or elude our attempts to reduce it to conventional modes of expression.
This capacity is the main theme of Brooks's important essay, ‘The heresy of paraphrase’(Brooks 1949: 176–96).
At the very most, Brooks argues, all that the practice of paraphrase can do is offer a crudely approximative outline of the poetic content of a text.
The error of so many critics and scholars is to write as if the paraphrasable elements in literature constituted its substance, whereas the value of literature is to be found not in propositions, but in relationships, and these relationships are not logical, but imaginative.
I hope that I have made the merits of the New Criticism sufficiently clear in the preceding pages.
As to their possible limitations, one's view of these depends, as it does in the case of most literary theories, on one's own theoretical position.
Stylistic analysts are likely to hold that the New Critics paid insufficient attention to the linguistic form of texts since, apart from Wimsatt's discussion of the ‘iconic’ properties of poetry, they were really only interested in certain kinds of structure of meaning, and made no use of the tools offered by modern linguistics for the analysis of poetic effect.
Structuralist critics are bound to disagree with the New Critics' insistence on the referential function of literature, with their view of literature's connection with the ‘real’ world.
Post-structuralist critics will deny that literature possesses the organic unity to which the New Critics attached so much weight.
An  objection that can more usefully be discussed here, however, is the general principle formulated by Wimsatt, Beardsley and Brooks, and to some extent shared by Ransom and Tate, that literary criticism can and should be both evaluative and objective.
That is to say, although the New Critics were less interested in evaluation than Richards, and more interested in description and analysis, they nonetheless assumed that their principles constituted criteria for distinguishing good literature from bad, and that good literature had an important part to play in human affairs.
Since this is an assumption taken for granted by a good deal of modern criticism, we should consider some of the objections that can be made against the New Critics' arguments in its favour.
These arguments in its favour concern as we have seen, both the meaning and the structure of texts, and difficulties arise in connection with both of these factors.
The thesis of ‘The intentional fallacy’, that the meaning of the words in a text is, and should be treated as, a matter of public knowledge, seems wholly unexceptionable as far as the dictionary-definition (the ‘denotation’) of words is concerned; but it seems much more problematic when one takes account of the broader associations that words carry with them (‘connotations’).
The New Critics argued both that these broader associations were an essential part of the meaning of literature, and that a high degree of consensus existed, at least among experienced readers, as to which associations were attached to which words.
Yet while it seems conceivable that a group of critics, given an adequate degree of historical or philological knowledge, might agree as to which associations are possible in the case of a given word, there is considerable room for disagreement, since every word possesses a very wide range of associations, as to which of these are relevant for the purposes of interpretation.
Moreover the interpreter of a text has to make a decision on the relative importance of the different elements in a work, and he has to find a way of relating these elements to one another.
Interpreting the meaning of a text is not just a matter of adding together cumulatively the individual meanings of the words of which it is composed.
How can an objective solution to these problems be found?
Positivistic literary scholarship solves these problems by looking outside the text for information about the author's intentions in writing, but as we have seen, the New Critics rejected this solution.
For them the answer to the question of interpretation, and at the same time to the question of evaluation, is provided by the concept of structure; good literature or poetry is distinguished from bad literature or non-literature by an objective structure of meaning, the balancing or reconciliation of opposing attitudes or terms.
If we accept this, then we might have an objective principle for distinguishing between the relevant and irrelevant associations of words in a text, for  ordering its parts according to their relative importance, and for connecting these parts with one another.
But is such a structure of opposing factors really an objective property of poetry, and can we therefore as a matter of principle allow our interpretation and evaluation to be guided by it?
There is more than one reason why we might not.
First, we can question whether the concept is an adequate one for distinguishing poetry from non-poetry.
It is easy enough to identify opposing terms or attitudes in a text, but how does one decide whether or not they are balanced or reconciled?
For Richards the reconciliation occurred in the reader's mind, and therefore could be identified introspectively.
For the New Critics it was an objective structural feature of the text, but they offered no precise structural criteria for identifying it.
In practice, like Richards, they had to rely on intuition rather than analysis, or at best on the consensus of experienced readers, a consensus which, the recent history of criticism seems to suggest, is not all that often achieved.
Secondly, we may well doubt that the reconciliation of opposites is really a sound principle for defining poetry, whether it is truly applicable to all the texts one would wish to include under the heading of poetry or good literature.
For like a great many theories, it seems much more easily applicable to some kinds of text than to others; one can see quite clearly its possible relevance to the sort of literature that the New Critics generally preferred to discuss, the lyric tradition from Shakespeare, roughly speaking, to Yeats (Wimsatt and Brooks described their movement (1957: 742) as ‘neo-classic’); but it is much less easy to see its relevance to the novel, or to much modern avant-garde writing.
This last objection can be put in a form applicable to many of the theories discussed in this book: that it may be a mistake to try to define the essential features of literature in absolute and objective terms; that such definitions as one may devise are likely to be relevant only to certain kinds or certain features of literature, or merely constitute one among a number of possible ways of approaching the subject.
As far as the New Critics are concerned, the best conclusion might be, not that their view of poetry was necessarily wrong, but that what was wrong was the claims they made concerning it.
One may well agree with their rejection of positivistic historical scholarship, and their insistence on a combination of interpretation and evaluation in the study of literary texts.
One may even agree that the best key to interpretation and evaluation is their principle of the reconciliation of opposites.
One should also accept, however, that interpretation and evaluation are not objective statements about literary works, but statements about the interaction between works and their readers, because critics cannot avoid imposing their own views and their own preferences on the texts with which they deal.
This is not to say that  the best alternative to positivistic scholarship is the exclusive study of the reader's response, such as Richards advocated in his early works.
Much more promising avenues are opened up by those schools of thought that combine a description of the structure of texts with an account of the knowledge and attitudes that readers bring with them and of the process to which they subject them: some versions of structuralism; and phenomenological and related theories, which study the process by which readers create meaning in a text with much more attention to the text itself than Richards ever allowed.
These will be the main subjects of the next two chapters.
STRUCTURALISM AND POST-STRUCTURALISM
Ann Jefferson
The title of a recent book on structuralism describes it as a revolution —; La révolution structurale (Benoist 1976)— and it is in this perspective that the phenomenon is best approached.
Its revolutionariness is, however, only incidentally political: in that it evolved outside the universities in marginal academic institutions, and in that its development during the 1960s reached a kind of peak in the years 1967 — 8, thus coinciding with the événements of 1968.
But its aims and intentions, for all their revolutionariness, are not primarily political.
Structuralism is revolutionary because it can be adopted only as an alternative and not as an addition to traditional academic habits.
It cannot be incorporated as a handy extra methodological tool to be resorted to when all else fails.
It is revolutionary too in its scope, for it has implications for a whole range of academic subjects in the arts and the social sciences.
But what must finally be regarded as its most revolutionary feature is the importance that it attributes to language: not only is language a major preoccupation of structuralist thinking, but language itself is used as a model for all sorts of non-linguistic institutions.
Although literary theory is only one aspect of structuralism, the question of language is obviously peculiarly relevant to it, and it is the conceptual rigour and the range of possibilities provided by the linguistic component of structuralism that give structuralist literary theory its distinctive qualities.
For although many aspects of structuralist theory may seem to be familiar from other literary theories, structuralist theory is developed to a point where issues previously unconsidered by linguistic approaches to literature have to be confronted.
The exclusion of the author from critical analysis, the attention to form, the claims for scientificity are themes which have all been voiced before, but not in the same theoretical context, and so they acquire a different significance.
Most important of all, however, is the way that structuralist.principles lead eventually to a questioning of the nature of critical discourse itself.
In structuralist theory the language of criticism ends up posing as many problems as the language of literature.
As far as literary theory is concerned, it is perhaps this more than anything else which constitutes the structuralist revolution.
The linguistic model
French structuralism, applied as it has been to a wide range of  intellectual disciplines, is a realization of Saussure's dream of a general science of signs — semiology.
Although he saw language as the most complex and most characteristic of all systems of expression, it was, in his view, nevertheless analogous in structure and organization to any form of social behaviour.
Because of its exemplary status, language was to be ‘the master pattern for all branches of semiology’.
What was involved in this extension of structural linguistics was a profound alteration of perspective in most of the human sciences; it was no longer a question of gathering empirically verifiable data; of turning a positivist gaze onto a world of objects, but it meant seeing forms of expression as signs whose meanings depend on conventions, relations and systems, rather than on any inherent features.
The earliest response to this proposed change of perspective was made by Lévi-Strauss, the founder of what he called ‘structural anthropology’.
Anthropology is potentially a positivist's paradise, inviting an endless recording of observable facts and data.
But in his analyses of kinship relations or of cooking, for example, Lévi-Strauss's approach is based entirely on the assumption that they are systems which are structured like a language; that is to say , that their individual elements have meaning only in so far as they are part of an overall system.
The anthropologist's task is to map out this system, and, by using the tools of linguistic analysis, to draw up what one might call the grammar of the various cultures he encounters.
This principle is not the special prerogative of anthropology, and it transcends all the boundaries of traditional academic disciplines.
The axiom that ‘culture, in all its aspects, is a language’(Barthes 1972) will affect any discipline that touches on cultural questions.
At whatever level of detail or generality, culture consists of signs which are structured and organized like those of language itself.
Barthes's The Fashion System exemplifies this linguistic principle in its attempt to read the grammar of fashion.
Saussure himself uses the example of polite formulas many of which, as he says, do seem to be ‘imbued with a certain natural expressiveness’, but which are nevertheless entirely based on convention.
He cites the Chinese gesture of bowing down to the ground nine times before an emperor.
Although this might seem in one sense to be an unequivocal expression of deference, it becomes clear that it is purely conventional as soon as one imagines an Englishman acting in this way in the presence of his Queen.
Whereas in a Chinese context the meaning of the gesture would seem perfectly transparent, in an English context this behaviour would be totally bewildering because it is not part of the English conventions of politesse.
And for an Englishman observing Chinese manners, the exact significance of this gesture would be lost on him unless he was acquainted with the system as a whole.
Only then would he know whether the Chinaman's gesture expressed the utmost in humility, and  if so, whether this is marked in the depth or in the number of the bows.
The structuralist brief, then, is to map out the conventions and rules governing all aspects of social behaviour.
Not all the people who have been called structuralists have been happy to accept the label, but this suggests not so much that it has been over-enthusiastically applied, but that far from being a school or a doctrine, structuralism is indeed a generalized revolution in ways of thinking.
The definition of the term structuralism is best kept to this sort of generality, and the formula proposed by Barthes perhaps provides the best one.
Structuralism, he says, is ‘a certain mode of analysis of cultural artefacts, in so far as this mode originates in the methods of contemporary linguistics’(1970: 412).
So, any systematic extension of Saussurean concepts may, broadly speaking, be regarded as structuralist.
This at once opens up a huge field of enquiry, but since our concern here is with  literary theory, I shall restrict my discussion to structuralism's contribution to the study of literature and, in doing so, unfortunately run the risk of understating the effects of the new pluridisciplinarity on the approach to literature.
Anthropology, psychoanalysis, philosophy, history, cybernetics, information theory, semiotics and, of course, linguistics have all left their mark on structuralist discourse about literature.
The hegemony of the linguistic model (the premise of all structuralist thought) acquires a special significance in the sphere of literature.
In one sense, literature is like any other form of social or cultural activity, so that it may be analyzed in semiological terms; this would involve discovering what the nature of its component signs are, and how the system governing their use and combinations operates.
To this extent literature is not so different from fashion or from the myths whose analysis is part of Lévi-Strauss's structural anthropology.
But, unlike fashion or kinship systems, literature is not only organized like language; it is actually made of language.
And in a third sense, literature is thought by many structuralists to have a special relationship to language, in that it involves a unique awareness of the nature of language itself.
At one level, literature is always about language, so that, in the words of Tzvetan Todorov, ‘the writer does nothing more than read language’(1969: 84).
Literature is regarded as distinct from all other uses of language, since only literature (by being non-referential) makes us aware of the true (i.e. Saussurean) nature of language.
Thus, the linguistic model is triply pertinent to literature: to its material (verbal), to its formal organization (semiological) and to its themes (linguistic).
As we saw in Chapter 2, Saussure's view of language excludes the referential dimension with his concept of the sign as the combination of signifier (written or spoken) and signified (concept).
He emphasizes that words do not depend on reality for their meaning.
Similarly, since  language is a self-sufficient system, meaning is not determined by the subjective intentions and wishes of its speakers: it is not the speaker who directly imparts meaning to his utterances, but the linguistic system as a whole which produces it.
Transposed onto literature, this at once excludes both the author and reality as points of departure for interpretation.
A structuralist approach will dispense with these linchpins of traditional literary history and criticism in order to reveal the signifying systems at work in literature.
Taking its cue from structural linguistics, it will concentrate on the signifiers at the expense of the signifieds.
It will be concerned with the way in which meaning is produced rather than with meaning itself.
Genette speaks of this change in emphasis as a restoration of equilibrium in literary studies: ‘Literature had long enough been regarded as a message without a code for it to become necessary to regard it for a time as a code without a message (1982: 7).
Structuralist theory is not a source of methodological tools capable of generating new interpretations of literary texts, but an exploration of the conventions that make interpretation possible.
The value placed on this formal approach is reminiscent of American New Criticism, and also of Russian Formalism and the work of Roman Jakobson — all of whom Genette approvingly cites in this essay on structuralism and literary criticism.
However, structuralist criticism differs from all of them on some important issues.
It does not share the New Critics’ preoccupation with meaning, and its attention to the signifiers of literature is never subordinated to any signified.
Furthermore, the relationship between literature and language in the structuralist view is not primarily a negative or oppositional one, as it is in Formalist theory; in accordance with the basic principles of structuralist theory, the relationship between the two is one of parallelism, or, to use a structuralist term, homology.
Literature (in the same way as kinship systems) is organized at every level like language, and it is a central part of structuralist purpose to reveal the similarity.
When the logic of the linguistic homology is taken a step further, the special status of language that literature is uniquely capable of revealing becomes apparent.
By concentrating on the signifying structures of literature, the structuralist approach sets aside all questions of content.
This means that the language of literature is no longer regarded as subordinated to the message supposedly carried by the text, and this emptiness of content illustrates far more powerfully than could anything else the primacy of language itself.
Most human discourses behave as if language were transparent to a meaning or a reality beyond it, but, if we carry the lessons of Saussure right through to their logical conclusion, we see that this cannot be so.
The organization of language precedes any message or reality, and indeed these are products constructed by the language system and not  vice versa.
Although for practical purposes in ordinary situations we use language as if it were transparent and as if meanings and intentions existed prior to it, literature, in its freedom from any referential obligation, demonstrates the supremacy of language over all other activities.
This is what Barthes means when he speaks of literature representing the sovereignty of language.
‘Language,’ says Barthes, ‘is literature's Being, its very world; the whole of literature is contained in the act of writing, and no longer in those of ‘thinking’, ‘portraying’, ‘telling’or ‘feeling’(1970: 411).
Language is not just the means of communication in literature, but, in so far as one can say literature has a content, language in all its opacity is also the content of literature.
So that for the structuralists literature becomes ‘a kind of extension and application of certain properties of language’(Todorov 1977: 19).
‘The writer does nothing more than read language’(Todorov 1969: 84), he is ‘someone for whom language is a problem’(Barthes 1966: 46), and the literary work itself becomes ‘a question put to language’(p.55).
The language foregrounded (so to speak) by literature in the structuralist view is not some supposed ordinary or scientific language: it is a Saussurean image of language, an image based on a coherent linguistic theory.
In this the structural approach to literature has huge advantages over many other linguistically inspired theories.
And it is this recourse to the Saussurean model which gives rise to the most innovative of structuralism's extensions of the linguistic analogy: poetics.
Poetics and narratology
The real originality of the structuralist application of Saussure to literary studies is not in the analysis of particular works, but in its elaboration of poetics as a general science of literature.
As well as using the linguistic concepts of sign and system to analyze structures at various levels of a text, the structuralists returned to Saussure's distinction between langue and parole in order to outline a whole new approach to literature.
Just as linguistics is not primarily concerned with individual utterances (parole) but with the language system as a whole (langue), the structuralist proposal is that individual works should be regarded as instances of parole informed by rules which belong to a general literary langue.
As Todorov repeatedly insists in his Introduction to Poetics, ‘The particular text will only be an instance that allows us to describe the properties of literature [in general]’(1981: 7).
Poetics is concerned with a general grammar of literature which will be only partially visible in any individual work.
And just as linguistics ought to be able to account for the structure and organization of as yet unspoken sentences, so poetics ought to be able to account for the  rules governing as yet unwritten works of literature: ‘Each work is therefore regarded only as the manifestation of an abstract and general structure, of which it is but one of the possible realizations.
[So that]this science is no longer concerned with actual literature, but with a possible literature’(pp. 6–7).
Todorov goes on to suggest that these properties of literary discourse are specific to literature itself, and invokes the Russian Formalist concept of ‘literariness’.
But in practice structuralist poetics have never been particularly interested in establishing the specificity of literature.
This is partly because structuralist poetics are part of a wider semiological venture, and partly because any distinctiveness ascribed to literature in structuralist thinking takes it right back to linguistics; for the element that constitutes ‘literature's Being’ and its ‘very world’(Barthes 1970) is simply language itself.
The shift of focus from the individual text to literature in general brought with it a new awareness of the different nature of different types of discourse about literature, and of the different ways of treating literature implied by them.
Broadly speaking, these discourses can be divided into reading, criticism and poetics, and in the structuralist view these divisions are radical.
Although the nineteenth-century literary historian would have acknowledged a distinction between literary scholarship and reading, the implication of much twentieth-century critical practice is that criticism is an extension of the reading process, and that the critic is simply an exemplary and particularly articulate reader.
This view informs every page of I.A. Richards's Principles of Literary Criticism, where the critic is seen as making explicit the states of mind produced in the reader by the literary work.
(For further discussion of this issue see Chapter 5.)
In his Critique et vérité Barthes outlines the nature of the distinctions that exist between poetics, criticism and reading.
Critique et vérité was written as a defence of the structuralist position after the attack on Barthes's study of Racine (Sur Racine) by Raymond Picard (a Sorbonne academic) in a pamphlet entitled Nouvelle critique ou nouvelle imposture (1965).
By uncovering the presuppositions of the sort of criticism typified by Picard's approach, Barthes shows that they are both arbitrary and ideologically motivated.
The values of ‘objectivity’, ‘taste’ and French ‘clarté’, which Picard claims to uphold, and in the name of which he defends traditional academic criticism, are ultimately political.
This demonstrates that criticism can no longer be regarded as a straightforward and unproblematic response to a given work of art.
Criticism is quite different, in Barthes's view, from reading.
Reading is a process of identification with a work and a faithful reading will be nothing more than a word for word repetition of the text.
Criticism, on the other hand, places the critic at a certain distance from the work.
For Barthes criticism consists in actively constructing a meaning for a  text and not in passively deciphering the meaning; for in the structuralist view there is no single meaning in literary works.
This insistence on the plurality of meanings in a text is the logical consequence of the absence of any authorial intention in literature.
In structuralist theory this absence is far more radical than it is in the case of the New Critics.
Doing away with authorial intention opens the way to doing away with the notion of unitary meaning in the text, since without some evidence about intentions it is usually impossible to reduce even everyday linguistic ambiguities.
The New Critics did, of course, make room for ambiguity in their theory, but their stress on the organic coherence of the literary text prevented ambiguity from being genuinely open-ended.
Being defined in terms of tension or paradox, ambiguity's potential diversity was restored to some sort of unitary wholeness.
In other words, the New Critical concept of coherence took over the task of unifying meaning which could no longer be attributed to the author.
In structuralist theory there is nothing to take over this task, so that ambiguity becomes fully polysemic, in the sense of consisting of an unreconcilable multiplicity of meanings.
In a view which sees meaning as the product of the rules and conventions of different signifying systems, there is no role given to private meanings or intentions on the part of individuals.
This is what is meant by the ‘ decentring of the subject’ in structuralist theory.
(The consequences of this  decentring of the subject are most fully and interestingly developed in the post-structuralist work of Lacan and Derrida.)
So without any authorial guarantee concerning meaning, the critic's job is no longer to retrieve the meaning of a text, but rather, in the full knowledge that the meanings of the text are plural, to produce an interpretation which realizes just one of the possibilities contained in the text.
Structuralist theory builds on connotation instead of trying to sweep the question under the carpet (as the New Critics might be said to have done).
As Barthes says, if words only had one (dictionary) meaning, there would be no literature.
Literature is based on ‘the very plurality of meanings’(1966: 50); or, put in a slightly different way which nicely reverses an old critical saw, ‘a work is ‘eternal’, not because it imposes one meaning on different men, but because it suggests different meanings to one man' (p.51).
It is the third category, poetics or the science of literature, which is most fully conscious of this plurality, because it is concerned only with the different ways in which meaning is produced in literature and not with its content.
It is this emphasis on the signifier at the expense of the signified which makes poetics the type of discourse most favoured and fostered by structuralism.
Structuralist contributions to narrative theory are probably the best instances of the nature of structuralist poetics.
The first two examples discussed below illustrate different  ways in which the linguistic model is used to develop a narrative model, and the third, Genette's Narrative Discourse (which does not use strictly linguistic analytical categories), illustrates somewhat differently the structuralist preoccupation with abstract models rather than with individual texts.
Todorov's Grammaire du Décaméron, despite the reference to a particular text in the title, deals primarily with ‘the structure of narrative in general and not with that of one book’(1969: 10).
Its aim is to establish ‘the science of narrative’ which Todorov baptizes ‘narratology’.
The Decameron stories are used merely as test material and were chosen because they seemed intuitively to be constructed primarily in narrative terms, as opposed to psychological, philosophical or descriptive ones.
The assumption is that each tale makes manifest a greater or smaller part of an ‘abstract structure’ and the task Todorov sets himself is the delineation of that abstract structure.
His starting point is that this structure will have the form of a grammar.
The linguistic model will provide the basis of the narrative model, and Todorov justifies this procedure by making claims that go far beyond the usual assumptions of structuralism.
He suggests that language is the ‘master pattern’ for all signifying systems not just because of the nature of the sign and the system, but because the human mind and the universe as well share a common structure which is that of language itself.
This claim would need an enormous amount of evidence to substantiate it, but it does illustrate very clearly a particular view about the structures that a certain type of structuralism deals with: namely, that they actually exist, and that the task of structuralist sciences is to uncover them.
This attitude is rather different from other instances of structuralist thinking which do not claim any intrinsic reality for their structures.
What matters is not whether the human psyche is in itself constructed in grammatical terms (as Noam Chomsky has suggested), but that social behaviour lends itself to analysis in broadly linguistic terms.
The real question in structuralist theory is how literally the linguistic model should be applied.
The three examples discussed in this section suggest that the most fertile and productive uses of the linguistic model are the most analogical and metaphorical ones.
Todorov's analysis of the Decameron tales is based on a very rigorous and literal use of linguistic categories.
He begins by dividing narrative up into semantic, syntactic and verbal aspects.
The semantic aspect is what we would otherwise call its content, and the verbal aspect is Todorov's term for the language in which the stories are told.
The syntax of narrative is the relation between the events and is the main concern of Todorov's study.
As in a linguistic analysis, he begins by finding out what the basic units of combination are (by analogy with the phonemes, morphemes, etc. which constitute the basic units of  language).
In the case of narrative syntax this basic unit is taken to be the clause which is in turn composed of a subject and a predicate.
Todorov then goes on to establish the primary categories of his narrative grammar, and they are proper noun, adjective and verb.
The so-called secondary categories consist of almost equally linguistic concepts: negation and opposition, comparatives, modes, and so on.
The detailed application of these categories to actual instances of narrative is, on the whole, tedious and not particularly illuminating.
The most that can be claimed for it is that it is ingenious.
Nevertheless Todorov's study is interesting for the principle which guides his whole enterprise, and which he sums up in his conclusion.
Here he accepts that his own grammatical categories may be questionable, but insists that his study confirms the belief that there exists a grammar of narrative, and moreover that there is a fundamental similarity between language and narrative which is mutually illuminating.
He claims that one can ‘understand narrative better if one knows that a character is a noun, and the action a verb’.
And furthermore, ‘one will understand nouns and verbs better if one thinks of the role that they adopt in narrative’.
Indeed, to combine a noun with a verb, he says, ‘is to take the first step toward narrative’(1969: 84).
This seems to be pushing the linguistic analogy too far, and to be taking too literally the structuralist tenet that literature is ‘the essential manifestation’ of language, and that ‘the writer does nothing more than read language’(p.84).
In practice, most work in structuralist poetics is not restricted to this direct transposition of linguistic concepts onto the structures of literature.
In his ‘Introduction to the structural analysis of narrative’ Barthes makes claims very similar to those of Todorov about the homology between language and narrative, with particular reference to the sentence: ‘a narrative is a long sentence, just as every constative sentence is in a way the rough outline of a short narrative’(1977b: 84).
But the model he constructs (and whose principles he expounds so clearly in his opening pages) is not based on such rigorously maintained categories.
For instance, the basic units of narrative which he picks out are defined and differentiated principally in terms of their narrative effect and not of any prior linguistic analogies that he may have found for them.
His distinction between function and index (two of his basic narrative units) is determined by whether the units link with others to form a chain of actions (the functions), or whether their role is a more diffuse contribution to the meaning of the story, such as information about characters (the indices).
It is only when this distinction has been made in terms that comply with the workings of narrative that the linguistic analogy is introduced: the functions, Barthes suggests, are based on metonymic relations, the indices on metaphoric relations.
And even here in his recourse to Jakobson's use  of the two terms, Barthes is referring to two very broad principles of combination in language and not (as Todorov does) to specific grammatical categories.
In other words, this approach treats narrative language as a second-order language which is therefore not susceptible to analysis in strict linguistic categories.
The same approach is evident in Barthes's use of the distinction made by the French linguist Emile Benveniste between personal and apersonal aspects of language.
In a series of articles published under the title Problems in General Linguistics, Benveniste demonstrates with particular reference to the temporal and pronominal systems of the French language that linguistic items can be distinguished according to whether they include a reference to the moment or position of the utterance of a statement (énonciation).
Any tense which includes a component of the present tense such as the passé composé (il a écrit) is personal in so far as it acknowledges the present moment of the utterance.
Similarly the pronouns I and you (je and tu) are personal because they can be defined only by the utterance in which they appear.
They differ from the pronoun he whose referent can be identified without consideration of the linguistic utterance.
What is important about this contribution to linguistic theory is that it allows one to analyze the personal or ‘subjective’ elements of language without having to resort to any real correlative outside language.
They simply point to the fact that language is being produced and do not involve any questions of psychological reality.
Rather than expressing the individual reality of the speaker who happens to utter them, these ‘personal’ aspects of language testify to a certain self-consciousness or reflexivity within language itself.
Barthes draws on Benveniste's distinction in order to analyze a level of narrative which Todorov ignores in his study: the ‘narration’, that is to say, the manner in which the story is told.
His particular application of Benveniste's terms is actually rather bizarre and unproductive.
However, the broad principle which informs Benveniste's category of the personal is most pertinently extrapolated onto a narrative model by Barthes when he points out that traditional critical practice has tended to attribute all apparently subjective (or personal) elements to a psychological reality placed outside the language of the text itself: the mind or personality of the author, the narrator or a character in the story.
In other words, the subjective elements were read referentially and so it was implied that the logic of narrative derived from a reality outside itself.
By including so-called subjective elements within the language system and associating them with a degree of linguistic self-consciousness, Benveniste is providing structuralist narratology with a very attractive analogy.
Narrative, which at the level of narration is most threatened by referential interpretations, can now be regarded as a self-contained system with its own internal rules  governing every aspect of its operation; the signs of the narrator are embedded in the narrative, hence perfectly detectable by a semiological analysis.
Moreover, the principle of linguistic self-consciousness or reflexivity seems to be made even more explicit when transposed to the narrative model.
Reference is emphatically excluded and reflexivity reinforced: ‘What takes place’ in a narrative is from the referential (reality) point of view literally nothing; ‘what happens’is language alone, the adventure of language, the unceasing celebration of its coming.’
(1977b: 124).
The construction of models independent of any external reality seems to encourage an emphasis on this sort of linguistic reflexivity and it will be encountered again in other structuralist writings.
Genette's largest contribution to structuralist narrative theory is his Narrative Discourse.
This is a remarkable study for a number of reasons, but chief amongst these must be its comprehensiveness.
Most other structuralist theories of narrative take only one aspect, and usually this is the events of the narrative, as in Todorov's Grammaire du Décaméron or Greimas's Sémantiqe structurale.
Barthes's ‘Introduction to the structural analysis of narrative’ deals with more than one level of narrative, but presumes that they are hierarchically arranged and that, therefore, to a certain extent, they can be discussed separately.
The principle behind Genette's study is that narrative is a product of the interaction of its different component levels, and that the science of narrative consists in an analysis of the relations between them.
This is why he calls the object of his study ‘narrative discourse’, which he defines as ‘the oral or written discourse which undertakes to tell of an event or a series of events’, and which he distinguishes from narrative as series of events (story), and narrative as the act of narrating.
In fact, Genette's relational approach means that none of these aspects of narrative can be conceived of as independent units: Consequently ‘analysis of narrative will thus be for [him]essentially a study of the relationships between narrative and story, between narrative and narrating, and (to the extent that they are inscribed in the narrative discourse) between story and narrating’(my italics).
This approach is reminiscent of the Formalist distinction between fabula and ryuzhet, but despite the absence of any direct linguistic analogy it is  supremely structuralist in its desire to construct a universal model of narrative discourse.
The linguistic model is, on the whole, used here in a very general and metaphorical sense, and not in a literal and detailed one.
The introduction makes a perfunctory bow to linguistics when Genette puts forward the hypothesis that narrative may be regarded as ‘the development — monstrous, if you will — given to a verbal form, in the grammatical sense of the term: the expansion of a verb…
The Odyssey or the Recherche is only, in a certain way, an amplification (in the rhetorical sense) of statements such as Ulysses comes home to Ithaca or Marcel becomes a writer’(1980: 30).
Genette goes on to suggest that this authorizes the use of linguistic categories in the analysis of narrative discourse.
In fact, however, he adapts the few terms he does borrow to fit his case, rather than forcing his view of narrative to comply strictly with linguistic principles.
For instance, although he borrows the concept of mood from linguistics, he recognizes from the outset that, in contrast to ordinary language, narrative only knows the indicative mood (there is no imperative or subjunctive forms of narrative), and that if his use of the term is to have any value at all it must be ‘stretched’ and given a metaphorical function.
The adaptation of linguistic terms like mood and of rhetorical terms like ellipsis is not so much designed to construct rigid parallels either with language or with rhetoric, but rather is itself a rhetorical device for freeing narrative from any referential interpretation.
Genette systematically coins new terms for aspects of narrative which have already been named but which imply a psychological or realist element: flashback becomes amalepsis, point of view becomes focalization, the opposition between telling and showing is translated back into Plato's terms diegesis and mimesis, and so on.
This ‘jargon’ serves not only to highlight distinctions which looser, more  commonsensical terms might obscure, but they imply most emphatically that narrative is governed not by any relation to reality, but by its own internal laws and logic.
This logic is set out in a manner that illustrates in an exemplary way the structuralist intention to map out all the possibilities of literature as distinct from its actual manifestations.
Genette's relational strategy leads him to construct purely abstract combinations without any real existence in literature.
For example, in discussing ‘duration’ he compares the relative speeds of the narrating and the story, and in order to draw up his table he needs to begin with a non-existent form, a ‘hypothetical reference zero’where the duration of the narrative exactly matches the duration of the events narrated — an ‘isochronous narrative’which, as he says, does not exist.
But even though the category is entirely hypothetical, it is nevertheless part of the ‘table of literature's possibilities’ which it is the business of poetics to construct.
The poetic purpose of Genette's Narrative Discourse is curiously complemented by his study of Proust's A la recherche du temps perdu which takes up a good portion of the book.
This procedure is unusual in that Genette devotes far more attention to Proust than other narratological studies have to actual texts, and it is also unusual in that Proust's novel is an  infinitely more complex work than those which narrative theories have commonly analyzed: with Boccaccio's Decameron, Todorov was taking relatively simple specimens as points of reference for his narratological analyses.
Genette's discussion of Proust is so far reaching that his book can be regarded as much as a reading of A la recherche as a contribution to narrative theory, and to this extent it represents a challenge to the generic distinctions normally made in structuralist thinking between poetics and criticism.
At the same time it also illustrates the practical purpose narrative theory may have for the reading of individual works of literature.
In a limited sense Proust's novel is used as a testing ground for the analytic concepts; and in another equally limited sense, the novel is treated as a concrete manifestation of the abstract narrative model.
But the most important and interesting aspect of its role in the book is the way in which Proust's narrative is shown to deviate from the model: Genette shows that in a number of ways A la recherche breaks and challenges the laws of narrative proposed by the abstract model but without undercutting their general validity.
For example, one of the most far-reaching subversions of narrative logic comes in Proust's confusion of the singulative and the iterative modes.
These are the terms Genette coins to describe different categories of frequency (a previously overlooked aspect of narrative).
In the singulative mode there is a balance between the number of times an event occurs and the number of times it is narrated (an event  occurring once is narrated once and an event  occurring x times is narrated x times).
In the iterative mode there is an imbalance whereby an event occurring only once is narrated several times or, much more frequently in literature, an event occurring frequently or repeatedly is narrated only once.
Proust's narrative undercuts these distinctions in a way that defies logic as well as narrative models by narrating single events as if they had happened repeatedly.
This apparent contradiction of the model by Proust's text is not a sign of the model's inadequacy but the reverse.
The existence of the category frequency in Genette's model alerts readers to a highly significant aspect of Proust's narrative which previous critical readings have failed to notice.
At the same time, by not forcing the text to fit the categories of the model, the text can be seen as a transformation of it, or at least of a part of it.
The model serves to illuminate literature without reducing individual literary texts to being miniature reproductions of it.
These three examples of structuralist narratology show varying  degrees of success and interest in their use of the linguistic analogy.
Todorov's Grammaire du Décaméron is the least successful (and perhaps the least interesting) because his topic (the events of narrative) remains too narrow, and the application of linguistics too literal.
Genette's Narrative Discourse, by contrast, is able to include a much wider range of narrative elements and to use the linguistic analogy in the most flexible way.
More importantly, his idea that narrative grammar may be transformed or subverted by individual texts gives his grammar far greater analytical power, since elements which might fall outside the scope of a more rigid model may now be read as transformations of it.
But the chief advantage of the linguistic analogy in any narrative theory is that it allows literature in general and narrative in particular to be read as a self-contained system independent of any realist function.
Finally, the variety of ways in which linguistic terms have been applied to literary narrative suggests that even in the most linguistically conscious theories of literature, the role of linguistics remains subservient: it can never supply literary analysis with prescriptive procedures when it is operating at this level of the literary text.
In short, linguistics may provide literary theory with the broad outlines of a model, but it cannot determine either its detail or the manner in which it is applied to  literature .
Structuralist criticism
Although structuralist writing in literature is predominantly in the field of poetics, there are some interesting instances of what Todorov calls a contradiction in terms: structuralist criticism (1973: 73).
For, as he says in the introduction to his essay on the tales of Henry James, ‘criticism seeks to interpret a particular work, while structuralism, for its part, is a scientific method implying an interest in impersonal laws and forms, of which existing objects are only the realizations,(1973: 73).
Nevertheless, he goes on to justify his pursuit of the contradiction by claiming that the instruments provided by literary theory may be refined and transformed through their application to particular texts.
In practice, however, the experiment in structuralist criticism reveals something far more interesting: Todorov's reading of James's tales shows them to have much in common with the discourse of poetics itself.
Their ‘content’(as articulated by Todorov) both mirrors their form and implies a commentary on the nature of literary works in general.
Literature is being read here as an allegory of poetics.
Todorov begins by taking his cue from one of James's tales, ‘The Figure in the Carpet’.
The situation is an exemplary one for a structuralist: a young critic is chided by a writer for having failed to identify the motive principle of his work, the ‘figure in the carpet which governs every aspect of it.
The critic never finds it, but Todorov sees in the tale both a set of instructions for any critic of literature and  an outline of the figure to be read in the carpet of James's own work.
The figure is, precisely, that of the existence of a secret or an absent essence, and he traces it in various forms through a number of different tales.
In other words, the critical key to James's tales is provided by the tales themselves.
At the same time, the critic will learn from this figure that, since the secrets are never disclosed, and since the absent essence only operates when it is absent, he should not force his text to produce a single interpretative meaning.
The meaning will always be secret, absent.
He should be content instead with outlining the motive principle and not try to predicate any content to it.
Todorov finds a variety of different manifestations of the absent essence in James's stories.
It exists either as a secret, as unknowable information (‘Sir Dominick Ferrand’, ‘In the Cage’), or in the form of ghosts, a ‘form of absence par excellence’(‘Sir Edmund Orme’, ‘The Turn of the Screw’), or in the form of death (‘The Friends of the Friends’, ‘Maud-Evelyn’), or in the form of a work of art.
This last variant of the figure of absence is regarded by Todorov as the key one, since the tales about art both incarnate the basic principle and amount to ‘veritable aesthetic treatises’.
In ‘The Real Thing’ a painter is offered the services of an extremely genteel couple who have fallen on hard times and are willing to act as models for his illustrations of aristocratic life.
To his surprise his paintings become worse and worse.
When he changes his models for a vulgar Cockney girl and a vagabond Italian his illustrations of lords and ladies immediately come to life.
The moral of this tale is that ‘the absence of ‘real’ qualities in Miss Churm and Oronte is precisely what gives them their essential value, so necessary to the work of art'.
And this in turn suggests its own moral, which is a constant theme of structuralist poetics: The primacy of the system over what it represents is a conclusion that poetics derives from the extension of the Saussurean model to the sphere of the grammar of literature; and now we find literature itself endorsing these conclusions.
The exclusion of the author from literature is similarly represented by a number of James's tales.
‘The Death of the Lion’, ‘The private Life’ and ‘The Birthplace’all illustrate that the creation and reading of literature have nothing to do with the author as a real person, and that literature exists quite independently of the author's particular circumstances and personality.
Todorov makes the work of art in James's stories the supreme and  exemplary form of absence: it is more essential than the hidden secrets, more accessible than the ghosts, more material than death.
In short, ‘it offers the only way of experiencing essence’.
The implication behind this hierarchy of the forms of absence in James is that secrets, ghosts and death are merely pale prefigurations of art as absent essence, and therefore that any significance they might have in the functioning of the tales derives from their status as anticipatory metaphors of art itself.
To a large extent, then, all the stories can be read as semi-allegorical or thematic explorations of topics in poetics.
They are reflexive representations of their own form and construction, ‘metaliterary stories, stories devoted to the constructive principle of the story’, and by extension, representations of literature in general.
What all this shows is that a distinctively structuralist kind of criticism is possible, and moreover, that it is more than the simple application and refinement of the tools of poetics.
It differs from traditional criticism by not pretending to retrieve a single, definitive meaning from the literary text, but on the other hand, it does ascribe a special kind of content to literature: form itself.
Structuralist criticism is characterized primarily by this kind of reflexivity.
But although Todorov's analysis of James seems to conform to distinctions between reading, criticism and poetics in its attempt to prove that structuralist criticism is possible, it also undermines them.
Literature's self-consciousness serves to blur the traditional opposition between literature and criticism.
In his introduction to part (1 of Critique et vérité Barthes argues that the degree of critical self-consciousness in literature means that it is not possible to draw a clear distinction between criticism and literature.
And he claims specifically that this is because writing itself has a dual, a poetic and a critical function.
The importance that structuralism in general and Barthes in particular place on the notion of writing both supports structuralism's challenge to traditional ways of talking about literature, and questions a number of presuppositions of the discourse of structuralism itself.
This process is begun more explicitly in Barthes's S/Z which in its change of direction opens what is now called the post-structuralist era and marks the end of the so-called classical or scientific period of structuralism.
Lisible and scriptible
S/Z represents a break both with poetics and with criticism.
Poetics is replaced by a basic evaluative typology of texts, and criticism by commentary (in this case of a short story by Balzac called ‘Sarrasine’).
The relation between literature in general and individual texts is seen by Barthes in a rather different way from that implied by poetics.
He questions the structuralist practice of reducing individual texts to a microcosm of a general poetics, of using ‘the indifferent gaze of  science’ to force them to ‘rejoin, inductively, the Copy from which we will then make them derive’(1975: 3).
The alternative approach of the evaluative typology that Barthes sets out in S/Z privileges the writing of the text, and sees it not as a structure or as a copy of a structure (poetics), but as a practice.
The static, closed image of the literary text that goes with the concept of structure is replaced by a dynamic, open one which is expressed in concepts like play and practice.
All that remains of the Saussurean model is the primacy of language and an emphasis on the signifier, both of which are even more strongly asserted here than in poetics.
The notions of system and homology are gone; neither literature in general nor individual texts are thought of as systems, and consequently analogies with linguistic structures do not apply.
Literature does not copy language any more than it copies reality.
Barthes's typology is based on his distinction between the lisible (the readerly) and the scriptible (the writerly).
The positive term is the scriptible because value is now attributed to production rather than reproduction or representation.
The lisible is what we recognize and already know.
The readerly text is the one that as readers we passively consume, whereas the writerly text demands the reader's active cooperation, and requires him to contribute in the production and writing of the text.
It would in fact be more accurate to speak of readerly and writerly qualities in a text, since no text is purely readerly nor purely writerly.
The scriptible/lisible distinction represents a scale of values by which individual texts may be evaluated.
Broadly speaking ‘classical’ texts such as Balzac's ‘Sarrasine’are predominantly readerly, whereas modern texts are predominantly writerly.
Or, to use another of Barthes's terms, the modern text is more ‘plural’ than the classical one.
The scriptible is not a thing but a process, and is therefore not assimilable to the structures of poetics.
There is structuration but no structure, production but no product.
Although Barthes gives meaning a role in the text, the emphasis is on its production.
Indeed, the production of meaning is seen as an essential part of the activity of the text, and it is not subordinated to an ultimate signified.
Meaning itself is part of a process, always on the move.
But the primary values are those of the signifier, and the writerly allows the reader to ‘function himself, to gain access to the magic of the signifier, to the pleasure of writing’(p. 4).
This conception of the signifier bears only a vestige of its Saussurean ancestry, for there is nothing formalist about it and it is not part of a structural attempt to outline the basic grammar of any system.
In fact, Barthes's treatment of the signified is designed to maintain dynamism and break the stasis of structure and system.
A reading which is faithful to the writerly will avoid the closure of static structures; reading a text in Barthesian terms does not lead to the  construction of ‘a Model’ or a ‘legal structure of norms or infractions’, a narrative or poetic law, but opens ‘a perspective (of fragments, of voices from other texts, other codes), whose vanishing point is nonetheless ceaselessly pushed back, mysteriously opened’(p. 12).
While the typology sets up these principles, only a commentary can be faithful to them and maintain the text's plurality.
Criticism and poetics both constrict the text by making it conform to a meaning or to a model.
Barthes's commentary represents what he calls the step-by-step approach which affirms the text's plurality by the attempt to ‘star [étoiler]the text instead of assembling it’(p. 13), to fragment and disperse it, instead of unifying it.
The commentary is based on totally arbitrary ‘units of reading’ which Barthes calls ‘lexies’.
These do not correspond to any pattern or structure inherent in the text, but consist of what the reader judges to be an identifiable unit,(a phrase, a sentence, a couple of sentences).
The purely linear progression through the text based on the successive identification of lexies is a major contribution to the maintaining of the text's plurality.
So, to sum up the main points so far: the scriptible as a value and the commentary as a form of reading both imply an approach which is largely incompatible with the chief principles of classical structuralism.
The third main way in which the idea of structure is undermined can be seen in Barthes's use of the idea of codes.
Barthes identifies five major codes by which literature is constituted.
They are the hermeneutic code through which an enigma is posed and eventually solved in a text; the semic code which determines themes; the symbolic code which is the sphere where meanings become multivalent and reversible; the proairetic code which determines action and behaviour; and finally, the cultural code which provides social and ‘scientific’ information.
The important thing here is not so much the nature of the codes, nor whether they have been properly identified, nor even whether they are comprehensive enough, but the idea of codes structuring literary texts.
These codes are shared by author and reader and their role in the text is what makes it a text.
‘The five codes create a kind of network, a topos through which the entire text passes (or rather, in passing becomes text)’(p. 20).
These codes are rather different from the grammars of structuralist poetics because they do not have the status of a model, but are instances of parole which have no ultimate langue.
In S/Z Barthes is not suggesting that literary texts implicitly refer to some transcendent model: literary texts can only cross-refer to each other.
Moreover, there is nothing inherently literary about these codes, since they function as a part of culture in general.
Reality therefore is not defined either concretely or semiotically.
Instead reality becomes a kind of text itself, constituted by codes.
In this case, then, to write about reality is not to relate word to thing, but text to text.
A code is no more than a  ‘perspective of quotations’(p. 20), and ‘its only logic is that of the already-done or the already-read’(p. 19).
These codes are quite different from the models of poetics because they cannot be reduced to a structure, and consequently the text itself cannot in turn be reduced to a structural homology of a code.
The codes participate in the structuring process of the text and cannot be rounded off or completed.
This intertextual model of what lies beyond it — reality, truth, author or reader — removes literature even further from any representational function.
Representation is redefined as a kind of quotation: When a text turns its attention to giving a physical description of a character it resorts to various strategies which give its presumed object the status of a representation.
Most typically, the apparent reality of the object is an effect of its being treated like a painting; the text frames its object and then refers to it in terms that suggest that it is already represented on a canvas.
Realism, then, consists ‘not in copying the real, but in copying a ‘painted’ copy of the real' (p. 55).
If the text represents anything ‘real’ at all, it is only the difficulty of representation.
This is because,.
although on one level Balzac's story is ‘about’ castration (one of the characters is a castrato singer), in Barthes's reading the theme of castration is seen as a pretext for a kind of reflexive anxiety on the part of the text itself concerning the very possibility of representation.
Since the hero takes the castrato to be a woman and makes a sculpture of him/her in female form, castration is linked to problems of representation.
And it is because of this that Barthes treats the theme of castration as a metaphorical comment on the absence of the full reality which a naive view of literature might imagine it to derive from.
‘Sarrasine represents the very confusion [le trouble même]of representation’(p. 216), and precisely because of this, representation is replaced by reflexivity.
Truth is similarly found to have no real status in the literary text.
Far from ordering and creating literature from without, Barthes shows truth to be a mirage produced by one of his five codes.
By posing an enigma and deferring its solution, the hermeneutic code pulls off a sleight of hand which makes delayed information synonymous with truth.
Truth is not something fixed and solid beyond and behind the literary text, and to which the text can be reduced: it is simply what comes last in the text.
Human subjects are also dissolved into codes or into the illusory products of those codes.
Characters, for example, are not ‘real’ people but effects produced by the semic code through its naming of qualities, which are then given an appearance of individuality and reality through the attribution of a proper name.
The character Sarrasine in Balzac's story is just a collection of traits which is arbitrarily unified through being called ‘Sarrasine’.
Nor has the author any more substance.
Like the characters and indeed the reader he or she is simply a collection of codes: ‘The ‘I’ which approaches the text is already itself a plurality of other texts, of codes which are infinite, or more precisely, lost (whose origin is lost)’(p. 10).
Any sense of individuality or substantiality is just another illusory effect of the codes.
Subjectivity acquires ‘the generality of stereotypes’.
The plural text will undo the classical image of a tangible author sending a tangible message to a tangible reader; and the more plural a text is, the more it will make it impossible for the reader to find any origin for it, whether it be in the form of an authorial voice, a representational content or a philosophical truth.
At this stage in the development of structuralism the implicit shift of emphasis onto the reader and reading emerges very clearly.
Jonathan Culler's brand of structuralism recasts the codes and conventions of structuralist poetics as a form of ‘literary competence’ that the reader has mastered or internalised before he or she approaches the text, and which can then be adduced as an explanation for the particular interpretation that s/he then gives of it.
(See Culler 1975 and the essay ‘Semiotics as a theory of reading’ in Culler 1981.)
In this view the ‘grammar’ of the text is more evident in readers' accounts of literature than in the actual literary works — unless, as Culler himself does in his study of Flaubert, one chooses to read a text as a sort of allegory of the reading process itself (see Culler 1974).
Barthes's S/Z brings the reader into particular prominence first in its concept of the scriptible that calls for active involvement on the part of the reader in the production of the text (which is not to forget that in Critique et vérité Barthes had already described the critic as someone who has actively to produce a meaning for the polysemic text); and second, in its thoroughly intertextual view of literature.
The text's intertexts are as operative in its reception as in its composition.
Indeed, in an essay which may be read as a gloss on aspects of S/Z (with which it is roughly contemporary), ‘The Death of the author’, Barthes writes that it is the reader, and not the author, who constitutes the only focus for the multiple writings and codes of which the text is made up: ‘The reader is the space on which all the quotations that make up a writing are inscribed without any of them being lost’(1977b: 148).
This view depends, of course, on seeing the reader, not as a unique individual, a private being, but as a vessel or meeting point for a variety of cultural codes and literary conventions, and it is in these terms and not those of affective experience that reading and readers would have to be discussed: the reader qua reader is as much the product of a ‘grammar’(however  loosely this notion may now be conceived) as was the text in classical structuralism.
(For a discussion of different conceptions of the reader see Chapter 5.)
Classical structuralism had already ruled out the possibility of explaining texts in terms of an author or a reality external to them, but its use of the linguistic analogy and its construction of a poetics had the effect of turning language and poetics into origins for literature.
Even if literary texts were not seen as copies of reality, they were nevertheless regarded as copies of structuralist models.
Barthes's approach to S/Z has the merit of respecting the individual play of a given text while at the same time relying on the general concept of the scriptible and the lisible to do so.
Indeed, the scriptible is paradoxically what makes possible the respect for the individuality of each text.
This combined with the format of the commentary allows structuralist discourse to exhibit many more of the qualities of the language of literature itself.
There is a kind of contradiction in classical structuralist writing which attributes to literature a non-referential self-sufficiency supposed to incarnate language's very being, and yet which continues itself to employ a language whose referential scientificity ignores the very qualities that it speaks of.
It had in fact been an early aim of Barthes's to make structuralist discourse ‘homogeneous with its object’(literature).
And he suggested that Saussure's view of language meant that the ‘logical continuation of structuralism can only be to rejoin literature, no longer as an ‘object’ of analysis, but as the activity of writing' (1970: 413).
S/Z comes very close to meeting that requirement, but as one continuation of Saussurean logic it seriously undermines the classical structuralist continuation of this same logic.
Derrida and post-structuralism
Like the later work of Barthes, the writing of Jacques Derrida is both a continuation and a critique of structuralism.
We are, says Derrida, still inside structuralism in so far as structuralism constitutes ‘an adventure of vision, a conversion in the way of putting questions to any object’(Derrida 1978: 3).
Any critique, then, must necessarily be made from inside the structuralist system.
Indeed, Derrida's quarrel with classical structuralism does not concern its Saussurean inspiration, but rather the way in which it has unwittingly betrayed the very principle on which the Saussurean revolution was founded.
Broadly speaking, Derrida's rigorous and far-reaching exploration of the implications of Saussure's claim, that ‘in language there are only differences without positive terms’, leads him to question the key concepts of structuralism (in particular, sign and structure) and its methodology (as represented by poetics and semiology).
But in order to appreciate Derrida's critique of these issues, it is necessary to know something of the position from which he makes it.
Of the various concepts that Derrida uses in conducting his argument, those of ‘logocentrism- and ‘différance’ are perhaps the most effective as a means of introducing his ideas.
Logocentrism is the term he uses to describe all forms of thought which base themselves on some external point of reference, such as the notion of truth.
Western philosophy, with Plato as an exemplary first instance, has generally acted on the presupposition that language is subservient to some idea, intention or referent that lies outside it.
This idea is at odds with the Saussurean principle that it is language which is primary, and that far from preceding language, meaning is an effect produced by language.
However, the conceptual oppositions which structure Western philosophical thought, such as sensible v. intelligible, form v. content all imply that ideas, and indeed content of any kind, exist independently of the medium in which they are formulated: the word ‘medium’ itself conveys the secondary status that language is given in these conceptual oppositions, always de fined as a vehicle or an instrument of something separate from it which governs it from without.
The privileged terms in all the oppositions which underpin Western metaphysical thought are the idea, the content, and the subservient terms are the medium, the form, the vehicle.
Language has always been regarded as belonging among these secondary categories.
For anyone who is not involved with philosophy and who has read and understood Saussure, the charge of logocentrism may not seem pertinent.
But Derrida's subtle analyses show that logocentrism tends to manifest itself in extremely indirect ways.
Notable examples occur in instances of what Derrida calls ‘phonocentrism’, and even Saussure was unable to avoid moments of phonocentricity.
Phonocentricism consists in a privileging of speech over writing.
This preference for speech tends to be based on a logocentric assumption that speech directly expresses a meaning or intention that its speaker ‘has in mind’.
Speech is somehow seen as being transparent to that meaning in a way that writing never can be, because writing is conventionally thought to copy speech rather than the ideas themselves.
Any view which gives speech precedence over writing must be basing its preference on this sort of hierarchical model, which implicitly places ideas in a commanding position at the top, and writing as a degraded form of representation at the bottom.
A truly Saussurean approach would give speech and writing equal status, since it regards language as a system of differences, and not as a collection of terms for conveying information existing independently of it.
Derrida counters the temptation of phonocentrist thought by describing language in general as a kind of writing, as an ‘archi-écriture’.
The reversal of the conventional speech/writing hierarchy which is implied in the term archi-écriture makes it impossible to see any use of language, written or spoken, as being determined by presence, intention or representation.
The concept that Derrida uses in opposition to logocentrism of any kind is différance.
The word is of Derrida's own coinage and is deliberately ambiguous (and therefore not translatable), being derived from the French différer which means both ‘to defer, postpone, delay’ and ‘to differ, be different from’.
The two senses of différance are needed to explain both the fact that any element of language relates to other elements in a text, and the fact that it is distinct from them.
The function or meaning of an element is never fully present because it depends on its association with other elements to which it harks back and refers forward.
At the same time, its existence as an element depends on its being distinct from other elements.
The term différance could be seen as a conflation of Jakobson's distinction between the paradigmatic and the syntagmatic, but in Derrida's argument these are inseparable and the conflation is given great importance and power.
Diférance is the force behind, or rather in language; it produces the effects of difference which make up language.
It is not a thing that determines language from without, and it therefore has a quite different status and function from that of truth in logocentric modes of thought.
It is not an entity or an origin, although the language we use may predispose us to thinking of it in those terms.
Différance is, says Derrida, ‘the non-full non-unitary ‘origin’; it is the structured and differing/deferring [différante]origin of differences' (1973: 141).
The word itself also nicely illustrates Derrida's point that writing does not copy speech, for it is only in the written form that one can see the difference between the word ‘différance’ and the usual French ‘différence’.
The distinction between the two written forms does not correspond to any distinction in their spoken form.
In a huge variety of ways and from a multitude of different per-spectives Derrida shows that nothing escapes différance, that there are no inviolate entities, that everything becomes part of what he calls the play of differences.
He also demonstrates how hard it is to maintain this view, and how easy it is to lapse into logocentric assumptions.
These dangers can be seen both in structuralism and in other approaches to literature which all thought they were avoiding them.
Although Derrida adopts the Saussurean principle of the differential nature of language, he is nevertheless extremely wary of the concept of the sign which in Saussure is an integral part of the differential principle.
Saussure's starting point is, as we have seen, that signs in language are arbitrary and differential.
Derrida, of course, endorses this formulation, but stresses the principle of arbitrariness and differences as against the notion of the sign itself, since it risks degenerating into an entity and thus reverting to a metaphysical concept.
Traditionally (that is to say, before Saussure) the sign was regarded as a substitute for something; signs were, by definition, signs for things.
This view, quite obviously, does not involve any principle of  difference.
What Derrida points out is that this view can creep back into the definition of the sign itself once it has been broken down into a signifier and a signified.
Saussure does say that the two are as inseparable as the two sides of a single sheet of paper, but the very existence of the terms themselves implies the possibility of an independent signified existing prior to its signifier, and therefore capable of being represented by more than one signifier.
In other words the traditional concept of the sign as a vehicle or substitute for an idea or a thing can fairly easily be transposed tot he structure of the sign itself, with the signifier being regarded as a substitute for the signified.
The danger lies in the very distinction between signifier and signified, and for this reason Derrida prefers to use a concept like différance which, while preserving the Saussurean principle of the differential, is completely non-substantive and non-hierarchical.
The concept of structure also has its risks and its dangers, even though it appears to be based on the idea of relations as opposed to entities or determining origins (as we saw above in the discussion of the Prague School).
First, the essential feature of the Prague School definition of structure is its totality.
This encourages a teleological or hierarchical view of the relation between the elements of the structure on the one hand, and its existence as a closed totality on the other: the parts are subordinated to the whole in a manner that conflicts with the principle of différance.
Similarly, being closed and self-contained, the structure implies a concentric form of organization with the centre as the organizing agent which would then be exempt from the play of differences which, instead, it appears to control.
Third, the structural emphasis on form, which was originally designed to dispose of the objects of content, leads to the possibility of treating form itself as an object, so ignoring any differential value.
And finally, the structuralist view of structures is supported by the Saussurean distinction between synchrony and diachrony which itself has a certain logocentric resonance.
Structures are presumed to be synchronically organized, and this implies that their elements are all simultaneously present.
This contrasts with Derrida's view of différance which cuts across the distinction between diachrony and synchrony by including a temporal as well as a spatial dimension: elements are seen as part of a chain of relationships which cannot be de fined as either diachronic or synchronic and so cannot be reduced to the status of an object in the way that synchronically defined structures can.
The concept of structure is replaced in Derrida's writing by the concept of a chain of signification which avoids the dangers implicit in the notion of structure: by being open-ended and non-teleological it does away with any idea of a commanding entity within the system, and by having a temporal as well as a spatial dimension it cannot itself be reduced to the status of entity or object.
All this may seem rather general and abstract, so at this point we might ask where literature fits into Derrida's scheme and how Derrida might be relevant to literature.
Derrida himself writes with as much ease and penetration about literary texts as about philosophical ones.
But it is perhaps primarily in his assertion that ‘Il n'y a pas de hors texte’(‘There is nothing outside the text/nothing except text’) that he may seem most relevant to literary theory, for in this claim one hears echoes of the principles of a number of the major theories of literature that have emerged in this century.
Derrida's assertion is, of course, a summary of his thinking on language in general and may be applied to individual texts.
If language in general is not governed by anything outside it, no more are individual texts.
This seems to have obvious parallels with the Russian Formalist attempt to found an approach to literature that would exclude all factors external to the texts — history, psychology, and so on.
Similarly, it appears to evoke the principles behind the New Critics' ‘words on the page’ axiom.
Indeed Derrida acknowledges the value of the Formalists' attempt to wrest literature from its secondary role as instrument in the logocentric sciences of history and philosophy.
And in fact, some of the values that have often been associated with literature would seem to conform to Derrida's anti-logocentric approach, in so far as the so-called medium in literature (the form, the language) has been presumed to exceed to a greater or lesser extent any content or message it may have.
In other words, the medium is not entirely transparent to its object.
It is as if literature were perhaps necessarily less susceptible to the temptations of logocentrism than other forms of discourse.
And Derrida certainly sees in a number of literary works (particularly those of Mallarmé and Georges Bataille) a keener sense of the principle of différance than can be found in any work of linguistics or philosophy.
Furthermore, there are certain aspects of Derrida's own strategies of writing which are likely to be familiar to anyone with any experience of literature.
First, there is his attitude towards the texts he is writing about: because writing can never be governed by the intention and avowed aims of its authors, Derrida finds himself saying of Rousseau, for example, that what he actually writes is quite different from what he means to say: that he is bound, as we all are, to say ‘more, less or something quite other than what he would mean/would like to say [voudrait dire]’(1976: 158].
Literary criticism has often taken precisely this assumption as its starting point, and has presumed that a literary text is not necessarily saying what it intends to say or even what it appears to say — hence the need for critical interpretation.
In a sense, the very institution of literary criticism is concrete testimony of this assumption.
And this is what distinguishes the reading of literature from the reading of philosophy which requires that one understands as fully as possible what is meant, and where it is assumed that the  writing will illustrate the meaning in a direct and immediate way.
So that although the theoretical presuppositions of traditional literary criticism are very different from Derrida's, the student of literature is likely to recognize his strategy of not taking texts at face value.
Second, he will also be familiar with the elements of ambiguity and word-play which are so characteristic of Derrida's own writing.
He will, of course, have encountered them in literary rather than in critical texts, but he will nevertheless appreciate the polysemy of a term like différance and not feel uncomfortable without a definition of its proper or primary meaning (there is none).
Many of the key words of Derrida's arguments are similarly polysemic and their polysemy is essential to his argument: his reading of Rousseau in Of Grammatology, for example, turns on the ambiguity of the word supplément which can mean both an addition and a substitute.
Ambiguity of this kind and degree demonstrates very forcibly that words are not determined on a one-to-one basis by the idea or thing which they supposedly represent.
However, although literature in general and certain works in particular would seem to support Derrida's claims about the principle of différance in language, the very nature of those claims means that we cannot regard literature as being a special kind or use of language.
All language and not just literary language, is informed by the play of différance.
If we take literary to mean something more than merely ‘decorative’, then, in a sense, all language may be seen as literary.
This claim is directly opposed to the principle underlying the Formalist approach, according to which practical language is, so to speak, regarded as logocentric, and literary language as deviant, and therefore subsidiary use of language.
Jakobson and Riffaterre base their poetics on a similar sort of assumption, when they define literary uses of language as both distinctive and measurable.
Derrida reverses this priority by making all apparently logocentric forms of discourse secondary and indeed illusory.
The discourses of science and philosophy, for example, which appear to be entirely directed towards some external referent and whose intelligibility would seem to depend on their transparency, are simply an effect produced by language itself.
‘philosophy is, within writing, nothing but the movement of writing as effacement of the signifier and the desire of presence restored’(1976: 287).
In other words, philosophy is just a certain type of writing in which the signifying element of language has been illusorily repressed in favour of the signified.
Because philosophy and science now occupy the secondary position that was previously ascribed to literature, it makes no sense to speak of literature as a special kind of language.
This only worked as long as the ‘primary’ use of language was regarded as logocentric.
In Derrida's thinking there is no special category for literature.
This challenge to the concept of literature combined with the  questioning of the concepts of structuralist theory seriously undermines the apparent advances made by all those theories of literature which draw on linguistics in general and Saussure in particular.
These threats are significantly extended in Derrida's discussion of the status of the discourse of the human sciences.
As we have seen, most of the principal theories of literature discussed in this book have included as part of their purpose the creation of a scientific basis for the study of literature.
It was, for instance, the Formalists' avowed aim and intention to create a scientific alternative to subjective chit-chat about literature.
Structuralism, guided by the founding discipline of semiology, had equally firm scientific pretensions.
And, to the extent that it comprises a certain body of knowledge and a certain set of principles for systematic enquiry, any theory of literature is likely to establish the study of literature as a science.
What Derrida argues is that any discourse which conceives of itself as scientific is bound to be logocentric: it will assume that it is transparent to its object and that that object is a stable entity.
But according to Derrida, neither language nor literature is a stable object, because neither the language of the texts we read, nor the language of the discourse in which we discuss them, is exempt from différance.
We have seen how structuralism showed increasing signs of unease concerning the nature of discourse about literature, and we noted the solution proposed by Barthes, namely that discourse about literature should take the form of the discourse of literature.
But since Derrida has no special category for literature,.
this solution would clearly be of no use to him.
His own solutions go by the names of ‘grammatology’ and ‘deconstruction’.
In Derrida's writing the science of semiology is replaced by grammatology which, as he says, takes the form of a question rather than of a new science.
Similarly, structural analysis is replaced by deconstruction which also questions its objects rather than reflecting them.
Grammatology is the ‘science’ of writing in so far as writing is regarded as a generalized phenomenon, as archi-écriture.
Deconstruction is the form it takes when it turns its attention to specific texts.
A deconstructive reading tries to bring out the logic of the text's language as opposed to the logic of its author's claims.
It will tease out the text's implied presuppositions and point out the (inevitable) contradictions in them.
To take an example: in his reading of Rousseau's essay on the origin of language, Derrida shows that Rousseau saw music as consisting of two contradictory components, melody and harmony.
Rousseau regards melody as authentic, springing directly from the passions.
Harmony, by contrast, he sees as a corrupt and mediated construct because it is the product of articulation (i.e. of differentiation).
However, when Rousseau's text is submitted to the questioning scrutiny of the grammatologist, it emerges that, although Rousseau  clearly wants to say that melody originates in the passions, he actually has to formulate a definition of it that includes a notion of articulation and differentiation.
A deconstructive reading of this kind, then, will take the metaphysical, logocentric oppositions at work in a text, reverse them, and then question them in such a way as to ‘neutralize’ them.
As none of us can ever get outside logocentrism (its power over our habits of thought and over our language is so pervasive), the most that one can do is work against them from within in this sort of way.
The inevitability of logocentrism is perhaps best demonstrated by the format and the assumptions of this account of Derrida itself.
The name of ‘Derrida’ has been used in such a way as to imply that it refers to a real person who has certain ideas and theories which he has expressed in various books and essays, and which this introduction has tried to repeat, treating them as signifieds that can be represented in a number of different forms.
What I have tried to say — namely that writing is not governed by the subjective intentions of its author, that ideas do not exist independently of the language which ‘expresses’ them — has (inevitably) been partially contradicted by the manner in which it has been said.
To obey the rules of the genre of the ‘introductory account’, to use the rhetoric of exposition is, in a sense, necessarily to betray the most interesting insights of ‘Derrida’.