

STAFF MEETING
A fly buzzed in the Staff Common Room of Burleigh School.
It provided a fitting accompaniment to the voice of the headmaster.
‘I sometimes think that the Oxford and Cambridge Examination Board has taken leave of its senses,’ said Mr Crumwallis, in his inconsequential tenor drone.
‘First it was someone called Golding, then it was Weskit or some such name, and now it's a woman with a name like a Victorian tart, who writes books about girls who get pregnant by homosexuals.
Is this the kind of stuff for teenage boys?
What was wrong with Black Arrow, I'd like to know?
Or Westward Ho?’
Or, to put the matter more honestly, thought Dorothea Gilberd, tearing her glance from Tom Tedder, why don't they prescribe books that Burleigh School has already got copies of?
Miss Gilberd (Junior English, Junior History and Junior anything going) had had, over the years, more than her fill of Black Arrow.
‘I'm sure I will have the support of Mr McWhirter in any representations I may feel called upon to make to the Board,’ said the headmaster.
Iain Ogilvy McWhirter (Senior English and Religious Instruction) had been asleep for the past ten minutes, but Tom Tedder (Art and Woodwork) said ‘Arrgh’ through  closed lips, and that seemed to do well enough.
The bust of Gibbon, purchased in Geneva during the headmaster's first post-war vacation, sneered down on him as he proceeded.
‘Then there is the question of…metalwork.’
The headmaster wielded that pause with all the virtuosity of Edith Evans in her prime.
Nobody could doubt that metalwork was going to get its comeuppance.
Nobody, indeed, who knew anything of the school's finances, could have doubted that its prospects were nil.
‘It has been suggested to me by the parents of Tomkiss and Wattling that their sons are skilled in…metalwork, and that the school should have an…option that would enable them to pursue their interest in this…field.
Other schools, they inform me, offer…metalwork.
But then, other schools, I am informed, offer their young gentlemen courses in car maintenance.
Or bricklaying.
And in any case the question of should we, may be pre-empted by the question of can we offer such a course…’
You mean old sod, thought Tom Tedder, torn between a consciousness of Dorothea Gilberd's eyes on him again and some residual interest in the subject in hand.
You wouldn't offer them art if you didn't see the chance of slapping on the cost of paint as an extra.
If you could just pick up a load of scrap iron and shove it on the bill under metalwork you wouldn't be turning up your nose at the subject.
If I had any guts I'd walk out of the front door now, this minute, and I'd hitch my way to Italy and rent a shack in Tuscany, and I'd paint trash to sell to the tourists in the Piazza della Signoria, and I'd paint…
But what else he could paint, other than trash for the tourists, brought him back to earth.
’…but even were we able to come to some agreement  with the authorities at Cullbridge Comprehensive, they would demand, would they not, a quid pro quo?
And what are we in a position to offer them?
I hardly think they would be interested in using our gymnasium.
Even on his last visit, two years ago, the Ministry Inspector declared that it would soon be more of a hazard to health than a promoter of it.’
Taking advantage of this unusual spurt of self-criticism, Bill Muggeridge (P.E., Games and Religious Instruction) threw forward a hefty fist and said: ‘In that connection, Headmaster —’
‘But then what do these Ministry Inspectors know about education?’ resumed the headmaster hastily, discarding doubts as quickly as he had assumed them.
‘About schools, no doubt, they know something-perhaps they have schedules and inventories that tell them in wearisome detail what they should look for in the structure, the physical fabric.
But to the soul of a school, to education itself, they are blind.
I question, personally, whether these inspectors have not outlived their usefulness.
It is not as though the country were riddled with Dotheboys Halls!’
A snuffle of laughter from the body of the meeting was hastily suppressed.
Please God, thought Penny Warlock (Junior Classics, Geography and Religious Instruction), get me a job in a real school before next September.
Please God let me be doing real work.
Penny Warlock, twenty-three, pretty and serious-minded, believed in God, and her words were not random aspirations.
But they lacked conviction, because she could not believe in a God who answered prayers.
If God answered prayers, why was she here?
Why were any of them here?
‘So if Tomkiss and Wattling feel impelled to express their artistic bent in any form of…metalwork, it will  have to be, I fear, in their own time, and at their parents’ expense.
And so we come to the antepenultimate item on the agenda.
The vacant position of matron.’
‘If I might say a few words, Headmaster, on that,’ put in Glenda Grower (History, French and World Religions if absolutely pressed).
Her voice, like everything about her, rang confidently, but the headmaster was not to be put off his stride.
‘Really, Miss Grower, this is a staff meeting.
As I was saying, the position of matron has now been vacant since term began, and in spite of valiant efforts to fill the position —’
‘Too mean to offer a living wage,’ muttered Tom Tedder to the young man beside him.
‘— we have been unable to fill the position.
Meanwhile, as you know, my good wife has stepped in to fill the breach, and —’
Goaded beyond endurance by the reference to the headmaster's wife, to whom she had that morning sent a boy with a high fever, only to have him sent back with iodine on his knuckles, Glenda Grower chimed in again in her rich, ringing voice:
‘I would remind you, Headmaster, that small as our boarding section is, the Ministry recommendation is that for any establishment of twenty boarders or more, a qualified matron be employed.
Grateful as we are, of course, to Mrs Crumwallis for her sterling…efforts.’
The headmaster regarded her with disfavour.
‘As I was about to say, this situation cannot be allowed to continue, trespassing as we are on my wife's time and goodwill.
Efforts will therefore continue to find a suitable person before the commencement of next term.
My penultimate item is that term ends on April 13th, and  reports and class lists should be in my office one week before then.
And the final item: I move that we all adjourn to my sitting-room for a glass of sherry.’
Penny Warlock perked up.
This was the first sensible suggestion she had heard from the headmaster since she had come to Burleigh School, one week after the beginning of Spring term (her predecessor having expired, Kennedy's Latin Primer in hand, in the middle of the pluperfect of Amo with Form 2B).
She let Glenda Grower lead the way, splendidly striding forward with that swing that showed off her tall, slim figure, and watched the other, older members of staff follow in her wake.
Together with Toby Freely, the fresh-faced young man who had been sitting next to Tom Tedder, she brought up, modestly, the rear of the exodus.
‘Best thing that's happened since I arrived,’ she muttered to him, as they shuffled along the lino'd passage towards the headmaster's quarters.
‘Absolutely,’ said Toby.
‘I suppose I'll get some, will I?
They couldn't not.’
‘You poor young things,’ said Corbett Farraday (Physics, Chemistry, and anything vaguely in that line) who was flapping his overgrown boy scout's body along with the mass of teachers, and now looked around at them with his unnaturally innocent expression.
‘What a jolly lot you have to learn.’
And certainly the atmosphere was less than festive in the headmaster's sitting-room.
Near the fireplace a table had been installed, and on it placed two bottles.
Behind the bottles stood Mrs Crumwallis — tall, bony, straggly of hair, the only memorable feature about her being her large, round, immensely thick-lensed glasses.
As each slightly shamefaced figure came up to the table, she peered intently  at the face, muttered ‘Sweet or dry?’ and then poured from one of her bottles as if administering Syrup of Figs or Cod Liver Oil to the infant sick.
The older men established themselves over by the fireplace.
The central position was taken by the headmaster himself, and the live coals sent vivid warmth to his posterior.
Edward Crumwallis was tall, sunken-cheeked, and he bent his neck and head forward towards his companions, making him look like a bird of prey with indigestion.
Next to him on his left, keeping as far as possible from the coals as though to emphasize his lack of pretensions to warmth, was Percy Makepeace (‘We're distantly welated to the Thackeways'), the pale shred of a mathematics teacher.
On the headmaster's right, encroaching rather than retreating, was Septimus Coffin, sixty-odd if he was a day, retired grammar school classics teacher.
A bachelor with a sister as housekeeper, he had found retirement unstimulating, and had been pleased to come back to teaching at any price, any place.
He was swilling his sherry with a will, and tugging at his bushy, nicotine-stained moustache as if he expected it to come off.
‘Evenings are drawing out,’ said the headmaster.
‘Yes, indeed,’ said Mr Makepeace.
It was Septimus Coffin's weakness that, after a lifetime of schoolmastering, he could never leave alone the flat, meaningless cliche.
‘Yes, indeed,’ he said.
‘Surprising if they weren't, what?
If it were March and we were still drawing the curtains at four.
Frightening to contemplate, what?
Earth stopped on its axle, or whatever you call it.’
‘So heartening,’ said Mr Makepeace, terrified to the depths of his timid soul by Coffin's tendency to seize on the headmaster's least utterances, brandish them around, then publicly trample on them.
‘So heartening, the coming of Spring.
The new green —’
‘Green, eh?’ said Septimus.
‘Whatever next?’
‘— the buds coming out, the crocuses coming up.’
‘The fuel bills coming down,’ said the headmaster.
At staff functions at Burleigh, little groups tended to form.
For example, by the drinks table Bill Muggeridge seemed to be trying to make up to Mrs Crumwallis.
They made an odd pair, she bony and remote, he heavy, grubby and vaguely disreputable.
What they could have in common it would be difficult to guess, unless it was that both were defiantly unacademic and felt the need to make a common front against the teachers — not that learning sat particularly heavy on any of them, either.
At any rate, if an alliance was being formed, it was as heavy going as bringing together two Middle East states.
Mrs Crumwallis was peering at Bill Muggeridge as if he were some little-known species of the rhinoceros family, and she needed to consult the label on his cage to be sure of his name.
On occasions such as this, Dorothea Gilberd tended to gravitate towards Tom Tedder.
On occasions such as this, and also on occasions such as coffee breaks, exam supervision and staff booze-ups.
She flattered herself this was done discreetly, and was noticed by no-one, though the yearning in her look as she gazed at him would be obvious to a child of five, and the staff made frequent jokes about her loving him with a love that made his life a burden.
This was not, in fact, true.
Tom Tedder — bulky, untidy, and God-dammit-I'm-an-artist in his approach to the world in general— accepted the situation quite calmly, as most men of forty will accept devotion, even from a woman a dozen years his senior.
‘I must say,’ said Miss Gilberd, ‘that however much that precious trio over there may burble on, I don't see much sign of Spring.’
‘I never really notice things like that during term time,’ said Tom Tedder.
‘I think I go into a sort of visual hibernation.
Of course, when it's vacation, and I can paint more…’
‘I don't think the seasons mean much anymore, though,’ continued Miss Gilberd eagerly, ‘not in an English town, anyway.
Now, if this were Italy…’
She had touched the right spring.
She always did.
She had made great capital out of a fortnight's bus tour to Lake Garda.
‘Ah!’ said Tom Tedder.
‘Spring on the Adriatic coast!’
‘Winter in the Dolomites!’
‘’ Thick as autumnal leaves that strow the brooks in Vallombrosa,’’quoted Dorothea Gilberd, going slightly pink.
‘I saw Siena for the first time in Autumn,’ said Tom Tedder, with a catch in his voice.
‘Wonderful Siena.
The cathedral must be a dream for an artist.’
Tom Tedder reined in his emotion.
‘When I painted it, it looked like a bloody great liquorice allsort,’ he said.
Tom Tedder's tragedy was that he had a perfectly accurate estimate of his own talents as an artist.
Over by the fireplace, the headmaster had exhausted his limited store of small talk and had advanced to matters of serious educational concern.
‘As far as I can see,’ he said, blinking magisterially, ‘this decision by the European Court is going to have far-reaching consequences.
Ver-ry far-reach-ing.’
‘Weally, Headmaster?’ said Mr Makepeace.
‘It spells the beginning of the end of corporal punishment in British schools.’
‘Heavens above!’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘How are the Scottish schools going to manage?’
‘How, indeed?’ said the headmaster, who was tormented with indecision whenever he spoke with Septimus Coffin, how far to take him seriously.
‘It's another victory for the ‘reformers’, I'm afraid.
One explains to them over and over again the benefits: it's quick, cheap, no hard feelings on either side —’
‘Considerable enjoyment on one,’ said Coffin.
‘Quite…quite.
But they won't listen.
They charge ahead with their ill-advised new brooms.
The Burleigh School has never, I hope, had the reputation of a beating school, but this will inevitably change the character of the place.’
‘I hope that point was put to the powers-that-be in Strasbourg,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘Too busy fattening their geese to listen, I suppose.
Well, well — to think the days of bottom-slippering are numbered.
I think I need another sherry to face up to that prospect.’
The rest of the teachers, or most of them, stood awkwardly together in the middle of the room.
Glenda Grower stood a little aside, as she so often did — splendid, cool, apart.
Penny Warlock, Toby Freely and Corbett Farraday grouped themselves around a rickety occasional table, on which was perched one of Mrs Crumwallis's repulsive collections of cacti.
This one was thick and  protuberant , and bent unexpectedly at the top: it looked like a cross between a penis and a corkscrew, and the little group looked at it as if wondering who would dare be first to point this out.
‘What's happened to old McWhirter?’ said Penny, deciding not to mention the comparison in the company of two young men who gave her some gratifying doggy devotion.
‘He nipped off,’ said Toby Freely.
‘Well, hardly nipped.
I saw him doing a side shuffle to the main entrance as we all trooped along here.
Presumably he's not to be soft-soaped by a glass of Amontillado.’
‘Black mark against his name,’ said Penny.
‘What greenhorns you are,’ said Glenda Grower, shaking her great mass of long, auburn hair from over her eyes.
‘You don't understand the situation here at all, do they, Corbett?
Mr McWhirter does what he likes at Burleigh, and the reason is that Mr McWhirter has money in the place.’
‘Money?’ said Toby, incredulous.
‘Yes, indeed,’ said Corbett Farraday, in his enthusiastic, puppyish way.
He was all of twenty-nine, but he acted thirteen, and he had great rolls of fat on his tummy, the result of unwise motherly feeding.
He rested his glass on the paunch now, regarded them owlishly, and gave the impression, as always, of someone who had not gone through the usual process of growing up, but had remained a toddler, magnified to the nth degree.
‘Isn't it incredible?
I mean, would you jolly well put money into this place?
But I had it from Makepeace, who was here at the time.
Three years ago, it was, and the school was nearly on the rocks.
You can imagine: old Crumwallis going around with the expression of a Soviet agronomist at harvest time.
Then along comes old McWhirter and says he will plonk his life savings in the school.’
‘I knew he was mad.’
‘Six months later, comprehensive education comes in in  the county of Swessex.
Burleigh School starts looking up.’
‘You could have fooled me,’ said Penny Warlock bitterly.
‘Comparatively,’ said Glenda Grower.
‘At least the bills get paid.
We get paid — very little, I hear you cry, but we get paid, and on the right day of the month.
I will refrain from horror stories of Burleigh's past, but I assure you, Corbett is right.
Things have looked up.’
‘Glory and honour unto him, be unto him,’’ said Corbett Farraday.
‘McWhirter, saviour of the day and hero of the hour.’
‘I say,’ said Penny, losing interest in the fortunes of Burleigh School, which she hoped speedily to put behind her, ‘look at that.
Old Coffin is going back to the sherry table.
I think he's going to ask for more.
Too Oliver Twist for words.
Do you think he'll get it?
He is — he's getting it.
My God, I'm going to try that.’
Glenda Grower gave Corbett Farraday the look old pros give when confronted by the naîvetés of fresh-faced amateurs.
As Penny went over to the drinks table the headmaster was in full spate.
Though he had no great stock of small talk he had a great store of commonplaces, which could be adapted to any subject.
‘There it is, I'm afraid,’ he was saying, ‘that's the way it is today.
When Europe speaks we click our heels and fall into line.
Wasn't like that in 'forty-five, eh, Coffin?’
‘Nor in 'eighteen,’ said Coffin.
‘Eh, Crumwallis?’
‘What it means,’ pursued the headmaster, ignoring him, ‘is first a gentle directive from the Ministry, then sterner ones, and so on.’
‘But surely the Ministwy can't touch us, Headmaster?’ said Percy Makepeace, uneasy at the thought of still more horrendous disorder in his classes.
‘They can make life damned unpleasant for us if we don't toe the line,’ said Edward Crumwallis.
‘No, I can see what this means: it's the end of beating in our time.’
Penny Warlock, cringing under the intense peer of Mrs Crumwallis, pricked up her ears.
She wasn't a fanatic, but she did think the slipper was used a bit too freely on the younger boys.
‘Is that a directive, Headmaster?’ she said.
Edward Crumwallis did one of his characteristic swerves, and went abruptly off in the other direction.
‘A directive?
Oh dear me, no, young lady.
Why anticipate the evil hour?
These jumped-up jacks-in-office have things all too much their own way.
No doubt we can drag our heels pretty effectively if we really try.
Go by stages.
Perhaps we could first take the right to slipper away from the prefects.’
‘They won't like that,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘One of the perks of office.
Pretty much the only damned perk they have.’
‘Perhaps we can bring it in next year,’ said the head.
‘When Hilary Frome is head boy.
Frome could certainly bring it off without any trouble.’
It was odd.
At the mention of Hilary Frome a sudden silence fell over the room.
The other teachers had been drifting towards the fire, anticipating, perhaps, a bit of an argy about beating, or a discussion of the pros and cons of Europe.
But now they stopped, shifted in embarrassment, and Tom Tedder cast a sidelong glance at Miss Gilberd, and raised his eyebrows.
Bill Muggeridge opened his mouth to say something, but happily only bad breath came out.
The headmaster noticed nothing.
He expected silence when he spoke, almost required it, and the more worshipful the better.
‘Ah yes, Frome can bring it in.
A boy with a great deal of tact and delicacy.’
‘A refined thug,’ muttered Tom Tedder to Dorothea Gilberd.
‘I congratulate myself, in fact, on the idea of nominating him as head boy designate,’ pursued Edward Crumwallis.
‘Quite an inspiration.
It takes the burden off Widgery in the lead-up to the GCE, and it gives Frome himself invaluable experience.’
‘It was the only way he could be sure of keeping him here next year,’ muttered Glenda Grower to Penny Warlock.
‘I observed him myself only last week, at the planning session for the all-Swessex schools athletics meeting.
He has manner, that boy.
Presence.
He makes himself felt.’
A monster, thought Percy Makepeace, tears squeezing themselves into his eyes.
A trouble-maker, a stirrer-up, a tormentor.
‘No doubt the rest of you will be able to see him in action next week, on Parents’ Evening,’proceeded Mr Crumwallis, smoothly bland.
‘Parents’ Evening?’said Penny Warlock.
‘Parents’ Evening,’repeated the head irritably.
‘Parents’ Evening is always the third Thursday in March.’
‘This is my first term here,’ said Penny defensively.
‘Well, you really must try to familiarize yourself with our traditions.
What was I saying when I was interrupted?
Ah yes.
Frome has already expressed his willingness to help Mrs Crumwallis with the refreshments.
He will organize the more presentable of the boarders to do the serving.
I have no doubt he will make an excellent impression on the parents.
A good-looking boy.
Quiet in his manner, but very confident.’
His assembled staff stared stonily back, as he looked  round at them, apparently calling for some kind of congratulations.
But the head seemed unable to leave the subject.
as if seized with prophetic fire he raised his eyes to the ceiling, and said:
‘I predict that Frome is really going to make The Burleigh School talked about!’
There was no visible reaction to this prophetic vision.
No-one suggested weaving a circle round the headmaster thrice, in view of the fact that he had obviously fed on honeydew and drunk the milk of paradise.
All there was was an awkward clearing of throats and a gazing at shoes.
Then Glenda Grower, the most strong-minded of the staff, put her glass down on the table and made obvious going-away gestures.
Penny Warlock decided to follow suit.
It was at this point that Mrs Crumwallis spoke aloud for the first time.
‘Miss Grower?
That will be 40p.
Miss Warlock?
Two glasses, Miss Warlock — that'll be 80p.
Forty, Mr Freely and one pound twenty, Mr Muggeridge.
No, it can't wait till tomorrow.’
‘You poor children,’ said Glenda Grower, turning to Penny Warlock and Toby as they slunk away.
‘You've so much to learn.
This is how all social occasions at Burleigh end.’
BURLEIGH
The position of Burleigh School in the English educational system would be very difficult to explain to a foreigner (who has, God knows, enough to contend with in comprehending the other parts of the system).
Nor would it be possible to refer him to any works of literature (before the present one) from which he could gain enlightenment.
The prep schools have had their Orwell, the public schools their Connolly and Benedictus, the convent schools their Antonia White, the private boarding-schools their Waugh and Nicholas Blake.
No-one has thought it worth their while to eulogize or anathematize schools like Burleigh.
Indeed, schools like Burleigh do not seem to be the sort of places from which writers emerge.
And yet, any medium-sized town in the southern half of England has its Burleigh school: a private day school to which, for a not too exorbitant fee, parents can send their children and boast that they are privately educated.
Not well educated, but privately.
Burleigh itself had been founded — no, started — between the wars, had survived the Depression (as the South of England middle classes in general had so signally managed to coast blithely through the Depression) and had offered over the years an alternative to the Grammar, Secondary Modern and  Technical Schools of the town of Cullbridge.
Which meant, in effect, that though some parents chose to send their children there rather than to the Grammar School, many more sent them there because they failed their eleven-plus, that Beecher's Brook of English childhood.
With the coming of comprehensive education three years before, even the faint whiff of privilege attached to the Grammar School had evaporated, a fact on which Burleigh had been able to capitalize, in a mild way.
Foreigners are always apt to find charming the examples they come across of quaint anachronisms, of dated anomalies, in English life.
One such charming and dated anomaly is that a school like Burleigh can be bought.
A man — any man — can buy such a place, set himself up as headmaster, and run it as he likes.
Indeed, that is precisely what Edward Crumwallis had done.
He had bought it from its previous aging owner/headmaster in 1969, and had been there ever since.
This must not be taken to imply that Edward Crumwallis was unfit for his position.
He was in fact a BA (3rd class, Geography) from the University of Hull (graduated 1948).
Still, scholarship was not exactly his thing.
He might take the odd class in Geography at a pinch, but he had never given the subject any particular prominence in the school, and most boys gave it up after two years.
Nor was Crumwallis anxious to take over periods in other subjects when there was need — as in cases of sickness or (frequently) death.
Since his graduation he had not cultivated Learning.
He had cultivated Manner.
He had bought Burleigh (which he invariably called The Burleigh School, in capitals) precisely so that his manner might be given free rein and ample pasturage.
A very good manner it was too, with parents — decidedly impressive.
It certainly impressed those of limited intelligence, among  whom may be numbered Crumwallis himself.
He really believed in it: he not only thought that others should remain silent during his threadbare pontifications, but he actually believed they would benefit from them.
Such a conspicuous lack of self-knowledge has its dangers.
Not that the Manner — which he intended should be so admired later in the week on Parents' Evening — was particularly in evidence on the Monday, as he sat at his study desk and went over the plans for that event with his wife.
The side of Edward Crumwallis that was most evident during such tête-à-têtes was the petty-minded, niggling side (that side of his psychological profile that was seldom turned in the parents' direction).
‘The question is, shall we splurge on the coffee and scrimp on the tea, or vice versa,’ he was saying, in that thin, scratchy voice of his that his wife did not seem to notice.
‘Now, which parents who matter are coming, and what do they generally drink?’
Enid Crumwallis, behind her pebble glasses, might be seen to screw up her eyes.
This was the sort of question that her intellect most enjoyed exercising itself on.
She had a mind like a computer, with indefinite retrieval of unimportant facts.
‘Well, now — Mr and Mrs Quigly are coming, and they drink tea.
And so do Mrs Patterson and the Reverend Martins.
On the other hand Major Tilney usually drinks coffee…’
‘Ah — pity.’
‘But then, Dr and Mrs Frome almost always take tea.’
‘That settles it.
Tea it is.
I'll say to the Major, ‘I particularly recommend the tea.’
Get a good, straightforward Ceylon.
Earl Grey never goes down well in a boys' school — there's that touch of Milady's Boudoir  about it.
And instant coffee.
Now, biscuits — shall we say two per parent?
Yes, two.’
‘Marie biscuits,’ catalogued his wife.
‘And some sort of non-alcoholic fruit cup for the boarders who do the serving out.’
‘Is that necessary?’ asked his wife, who had all the instincts that would, a century ago, have made her a successful workhouse mistress.
‘I'm afraid so.
The parents are quick to seize on anything that might suggest we use boys as unpaid labour.
A sad reflection on human nature, and the times we live in, but true.
Some sort of squash will do, but put some slices of apple and orange in, to make it look something special.’
The festive deliberations were interrupted by a knock at the door.
‘Oh, Mr Crumwallis, I'm awfully sorry to interrupt —’
Miss Dorothea Gilberd's comfortable face came round the door, and then her comfortable figure came in.
‘Awfully sorry.
I can see you're busy.
But Mother was rather poorly this morning, and I wondered if I might skip 2B English and just rush home and see to her a bit.’
Miss Gilberd was a great asset to Burleigh.
Motherly but firm, ignorant but insistent on communicating what she did know, she was an excellent teacher for the lower forms.
She knew her limitations better than she knew her worth, and she taught in a private school because it gave her a little more latitude to come and go as she wished — an important point, since she cared for an old mother whom eighty years had made exacting.
Mr Crumwallis was very understanding.
He wanted to keep her.
‘I'm sure that can be arranged, Miss Gilberd.
I expect Mr Freely will be willing to oblige.’
‘It's only poetry…’
‘Well, there should be no problem, then.’
‘I'll be back after lunch.’
‘Of course, of course .
I know I can trust you…
Oh, and Miss Gilberd —’
‘Yes?’
‘Those biscuits of yours that went down so very well at the last Parents’ Evening.
I wonder —’
Compliments always caught Miss Gilberd on the hop, she was so little used to them.
She blushed.
‘Of course, Headmaster.
Only too happy…
‘Ah,’ said Edward Crumwallis as she withdrew.
‘A happy thought.
Cross off the Maries.’
His wife stared, her piggy eyes speculative, at the door.
‘You do realize, don't you, that she's in love with that Tom Tedder?’
Her husband laughed, a high sound like radiophonic interference on a shortwave band.
‘Of course.
We've discussed it many times, Enid.
All to the good, you know.
It might keep her here after that mother of hers dies.’
‘What we discussed was infaturation,’ said Enid Crumwallis, who had a fund of malapropisms acquired unconsciously from her cook.
‘So far she's just been infaturated with him.
But I was standing near her at prayers this morning.
I saw her looking at him.
It's gone beyond that now.
It's love, that's what it is.
Love.’
Edward Crumwallis let out more silvery squeaks of amusement.
‘Good heavens, Enid, what nonsense.
Love, infatuation: what would you know about that?’
What, indeed?
Dorothea Gilberd had already asked Toby Freely to take over her class in English.
Toby was in fact if not in name in charge of the twenty-seven boarders at Burleigh, and he spent much of the day with nothing to do.
In the afternoons he sometimes helped with games, or stood in for Bill Muggeridge in the gym, if Bill wanted to go home and check up on his wife (which he quite often did).
Or he stood in for one or other of the teachers, notably Miss Gilberd when she wanted to ‘pop home’, or Mr McWhirter when he failed altogether to arrive.
But quite a lot of the day Toby spent wandering around the school, not because he was naturally idle, but because it was his first job, and the school fascinated him.
Sometimes he wondered how the teachers could go on living, knowing this was to be their life, until the end.
He would stand in the corridor which ran along past the junior classrooms, as he had done that morning, and listen to the lessons being given.
Some of them, in fact, were perfectly good.
Septimus Coffin could call on forty years of experience, and in so far as Latin could be made entertaining, he made it so.
Glenda Grower was positively a genius.
He could stand listening to her classes for hours.
She stood there, tall, slim, striking, her hair catching light from the sun, and she told them about history or exotic religions — dramatically, humanly, but cleverly mixing in the dry bits with the drama.
But to stand outside listening to Percy Makepeace's classes, as he had done today, was to die a little.
What went on there was not education, nor even the appearance of education.
It was a good old traditional teacher-roasting.
‘The square on the hypotenuse,’ said Percy Makepeace for the tenth time.
‘The square on the hippopotamus,’ chorused three or four boys.
‘Please sir, how did the hippopotamus get a square on him?’ shrilled one teenage wit.
‘It was a square hippopotamus to start with, you oaf,’ yelled another.
‘Please sir, is this Euclid?’ came from the back of the room.
It was a signal for one of their favourite litanies.
‘You-clid!’ came from one boy at the front.
‘You-thanasia!’ contributed a boy near the back.
‘You-genics!’
‘You-topia!’
‘You-tube!’
If he lingered at the end of the corridor he could see the class without Percy Makepeace seeing him.
But he knew what he would see.
Seated in the middle of the uproar would be Hilary Frome, who was destined, according to the headmaster, to make Burleigh School talked about.
At first sight one might think he was taking no part in the uproar, but Toby had only recently completed his own schooldays, and he had soon realized that Hilary controlled it.
Percy Makepeace, too, knew that, and seldom took his eyes off him.
He was a willowy boy, firm of body; his hair was fair, and a lock fell over his right eye.
His lips were curled in contemptuous amusement — lips with a suggestion of fullness about them.
He looked, Toby thought, the kind of boy who might play the passive role in some bent porno film — and, indeed, were he asked, Hilary Frome would certainly have been willing.
Hilary was a boy who saw himself as a connoisseur of experience.
It was not only Percy Makepeace who kept his eyes on Hilary.
The boys contributing to the uproar did so as well, and were rewarded for any unusually telling stroke  of humour (within the tradition-bound schoolboy framework) by a smirk of appreciation.
He was conducting the whole thing, with a minimum of gesture: a sort of schoolboy Adrian Boult.
‘Stop this noise!
STOP THIS NOISE!
If there is any more of this I shall weport you to the headmaster.’
‘MAKE PEACE NOT WAR!’ chorused the boys.
‘You should love your neighbour, sir.
Isn't that what you learn in church?’
(Mr Makepeace's obsessive frequenting of High Anglican church services was well known.)
‘Do you love your neighbour, sir?
Is Willis your neighbour?
Miss Warlock says everyone is your neighbour.
Do you love Willis, sir?’
‘Oh, sir,’ said Willis, with elephantine coyness.
‘I say,’ said Hilary Frome, as the shrieks of laughter reached a crescendo.
‘Isn't it about time we got down to some work?
After all, you are paid to teach…sir.’
The class took it as a signal.
Within thirty seconds they were all sitting, if not working, with some semblance of order.
Out in the corridor Toby found he was sweating.
He let out a long-held breath.
How, he asked himself, how could one put up with that, day after day.
He looked at his watch.
Ten-forty.
He would wait and see if Mr McWhirter arrived, or if he would have to fill in.
Because Mr McWhirter-he who had put money into the school was in a privileged position, and he took every advantage of it.
But when he strolled out into the front drive, Mr McWhirter was being decanted from a neighbour's car at the front gate.
Mr McWhirter had had his first two periods free, as usual, the timetable being constructed around Mr McWhirter's convenience and preferences.
From the front gate he shuffled down the drive, a slow shuffle, because  he was afflicted with chilblains.
At periods of especial affliction he wore shoes slit down the side and stuffed with newspapers.
He suffered a desperate need of heat, and on occasion would come to school with a great hole in the back calf of his trousers, surrounded by scorch marks.
Next day he would come with a rough square tacked on to the inside.
Before long, that too would be scorched.
He looked, in fact, less like a man of academic attainment than a scarecrow kept in the garden of a man of academic attainment.
Perhaps for this reason it was rumoured among the boys that he was a millionaire.
He shuffled straight past Toby, eyes fixed straight ahead, and arrived at 4A one minute before his class was due to begin.
Toby, leaving a judicious interval, strolled back towards the classrooms.
If Mr Makepeace was a study in how much inhumanity a man could bear, Mr McWhirter was a study in how non-human a man could become.
‘Macbeth, Act One, Scene Seven,’ he announced as the boys clattered in.
His voice was harsh and nasal, as if it had had to fight a stiff battle around the bridge of his nose before it had been able to emerge at all.
‘If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly.’
The word ‘done’ in its first appearance may be taken to mean ‘finished’.
‘If the assassination/Could trammel up the consequence…
’ The word ‘trammel’here means…’
Iain Ogilvie McWhirter's teaching methods, Toby felt, were more than a little old-fashioned.
In fact, it seemed that Burleigh School as a whole was untouched by modern educational theories.
In this respect the boys were lucky.
But Toby wondered whether the old-fashioned theories it conducted itself by were of the best, or consistently applied.
He wondered, indeed, if some of the teachers  were interested in anything other than getting through to three-thirty, filling up the time with something or other.
Mr McWhirter's methods meant that some — any — excuse had to be found to interrupt his recital every ten minutes or so.
‘Sir, sir,’ said a boy.
‘Sir, do you think Macbeth is a good play?’
It was a question calculated to arouse Mr McWhirter's scorn.
He piped through his nasal tubes a snuffling laugh.
‘If you think it a good play, all the better for you.
And if you don't — you still have to do it.’
‘Well, because, I mean, sir — we did it in 2A, and now we're doing it again, sir —’
‘And we're doing it again next year for GCE,’ drawled a voice that Toby recognized as Hilary Frome's.
‘Oh no!’ sighed the chorus.
‘Well, you won't be able to say you don't know the play,’ returned Iain McWhirter, with another nasal chortle.
‘Actually,’ said Hilary Frome, ‘the school has only got Macbeth, The Merchant of Venice, and Henry IV, Part I, and that's why we have to do them so often.
Look —’ he held aloft his battered, ink-bespattered copy —‘this one looks as if it's been in use since the Boer War.’
The trouble with Hilary Frome, thought Toby, was that he was so often right.
Watching that fair, contemptuous face he thought how well he knew the type from his own school.
But Hilary did not impress Mr McWhirter.
‘And catch with his surcease success,’’ he intoned, and the class settled down to another ten minutes of drudgery.
It was at this point that Dorothea Gilberd, wandering round the school in search of him, came upon Toby.
With a schoolboy's shamefacedness, as if he had been  caught out in something furtive (as, really, he had), he agreed at once to take her class.
When he came to look at the poem Miss Gilberd had intended to teach, Toby rather wondered at her judgement.
When he took classes for McWhirter he stuck to the Romantics, or things that one could get a good adolescent wallow out of: Housman, say, or The Ballad of Reading Gaol.
He really couldn't see 2B going for Thomas Gray.
He should have realized that it was a poem that Miss Gilberd herself had had drummed into her at a Girls' High School in the West Riding, sometime in the nineteen-forties.
Anyway, she had thrust into his hands a copy of Palgrave's Golden Treasury, in its revised and enlarged 1911 edition, prepared and annotated for use in the Public Schools, and he didn't argue.
Perhaps, after all, she might have some master plan behind her teaching.
‘Alas! regardless of their doom,
The little victims play!
No sense have they of ills to come,
Nor care beyond today…’’
‘I say, sir,’ said Pickerage, looking up at him with his Puck face, ‘don't you think that's a bit exaggerated?
I mean, schoolboys as little victims, and all that?’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said another boy darkly.
‘Actually, you've got it a bit wrong,’ said Toby.
‘What he's saying is that they play away quite happily, not realizing what's in store for them in the rest of their lives.
Though from what I've read about eighteenth-century Eton, anything that came after that could only be a pleasant relief.’
‘Was it that bad, sir?
Was it worse than here?’
‘Of course it was, Pickerage.
Infinitely worse.’
‘Hilary Frome says that Burleigh is one of the twenty-five worst schools in the country.’
‘Then Hilary Frome is talking nonsense.
If he thought that he would hardly want to be the next head boy.’
‘He said that if the Ministry of Education had any guts, they would refuse to recognize it,’ pursued Pickerage.
‘He was having you on,’ said Toby firmly.
And then, slipping out from under this delicate and embarrassing subject, he went on: ‘Anyway, you're missing the point, Pickerage.
The point is, what is going to happen to these boys later.
Look, in the very next lines Gray says:
‘Yet see, how all around them wait
The ministers of human fate
And black misfortune's baleful train!’
These are the things that are in store for them in later life.’
‘Well,’ said Pickerage, obstinately.
‘I don't see the ministers of human fate pointing their fingers at me.’
It was a remark that Toby was to remember, with a catch of his breath, a week or so later.
As it happened, Toby was to get a good conspectus that day of the foothills of Burleigh teaching.
For after he had supervised lunch, Corbett Farraday came and put his hand on his shoulders and said:
‘I say, I'm doing an absolutely top-hole experiment with 4A second period this afternoon.
Why don't you come along?
It's going to knock them in the aisles.’
He did everything, Toby felt, but say he had a spiffing wheeze.
The fact was that Corbett was more than a bit of  an embarrassment.
He seemed to have got so immovably entrenched in the short trouser stage of life that nothing could ever arouse him to a sense of adult realities.
Now he was looking at Toby with the pleading grin of the schoolboy planning a jape, and Toby, who was near enough to that stage to want to put it firmly behind him, would have loved to refuse.
But you couldn't refuse Corbett, or speak brutally to him.
Somebody should have, perhaps, much earlier in life, but now it was too late.
‘I'd love to,’ said Toby.
When he came into the labs, Corbett was already poised over a crucible of smoking liquid, looking less like a mad professor than an incompetent short-order cook.
‘Now, boys,’ he said, ‘this should be awfully jolly.’
He waved his hands over the mist-producing crucible, as if he were a Christmas-party conjuror.
‘Now, little boys — watch this!’
The little boys — pubescent, sexually precocious fifteen-year-olds — gazed back, some with reluctant expectation, some in tolerance, one with an expression of cultivated languor.
‘And now, what do I do?
I take this little bottle of the pink stuff…and very carefully, very gently, I add it like this…’
He drew, slowly, the little bottle over towards the crucible, seeming to hug himself with anticipation.
Nothing delighted him more than to feel twenty-five pairs of eyes fixed upon him.
Slowly, still like a conjuror, he gently poured a drop or two in.
From the crucible there arose a great, green, fluorescent haze, which enveloped the lab bench and the teacher in an inappropriately lurid glow.
‘I say,’ said Hilary Frome, calculatedly offensive, at the height of Corbett's triumph, ‘do we have to waste time on  these party tricks?
Some of us want to get through GCE next year, you know.’
Corbett Farraday flinched like a spurned puppy.
Toby would have liked to kick Hilary Frome.
The trouble was that, as usual, he had a point.
At the end of teaching, the long street towards the centre of Cullbridge was for a time a babble of noise, with scuffles, cap-snatching and schoolboy indecencies hurled from green-blazered groups on one side to green-blazered groups on the other.
A sensible quarter of an hour later, the teachers began to trek home, most of them to bachelor quarters of various degrees of chastity.
Toby spent some time smoothing the ruffled sensibilities of Corbett Farraday (‘I mean, after all, when you n–y to give them a bit of fun…‘), then he went to check the changing huts, which Bill Muggeridge usually forgot to lock after his afternoon tearing round blowing whistles at the boys.
Then Toby trudged towards the boarders’ annexe which was for the moment his home.
Toby Freely was just nineteen, only a couple of years or so older than the oldest boy at Burleigh.
He was the son of a clergyman, and his mother had scrimped and saved and made the lives of her family and parish miserable in order to send her son to Portlington.
Portlington was a public school so minor that you got none of the cachet for having been there that is the real point of an English public school education.
In fact, you had to go through the humiliating procedure of explaining to everyone that it was indeed a public school.
It wasn't much of a place, and Toby hadn't been particularly happy there.
He was in the third-year sixth when he got his place at Trinity Hall, Cambridge.
In fact, it was while he was up  for the interview that he read in The Times the advertisement that had brought him to Burleigh:
GRUBWORTHY AND STING EDUCATIONAL SERVICES LTD are seeking for January 1983 SCHOOL LEAVERS to teach games and other subjects in Boys' Private and Preparatory Schools.
No fee whatever is payable for these posts.
The honesty of the advertisement struck him.
When he called in at the offices of Grubworthy and Sting, on his way through London, they were no less honest with him.
‘Of course, we have to put these advertisements in,’ said the tired, courteous, slightly frayed man who interviewed him, ‘because we are a service for all schools in the private sector.
All schools, however unsat…if you see.
But we would hardly recommend…’
‘I don't know,’ said Toby.
‘It might suit me.
As a fill-in.’
‘I mean, look at this one,’ said the interviewer, becoming quite indignant and picking one of the schools' letters contemptuously from the pile.
‘Help with games and with the small boarding section.
Some elementary teaching in various subjects.’
My God!
They don't want much for nil salary, do they?
Lucky they didn't specify they required a Ph.D.
‘Homely atmosphere.’
That means the cooking is even more dreadful than it usually is in these places.’
But Toby was made obstinate by his first off-the-cuff effort to get himself a job.
‘I think I'd like it,’ he said.
‘Would I get it?’
‘Oh, you'd get it.
You don't think there's a queue, do you?
But you know, dear boy, the only possible reason  for taking a job like this is to get away from school or family.’
‘Those are my reasons,’ said Toby.
So, having done his best to dissuade him, the man did his best to get him reasonable terms.
He threw the name Portlington into the telephone conversation, assured Mr Crumwallis that it was indeed a Public School, and the results were gratifying.
A purr came down the line.
Mr Crumwallis even agreed that, in view of his boarding-school duties, Toby should be paid for any teaching he did.
In accordance with experience or qualifications.
Toby had no experience or qualifications.
He had taken up his duties shortly after the beginning of the spring term, when he was sure of his place at Trinity Hall.
The school had fulfilled all the worst forebodings of the gentleman at Grubworthy and Sting, but Toby had not been unhappy.
He had more or less sole charge of the twenty-seven boys in the boarding section.
One evening off a week he had insisted on, and on those evenings Mr or Mrs Crumwallis occasionally poked their noses through into the boarding annexe and yelled ‘Shut up’ through the riot proceeding there.
Otherwise Toby was father, mother and elder brother to the boys, and on the whole he enjoyed himself, creating for them the home he felt he had never had himself.
Many of the boys were children of army families, or business families settled abroad.
They were mostly a little lonely and disorientated, enjoying none of the (few) advantages of the ordinary boarding-school, and too few in number to feel any sense of corporate identity.
Toby felt he was doing good.
Today he trudged up to his cubbyhole of a room, showered in the communal bathroom, and went along to tea at four-thirty.
Tea was a plate of doorsteps cut  by Mrs Garfitt the housekeeper at one-thirty, as soon as school lunch was over.
If the doorsteps could have curled at the edges, they would have done so.
She had regarded his suggestion that they be put in plastic as a piece of impertinence to a woman of her years.
‘Oh God, raspberry jam again,’ said Mortimer, as he entered the room.
‘Toby, why is it always raspberry jam?’
They called him Toby in the boarding annexe, ‘sir’ in the school, except when they got it mixed up.
‘It isn't always raspberry,’ said Toby.
‘I distinctly remember fish paste last Thursday.’
‘Ugh, filthy old fish paste.’
‘Look at this fruit cake,’ said Pickerage, the live wire of the boarding annexe.
‘It must be months old.
All dry and crumbly.’
‘Nonsense, it's perfectly all right.
Meant to be like that.’
‘My mother never makes cakes that are meant to be dry and crumbly,’ said Mortimer.
‘Hilary Frome says he sees old Garfitt round the back door of the baker's on her way to school in the mornings,’ chimed in Pickerage.
‘Buying up all the really old stuff for practically nothing.
I expect it's true, don't you, Toby?’
‘No, I don't.
And why are you quoting Hilary Frome every other sentence these days, Pickerage?
Doesn't anyone else ever say anything worth remembering?’
‘Not really.
Anyway, he's my friend.
He often talks to me.
We're good friends, Hilary and I.’
Pickerage said it self-importantly.
Hilary Frome was, after all, head boy designate.
But in Toby's experience friendship between a boy in his fourth year and one in his second was a rare occurrence, and one which would usually be a particular sort of friendship.
Toby decided to keep his eye on Hilary Frome.
PARENTS' EVENING
There was one thing, Toby thought, about Mr Crumwallis: the teachers might dislike or despise him, but in the end they toed his line.
Like tonight, Parents' Evening, when they had assembled at his behest in the Staff Common Room overlooking the school driveway to watch out for arriving parents and usher them through to the headmaster's sitting-room, where the first part of the festivities were to take place.
Or was it less his personality that accounted for their compliance than his power — a power so much greater than that of a headmaster within the State system?
Glenda Grower, who rarely commented on her past career within that system, seemed to think so.
‘And so, my children,’ she said, dominating the staff room as inevitably she dominated whenever she chose, ‘so we all troop along an hour early, as commanded by the Great God Crumwallis, to usher the parents from their Daimlers and along to the glittering scene awaiting them in the Crumwallis quarters.
Aren't we good little children?
Or are we, perhaps, merely craven?
We have, after all, a meagre enough amount of free time.
It wouldn't have happened, I can tell you, at Bedfordshire Comprehensive.’
Glenda Grower's hair, auburn and shiny, was normally tied in a neat bun at the back of her head, but tonight it had been allowed to stream glamorously down her back.
She had been at one of the best State schools in England, where she would still be, no doubt, but for what Toby had heard referred to as an Incident.
Toby would have liked to inquire further, but had feared a snub at his age and inexperience.
It accounted, he supposed, for her aloofness, and the occasional appearance of resentment and unhappiness.
‘Not all of us are toeing the line,’ said Tom Tedder.
‘McWhirter's not here, for one.’
‘But then, our Mr McWhirter's a law unto himself, is he not?’ said Glenda, tossing a splendid lock back from over her eye.
‘No doubt he will shuffle in five minutes after the first parent comes, and shuffle out half an hour before the last one goes.
Money talks.’
‘Don't underestimate him,’ said Septimus Coffin, tugging at his tufty moustache.
‘He may be the world's most tedious teacher and its driest personality, but he has one admirable quality: he is totally honest.
When Mrs Whatsit asks him tonight why her little Johnny isn't making more progress with his English, Iain McWhirter will reply that progress is not to be expected from a boy who is abysmally lazy and congenitally stupid.’
‘Whereas the rest of us,’ said Glenda Grower, ‘will mutter something like ‘perhaps his real strengths do lie elsewhere’.’
‘It seems a good idea,’ said Penny Warlock, looking up to Glenda and wondering if she herself would be as impressive a figure after ten or fifteen years in the teaching profession.
‘Perhaps I'll try the total honesty line.’
‘I wouldn't,’ said Glenda Grower.
‘I really wouldn't.
But bully for McWhirter.
As I say, money is power.’
‘I don't think it's anything to do with money,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘It's his position as licensed eccentric.
Though, mind you, it scares the pants off poor old Crumwallis.
Watch him tonight.
He'll be on tenterhooks the whole time, and muttering to the parents things like: ‘A true eccentric, our Mr McWhirter, but a very fine scholar in his field.’’
‘Anyway,’ said Toby, ‘he's not the only absentee.
Bill Muggeridge hasn't pitched up yet.’
‘The Crumwallises would very much rather he didn't pitch up at all,’ said Glenda.
‘They don't feel he gives the place tone.
The awful thing is that one almost agrees.
I do rather object to the sort of chap who farts in public and then says ‘Better out than in.’’
‘He said earlier,’ chirrupped little Mr Makepeace, ‘that Onyx was insisting on coming.’
‘Oh my God — it only needed that.
Just introducing her is an embarrassment.
On what grounds would she be coming?’
‘Well, Muggeridge said she was complaining he never takes her anywhere.
And she has taught with us now and then.’
‘Fill-in hours.
She's about the only person that even Crumwallis is reluctant to employ.
Normally he's quite happy to go out and grab someone from the street.
I say, look: a parent.’
And indeed a car — not a Daimler, but a puce Ford Fiesta — had coasted down the drive.
‘A parent,’ repeated Glenda.
‘Anybody know it?
They can take it through to the ancestral ballroom.’
‘Oh — it looks — yes — it's the Wevewent Martins,’ said Mr Makepeace, who knew all the vicars, rectors, rural deans and curates in a twenty-mile radius.
‘He's the vicar of Bwimstone Parva.’
‘Ah, well, since you know him…’
‘He's awfully low-church, I mean.’
‘Could you,’ said Glenda sweetly, ‘just perhaps bend a little for once?’
But as Percy Makepeace twittered through the hall and down the corridor with his clerical acquaintance, two more cars drew up in the Burleigh driveway.
One by one the teachers squared their shoulders and assumed the burden of the festivities.
By eight-thirty the headmaster's sitting-room was nicely full.
Fifty or sixty parents were present, and were talking in nervous or gushing little groups which centred on one or other of the teachers.
Mr McWhirter had shuffled in, looking like a morose vagrant, some ten minutes late, and had taken up a position in front of the fire.
Only the bolder or more totally disillusioned parents braved his forthright opinions of their sons and heirs.
More regrettably still, Bill Muggeridge arrived, looking what he was — an ex-fourth-division footballer: bulky, grubby, in an unbrushed suit and with a button missing from his shirt.
In tow was the equally regrettable Onyx.
How she had got that name no-one dared ask.
To give it to a child would seem unnaturally insensitive; to assume it oneself would argue a capacity for self-inflicted wounds beyond even Onyx's nature.
She was a dreary, promiscuous, disorganized piece of human driftwood, who kept having babies of dubious provenance.
She slouched from parent to parent, latching on to those who looked as if they would listen to her woes — not realizing, perhaps, that this was hardly the purpose of Parents' Evening.
Most of the parents, however, had come intending to talk about their boys, either out of a genuine or an assumed interest in them; and few of them were prepared to waste  time on Onyx when there were real teachers on whom to vent their parental concern.
‘James is such a sensitive little boy,’ the Rev. Martins was saying to Glenda Grower, ‘and so easily discouraged.
He has to be tempted to learn.’
‘Yes,’ said Glenda, noncommittally.
‘Certainly he doesn't give the impression that history is where his main interest lies.’
‘Frank's never going to be more than your average brain,’ said Major Tilney to Toby Freely.
‘In the old days they'd have thumped enough into him to get him through his exam.
I suppose you have to find some other method.
The main thing is, he seems happier this term as a boarder.’
‘Yes, he does seem to be settling down well,’ said Toby Freely.
‘It's small enough to have a sort of family atmosphere.’
‘Hmmph,’ said Major Tilney.
‘I don't see the headmaster and his wife as homemakers, to be brutally frank.
But from what I can gather from his scrawls you're doing a good job.’
‘He's a boy,’ said Mrs Cantribb, greatly daring, to Mr McWhirter, knowing very well the nature of his teaching methods, ‘who responds to stimulus.’
‘He's a numbskull,’ said Mr McWhirter witheringly.
‘You can't stimulate when there's nothing there to respond.’
The headmaster, who had just finished dispensing multiracial condescension to Mr Patel and was now turning gratefully to Dr and Mrs Frome, gazed with ill-disguised apprehension in the direction of Mr McWhirter.
‘Every school should have its eccentrics,’ he said, bravely.
‘We are fortunate that ours is a man of genuine, first-rate scholarship.’
Dr and Mrs Frome looked at Mr McWhirter as if not entirely convinced.
Then they turned to the headmaster and launched into the topic all three of them had closest to their hearts: the Fromes' only son.
The Fromes were certainly among the smartest parents present that evening, though in no ostentatious way.
They were, like their son, smooth.
Dr Frome was in his forties, with a clean-cut profile and the remains of Rupert Brooke good looks.
His decisive, no-nonsense manner had given him the reputation of being a good doctor, and this had been only slightly dented by one or two spectacularly wrong diagnoses.
His wife was also handsome — blonde, tactfully made-up, with a figure and face preserved by hard work and frequent attendance at beauty specialists.
There was a slight gush in her manner which gave the impression that she was the stupider of the two.
The impression was wrong.
If Dr Frome had not been stupid, he would not have sent his son, of whom he thought a lot, to a school like Burleigh.
Snobbery had fought with economy, and the two had reached a very silly compromise.
‘Of course, as you know, Hilary did want to transfer to the Comprehensive for his GCE year,’ said Mrs Frome.
‘But we're delighted at the thought of his being head boy here.’
‘I know he's going to do a first-rate job,’ said Edward Crumwallis, gazing towards the door, where Hilary Frome was already doing a first-rate job with two of the more important parents.
‘Nevertheless, there are still the GCEs,’ said Dr Frome.
‘And Hilary's strengths are on the mathematics/scientific sides (as my own were).
I want to have a good talk with Mr Makepeace and Mr Farraday…’
There seemed the suspicion of an implied threat here that Mr Crumwallis did not at all like.
‘He couldn't be in better hands,’ he said, spuriously confident.
‘Makepeace has a first from Reading, you know.’
(How he wished he could have said Oxford.
Still, it was close.)
‘Top-class chap in his field.
Hilary couldn't have a better coach for GCE Maths.’
‘There's the question of discipline…’ said Dr Frome.
Similar preoccupations were at the back of the mind of Hilary Frome himself, as, with the front of his mind, he made conversation with the overdressed parents of one of the boarders.
Hilary Frome had made no decisions yet about his future, beyond the one crucial decision that it was going to be a distinguished one.
He was going to make a splash the nature of which was still to be determined.
An obvious possibility was an academic splash, and throughout his years at Burleigh he had chafed at the mediocrity of the school, the variable nature of the teaching, the dimness of its reputation, all of which seemed to preclude the splash academic.
Of course, if he settled for Burleigh for one more year, there was the position of head boy, with all the possibilities for mischief of a sophisticated and enticing sort that that would bring with it.
But at what cost!
Still, it was as well not to close off any possibility of future splash, so he stood there, in his immaculate green blazer and flannels, his tie neatly knotted, his profile presented most becomingly to Mr and Mrs Channing, as he acted the role of head boy in some long-forgotten boys' book by Talbot Baines Reed or Annesley Vachell.
‘Tommy's soccer is improving enormously,’ he said at random, having no idea, nor caring, whether this was true or not.
‘Oh, really?’ said the heavily over-painted Mrs Channing.
‘He always says he doesn't care for the game.
Of course, Tommy is an awfully sensitive little boy.’
Sensitivity, be it noted, was the quality most often  claimed for their offspring by the parents in the course of their conversations and consultations that evening.
With the unpredictability of fashion, it seems that sensitivity has replaced brains or athletic ability as the quality all boys should aim at.
Certainly, if they were to be believed, Burleigh was a positive hot-house of delicate blossoms.
‘Oh yes, I think all of us here can see that, Mrs Channing,’ said Hilary Frome.
‘One would have shuddered to send him to a public school,’ said the lady, who had in fact sat long and agonized in calculation of the cost of doing so.
‘But we decided the boarding section at Burleigh was so small-like a large, warm family.
It sounded such a friendly place —’
‘Oh, it is.
Awfully friendly,’ said Hilary Frome.
‘Tommy does need a little love,’ said Mrs Channing.
Hilary Frome gave the most tremendous inward smirk.
‘I think you can rely on his getting it,’ he said.
‘Would you be so kind as to excuse me for a moment?
I have to go and supervise the refreshments.’
In the large kitchen off the sitting-room Mrs Crumwallis was organizing in no very effective manner the refreshment of the masses.
She peered closely at the surrounding mass of faces, comprising ten of the cleaner or nicer-looking boys from the boarding section, who were whispering and fooling among themselves and taking little notice of her.
She went over the points for the tenth time.
‘Two biscuits on each saucer,’ she said in her crow-like voice.
‘Go and ask them what they want, then ask them if they want milk and sugar with it, then ask another one the same, and then come back here and get two cups and the biscuits from me.
Is that clear?’
‘Yes, Mrs Crumwallis,’ said the ragged chorus.
‘I think they know what's to be done, Mrs Crumwallis,’ said Hilary Frome, coming in from the sitting-room and taking immediate charge.
‘Pickerage, you start with the parents in the far corner by the door.
Tilney, you take the parents around the fireplace.
Wattling-you take the ones by the occasional table…’
Efficiently the boys were sped on their various errands.
Mrs Crumwallis poised herself over her urns in her favourite position, while Hilary Frome acted on Milton's assurance that they also served who only stood and waited.
‘It's just my luck,’ said Onyx Muggeridge to Major Tilney in her plaintive tones, the whine of the professionally put-upon.
‘Men always turn out like that in my life the ones I'm interested in.
I mean, look at Bill — there he was, a footballer with Colchester, a league side, the world all before him.
You'd have thought it couldn't go wrong, wouldn't you?
And now look at him.
The original nowhere man.
The trouble with me is, I'm too trusting.’
She took the Major's arm confidingly.
Used as he had been in his youth to the drabs of the garrison towns, the Major nevertheless began courteously to disengage himself.
‘Tea or coffee, sir?’
The interruption of young Pickerage, looking up elfishly, was welcome to the Major.
‘Oh, er — is that the choice?’
‘Pretty much, sir.
Oh — there is some fruit cup out there.’
‘Well, I've never been one for tea or coffee after seven o'clock.
I'll see what the fruit cup's like.’
As the cups and saucers were brought round, teachers and parents began to circulate.
Dorothea Gilberd edged away from the parents to whom she had been uttering words of reassurance about their little Philip's future and glided quite at random in the direction of Tom Tedder.
‘Look at her,’ said Onyx Muggeridge spitefully.
‘The human equivalent of cling plastic.’
The Major began to feel that Onyx Muggeridge was not quite what he had come to a Parents' Evening for, and was quite grateful when the headmaster disengaged himself with palpable reluctance from the Fromes and sailed in his direction, exuding Manner.
‘Ah, Major Tilney.
Boys getting you something, I trust?
I can recommend the tea.
Thoroughly recommend it.’
‘Wouldn't know one tea from another.
He's getting me some fruit cup stuff.’
‘Ah — good.
We made that up for the boys, but if you prefer…’ neighed Mr Crumwallis, congratulating himself on insisting on something that at least looked a bit special.
And certainly, when the Major sipped his, he was surprised at how palatable it was.
While the meagre refreshments were doled out, or refills were procured, the little groups around the teachers began to break up, and the whole occasion gradually became more flexible.
Parent began talking to parent.
‘I hear from Tommy,’ said Mrs Channing, gazing significantly in the direction of Glenda Grower, ‘that she's an awfully good history teacher.
Burleigh is terribly lucky to have her.’
‘Place needs all the good teachers it can get, from what I can gather,’ said Major Tilney.
‘It's the salary they pay.
And of course we wouldn't want the fees higher, would we?
The only reason they could get Miss Grower on the staff was that Incident at her previous school, you know…’
‘Incident?
What kind of Incident?’
‘I really wouldn't like to be more specific.
Let's just say that she's quite safe in a boys’ school…’
Lesbianism held no terrors for the Major, who had long experience of the women's services.
He drained his glass to the dregs, and felt a pleasant, warming, unmistakable sensation rising to his cheeks.
‘I'll have another one of those, young feller-me-lad,’ he said to Pickerage, who was passing.
The headmaster saw the mingling of parents, unchaperoned by teachers, with distaste.
A dangerous development: parents left alone were apt to swap causes of dissatisfaction with the school.
Already, he could hear, the Major and Mrs Channing had progressed from Glenda Grower to some of the deficiencies of the boarding establishment.
It was time to break things up.
He joined Mr McWhirter, standing by the fire in the usual lonely state of the one honest man, and, assuming his Manner at its most impressive, he cleared his throat.
‘Errgh.’
The room fell silent, and from his great height he gazed over the room with that familiar expression he put on when being headmasterly — an expression that was at once dyspeptic yet predatory (for were they not, after all, his prey?).
‘It is — ah — splendid and — ah — heartwarming to see you all here enjoying yourselves, and I want to say — ah — how much pleasure it gives my good wife and — ah — myself’(he  could never work out whether it should be ‘I’ or ‘me’)‘to be able to entertain you in our modest home.
But we have business to be done, too, tonight, and I know that many of you are anxious to have a chat to the — ah — instructors of your boys.
And I know they are hoping to have a talk to you, too, because all of us here at Burleigh realize how important it is to get a — ah — total picture of the child, of his problems, his hopes, his ambitions, his — ah — ah — Hmmm.
Now, Miss Gilberd, our valued teacher of the lower forms, will be in classroom 2B to talk to anybody who might wish to go along and see her; Mr Makepeace will be in 4A; Mr Farraday in the scientific laboratories, of course; Mr Coffin in 5B…’
As the recital proceeded, the teachers began to drift off to their appointed confessional boxes, anxious to miss, on any excuse, as much as possible of the headmaster's address.
‘And if you cannot find the room you want,’ Mr Crumwallis concluded, ‘I know that Hilary Frome, our valued head boy for the next year, will be happy to show you the way.’
He gestured towards the door, where Hilary Frome was standing, flaunting his fair hair and profile, and looking still more like an illustration of one of Baden Powell's scouting manuals; a fine specimen of British boyhood, who in only a matter of a year or two might be imagined assuming the burden of Empire, and administering imperial justice with rod and gun to one or other of the lesser breeds without the law.
‘And — ah — I shall be in my study, and delighted to meet any of you, should you care to come along for a chat,’ said the headmaster, very much as an afterthought, and clearly hoping they wouldn't.
It was while the assembly was breaking up, and parents and staff were drifting to their various meeting points, that Major Tilney heard distinctly, through the closed door to the kitchen, a high-pitched hiccup and an outbreak of hysterical boyish laughter.
Mrs Crumwallis paused in the piling up of cups and saucers and the conserving of uneaten biscuits (so generously supplied by Miss Gilberd) for future boarders' teas.
She squinted in bewilderment at the ten or so boarders who had formed her little band of helpers.
A quarter of an hour ago they had been more than a little discontented.
When they had sampled her hastily flung-together fruit cup she had distinctly registered — for her hearing was as acute as her eyesight was bad — mutterings of distaste and dissatisfaction.
‘Ugh, what beastly muck,’ Wattling had said.
‘It's all bitter,’ young Tilney had exclaimed.
Now the discontented group had been transformed into the merriest little gang of kids since the first night of Oliver.
The centre of the group was Wattling, perched on a chair surrounded by his admiring peers, and attempting to sing ‘Doh, a deer, a female deer’— revealing, in the attempt, conspicuous deficiencies in his knowledge of the tonic sol-fa.
‘I say,’ said Pickerage, coming in from the sitting-room.
‘I say, I say, I say,’ shouted Wattling in response, switching to his music hall routine.
‘Old Major Tilney just slipped me half a quid,’ said Pickerage.
‘What do you think he did that for?’
‘Perhaps he fancied you,’ said Broughton, the oldest boy, his face flushed a bright, livid pink.
‘Watch it,’ said Tilney.
‘He is my dad.’
‘If I was your dad I'd fancy anyone — hic — rather than you,’ said Martins.
‘I say, Pickerage, have some of the fruit cup.
It tastes funny, but when you get used to it, it isn't half bad.’
‘You boys are supposed to be helping with the washing up,’ said Mrs Crumwallis, in the tones of an aggrieved crow.
‘Look lively.
Wattling, bring me those saucers there.’
Wattling turned uncertainly to the table, took up cautiously the pile of saucers, and started with them waveringly to the sink.
Before he got half way, they dropped with an almighty crash on to the stone floor.
A delighted howl of laughter went up, drowning the eldritch shriek of Mrs Crumwallis.
‘I say, Wattling — hic — you've dropped the saucers.’
‘You are a clot — what?’
‘Boys!’
‘Try again, Wattling.
There's another pile.’
‘Bet you can't get them to the sink, Wattling.’
‘You can't walk straight, Wattling.’
‘Yes, I can, see.
I tripped.’
‘BOYS!’
‘Go on, Wattling, pick 'em up.’
‘I say, Wattling can't find the saucers.
He can't see properly.’
‘Can, see.
They're there.’
‘Good old Wattling.
Bet you can't walk straight with them.’
‘Go it, Wattling.’
‘BOYS!’
It was at the height of the disorder that the noise penetrated to Toby Freely.
He was the last to leave the  sitting-room, calculating that the parents of boarders would talk to the regular teachers before coming along to talk to him.
The giggling was usual enough, but the quality of it was not normal, and it augmented itself to laughter that was even more hysterical, then to delirious hics, and jeering shouts.
The sound puzzled him: it was wrong for boys in the presence of Mrs Crumwallis.
And when he heard the first crash he determined to intervene, in some way that would not dispute the authority of the headmaster's wife.
By the time he had worked out how to do this the riot had increased, and he was forced to fling open the door.
Crash.
Another pile of saucers went.
‘Mr Freely!’ shrieked Mrs Crumwallis.
‘They've gone mad!
I can't do anything with them!’
‘They're not mad, Mrs Crumwallis.
They're drunk.’
‘Drunk?
Nonsense.
They've only had my fruit cup.’
‘Sir!
Toby!’ yelled a boy.
‘Look at Tilney.
He's going to spew.’
And Tilney, leaning greenly over the kitchen table, began with a spectacular heave to do just that.
‘See to him, Mrs Crumwallis,’ yelled Toby.
‘I'll get this lot out.
The parents can't see them like this.’
And grabbing three of the smallest around their necks, he started pushing them out of the back door, into the fresh air, and towards the outer door of the boarding section.
‘Right — follow them,’ he commanded the rest.
‘Broughton, I'm surprised at you.
Don't make so much noise.
Go to the outer door and then go up to the dorms, but do it quietly.
I'm right behind you, but you mustn't let the parents hear.
Quiet, you there…’
It was as he was shepherding the tail end out that the headmaster made a belated appearance.
‘Freely!’ he fumed.
‘What is this deplorable disturbance?
Get those boys back to the dormitories at once.’
For the headmaster, pusillanimous in action, was always ready to follow up the action of others.
Major Tilney, when he left the main block of Burleigh, lit a cigarette as he walked down the drive to the road.
He had expected to have a little chat with his boy, but the headmaster had explained that he had been put to bed early because he had an important French test the next day.
The Major had not been deceived.
He knew that boys of twelve did not have French tests so important as to prevent their seeing their fathers.
He knew there had been alcohol in the fruit cup, and plenty of it.
He had heard the hiccups from the kitchen.
The boys had got drunk.
He enjoyed the thought hugely.
It reminded him of his boyhood reading.
It wouldn't do the kids any harm.
He was in Cullbridge for the night, and he'd see his lad in the morning.
He'd be willing to bet he'd be as bleary as hell.
He smiled again.
No harm in it.
Damned good jape.
No harm in it at all.
The headmaster thought otherwise.
He said so to his wife when everyone had finally gone home.
He took the matter very seriously indeed.
It was an outrage, and somebody was going to pay.
If it hadn't been for his quick-mindedness, he said, goodness knows what scandal might not have ensued.
He intended to regard it as an incident of the utmost gravity.
And though the Major was a man of very much greater intelligence than the headmaster, it was in this case, for once in his life, Mr Crumwallis who was in the right.
BOYS
The life of the boarding annexe next day was dominated by ten young boys with horrendous hangovers.
Such pains and miseries as they did not feel, they acted out: acting, indeed, at this level of ham had not been seen since the last World Cup, or the Peter O'Toole Macbeth.
The act was performed with particular virtuosity when Mrs Crumwallis dosed them all with castor oil, an old-fashioned cure-all in which she had a fiendish trust: then the boys' performance resembled nothing so much as an acted-out illustration for Nicholas Nickleby.
Toby Freely felt somewhat out of his depth, not confident enough to sort out the genuine from the assumed.
The ten boys were patently enjoying their notoriety, though, and after lunch-time Toby decided that sympathy had better, give way to a brisk, enough-of-this approach if the boarding block was ever to return to normal.
With such a sure-fire topic for reminiscence and speculation, however, this was far from easy to achieve.
Mr Crumwallis, inevitably, conducted what he described as a ‘rigorous inquiry’.
Equally inevitably, it got nowhere.
He had none of the equipment of a detective, neither being particularly observant nor having any great insight into the psychology of small boys.
In the end he slippered Pickerage and called it a day.
His action was unfavourably commented on in the Staff Common Room.
As Septimus Coffin pointed  out: if he had really thought Pickerage had done it, he would have caned him; if he didn't know whether he had done it or not, he shouldn't have slippered him.
Later one of the day boys, on his way home after being kept in, saw an empty bottle of Smirnoff's in the long grass near the drive.
After some consideration he kicked it still further into the undergrowth.
By Friday evening Toby Freely congratulated himself that the boarding block was beginning to return to normal.
The boarding annexe at Burleigh was an unlovely square built on to the main house in the nineteen-twenties-it was the cause, in fact, of the original owner going bankrupt and being forced to forsake the licensed trade.
The main part of the school was considerably more attractive, being a red-brick residence, rambling but characterful, built for the vendor of wine and spirits in the last years of the Old Queen, when people were beginning to wonder if she would ever go.
Situated on the outskirts of Cullbridge, it was reached by a long drive edged by trees and shrubs.
The front part of the house, being somewhat darkened by evergreens, was given over to the Staff Common Room, with the classrooms of the senior forms on the first floor.
The back part of the house, being lighter and pleasanter and giving out on to the lawn, was the headmaster's residence.
There were also some additional classrooms, built on in the ‘forties, when building controls were strict and architectural standards were low: this extension was a long, straight line of jerry-built square rooms, projecting from the right of the original house.
The boarding annexe had its own outside door, leading towards the headmaster's lawn, where the boys sometimes played (quietly, of course, insisted Mr Crumwallis) on spring evenings.
It also had a door leading into the main  house, connecting with the headmaster's hall, whence Mr Crumwallis made his occasional incursions.
On the ground floor of the annexe there was a large room where the boarders, and those day boys who took it, ate school lunch (it was called dinner at the Cullbridge Comprehensive, but lunch at Burleigh — which somewhat excused the meagreness of it, though not the high price charged for it).
Above were the boarders’ dormitories, a recreation room or two, the sick bay (only one boy was allowed to be sick at a time) and a small bedroom for Toby.
It was not a comfortable environment for the boarders, but its very shabbiness made it liveable in.
The routine of the annexe on Friday after school was disturbed by Mr Crumwallis making ineffectual invasions of it from time to time.
He had been alarmed by the narrowly-averted disaster of the previous evening, and felt the need to assert his presence.
‘All present and correct?’ he would demand of Toby, or ‘What are the boys doing now?’
Eventually his little spurt of concern subsided, and he collapsed in front of the television in his own quarters, engrossed in a long-running J. B. Priestley serial.
‘I feel better now,’ said young Tilney to Toby, as the boys sat around eating supper — a potato pie that Mrs Garfitt had left for them, and which Toby had put in the oven.
‘Do you think I might eventually get a taste for alcohol?’
‘I've no doubt you will,’ said Toby.
‘But do you mind trying not to get it just yet?’
‘Toby,’ said Wattling, shovelling in a forkful, ‘who do you think did it?’
There was no point in asking what it was.
There was only one topic of conversation at Burleigh that evening.
‘The headmaster,’ said Toby carefully, ‘decided that Pickerage must have done it.’
Pickerage let out an exaggerated groan.
‘Well, I didn't.
I've had alcohol before, and I don't like it.
I know what it does to you, and I don't want to feel like I feel now, thanks very much.
Anyway, the head didn't really think I did it.’
‘'Course he did,’ said Hoddnett, one of the older boys.
‘Otherwise he wouldn't have slippered you.’
‘He slippered me because there had to be someone slippered.
But he didn't slipper hard.’
‘You yelled like a stuck pig.’
‘Of course I did.
That's part of the game.
But he didn't slipper hard.
Personally,’ he added, saying that word in a very considered and grown-up manner, ‘I think one of the teachers did it.’
‘What nonsense, Pickerage,’ said Toby firmly.
‘They weren't even around the kitchen.’
‘Well, they were — see.
Several of them.
Before they went through to the staff room to take up positions when the parents arrived.
And Miss Gilberd and that awful Muggeridge always come through the back, because it's the quickest way from their homes.
Muggeridge and his soppy wife were in there for ages on their way through she was ear-bashing Mrs Crumwallis.’
‘And the Grower went back to get herself another cup of coffee,’ said Wattling, ‘though we were supposed to do that.’
‘I bet it was one of the Muggeridges,’ said Tilney.
‘What absolute bilge, Tilney,’ said Toby, forced into solidarity with one of his least favourite fellow members of staff.
‘Why on earth would either of them do a thing like that?’
‘He's a spiteful bugger,’ said Wattling.
‘You never played footer with him, Toby.
I expect he just wanted to make us very ill.’
‘Rubbish.
If he'd got a down on you, he could get back at you any time he wanted.’
‘Perhaps she did it, to get him into a jolly big row.
So that he had to get a job elsewhere — somewhere much better,’ said Pickerage.
Toby tried to see Onyx as an Eton games master's wife.
He failed.
He looked at his watch.
‘Come on.
Time for bed for the young ones.’
The young ones, as always, made a frightful racket as they got ready for bed.
The whole thing was a sort of ritual, with the same motions performed night after night.
Tilney always managed to make the business of cleaning one's teeth sound like an electric drill demolishing part of the Barbican, while Wattling's idea of washing his face was to chuck his flannel at it and spatter water all over the bathroom.
Wattling's father was in the army, and his mother spent half of the year in Singapore or wherever he happened to be stationed, so his state was even more bereft than Tilney's, whose parents were divorced but whose father was stationed less than fifty miles away.
Pickerage had a mother somewhere or other, who liked to descend on the school at inopportune moments, always driving a different car, the property of her current escort (she was the sort of woman who, even in this day and age, had escorts), and embarrassing Pickerage by the demonstrable falsity of her pretended affection.
Toby prided himself that at the moment none of these boys, or the two dozen others, was conspicuously unhappy.
When they had got into bed, it was Toby's custom to read them a chapter or two of a book — the school  had a tattered library of elderly boys' books, most of them left behind by ex-pupils.
Luckily boys don't notice datedness too readily, and the boarders seemed to lap up Biggles, or John Buchan, or even Edgar Wallace.
Tonight, though, they were all too excited to be read to.
‘I'll tell you what Hilary Frome says about —’
There was a general groan against Pickerage, in which Toby gladly joined.
‘No, shut up, let me tell you,’ said Pickerage.
‘After all, he should know.’
‘Why should he know?’ said Toby.
‘Put a sock in it, Pickerage.
I'm sure the boy doesn't want to be quoted as if he was a cross between the Encyclopedia Britannica and the Authorized Version.’
‘He knows all about this school,’ said Pickerage obstinately.
‘And he says old Coffin and McWhirter would like to take over Burleigh.
Get out the Crumwallises and run it themselves.
He says it was probably old Coffin.’
‘Well, one thing I know about Mr Coffin is that he was born in the early nineteen-twenties.
That makes him over sixty.
Can you really imagine anyone hatching a devious plot to take over the school at his age?’
‘I don't see why not,’ said Tilney, who was at the age when the more outrageous the idea, the better.
‘They say the population is getting older and older, so he probably has years to go yet.’
‘Anyway — that's enough speculation for tonight, right?’ said Toby, getting up.
‘And enough Hilary Frome.’
He shouldn't have mentioned the name.
‘Hilary's taking me home on Sunday,’ said Pickerage, fighting against sleep.
‘He's going to introduce me to his parents.
And he's going to teach me to play squash.’
Is he, by God? thought Toby, firmly switching off the light.
Later that evening, when he was playing a desultory game of Scrabble with Broughton and Hoddnett, two of the older boys, he casually brought the subject up.
‘We really get our fill of Hilary Frome from young Pickerage at the moment,’ he said.
The two boys laughed blandly, giving nothing away.
‘Hilary's the great man in this school these days,’ said Hoddnett.
‘Every great man has to have disciples.’
‘I wish him luck of Pickerage,’ said Toby.
‘Personally I'd feel safer with Judas Iscariot.’
The two laughed, but they loosened up a little.
‘He's a bright lad, Pickerage,’ said Broughton.
‘Lively.
Up to anything.’
‘That's what I'm afraid of,’ said Toby.
‘I don't want this Frome leading him into trouble.’
‘Oh, Hilary wouldn't do that,’ said Broughton.
‘Hilary's a smart operator.
He keeps within the limits.’
‘His limits,’ said Hoddnett.
Earlier that day, when school had ended at a quarter to four, Hilary Frome had walked down the long road towards Cullbridge with Willis and Quigly.
Quigly, Willis and Frome — it would have formed a sufficiently high-sounding trio of names to grace a solicitors' firm.
And indeed the fathers of all three boys were professional men, filling positions of trust or responsibility, and ones bringing a degree of social prestige.
They all belonged to golf clubs or sailing clubs, took their holidays abroad, and were devoted Masons; two of them had stood for the local council.
Like clings to like, and in so far as Hilary Frome had friends of his own age — mostly  he had followers — those friends were Willis and Quigly.
As they walked along, weaving through the little groups of fighting or jesting juniors, the three boys were discussing what they were to do over the weekend.
‘I'm going swimming on Saturday,’ said Willis, in an assumedly bored voice that was modelled on Hilary's.
‘My dad's all enthusiastic about swimming, God knows why.
Times me, and hands over a quid when I cut a fraction of a second off my record — can you imagine?
Then I suppose I'll go to that disco over at Hadleigh.
Everyone seems to be going.’
‘All the more reason for not,’ said Hilary Frome.
‘All those sweaty bodies…’
‘I didn't know you had anything against sweaty bodies,’ said Quigly.
‘Won't you be there, then?’
‘Margaret wants me to go with her,’ said Hilary, with a languid gesture.
‘Perhaps that's another reason for not going.’
‘Tired of the heterosexual kick, Hilary?’ said Quigly.
‘Nothing remains a kick long, does it?’ said Hilary, scooping back a lock of fair hair from over his eye.
‘And one sees so much of the hetero thing at school: the Gilberd mooning after Tedder; Billy Bunter Farraday mooning after little Penny; sweet little Toby mooning after little Penny…’
‘Makes a change from la Grower mooning after little Penny,’ said Willis, and they all laughed.
‘Well, I hope she wins,’ said Hilary.
‘One does get so sick of the normal and the expected.’
‘Then you'd better keep away from the disco,’ said Willis.
‘If there ever was anywhere given over to the normal and the expected, it's a disco at Hadleigh.’
‘I expect I'll give it a miss,’ said Hilary.
‘Weep your eyes  out, Margaret.
In any case, I have this date with Pickerage on Sunday.’
The other two laughed.
‘That's more our Hilary,’ said Willis.
‘Better make your mind up,’ said Quigly.
‘Get yourself sorted out.’
‘Sorted out?
Do you have to sound like the vicar, Quigly?
I see no reason why I should sort myself out.
The world is over-stocked with sorted-out people.’
‘And what is your line?’
‘Me?
I sample.
I savour.
I roll the flavour of the month round in my mouth.
I flit from flower to flower, and I pick up different things from different flowers.’
‘Bully for you.
And what is the flitting bee going to do on his date with Pickerage?’
‘Really, Willis, mind your own business.
I'm not even sure that I've decided yet.’
‘After that write-up, it had better be something a bit more decisive than tossing each other off in the bogs.’
‘What a crude, Sunday paper mind you have, Willis.
And what makes you think I choose Pickerage to toss me off in the bogs?’
‘You asked to go spot on half past two in Makepeace's class today.
I'm by the window and I'd seen Pickerage make his enticing little way there just a minute before.
You arranged it.’
‘You have a very narrow range of ideas as to what can be done with Pickerage in the bog.
If I want that, there's ten or twelve in his year I'd fancy more.
Wattling, for example.
Actually Pickerage and I have a relationship that goes much deeper than your grubby little mind could encompass, Quigly.’
‘All that means is that he's your latest disciple.’
‘Disciple?
Is that what you think, Quigly?
Of course, he would make a very good successor.’
‘You haven't gone yet.’
‘Well, this year, next year — it won't be long.
And without me the school might sink into torpor.
Passive acceptance would be the order of the day.
This school is too awful to deserve passive acceptance.
There has to be someone around to galvanize you lot into action.’
‘Is that all you're planning to do with Pickerage on Sunday?
Train him up in the role of agent provocateur?’
‘Really, Willis, your French accent is quite ghastly.
Anyone'd think you'd never been south of Harwich.
Actually, I haven't decided what I'm going to be doing with Pickerage on Sunday.
But I think it'd better be something original, something with a bit of spice.
Because I admit that I'm bored, and that's unforgivable.
I'd hate to think I was going stale.’
Hilary said the same thing, in a rather different tone of voice, over the breakfast table next morning to his parents.
‘I think I'll be away most of the day tomorrow,’ he said.
‘I feel like a long hike somewhere or other.’
‘A good Sunday walk is always a good thing,’ said Mrs Frome.
‘I'll do something a bit longer than that,’ said Hilary.
‘Take some food and be away the whole day.
All this responsibility at school is getting on top of me.
I can feel myself going stale.
And if I'm going to be head boy, I can't afford to get stale.’
They looked at him, fondly and proudly.
When he'd got up and gone out, Dr Frome said to his wife:
‘I think after all it was a good plan to keep Hilary at Burleigh.
In spite of the academic standards.
That boy is showing a real sense of responsibility these days.’
TEACHERS
It needed no especial acuteness of perception in Hilary Frome to discover that Penny Warlock was the axle around which the sexual activity of the Staff Common Room revolved.
Such, naturally, as it was.
For while Glenda Grower was the better-looking, Glenda struck rather than attracted; Penny was definitely pretty, and certainly the more approachable.
And Penny was only twenty-three.
She was silently amused at the forms the approaches took: the clumsy grope from Bill Muggeridge; the galumphing puppyishness of Corbett Farraday; the appraising eye of Tom Tedder (for either loyalty to Miss Gilberd, or lethargy, prevented anything more tangible).
About Toby, Hilary Frome was wrong.
Appreciative though he was of Penny, ally though he felt her to be, there is between nineteen and twenty-three a great gulf fixed which prevented anything in the way of advances.
Toby imagined Penny as a girl of infinitely greater experience and sophistication than himself, though, in looking back on her four years at Bedford College and her half year of unemployment thereafter, Penny could only be struck by the slim amount of worldly knowledge gained, the fleeting, unsatisfactory nature of the relationships formed.
Thus, though she had little intention of responding more than politely to any of the advances, she enjoyed the  game: it made her feel human.
And that was not the feeling engendered by her relations with either of the Crumwallises, for example, or with Mr McWhirter.
As a rule the advances occurred either when she was alone with one or other teacher during a free period, or in the time between the end of school and the journey home.
Most of the teachers lingered a few minutes in the staff room, not from any affection for the place, but to allow the unruly mob of boys to get down the long road that led to Cullbridge, and thence to disperse to the bus station, to Wimpy bars, the library or their various homes.
Then the staff could walk home in peace.
So, though the place was as ill-furnished as it was ill-lit, they hung around there, putting books away in lockers, glancing at newspapers, knocking out their pipes or whipping through the odd bits of marking.
Or, on occasion, making the odd concealed, subdued, terribly English pass at Penny.
‘Ah well,’ said Septimus Coffin, on the Monday after the Parents' Evening, ‘it's four o'clock.
The madding crowd seems to have ceased madding.
At last the respectable citizen can take to the streets and get himself home.’
‘I go the back way anyway,’ said Bill Muggeridge, smelling as usual of stale sweat, and exuding a bullish discontent.
‘No cause to rush home in my opinion.’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said Coffin, tugging at his nicotine-stained moustache.
‘As I get older I think more and more of my stomach, and I'm not ashamed to admit it.
I'm promised a nice piece of rump steak with saute potatoes.
I'm beginning to smell them already.’
‘You bachelors,’ said Bill Muggeridge.
‘All right for some.’
Septimus Coffin always resented that cheap jibe.
In his young days unmarried men had been assumed to be wicked dogs, gay bachelors.
Now they were assumed to be — well, gay, but not in the sense he acknowledged.
And that he certainly was not.
He merely grunted.
Mr Makepeace, who dreaded public places where he might meet the boys of Burleigh, sat longer than any, pretending to go through the disgracefully scrappy mathematics homework that his classes saw fit to throw his way.
Toby, on the other hand, just looked in on the way to the boarding annexe, and popped straight out again, while Corbett Farraday had no particular fear of the boys — weren't they all boys together at Burleigh? and stayed in the Staff Common Room for no other reason than to work himself up to an approach to Penny.
He it was, that Monday, who plucked up courage to approach her, huffing and puffing around her with the slightly intimidating bonhomie of a young St Bernard.
‘I say, isn't the weather fine,’ he said, leaning over her and pushing his well-scrubbed face close to hers.
He looked like an advertisement for baby-soap, grown up.
‘I mean, it does look like being a jolly nice evening.’
‘Yes, doesn't it?’
‘Are you interested in wild flowers at all?’
Oh God, the approach botanic, thought Penny.
‘Well, I haven't thought much, really, about…wild flowers.’
‘Because the area round Cullbridge is awfully rich in rare species.
I don't think many people know that.’
‘No, I don't think they do.’
‘It's a bit of a hobby of mine, actually.
Sort of sideline.
I wondered if one evening you'd like me to show you some of the things you can find.
‘Sort of nature ramble?’ said Penny, gathering up her marking.
‘That's the ticket.
Awfully fun if you know what you're looking for.
Then we could make for home, and you could meet Mother.’
Penny added to her load a pile of books she had in fact marked yesterday.
Corbett Farraday's face fell, like a toddler whose jelly-baby has been snatched from its grasp.
‘Oh, what a blow.
Have you got all that marking tonight?’
‘'Fraid so, Corbett.
Latin's not one of those languages you can teach with tape-recorders and acting little plays.
You have to drum it into them.
Some other night, eh?’
‘Poor old Corbett,’ said Septimus Coffin, as Penny shoved the books into her briefcase and made off down the drive.
‘Never mind — none of the others have better luck.’
‘Don't they?’ said Corbett Farraday eagerly.
‘Well, I suppose I'll have to keep trying.
Mother's awfully anxious for me to bring a nice girl home.
She's a Corbett, you know — that's who I'm named after.
They used to be a big family in Cullbridge: milling and banking and that sort of thing.
Mother says if I don't get a move on the line will die out.’
‘Good Lord,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘To think I may be looking at the last of the Corbetts.’
Glad she had avoided meeting Mrs Farraday (nee Corbett), whom she imagined as some Gorgon straight from the pages of George Eliot, Penny swung down the drive, wishing she had not had to assume a double load of exercise books to avoid her.
As she neared the front gates, Glenda Grower rode out from the path to the bicycle  sheds and pedalled past her.
A few yards on, though, she stopped, and turned her head round.
‘You don't feel like coming round for a bite of supper tonight, I suppose?’ she shouted.
Penny was conscious of the slightest of flushes coming to her face.
To cover her confusion, something unusual with her, she said:
‘I'd love to.
Salisbury Crescent, isn't it?’
‘That's it.
Number five.
About nine suit you?’
‘Great.’
And with a wave Glenda Grower remounted and rode stylishly through the gates.
Penny strode on, regretting the flush that had risen to her cheeks, wondering if she had received her second tentative approach that afternoon.
One by one the teachers made their ways to their homes — modest, mostly celibate, mostly cheerless homes.
Corbett Farraday let himself into the moderately imposing Edwardian villa which he shared with his mother.
He called a gay ‘I'm back’ in the direction of the lounge and started up the stairs.
But he was halted by a massive ‘Corbett’ and, putting a cheery face on it, he went towards the door behind which waited for him, looking indeed the spit image of Aunt Glegg in The Mill on the Floss, his mother.
Mr McWhirter had summoned a taxi to take him home, as he often did when afflicted with the snap and bite of chilblain pains.
He had been first away, for he was not one to linger with colleagues.
In the back of the taxi he snuffled contentedly at some (he thought) particularly witty riposte he had made to some piece of boyish impertinence from 3B in the final period of the day.
Then he paid his fare, added a tip so meagre as to be barely decent, and shuffled across  the pavement, through the front gate, and down the path to his semi-detached residence.
Whether or not there was a Mrs McWhirter was a matter of some debate at Burleigh.
The general opinion was yes, but certain it was that no-one had ever seen her.
What could she be like?
What kind of private life could be imagined for this dried-up bundle of chilblains and nasal catarrh?
What Elaine waited in her tower for this shuffling Lancelot?
The fact was, there was such a person, and there was even a daughter, now at Oxford.
But Mrs McWhirter, cutting her losses, spent most of her time away, on the excuse that she was nursing her mother; and the daughter, if she felt like coming home, preferred to regard home as where her mother was.
Mr McWhirter did not regret them.
He thought private life was a much over-rated thing.
Once in the house, he carved himself a slice of meat from an ancient joint, put it on a slice of bread, and settled down at his desk with a sigh of pleasure, preparing to continue work on the Gaelic Dictionary on Historical Principles which he had been occupied with now for nearly forty years.
There was never any doubt that Mr Makepeace lived alone.
He had a ground-floor flat in a gloomy, yellow-brick, nineteenth-century house.
He did not greatly mind the lack of light.
At times he liked to sit there, with no more than two or three candles dotted about the room, imagining himself in some sort of shrine.
Very frequently he was away from home, sampling the forms of service offered by the various high-church ecclesiastics in the area, driving determinedly over the countryside in a little red Mini that had become used to the eccentricities of his driving technique.
Twice on Sundays he would thus venture forth, as well as to Evensong on Wednesdays  and Fridays.
And dotted through the year were the increasing number of Days dedicated to Saints who were honoured with his particular attentions.
Such occasions, when he could worship the Saint in question on his or her (he had no sexual bias in these matters) day, in a church dedicated to him or her, in an atmosphere of tallow and incense, surrounded by flickering shadows and gorgeous vestments dimly perceived — these were the red — letter days of Mr Makepeace's life.
And there was no chance whatsoever of meeting boys from Burleigh in a church.
Tonight he prepared, with an aesthete's excitement, his evening meal: he grilled a trout, prepared a butter sauce, boiled three potatoes of equal size, and a modest serving of fresh peas.
Then he arranged the meal with mathematical precision on a plate, and took it to the dining table, placing it next to a dazzlingly white, freshly laundered napkin.
He stood for a moment admiring it.
It looked almost too good to eat.
Then he fell to with relish.
Mr Makepeace, if the truth were known, was the most purely sensual of all the teachers at Burleigh School.
Monday evenings were always highspots in his week.
For nearly six months now he had gone to Father Michael at St Cunegonde's for long, thrilling discussions about whether he had a vocation for the priesthood.
Father Michael's personal opinion was that if Mr Makepeace had a vocation it was more for Drury Lane than for the Anglican Church.
But he was a merciful man, and kept the conversations going, trying to probe if there was a grain of spiritual content implanted beneath Mr Makepeace's addiction to theatrical spectacle.
Dorothea Gilberd perched the tray on her mother's lap, and tucked the bedclothes fussily around her.
‘It's haddock.
I know you like haddock,’ she said.
‘Would you like the BBC News on?’
Mrs Gilberd, her mouth already full of food, grunted through her near-toothless gums, and spat food over her bed-jacket.
Her daughter wiped her clean, and then went over to the little table and turned on the portable television.
‘There we are.
Don't suppose there'll be any good news, though, do you?
Well, I'll go and have mine.
I'll be back for the tray in two ticks.’
But she did not go back to the kitchen.
Her mother's bedroom, once the living-room, was just off the hall, where the telephone was.
The television sound had to be loud, though…
Miss Gilberd picked up the receiver, and dialled.
‘Tom?’ she said, her voice low, giving to the conversation a touch of melodrama that Tom Tedder, at the other end, found distinctly ridiculous.
‘Tom, I hate to bother you — you know I do try not to — but could I pop round tonight when I've got Mother settled?
I'm upset really upset…’
Tom Tedder's easy voice came reassuringly down the line.
Dorothea Gilberd calmed down perceptibly.
‘I expect I'm making a mountain — you know — but it was on my way home from school.
Yes, today.
And that beast Hilary Frome — I was in…
But I'll tell you when I see you.
About ten?’
She put down the receiver, feeling much happier, and even enjoyed the lukewarm haddock that was waiting for her in the kitchen.
‘Do you have to change him in here, now?’ demanded Bill Muggeridge, as he finished his evening meal of boiled mince and mashed potatoes.
‘Piss off,’ said Onyx unemotionally, pulling the disposable paper nappy on to the unappetizing baby with a remarkable lack of expertise, considering it was her fourth.
‘It's got to be done.’
‘I know it's got to be done.
Looks as if it should have been done hours ago, if you ask me.
I just asked whether it had to be done in here, while I'm eating.’
He lifted his nose, like a gone-to-seed beagle.
‘This place stinks like a French pissoir.’
He wasn't far wrong.
Onyx notably lacked inclination for housework, not to mention motherly instinct.
Which made it the more regrettable that, in an age when abortion is pressed on one as if it were a free sample, she should have contrived to have four children in six years — unwanted, dubiously parented, ill cared for.
The previous one had never been clean before the next one arrived; they had had dummies shoved in their mouths to keep them quiet until they were four or five; and they crawled, ran and fell around the place — filthy, whining and hungry — until Onyx was forced to give them some of the attention they needed.
Usually — it was a ploy — when her husband was eating.
‘I didn't know you'd got so bleeding sensitive,’ she said, pulling a filthy pair of leggings on over the nappy.
‘Never used to be.
This place doesn't smell any worse than the changing rooms at Colchester U's.’
‘I didn't live in the changing rooms at Colchester U's.
And that wasn't bloody babies.
Christ, I'd like to see the end of bloody babies.’
‘Just move out, any time you care to.
Can't be too  soon as far as I'm concerned.
But don't forget to keep the cheques rolling in.
Kids eat up the money.’
‘Bloody hell,’ said Bill Muggeridge, raging feebly.
‘You can keep and feed your own bloody kids.
Most of 'em aren't mine anyway.’
‘As far as the law's concerned, they're all yours.’
Lacking Mr Bumble's power of repartee, Bill Muggeridge just muttered: ‘That's a bloody laugh.’
‘I don't know why you don't get old Crumwallis to make you head of the boarding section,’ said Onyx, dumping the baby down in its playpen and ignoring its grizzles of discontent.
‘Then you could move over there and we'd all be happy.’
‘Oh yes — get shot of babies and land in the middle of a crowd of boys.
I can't stand boys.’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said Onyx.
That reminded Bill of something.
‘Oh yes, and I saw you this afternoon.’
‘Come again?’
‘I saw you this afternoon.
Walking over to the school.’
‘So what?
I was coming to have a yarn with Mrs Garfitt.
She'd promised me a recipe.’
‘That's a laugh, you and recipes.
What were you going to do, set it to music?
I suppose it was just by sheer chance you met up with Hilary Frome, was it?’
‘Is that his name?’
‘You know damned well what his name is.
You talked to him long enough.’
‘I remember him from Parents’ Evening.
Pretty as a primrose, isn't he?’
‘I saw you — putting on your little girl lost act.
Brushing up against him.’
‘Oh Gawd — sounds like something out of bleeding  Barbara Cartland: ‘Suddenly she brushed up against him, and he knew that this was the real thing.’
Be your age.
And if you want to know, I wouldn't have thought he was the type to be interested-not at all.’
‘Hilary Frome would fuck the school cat if he thought he'd get a kick out of it.’
‘Probably would at that.
Well, I'll bear it in mind.
I do sometimes fancy something a bit more refined.’
‘Well, try a stick of barley sugar, for Christ's sake.
If you go interfering with the boys we're out on our backsides.’
‘Since you're moving out anyway, I don't see why you worry.
I'd really try Crumwallis on this boarding lark.’
‘Not a chance.
He's got a head of the boarding section — salary nil per annum.’
‘Oh yes, that nice little Toby Whatsit.
Now, I'd say he had a really sensitive face, wouldn't you?’
Bill Muggeridge groaned.
‘At least,’ said Penny Warlock, ‘you can say you have taught in a good school.
As far as I'm concerned Burleigh is about the most dispiriting way possible to begin a teaching career.
I'm beginning to think I'll leave in the summer, whether I get a proper job or not.
I'd plump for unemployment, given the choice.’
She sat back in the large, embracing armchair and took another mouthful of the splendid Spanish omelette.
Glenda's cooking, like her everything else, was supremely competent.
Penny made a mental note to get cold food from the delicatessen when she invited Glenda back.
‘Of course, Burleigh is the dregs,’ agreed Glenda, elegantly ingesting (rather than eating) the last scrap of food from her plate, and taking a goodly swig of  white wine.
‘But it has one enormous advantage over Bedfordshire Comprehensive.’
‘Surprise me,’ said Penny.
‘It doesn't have girls.’
Penny, to her surprise, was surprised.
‘I can see…’ she tentatively began.
‘I have had girls,’ enunciated Glenda, ‘up to here.’
‘I don't suppose there's many girls that could be that much worse than, say, Hilary Frome,’ put in Penny, out of loyalty to her sex.
‘You think not?
Oh, Hilary's a little charmer, I admit.
Did I tell you what he did the other day, by the way?
He'd been sitting apparently fascinated by my World Religions class, and when he came up at the end I was sure he wanted to ask a question about Zoroastrianism or Thuggee, or whatever damned thing I'd been going on about.
Well, he smiled all ingratiatingly, then suddenly he asked if I wasn't tired of the Lesbian kick?
He said he'd be happy to oblige me any time I ‘wanted it straight’.
Isn't that typically charming?’
‘Good God.
What did you say?’
‘I said any time I wanted it straight I'd have it with someone who really enjoyed it straight.
He switched on his sneer and took himself off.’
‘My God, that boy…’
Glenda stood commandingly by the mantelpiece and took a cigarette.
‘Nevertheless, anyone can take Hilary Frome's measure.
We all have, apart from the Crumwallises, who carry moral and physical imperceptiveness to undreamed-of heights.
On the other hand, my little charmer…’
‘Your…?’
‘The one who put me in.
Betty Maitland.
My Betty, star  pupil of the arts line at Bedfordshire Comprehensive.
Such a sweet girl.
Everybody said so.
And such an unblemished record.
So that, when she went to the headmistress with what I was supposed to have done to her as we were changing after a singles tennis game, of course everyone believed her.
Why would sweet Betty lie?
Not a single one of my colleagues doubted for a moment what she said.
The solidarity of women!’
‘And there wasn't an atom of truth in it?’
‘Not a scrap.
I'd got fed up with her everlasting sweetness and shown her up in class the day before.
Who would believe a sweet child would take that sort of revenge?’
‘Wasn't there even a suspicion of truth in it?
I mean, didn't you feel…perhaps…you would like to?’
‘Oh, for God's sake,’ said Glenda, throwing her cigarette disgustedly into the grate.
‘You're just like the rest.
Look, once and for all: I prefer men.
I don't go for women, and I never have.’
Penny was conscious of feeling a twinge of disappointment.
Tom Tedder's flat was comfortable and untidy, like himself.
Like him, too, it was daubed with paint.
Specifically, several of his pictures hung on the walls, and one stood on an easel in the centre of the living-room.
One and all testified to a staggering lack of talent.
He had some of the techniques but none of the instincts of a painter.
When he deprecatingly called them his ‘daubs’, nobody contradicted him.
They depressed even him, though they comforted Dorothea Gilberd, who saw their value, and knew that Tom Tedder would never disappear to Chelsea, Arles, Florence or the South Seas.
Empty plates with crumbs from a chicken pie littered  the floor around them as they sat in the late evening peace, that Monday night.
Tom sprawled in the armchair, in an open, smock-like shirt, smoking.
Dorothea sat at his feet, her head in his lap.
If the spectacle of a woman well into her fifties in love with a man twelve years her junior is ridiculous, then they were ridiculous.
Onyx Muggeridge would certainly, in her language, have had hysterics.
But perhaps to more sympathetic eyes they were more touching than risible, and no more grotesque than many other lovers in whose relationship one loves overwhelmingly, and the other lets himself be loved, for whatever reason — convenience, self-importance, pity.
Tom Tedder stroked Dorothea Gilberd's hair.
‘That was good,’ he said.
‘Yes,’ she agreed.
Adding in her honest way: ‘I didn't make it.’
‘Feeling better now?’
‘Oh yes.
Much.
You don't know.’
‘Want to talk about it?’
Dorothea Gilberd thought.
Thought back to the afternoon, as she stood in the delicatessen, that valued resort of the hard-pressed teacher bent on entertaining.
Remembered Hilary Frome and Peter Quigly marching round the shelves singing ‘Little Tommy Tedder, Sang for his supper’.
Remembered the horrible, fair, insinuating Frome sidling up to her at the counter and suddenly, unexpectedly, braying out for the whole shop to hear in exaggerated cockney: ‘Better not fatten him up too much, love, or he'll be too heavy to baby-snatch.’
And the blush that rose, the helplessness, the looks of the other customers.
No, she couldn't tell him, she just couldn't.
And why spoil the perfection of this moment?
Let it pass.
‘Oh, I think I over-reacted,’ she said.
‘It wasn't much.
Let's forget it.’
Tom Tedder grinned, behind her head.
He thought: I bet she made it all up.
He ruffled her hair affectionately.
On Monday afternoon and evening Toby once again enjoyed undisputed sway in the boarding annexe of Burleigh.
Mr Crumwallis's brief eruption of activity was now again quiescent.
Like all basically lazy people he was content to let things be not only when they were going well, but also when they merely appeared to be going well.
The parents, he was convinced, had perceived nothing of the incident last Thursday, and therefore he was happy to relegate it to the back of his mind, and do nothing further about it.
After the usual bread and jam left out by Mrs Garfitt, Toby went and played a few games of rounders with the young boys.
But his heart was not in it.
He was turning over in his mind the best way to have a little talk with Pickerage.
He had been unable to prevent Pickerage going off on his own on Sunday.
Sunday was the one day of the week when all the boys — particularly those of thirteen or over — enjoyed the largest possible freedom.
It would have demanded from Toby a display of powers he was by no means sure he possessed to prevent Pickerage going off with Hilary Frome.
Any appeal to the headmaster would have been quite useless, for at the mention of Hilary's name there would have snapped over his eyes those rose-tinted contact lenses he automatically assumed for viewing that young man.
So he had adopted the feeble expedient of ringing the Frome household around teatime, and asking to speak to Pickerage.
‘Who?’
Mrs Frome had asked.
‘I'm afraid I don't know any boy of that name.
Hilary's away for the day — gone on a long hike to tune himself up, as he put it.
So sensible.
I'm afraid I can't help you.’
‘Sorry you've been troubled,’ Toby had muttered, like a long-ago switchboard operator.
So presumably either Pickerage was lying about his date with Hilary Frome, or the pair had been up to something the whole of Sunday.
Pickerage had gone straight to bed when he got back, and that day, Monday, had been something less than his dottily exuberant self.
Toby was worried.
But it was far from easy to get to talk to him alone, at least without making a ‘thing’ of it, and that Toby was determined he would not do.
Pickerage, with the cunning of adolescence, was finding expedients that kept him well out of Toby's way.
He only appeared when the boys were half way through supper (corned-beef hash), and by then it was practically time for bed.
Perhaps he could get him between breakfast and school.
‘Time for bed for the younger ones,’ he said at nine o'clock.
There was a general groan, but then they started upstairs, ragging and fighting and telling terrible jokes.
Pickerage was in bed in two shakes — again unlike him — and apparently deep in a book under the sheets.
Toby looked at him, and imperceptibly shook his head.
He looked round at the rest of them.
Young Tilney was cleaning his teeth with that concrete drill effect in the bathroom beyond the dormitory.
‘You haven't washed your face, Wattling,’ said Toby.
‘Come on, hurry up-I know you haven't.’
With a groan Wattling got out of bed, and then danced  cheekily into the bathroom.
Toby saw him take up the pile of wet flannel from beside the bath and chuck it at his face.
Then there was a piercing, terrified scream.
When he dashed into the bathroom Wattling's face was covered with blood, pouring from a gash that stretched from eye to chin.
The palm of his right hand was oozingly red from another gash.
Toby ran to the sobbing boy and took the flannel, and as he did so a naked razor blade fluttered down and tinkled on to the floor.
The two of them looked at it, as blood dripped down on the cold linoleum.
A CONCATENATION OF CIRCUMSTANCES
It was typical of Edward Crumwallis that, even at this stage, his first reaction was an instinctive determination to cover up.
It may be that he had missed his metier, and that he would have made a greater mark had he gone into politics.
‘Ah — most unfortunate,’ he said, standing in the blood-bespattered bathroom of the boarding section and looking at the pool on the floor as if it were a spilt cup of tea.
‘But not very deep cuts.
Now, perhaps if Mrs Crumwallis were to put some iodine on…’
‘No!’ howled Wattling.
‘No,’ said Toby, very firmly.
Mrs Crumwallis's medical ministrations were so notorious for their vagaries that even Toby, a healthy young man with no great tolerance of the sick, would not willingly subject a boy to them.
‘Well, perhaps just a bandage,’ said the headmaster.
‘No,’ said Toby again, his heart in his mouth.
‘The boy needs a doctor.’
‘Mr Freely,’ whinnied the headmaster.
‘I think you —’
‘It would be criminal not to get him proper attention.
If that cut isn't seen to by somebody qualified the boy could be scarred for life.’
‘Oh, nonsense.
Fiddlesticks.
Nothing but a surface cut.
Naturally the cheek bleeds a little.’
‘Do you think his parents are going to be happy when he comes home for the holidays with a scar the length of his face?’
Mr Crumwallis perceptibly weakened, and cleared his throat.
‘They're going to ask what medical attention he had.’
‘Mr Freely, I think you are usurping…er…
I think you can rely on me to know…er…’
‘Headmaster, I'm grateful to you for giving me almost sole charge of the boarders.
I'm proud of your trust.
But I feel I'm responsible for these boys now, and I feel I've failed them.
If you don't phone for a doctor, I'm leaving Burleigh tomorrow.’
Mr Crumwallis gazed at him in amazement, as if the worm had turned, and left him flabbergasted at the depths of human ingratitude suddenly exposed.
Then he caved in, and pottered off, muttering to himself, to telephone the school doctor.
Toby, next morning, was inclined to regard it as a great victory.
It wasn't bad, he said to himself, at the age of nineteen, to be able to carry your point like that, especially when your antagonist was the headmaster, and you were an unpaid temporary assistant.
In this appraisal of the situation Toby deceived himself.
There is nobody in a stronger position than someone who is doing a good job of work for nothing, especially when his employer is stingy and congenitally idle.
Mr Crumwallis was very insistent that ‘none of this should get out’.
It was ‘just an unfortunate accident’, he said.
‘One of the senior boys being criminally careless.’
And certainly Broughton and one or two of the older boarders regularly drew a cheap safety razor over the blonde fuzz on their cheeks, and anxiously inspected the  shavings as if they were virility tokens.
Toby held his peace.
He had won a victory, the doctor had come and put Wattling together again, and perhaps — though he didn't expect it — everything might return to normal.
Except, of course, that it was quite impossible that ‘none of this should get out’.
Next day it was all over the school.
Ghoulish tales were told, by the boarders in every class, of the hideous pools of blood on the bathroom floor, of Wattling's terrified and ghastly aspect.
In the very first hour one of Dorothea Gilberd's little boys had told her, and naturally at lunch break in the Staff Common Room she told everybody else.
By the time Toby came in it was clear that the whole school knew.
There was no point in holding anything back, so he didn't.
‘According to the headmaster, it was just one of the older boys being careless with a used blade,’ he concluded.
‘Hmmm,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘What do you think?’
‘The older boys hardly ever have used blades.
One lasts them a term at least.
And this one wasn't old.
I picked it up off the floor, and it looked perfectly new.’
‘Was it lying on top of Wattling's flannel?’
‘No — as far as I can make out it was hidden in it.
It must have been.
Wattling always leaves his flannel lying in a heap by the bath.
If the razor was on top of the heap, he would have been cut as soon as he touched it.
My guess is that it was concealed inside.’
‘Nasty,’ shivered Dorothea Gilberd.
‘Really malignant.’
‘Taken with the other thing, you begin to wonder,’ said Corbett Farraday.
‘Has someone got a down on the school?’
‘Or is it a maniac with a hatred of boys?’ suggested Tom Tedder.
‘He doesn't have to be a maniac to hate boys,’ grunted Bill Muggeridge.
‘But they're not weally the same, are they?’ put in Mr Makepeace diffidently.
‘I mean, the first was just a silly twick, a boy's pwank.’
‘You mightn't have thought so if you'd seen them the next day,’ said Toby.
‘But you wouldn't think of that, the hangovers and all that, when you laced the fwuit cup, would you?
But this is diffewent — weally vicious.’
‘Well,’ sniffed Mr McWhirter, with apparent relish, ‘much more of this sort of thing and Crumwallis is going to start losing pupils.’
‘Which would be good for none of us,’ said Tom Tedder.
The odd thing was, that didn't seem to be how it struck McWhirter.
In the kitchens Mrs Crumwallis and the school cook were having one of their comfortable morning confabulations.
‘And I said to 'im, I said: ‘All right, Mr Hodge, all right .
There are other butchers in this town.
Them neckchops we 'ad last Friday was all fat an' gristle.
They was rubbish, and they was full price.
We don't mind you giving us rubbish, provided you charges us for it as rubbish.’
Now, was I right, Mrs C?’
Mrs Garfitt, fat, voluble and slovenly, paused for breath and gave a perfunctory stir to something that looked like workhouse broth on one of the meatless days.
‘Quite right, Mrs Garfitt.
A bit of fat never did a boy any harm, but we're not going to pay for it as if it was lean.
We're not made of money.’
‘I know that, Mrs C. Got to look to every penny.
Got  these at the baker's for next to nothin', by the by.’
She drew from an enormous hold-all an array of archaeological cakes and buns, and displayed them with pride.
‘Might put 'em in the oven, freshen 'em up a bit.’
‘That's a good idea, Mrs Garfitt.
Is there a fairly good one there?
We've got a boy in the sick bay.’
Mrs Garfitt picked up a cream horn and sniffed at it warily.
‘Smells all right.
Who is it?
Hasn't got tummy trouble, has he?’
‘No, no.
It's Wattling.
He had an accident with a razor blade.’
‘Cor!
Cheeky young blighter!
All of thirteen and 'e's shaving 'isself.
Makes you laugh, dunnit?’
Mrs Crumwallis's thought had apparently glided elsewhere, for she did not correct Mrs Garfitt.
‘Now, lunch today is fish-cakes, and there's sausages tomorrow, Cornish pasty Thursday and shepherd's on Friday.
Is that right?’
‘Right.
And that Hodge promised me some good cheap mince for the shepherd's.
I'll make it tomorrow and shove it in the freezer.’
She gave a final stir to the enormous pot.
‘There.
That's done.
Though I says it as shouldn't, I could almost fancy a bowl o’ that meself.’
It was next day, Wednesday, that Bill Muggeridge went to Mr Crumwallis and said he would be unable to take the Burleigh team to the All-Swessex Schools Swimming Championships on Thursday.
‘Oh — ah — that's — er — most unfortunate.
May I ask er — why?’
Bill had expected that question, but he could not prevent there coming across his inward eye the memory of the  grubby calendar in Onyx's kitchen, with the new red ring round Thursday the twenty-ninth.
‘Family reasons,’ he pronounced laconically.
Now family reasons can be anything from baby's colic to a wife running off with the milkman, and there is no arguing with them, because it is indelicate to inquire further, and potentially embarrassing to boot.
Mr Crumwallis blinked.
‘Ah — yes — er — I see.’
It was a nuisance.
Of course they could cancel Burleigh's participation.
Not having a swimming pool, the boys merely had occasional periods at the Town Baths, and were unlikely to make any great splash in the swimming championships.
On the other hand, they did have Willis, whose father was keen on swimming, and influential, and who had a fair chance in the 100 yards freestyle.
No — it would look bad to cancel.
‘Now what shall I do?’ said Mr Crumwallis aloud.
His first thought was to send Hilary Frome in charge.
But then he remembered he had so far made little public display of his temporary teacher from Portlington.
A public schoolboy, no less.
‘I'll send young Freely with them,’ he said.
Toby, when he was sent for, was perfectly willing.
‘I don't know much about swimming,’ he said, ‘but I suppose it's mainly supervision, and getting the boys to the right races.’
‘Quite,’ said Mr Crumwallis.
‘Quite.
Mainly supervision.’
‘What about the boarders?’
Mr Crumwallis drew himself up.
‘I, of course…
Oh, no.
Goodness me, no.
My wife and I have to go to the Cullbridge's Athenaeum's wine  and cheese party.
We are promised.
Ah — I have it.
I'll ask Hilary Frome to step in and see to things.’
‘Hilary Frome?’
‘Yes.
Perfectly capable.
And always willing to oblige.’
Toby opened his mouth.
It was at this point, if any, that he would have to protest.
But the fact that he had won a signal victory over the headmaster on Monday night made him reluctant to pit himself against him again so soon.
The headmaster (Toby had some of the instincts of the minor public schoolboy) was, after all, the head.
It was his school.
What was more, it was in the highest degree unlikely that any protest of his would have the slightest effect in any matter relating to Hilary Frome.
It was while he was dithering that the headmaster said:
‘That will be all, Freely.’
And that was that.
When Toby had gone, the headmaster got on to the organizer of the Championships.
‘I'm afraid our regular chap has had to cry off.
Trouble at home, you know.
But I'll be sending the boys with Freely, one of my temporary people.
Tip-top young fellow, filling in time before Cambridge.
Public schoolboy, you know…
First class…
Extremely responsible.’
And so it was settled.
When Hilary Frome was approached he was, as the headmaster expected, perfectly amenable.
‘Yes, that will be OK, Mr Crumwallis.
Yes, I did have something on, but nothing I can't cancel.
I'd like to do it.
I've been a boarder, so I know the routine.
Just you and Mrs Crumwallis go out and enjoy yourselves.
Everything will be perfectly all right.’
That, then, was the concatenation of circumstances that lay behind the events of Thursday night: Bill Muggeridge noticing the ring on the kitchen calendar; Toby winning  a victory over the headmaster on Monday night which made him chary of challenging him again on Wednesday; Mr Crumwallis deciding that, on balance, a public schoolboy who was on the staff would do more for the school's prestige than a young local, however personable.
All these things, and other trifles light as air, took their place in the murder investigation that was to begin at Burleigh School on Thursday night.
YOUNG MAN, I THINK YOU'RE DYING
Naturally, being worried, Toby chewed over the subject on Thursday before school with Penny Warlock.
Equally naturally, by lunch break everybody was talking about it.
‘The headmaster,’ pronounced Mr McWhirter, ‘has an almost total inability to judge the character of boys.’
He emitted one of his painful-sounding nasal chuckles.
‘But then, I have never in my life known a single headmaster of whom that might not be said.’
‘Are you worried generally,’ Septimus Coffin asked Toby, ‘or is there something special?’
‘Well, it's particularly Pickerage, I suppose.
He seems to have elevated Hilary Frome into a sort of hero.’
‘Not unusual.’
‘No.
But what I don't like is that Hilary Frome seems to spend a lot of time with him.’
‘That is unusual.
Schoolboy heroes usually keep their worshippers at a distance.’
‘Yes.
But they seem to have spent the day together on Sunday.
Pickerage said Frome was going to teach him to play squash, and then take him home to introduce him to his parents.
That would be strange enough, but the fact is, he didn't.’
‘I'm not surprised at that,’ said Coffin.
‘What sixteen-year-old is going to take a thirteen-year-old home to meet  his oldies?
Parents are not that slow on the uptake, and his father is a doctor.’
‘Still,’ said Toby, ‘I'd like to know what they did do.
And Pickerage has been very reserved since — quite damped down.’
‘Pickerage,’ contributed Tom Tedder, ‘is rather out of commission at the moment.
He was looking very hot and flushed in woodwork just now, and I sent him along to Mrs C. She took his temperature — about the only thing she can do — and sent him to bed.’
‘Oh,’ said Toby, with an expression of puzzlement.
‘I wonder if that makes it better, or worse.’
‘I think you're worrying needlessly,’ said Dorothea Gilberd comfortably.
‘I mean, what can he actually do?’
Nobody cared to enlighten her, and after an embarrassed silence the conversation turned to other matters.
The bus was to come to Burleigh for the swimmers at five-thirty, and then drive to Sturford, the county town, where the championships were to take place.
Toby checked carefully through the boarding annexe after school, and then there was nothing to be done but hand over to Hilary Frome.
This was done with the frigid politeness of two people who do not like each other, know they do not like each other , but have never let that dislike come out into the open.
Little icicles like daggers hung in the atmosphere.
‘Supper is in the kitchen,’ said Toby, speaking to Hilary in the upstairs corridor of the boarding section.
‘It's cold, so there's no problem.
The younger boys go to bed at nine o'clock.
I usually read to them a bit, but there's no need for you to.
Just let them read in bed for ten minutes or so, and then put the lights out.
Oh, and Pickerage is in the sick bay.’
‘Oh, I know,’ said Hilary Frome, with deliberate, impertinent provocation.
‘Pickerage is a friend of mine.’
‘Yes,’ said Toby, and cleared his throat uneasily.
‘Well — Mrs Crumwallis says he's to have another dose of-of medicine before he goes to sleep.’
The two of them looked towards the little wooden table outside the sick bay, where a bottle labelled ‘Dr MacLaren's Stomach and Bowel Mixture’ stood, together with a large spoon.
The label on the bottle bore a picture of Dr MacLaren, who looked as if he might have been personal physician to Mr Gladstone.
If the two had liked each other more, they might have cast their eyes heavenwards.
As it was, they made no sign.
‘Two tablespoons,’ said Toby.
Hilary Frome nodded coolly.
‘Oh, and I don't know if you're going to play any games with the younger boys before it gets dark —’
It was out before Toby could stop it.
Boy as he still was, he blushed.
‘I might,’ said Hilary Frome.
‘Before it gets dark.’
‘Well, I shouldn't let Wattling play,’ continued Toby hurriedly.
‘He's only just out of the sick bay himself, and he might fall over and open up that cut again.’
‘Of course,’ said Hilary.
‘Poor old Wattling.
Perhaps he can just sit around and score.’
‘Yes.
Well, I'd better be getting down to the bus…
I expect I'll be back by eleven or so.’
‘Right you are,’ said Hilary, turning away as if terminating the interview.
‘Cheer on Willis.
From me.’
You cool little sod, thought Toby, and reluctantly went down to the front drive.
In the event, Hilary rummaged around in the gym and  found a cricket bat and ball.
The smaller boys could have some bowling and catching practice.
Admittedly it was only March, but the cricket season could never come too early for Hilary.
He knew he looked well in white flannel.
He rounded them all up, and ushered them out on to the lawn.
‘Just going for a bit of a hit, Malcolm,’ he called, as they went past the sick bay.
‘You won't be lonely?’
‘No, Hilary,’ came the muffled voice of Pickerage.
Hilary, of course, batted, and the boys took it in turns to bowl.
The rest stood round the outskirts of the lawn, poised to catch.
Wattling had tagged on, plastered up as he was, and Hilary included him in.
He wasn't going to take orders from a jumped-up sixth-former.
Hilary batted with style, in the manner of a latter-day Raffles, distributing possible catches around the lawn.
He really looked very well indeed.
That, at any rate, was what the headmaster thought, watching him keenly from his sitting-room, sipping a cup of atrocious coffee.
A real credit to the school, he thought.
He meant, in fact, a real ornament, for Hilary Frome was ornamental rather than creditable, but the two things elided in his mind.
The headmaster expanded into geniality as he contemplated his own cleverness in ensuring that Hilary Frome remained at Burleigh for his GCE year.
Indeed, he regretted bitterly that his attempts to establish a sixth form in the school had been so abortive.
Those boys (they were few, for academic impulses withered and died in the Burleigh air) who aimed at Advanced Level, or even university, had always trickled off into the state system as soon as they had taken their Ordinary Levels, if not before.
A criminal waste.
Imagine what Burleigh might achieve, Edward Crumwallis thought, with Hilary  Frome as its head boy for two or three years!
Hilary Frome knew he was being watched.
He always had a consciousness of that, as a beautiful woman does.
When the light began to fail he despatched Tilney with the bat and ball to the gym, and sent the others ahead to the boarding annexe.
Then he strolled, slowly and elegantly, in that direction himself.
‘Ah, Frome…
One moment.’
It was the headmaster, calling him from his sitting-room window.
Somehow Hilary had known he would.
‘Ah — Frome,’ said Edward Crumwallis, as Hilary walked respectfully in.
‘Splendid idea of yours, getting in a bit of advance practice for the season.
Excellent notion.
Any talent there, do you think?
Well, time will show, eh?
You seem to have an excellent way with them, with the younger ones.
You have, if I may say so, the right touch.’
‘Thank you, sir,’ said Hilary demurely.
‘You know, Frome, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to think of you as head boy here next year.
A school, you know, is like —’ here the headmaster came to a halt, because he had launched into a metaphor without having a metaphor readily to hand; and in fact he had very few notions of what a school was like —‘is like the human body.
Know what I mean?’
Hilary Frome nodded intelligently.
‘It may seem healthy enough, but it's no use if what's up here —’ he tapped his head —‘isn't up to scratch.
It's what's up top that counts.
It's like that with a school.
We've got a fine little school here, I'm sure you'd agree —’ Hilary Frome looked at him with a light of pure idealism in his eyes, but he drew the line at assenting —‘but what's going to count in the years ahead is what we've got up top.
And one of those things is you, Frome.’
Hilary swallowed, apparently with emotion.
‘I'm sure I'll try to pull my weight, sir,’ he said, his damask cheek giving no sign of the tongue inside it.
‘I know you will, Frome.
I've always known it.
I may say without vanity that I'm rarely mistaken in a boy.
And I can see that for the tasks that lie ahead of you in this school you are splendidly equipped.
Quite splendidly equipped.’
Hilary Frome was afflicted by a cough.
‘I can see already what a fine relationship you have with the other boys.
Firm, yet friendly.
Build on it, Frome.
And there's one more thing I wanted to say.’
‘Yes, Mr Crumwallis?’
‘I appreciate your stepping in like this.
Filling the breach, holding the fort, and that kind of thing.
I may treat you as a grown-up person, may I not?
Should you feel like a glass of — er — sherry in the course of the evening, by all means come and pour yourself one!’
He waved his hand munificently in the direction of the sideboard, as if it were the bar at White's.
Hilary Frome glanced politely in its direction, and saw the two bottles of sherry left over from the last staff festivities, one of them half empty, the other two-thirds empty.
‘Thank you very much, sir.
If I feel like a glass I certainly will have one.’
‘Good,’ said the headmaster.
‘Good…
And now Mrs Crumwallis and I must wend our way to the Athenaeum.
A fine organization, Frome.
Father's a member, eh?
One day I hope you will be.’
His back was already turned, so he did not see Hilary Frome's gesture, expressive of what he could do with the Cullbridge Athenaeum.
‘Hello, Malcolm,’ said Hilary Frome, pausing at the door of the sick bay on his way to the boarders' common  room.
‘How are you feeling?’
‘Pretty rough,’ said Pickerage, who certainly looked less than his usual perky self.
‘I think I caught a cold on Sunday.’
‘Did you now?’ said Hilary, coming in to the sick bay, which was really no more than a scruffy little room with only a slight hospital smell about it to bespeak its function.
‘One more thing for you to hold against me.
Never mind, I'll be coming to give you your medicine later on.’
‘Ugh.
Mrs Crumwallis's muck.’
‘Now, now.
Remember I am the apple of the headmaster's eye.
His right hand…testicle.’
Pickerage giggled.
‘He has just told me that if I continue in my present path, remain the fine, upstanding, clean-living boy I so evidently am, I may one day hope — wait for it — to be elected to — Gracious heavens!— the Cullbridge Athenaeum!’
‘Big deal!’ cried Pickerage, regaining something of his usual Senate page-boy look.
Hilary seemed to have got the reaction he wanted and, looking pleased, he went over to the window.
‘What are you looking at?’
‘Surveying the stately grounds, enjoying the splendid view to be had from Burleigh's magnificent hospital facilities.’
He peered into the gathering gloom.
‘Well, well; you can see over to the sports field.’
‘So what?
We don't play floodlit football.’
‘Even to the sports pavilion.
Well, well.’
Suddenly he dashed over to the door and put out the light.
‘What are you doing, Hilary?’
‘Seeing, but not being seen…
Ah, just as I thought…
Poor old Muggeridge.’
‘Muggeridge?
What's he doing here at this time of night?
Why didn't he go with the swimmers if he's not doing anything?’
‘Wouldn't you like to know!
There are parts of my life, my dear Malcolm, that even you are not privy to.
Elements in my grand strategy that, as commander, I do not care to confide in you…
Cowardly timorous beastie as you are…
Whoops!
He's tripped over a root…
There he goes, off into the trees.’
He glanced round in the darkened room.
‘Well, Malcolm, what are we going to do with you?’
‘Switch on the light, Hilary.
I don't like the dark.’
‘Baby…
There you are…
Well, now I'm in charge of this great boarding establishment, how are we going to amuse ourselves?’
Pickerage, already flushed, looked down at the sheets, hot and bothered.
‘I don't know…’
‘Come on, shy little miss.
What's up?’
‘Well, I don't want to do…what we did on Sunday.’
‘You don't want to do what we did on Sunday, do you not, you prim little Victorian?
And why, pray, not?’
‘I didn't like it…
It was nasty…
It hurt.’
‘Really?
What a shame.
It didn't hurt me.
It'll be easier next time.
We make a great partnership, Malcolm.’
‘Don't start on about that again.
I don't want to.’
‘Who's starting on about anything?…
You wouldn't like me to adopt someone else as my protege, would you, Malcolm?’
‘Oh no, Hilary!’
‘Well, then, we are going to make a partnership, aren't  we?’
Hilary Frome sat down on the bed.
‘And if I hurt you, that's not the only fun there is, is it?
You prefer the old kind, do you?
Conservative little thing.
But the old kind is a very good kind.’
He slid his hand down under the sheet.
‘Awfully nice…warming…satisfying…
Isn't it, Malcolm?’
The ancient television in the boarders' common room was giving a reasonable picture for a change.
ITV had a good traditional Western on, in which the grizzled old sheriff (played by a clapped-out Hollywood actor who had kept out of politics) taught the rules of the game and his homespun philosophy to his tearaway young deputy (played by a reformed pop star).
It was just the sort of thing the boys liked, and when Hilary had fetched their suppers — a cold Scotch egg each — from the kitchen, they all sat watching it.
The younger boys did not take at all kindly to Hilary lounging in a superior way in front of the set and drawling out the dialogue before it got spoken.
‘Sometimes a man's gotta do…’
‘Oh, shut up, Hilary!
You're spoiling it.’
‘Womenfolk's just like cattle, boy.
You treat 'em rough but you treat 'em fair.’
‘Put a sock in it, Frome.’
The film drew towards its close, the inevitable shoot-out round the hanging rock.
‘Well — bed for the teeny-weenies.’
‘Oh, get stuffed, Hilary.
We're going to watch to the end.’
Recognizing the limits of his power, Hilary gave in ungracefully.
‘Well, well — to think there are people in this world  who can't guess how that will end.
So be it.
I hope you realize you could get me into trouble with the Great God Crumwallis.
If it's not over in ten minutes — bed all the same.’
But ten minutes sufficed for the blazing gun-fight, and for the affecting death scene with soaring strings.
Then Hilary kicked the boys along to the dormitory, and supervised their minimal ablutions.
‘Kindly inspect your flannel, Wattling, in case your hidden enemy has concealed a Samurai sword in it…
Do shut up, Tilney: no wonder little Toby is such an insensitive oaf, if he has to listen to that racket every night…
Is that tear in your pyjamas due to the age of the garment, Martins, or is it a feeble attempt to be provocative?’
Finally he got them all into bed.
‘Right.
Ten minutes’ reading, then lights out.’
‘Aren't you going to read to us?’
‘I am not.
You're confusing me with Nanny Freely.
You'll have to wait to see what happens to the Famous Five until he can read it to you in his own inept fashion.
I have to go and see Pickerage.’
There was a satirical moan.
‘Enough of your jealousy.
I'm only going to give him his medicine.’
There was another satirical moan.
Hilary marched off coolly, and continued along the corridor.
‘Right,’ he said at the door of the sick room.
‘And how do we feel after the Frome treatment?’
‘Not bad,’ said Pickerage, looking perky.
‘All right, really.’
‘Good.
And now the patient must have the Crumwallis treatment.’
‘Oh, come on, Hilary.
I feel better.
Honestly.
Anyway, that stuff is stomach medicine.
Mrs C.'s got no idea.
There's nothing wrong with my stomach.’
‘Nevertheless, swallow it down you must.
Two  tablespoonsful , as prescribed by Florence Nightingale Crumwallis, the lady with the lamp and the face like a granite quarry.’
Pickerage laughed in spite of himself.
Hilary Frome fetched the bottle and spoon from the corridor, and took a glass from the cabinet by the window.
‘Oh, come on, Hilary.
Pour it down the sink.’
Hilary was distracted by the window, and peered out into the darkness, watching for signs of movement.
‘All quiet on the Western front…
No, medicine it is, I'm afraid, Malcolm, old boy.
I cannot betray my  terrust .
I'll tell you what I'll do, though.
Old Crumwallis said I could have a glass of sherry.
Think of that!
A…glass…of…sherry!
From the headmaster's own cellar!
What princely munificence!
Well, I'll go and get myself a glass, and we'll drink together.’
‘I don't see how that benefits me.
I've still got to drink that ukky medicine.’
‘Ungrateful little swine,’ said Hilary.
‘I'm promising you a gracious occasion, so try to behave with a bit of savoir faire.
If you're good I'll let you have a sip or two of the head's genuine Cyprus Amontillado, to wash down Dr MacLaren's bowel mixture.
We haven't had a chance of drinking together, have we, Malcolm?
Due to the lunacy of the English licensing laws.
Perhaps next summer we could go to the Continent — drink at a pavement cafe.
I'll go get me that sherry.’
At the door Hilary bellowed along the corridor to the junior dormitory:
‘Lights out!’
Then he darted downstairs.
When he returned two or three minutes later, he brought with him the fragrance (in Dickensian phrase) of a fairy emerging from a wine vault, and hiccoughing.
‘You've had one already,’ said Pickerage.
‘A mere soupçon.
Old Crumwallis won't notice I've had more than his miserly allowance.
He doesn't care for drink, or for any of the good things of life.
And anyhow, I'm his blue-eyed boy.
He wouldn't begrudge me an extra glass.
Now…two  tablespoonsful , Nurse Toby said.’
‘Ugh.
That stuff's disgusting.
Can't we throw it away, Hilary?
Look at the bottle.
It's about a hundred years old.
You're not supposed to keep medicine that long.’
‘Nonsense.
They just never change the label.
Mrs Crumwallis uses gallons of the stuff.
Probably keeps the firm in business.
This came fresh last week from their labs in Birmingham — just by the detergents factory…
Right, now here's your glass…
Now, let's drink.’
There was a bang, and a flutter of suppressed laughter from along the corridor.
Hilary went to the door and shouted.
‘Quiet there, you infant menaces, or I'll be along and slipper the lot of you in a minute.’
Then he came back.
‘Right, Malcolm, let's have a toast.
I propose — sounds a bit corny, but toasts always do — I propose ‘To Us’.
Come on — bottoms up, luvvy.’
He grinned a charming smile as he assumed the cockney charwoman's accent, and they both raised their glasses and drank.
Ten minutes later, Mr and Mrs Crumwallis, returning earlier than they expected from the wine and cheese do, heard even from their quarters the noise from the boarding section.
Running to the connecting door they opened it, and stared aghast at the scene.
Hilary Frome, stretched face down along the floor, was writhing and retching at the top of the stairs.
Around him, wide-eyed, curious, afraid, were the boarders, young and old.
Broughton, the oldest boarder, was slapping Hilary on the back, then in desperation pushing him over and trying to massage his stomach.
‘Get it up, whatever it was, Hilary.
For Christ's sake get it up.
Tilney, for pity's sake go and call a doctor.
I don't understand what to do.
Get on the phone to his dad, for Christ's sake!’
But it was the head who ran to his study to phone.
And it was Mrs Crumwallis who ran up the stairs and incompetently took charge.
And it was leaning his head on Mrs Crumwallis's bosom that, ten minutes later, Hilary Frome expired.
Connoisseur of bizarre sensations though he was, it was probably not the deathbed Hilary would have chosen.
MR CRUMWALLIS'S CONSTERNATION
Within an hour of Mr Crumwallis's telephone call to the school doctor, the police were in residence at Burleigh.
Within an hour and a half a detective-superintendent had arrived from Sturford, and had taken charge.
Somebody had to.
Mr Crumwallis, the fragile facade of his public personality shattered, seemed to be in a state of near-breakdown.
He shouted directions to the boarders, and, when they were ignored, he shouted contrary orders.
He and Broughton carried the dead body of Hilary Frome from its resting place at the top of the stairs, and laid it on the bed in the sick bay.
The doctor, when he arrived, tut-tutted at this, but he decided that this — like everything else — was a matter for the police.
When Superintendent Pumfrey arrived, charging in like a drill sergeant-major bursting in on some particularly slack recruits, he found the local Cullbridge Police already well into the routine work, with the Crumwallises fussing around upstairs and downstairs, vocal but ineffectual.
A little knot of boys, white but wide-eyed, stood in the doorway of the dormitory.
From inside Pumfrey could hear the sound of a boy crying.
‘By gum!’ he expostulated, more to himself than to his sergeant or anybody else.
Then he raised his voice in the direction of the only civilian male adult around.
‘Are you a master here?’ he demanded.
Mr Crumwallis let out a high whinny.
‘Er — headm—’
‘Well, please go to your quarters.
Or somewhere away from these stairs.
Enough seems to have been destroyed already.
The photographers will have to make what they can of what's left.
I shall need a room —’
‘There are — er — classrooms…’
‘Do you have a study?’
‘Er — yes.’
‘That will do.’
Mr Crumwallis, even in his broken state, muttered aggrievedly to himself that the Superintendent hadn't asked, and Mrs Crumwallis stared at Pumfrey with stony dislike.
The head pointed, offendedly, in the direction of his own quarters.
‘Through there.’
‘Right.
Will you please hold yourselves ready.
But keep away from the stairs and the sick bay…
Oh glory, what's that?’
That was the door of the boarding annexe banging open, and Toby Freely and four of the boarders dashing in.
‘What's happened?
Why are all those —’
‘Who are you?’ bellowed Pumfrey, in his most parade-ground voice.
‘Head boy or something?’
‘Er-Mr Freely,’ murmured the headmaster.
‘In charge of the boarding section.
Er — a Portlington boy.’
Superintendent Pumfrey looked at him in bewilderment, then turned back to Toby.
‘Right.
You look competent enough.
Get all those boys into the dormitory, and keep them there.
I don't care what you do — I don't suppose the little blighters will go off to sleep — but keep them there and out of the way of my men  right?
And be careful when you go up the stairs — OK?’
‘There's a fire-escape we could use.’
‘Right.
Use it.
Though it's a bit like shutting the stable door.
Now — where's this study?’
And with Superintendent Pumfrey marching off through the door into the private quarters of the Crumwallises, the investigation into the death of Hilary Frome began in earnest.
Superintendent Michael Pumfrey came from the Swessex Police Headquarters at Sturford.
Swessex, a bastard county created by the iniquitous reorganization of local government in the early ‘seventies, comprised one and a half old counties knocked together because it looked neater that way.
It was therefore larger than the old units, and infinitely more inefficient.
Sturford, however, was no more than twenty miles away from Cullbridge, so Pumfrey's take-over at the scene of the murder had been reasonably quickly achieved.
Michael Pumfrey had spent part of his childhood in Cullbridge, though the existence of Burleigh School had made no particular impression on him at the time.
When he had been shown the study he drew in Sergeant Fenniway, pointedly shut the door, and said again ‘By gum!’
He was not, in fact, from the North Country, but he knew no better expression for letting off steam and easing pent-up irritation.
He held his temper on a pretty short fuse, and it was as liable to explode in the face of a headmaster as in that of a dustman.
More liable.
He was not tall, close to minimum height in fact, but he was stocky, and he made up for lack of inches with a pressing, high-speed manner which sometimes made people think he was all noise and movement and no intelligence.
In  fact, the noise and movement were outward expressions of a relentlessly ticking brain.
His hair was slicked back in a manner popular in the ‘fifties, and his hardbitten face was hardly softened by a neat black moustache of the sort that Herr Hitler had driven out of fashion.
Once in the room he looked again at Fenniway and let out a splutter of irritation.
‘That's someone I'm going to bite the head off of before this investigation's over!’
‘Not his usual self at all,’ said Fenniway.
‘Came here myself as a boy once — playing football.
Very different he was then.
Condescending as you like.
The lord of the educational manor condescending to fraternize with the plebs.’
‘Is that so?
Doesn't surprise me.
It seems he goes to pieces in a crisis, then.
Not what one expects from a headmaster.
Did I gather he had only just arrived back?’
‘Apparently.
The boy-his name's Hilary Frome, by the way — was retching at the top of the stairs when he and that hatchet-faced wife of his got in.
I talked to the boy who'd been trying to help this Frome — trying to get him to vomit it up, and so on.
It was no use, he said.
The headmaster couldn't have done anything.’
‘That's as maybe.
I'd like to know exactly why he's gone so completely off his head.
There's a local doctor called Frome.
Could be a pretty influential parent.
Should we speak to this Crumwallis first, do you think, while the technical chaps are playing their games upstairs?’
‘Well,’ said Fenniway, ‘I gather there's a boy —’
‘Oh?’
‘A young lad.
He was in the sick bay.’
‘I saw some damnfool medicine up there.’
‘Yes.
It was for him.
I gather Frome was in the room with him when he — well, started retching.’
‘Hmmm.
Best see him and get it over.
Then he can go to bed if he's nothing to do with it.
Not that the poor chap's likely to get much sleep tonight.’
Superintendent Pumfrey looked around the study, and once more said, ‘By gum!’
‘Something getting you, sir?’
‘I don't know…
Pretty rum kind of school this, wouldn't you say, Fenniway?
Would you send your son here?’
‘He's about minus three months at the moment, sir, if that's what it is.’
‘Oh well, I don't think this is the kind of place you have to put them down for at birth.
Plenty of time for you to make a decision.
I don't know what it is about this study…sort of phoney.
These books — they look like a second-hand bookshop.’
‘Probably does buy books at that kind of place.’
‘Yes.
But it looks as if he went in and said ‘I'll have that wall.’
To furnish the study.’
Mike Pumfrey punched the books  aggressively , and then peered at them.
‘Look, here's Southey's History of the Peninsular War next to Angel Pavement.
And here's volume one of Old Mortality with volume two over there.
Just shoved up on the shelves with no order or reason.
Like…like a stage set.
What was that play all the amateur dramatics people used to do?’
‘Amateur dramatics was a bit before my time, sir.’
‘Nonsense.
They're still at it.
You just plonk your arse down in front of the telly and don't realize.
What was that play?
The Happiest Days of Your Life.
That's it.
This looks like a set for The Happiest Days of Your Life.’
A thought struck him.
‘Well, I don't think those kids up there are going to count this as one of them.’
He turned back to Fenniway.
‘I'm wasting time.
Will you get that kid in?’
Fenniway crossed through again into the boarding annexe, and sent a message up by one of the constables helping the technicians on the stairs.
After a wait Toby came along the upstairs corridor and sent Pickerage down with an encouraging pat on the shoulder.
Pickerage looked as if he needed it.
‘Everything all right?’
Fenniway called up to Toby.
Toby looked down and grimaced.
‘As well as can be expected, as they say.’
Which was about how you would describe Pickerage.
He had clearly been sobbing fit to burst, but he was now past that.
His face, however, was smeared by the dabbings he had made at it with a stupendously dirty handkerchief.
He was conspicuously trying to be brave, but it was quite clear he had been devastated by the experience.
Even now, quiet, there seemed to be a sob perpetually at the back of his throat.
One thing about him struck Pumfrey as being unboyish: he seemed to be taking no pleasure from being so sensationally at the centre of things.
Mike Pumfrey had wondered whether the two of them might sit and talk things over in the two easy chairs stained, dusty, pre-war relics, that squatted capaciously in the far corner of the study.
But he thought something more normal might pay dividends, something that was more within the boy's everyday range of experience, so he sat himself behind the headmaster's desk and cultivated an air of briskness.
As soon as he saw Pickerage he knew he had been right: here was a boy who had often gone for interviews in the headmaster's study.
‘Right, now, sit down, old chap.
I realize this has been a horrible thing to happen to you.
But we're going to talk to you first, and then you can start putting it behind you.
We've got to find out exactly what happened before  this boy — Hilary Frome, is that the name?— died, and you're the one who can help us.’
Pickerage nodded dully.
‘Now, what exactly happened?’
‘When Hilary died, you mean?’
‘Then and earlier.
Let's go back a bit, shall we?
You were in the sick bay, weren't you?’
‘Yes.
I had a fever.
I think I caught a cold on…on Sunday.’
Pickerage gulped.
‘Anyway, Hilary came in —’
‘Hold your horses.
Was Hilary a boarder?’
‘Oh no.
He was in charge because Toby had to go with the swimmers to Sturford.
Hilary's going to…
’ He stopped.
‘He was going to be head boy next year.
He was my friend.’
‘I see.
That's why you're so upset, is it?’
Pickerage paused, and then nodded.
Perhaps he felt there was no point in pretending not to be upset.
‘So you were in the sick bay, and naturally Hilary came to see you.
When was that?’
‘He shouted to me as he was going out to play cricket with the other boys.
Then, when they came in, he came up to see me for a bit.’
Pumfrey noticed that a slight flush came into Pickerage's face, and he looked down at his hands, clasping and unclasping themselves nervously in his lap.
‘And what did you talk about?
What did you do?’
Pickerage said hurriedly: ‘We talked about Muggeridge.
Hilary went to the window and looked out, and he said Muggeridge was stalking around outside.’
‘I see.
Is that the caretaker?’
‘Oh no.’
Pickerage, wide-eyed and somewhat scornful, was clearly incredulous that anybody should not be familiar with the details of his own small world.
‘Muggeridge is  the games master.
He's awful.
All smelly, and then he gets downs on you, and takes it out on you.
He was supposed to go with the swimmers.’
Click-click went the little machine in Pumfrey's brain that was card-indexing all this information, putting arrows against all the possible trails.
Normally he would have taken notes, but he knew that Pickerage would be doubly uneasy if he did that.
‘I see,’ he said.
‘And then?’
‘And then he went away and watched the television with the others.
Later on I heard him go with them to the dorm.
Then he came down to —’ the boy gulped —‘to give me my medicine.’
‘That's the medicine we found in the sick bay, is it?’
Pumfrey had already noticed it was a patent stomach medicine.
Pickerage nodded, and then, in a sudden excess of indignation, said:
‘That's right.
Old mother…
Mrs Crumwallis gives you just anything.
It's not right.
She's no idea.
She could kill you.’
He caught himself up in horrified confusion.
‘Anyway, I said I didn't want to take it.
There's nothing wrong with my stomach.
We could have poured it down the sink.
But Hilary said I had to.
And he said he'd go down and get himself a sherry.’
‘A sherry?’
‘From the head's sitting-room.
Oh — it was all right.
Old…
Mr Crumwallis had said earlier on that he might.
So Hilary said.’
‘So he was going to have a drink with you and help you get yours down, was that the idea?’
‘Yes.
Anyway, he was gone a few minutes, and he came back smelling — you know.
My mum likes sherry, so I know the smell.
Awful when she kisses you.’
‘So he'd had one already.’
‘Yes.
But he said old Crumwallis would never notice.
So then he got my medicine from outside —’
‘Outside?’
‘Yes.
It was standing just outside in the corridor.’
A trace of Pickerage's natural urchin grin wafted over his face.
‘I suppose Mrs C. thought I'd be swilling it down like an alcoholic if she left it in the room.
Anyway, Hilary brought it in, and put two  tablespoonsful in a glass.
Then we had a sort of toast…’
‘Ah, yes.
What was that?’
‘Good health,’’ lied Pickerage.
‘And then we drank.
And then he rushed off to the bathroom and started throwing up.’
His eyes filled with tears.
‘It was horrible.
And he came out into the corridor.
I think he was trying to call for help.
And Broughton came.
And then all the others.
And I went out, and Hilary was crying out, you know, and…’
Two enormous tears welled out of Pickerage's eyes and ran rapidly down his cheeks, followed by others.
He looked down miserably, and then wiped them away.
‘Well,’ said Pumfrey briskly, ‘we can hear about the rest of it from Broughton, can't we?
That's all been very helpful.
One little thing: where did Hilary get the glass for his sherry?
From down here?’
‘No.
He took one from the cupboard in the sick bay.
She doesn't leave medicines there, but she leaves a lot of dirty old glasses and bowls and thermometers and things.
He could have got one from the kitchen, but I expect he'd locked up after he'd brought the supper up.’
‘Ah — there'd been supper.
Had you had any?’
‘No.
I didn't feel like it.’
‘I see.
Right, well, is there anything else you can think of?’
Pickerage sat huddled miserably in his chair.
He swallowed hard once or twice.
His face was drooping into his chest, but Pumfrey saw him half look up at him, then duck sharply down again.
Finally he muttered:
‘Hilary was my friend.’
‘Yes…’
‘I don't want to stay in this place now he's…dead.’
‘Oh, come on.
I'm sure you've got other friends.
You may feel like that now…’
Suddenly Pickerage looked up and spoke very loudly.
‘I don't want to stay in this school at all.
I'm afraid.
I want to go away.
Go away somewhere else.’
His voice was rising into hysteria, and suddenly he burst voluptuously into tears.
‘I don't want to sleep in the dorm.
Somebody might try to kill me.
I'm afraid.
I'm so…afraid.’
Then Pumfrey did try to comfort him, as he would have done one of his own.
After a little Pickerage calmed down, but only with a palpable effort.
Pumfrey took him upstairs and, after consultation with Toby, they put him to bed in Toby's room, and locked the door.
He gulped a little, but the notion of locking the door certainly seemed to make him feel happier.
As he went down again, and traversed the headmaster's hall on his way to the study, Pumfrey thought he caught a glimpse of the head's pallid face through the crack of an open door.
He gave no sign of having seen.
‘What did you make of him?’
Pumfrey asked Fenniway.
‘Lively kid.
Lively normally, I mean.
Horrible thing to happen when you're that age.’
‘Yes…
I think he was hiding something, you know.
Or keeping something back.’
‘Like what?’
Pumfrey shrugged.
‘Hard to guess.
Could have been just nothing-some little schoolboy sin.
Could have been vital.’
‘Hilary was my friend,’’ quoted Fenniway.
‘There may have been something there.’
‘Quite likely.
He blushed now and then.
But I thought there was something else…
I wouldn't want to have that woman treating one of my kids if he was sick, would you?…
You notice how he said ‘I want to go somewhere else’?
Not ‘home’.
Poor bloody kid…
The boy upstairs seems to do a good job…
It would be a pretty terrible place, this boarding section, if there was just the headmaster and his wife.’
Beautifully on cue, there was a knock at the door.
Pumfrey lifted his eyebrows at Fenniway, and shouted: ‘Come in.’
‘I wondered,’ said the voice of the headmaster, piping insecurely as he insinuated himself round the door, ‘if Mrs Crumwallis could get you something.
Tea?
Coffee?’
‘No,’ said Pumfrey.
‘No.’
‘Ah…
I see you've talked to Pickerage,’ said Mr Crumwallis, his long, bony body now fully inside and draped up against the doorpost, his head poked forward, the whole effect being to make him look like a bereaved ostrich.
‘Poor little boy,’ he went on, with a conspicuous inability to express feeling.
‘What a terrible experience for him.
Did you…did you find out exactly how it happened?’
‘Not exactly.
We certainly found out when it happened.
Tell me, Headmaster: I gather you spoke to the boy earlier on.’
‘Pickerage?
Not so far as I recollect.’
‘The boy who died.
Hilary Frome.’
‘Ah yes.
Hard to think of him as a boy.
So mature.
So responsible.’
The headmaster emitted what sounded like a perfectly genuine sigh.
‘This is a bitter blow, Superintendent.
A bitter, bitter blow.
To myself — and to the School.
All the hopes I had…
How am I going to face his father?
What can I tell the other parents?’
‘That I can't help you with,’ said Pumfrey, his characteristic briskness now almost contemptuous.
‘But you say you did speak to Hilary Frome earlier tonight?’
‘Yes.
Yes, indeed.
Oh dear — a melancholy thought.
I told him how much pleasure it gave me to think of him in charge of the school next year.
As head boy, you know.
Who is to take his place I cannot think.
Broughton is hardly —’
‘Yes, yes,’ interrupted Pumfrey impatiently.
‘What else did you say to him?’
Mr Crumwallis looked at him in dyspeptic reproof, unused as he was to having his magisterial ramblings interrupted.
‘I really…don't rememb…wait.
I think I said how it would please me if one day he were to be elected to the Cullbridge Athenaeum.
Alas, that will now never be.’
‘Did you offer him a drink?
Suggest he might like one later?’
‘Yes, I did.
I…’
Suddenly Mr Crumwallis stopped, his eyes popping, fixed in consternation on the Superintendent.
‘I suggested he might like a…sherry.
Oh dear God, Superintendent: don't tell me it was the sherry.’
He gazed from the one of them to the other in anguish.
And, gazing back, Pumfrey tried to interpret, from his expression, the implications of that last remark.
Was it  the equivalent of Lady Macbeth's ‘What, in our house?’
Was he saying ‘What, with my sherry?’
Or was it to be understood as the horrified realization that, in the words of Hercule Poirot, ‘It might have been ME.’
Pumfrey would have given a great deal to know.
MASTER AND SLAVE
‘Well,’ said Mike Pumfrey, reluctantly dragging his eyes from the spectacle of the headmaster's face.
‘I think we'd better look into this a little more closely, don't you?
Where do you keep this sherry?’
The headmaster continued gawping dumbly for a second, then without a word he turned on his heel and led the way across the hall.
When he opened the door of his sitting-room, Mike Pumfrey saw Mrs Crumwallis, seated bony and straight-backed on a sofa, peering concentratedly at them through her pebble glasses.
Pumfrey nodded brusquely in her direction, but there was no response.
‘There,’ said the headmaster, gesturing uncertainly in the direction of the bottles on the sideboard.
‘There they are.’
Pumfrey and Fenniway gazed at them without touching.
‘How much is gone, do you know?’
‘Really, I can't —’
‘Quite two glasses full,’ said Mrs Crumwallis from the sofa.
‘You haven't touched the bottles since you came home?
Had a glass yourselves?’
‘No,’ said Mr Crumwallis.
‘Thank the Lord.
I drink socially if that is necessary, but not otherwise.
My wife and I were both brought up Methodists.’
He produced this piece of information with a certain dim self-satisfaction, as if it were a sort of moral American Express card.
‘I see,’ said Pumfrey.
‘Then, supposing the sherry was poisoned, and supposing it was aimed at you, then it could only have been put there by someone who didn't know your habits?’
The headmaster blinked at him owlishly, and then nodded.
A thought struck Mike Pumfrey.
‘Where were you when you invited Frome to…partake?’
‘Here.
In this room.
I called him in from the garden.’
The headmaster gestured towards the window, still uncurtained, but giving out on to pitch blackness.
‘He had been doing some cricket practice with the younger boarders.
Most stylish, a handsome sight…
’ He sighed.
‘I called him in, expressed my gratitude at his willingness to hold the fort in the boarding annexe, and then…offered him a sherry, if he should feel like it, later on.’
Mrs Crumwallis sniffed.
‘Time?’ asked Pumfrey.
‘Around six-thirty or so, I suppose.’
‘I see.
Were the windows open at the time?
Or the door to the hall?’
‘Oh — ah — the windows were, yes.
The evening was not cold.
I believe the door was shut.
It usually is.’
‘I see.
The lower window was open?
Yes…well, perhaps we could go back to the study.
I'll send the prints men down for these.’
He nodded in the direction of the sherry bottles.
He could have sworn Mrs Crumwallis had to bite back a demand for the equivalent in money.
Back in the study Edward Crumwallis collapsed into the chair usually reserved for boys whom he was hauling over the coals.
The irony did not seem to strike him.
In fact, nothing seemed to get through to him at all.
He just sat there, gazing at the desk through bleared eyes, but seeming to see nothing.
There was no Manner at all to be seen now.
He looked a crumbling shell of a man.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said after a time, struggling to get himself upright in his chair.
‘This has struck me very hard…
Very hard.’
In spite of his efforts he seemed to be able to do no more than mumble.
‘Who would have thought…?’
‘You were fond of the boy?’ asked Pumfrey.
‘Fond?’ said Mr Crumwallis, his forehead crinkling.
‘Fond?
I had a great respect for him.
I had great hopes for him, and for the school under his leadership.
Shattered!
Dust and ashes!
He would have done us such credit.
Now.
‘I suppose it was because you had such respect for him that you felt you could leave him in charge of the boarders tonight?’
‘Quite.
Quite.
He'd been a boarder himself — last year when his parents went to the States on three months’ sabbatical.
I knew I could trust him implicitly.
A boy of great rectitude.
Of old-fashioned standards.’
‘Normally this other young man-Freely, was that the name?— would have been in charge?’
‘Under me.
Yes.
In charge under me.’
‘But tonight he was —?’
‘He was accompanying the swimmers.
To the All Swessex Schools Championships.’
Mike Pumfrey nodded.
He had a daughter competing.
If he hadn't been on duty he would have been there.
‘Is young Freely a swimmer?’
‘No, no.
Not so far as I know.
Our usual man, Muggeridge —’ there was a sharp intake of breath, like a suction rubber trying to clear a sink —‘an ex-Colchester United player…he was unable to accompany them.
Family reasons.’
‘I see.
Yet I gather that Mr Muggeridge was around the school in the grounds tonight.’
The headmaster looked bewildered.
‘Really?
I'm afraid I don't know anything about that.’
‘He would have a key to the school, would he?’
‘Oh, certainly.’
‘And he could have got into the other parts?
Into your quarters?
The boarding annexe?’
‘Yes.
With his keys he could have got into any part.’
‘And the other teachers?’
‘Oh yes.
All of them had keys.
In case they had to come back for anything they'd forgotten.’
‘But not the boys?’
‘Oh no.
Not the boys.
They couldn't have got into the main part of the school.
But they could have got into the boarding annexe.
The outer door is not locked until Mr Freely and the older boys go to bed.’
‘I see…’
‘It's a very free and easy place, Superintendent,’ said Mr Crumwallis, in an almost pleading voice.
Just plain bloody lax, thought Mike Pumfrey.
He did not detect an atmosphere of freedom or ease.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘the members of the staff.
I wonder if I could have a list of them.’
‘Ah yes.
I — er — I have a prospectus.’
Mr Crumwallis fussed round to the front of the desk eagerly, as if Mike Pumfrey were a prospective parent.
He took a brochure from the drawer at Pumfrey's right hand, and inspected  it.
The list had obviously been printed some time before.
Some names had been crossed off, as teachers had died at their posts, or departed to more luxuriant scholastic pastures.
At the foot of the list new names had been added in ink.
Mr Crumwallis, satisfied that it was up to date, handed it to Mike Pumfrey, who inspected it in silence.
Senior English: I.O. McWhirter, B.A. (Durham); B. Litt.
(Edinburgh)
Senior Classics: S.G. Coffin, M.A. (Oxon)
Mathematics: P. St J. Makepeace, M.Sc.
(Reading)
Science: C. Farraday, B.Sc.
(Kent)
History, French: Miss G. Grower, B.A. (Cantab)
Junior English, History, Geography: Miss D. Gilberd.
Games and Physical Education: W. Muggeridge.
and added in pen:
Junior Classics, French: Miss P. Warlock, B.A. (London)
Head of Boarders: T. Freely (Portlington School; Exhibitioner, Trinity Hall, Cambridge)
Written in days before his present broken state, that last entry seemed to bear the marks of a flourish of self-satisfaction.
‘Hmmm,’ said Pumfrey.
‘You seem to do a lot of classics.’
It was not the remark Mr Crumwallis had been expecting, but he perked up, as he frequently did in interviews with parents, when an opportunity for fraudulent self-congratulation presented itself.
‘Yes, indeed,’ he said.
‘We lay great stress on them.
So sad to see their decline — their so rapid decline — in other  schools, elsewhere.
But if the private schools will not be custodians of the great classical tradition, who will be?’
Mike Pumfrey did not feel called upon to reply.
He wondered whether, in view of the decline of classics elsewhere, classics teachers might not be in a state of glut upon the market, and therefore to be had cheap.
He rather thought they might be.
He looked cynically at Mr Crumwallis, swelling with spurious pride.
‘Now, this boy, Pickerage…’
The head's face immediately fell, as he was brought back to the tribulations of the moment.
‘Who?
Ah yes, Pickerage.
A terrible experience for him.
To have to watch…that.’
‘Particularly as I gather he and Frome were friends.’
‘Friends?
Oh, I don't think so.
Hardly likely, Superintendent.
Frome was one of our senior boys.
We have, alas, no sixth form, but Frome would next year have been in the fifth, and he was old for his years.
Pickerage is only in his second year.
Oh no, I don't think so.’
Pumfrey marvelled at the limitless naivete of some schoolteachers.
‘What sort of a boy is Pickerage?’
‘What sort of a boy?’
The question seemed to give the headmaster trouble, as if he was accustomed to regard boys en masse, not as individuals.
‘He is, perhaps, a shade mischievous.
A prankster, shall we say?
But we must remember his home background.
Or lack of it.
His mother — but on that subject, perhaps, the least said the better.’
‘You say mischievous.
Could you give me some examples?’
‘Ah yes.
I had occasion, I fear, to slipper the lad only last week.
It misgives me now a little, in the circumstances.’
It was the first time Pumfrey had heard anyone use the word ‘misgives’.
It misgave him no end.
‘What had the boy done?’
‘He had — I tell you this in confidence, Superintendent — he had, on the occasion of the annual Parents’ Night, doctored with alcohol the fruit punch intended for the boarders who helped serve the modest refreshments.
It was only through my presence of mind that we were saved from a frightful scandal.’
‘I see.
And you're sure he did it?
Did he own up?’
‘Not in so many words.
But I was morally certain.’
That, thought Pumfrey, was so much flim-flam.
Another way of saying ‘I had no evidence, but I picked on him.’
Policemen who were ‘morally certain' someone had done something tended to start manufacturing evidence.
Headmasters didn't even have to bother with that.
He wondered whether he should ask Crumwallis to go and sit with the boarders in the dormitory, while he had a word with this young Freely.
Freely looked, Pumfrey had thought, honest and sensible.
Which would make a change after the headmaster.
But Crumwallis in his present state did not look as if he would provide a soothing influence upstairs.
Pumfrey decided against it.
‘Well, that will be all, for the moment,’ he said.
‘My men will be here for some time yet, and I'll leave someone here on duty all night.
I suggest you try and get some sleep.’
Mr Crumwallis shook his head despairingly.
‘I fear not, Superintendent.
I…fear…not.’
And with that final attempt to recapture something of his former Manner, Edward Crumwallis shuffled out of the study.
Mike Pumfrey looked at Fenniway and shook his head.
‘Silly old buzzard,’ he said.
‘Aggravating too.
If somebody slipped a little cache of something into his plonk, they were probably irritated out of their tiny minds.’
‘Is that what you think it was?’
‘Could be.
The boys, for example, might not know he doesn't drink at home.
You know what schools are like — all sorts of rumours get around: this master is a sex-maniac, this one an alcoholic.
And they're usually perfectly innocuous chaps.
So one of the boys could well have imagined that the Crumwallises knocked it back enthusiastically in the privacy of their home.
By the way, did you see the name of the Science teacher here?’
‘No,’ Fenniway looked at the prospectus.
‘C. Farraday?
Doesn't mean a thing to me.’
‘Corbett Farraday.
Enthusiastic naturalist chappie, always writing letters and little pieces for the Sturford Gazette about plant species threatened by insecticide, or the medicinal properties of this or that weed.
There was an interview not so long ago.
I wonder what he's been teaching the boys…’
They thought about that for a moment.
‘Poisonous properties, and all that?’ asked Fenniway.
‘Surely he wouldn't be so silly?’
‘He looked a young chap, mad keen and so on.
That sort does all sorts of silly things, till experience tells them to put a sock in it.
Let's hope this isn't the experience…
Well, no point in going into that until we've heard from the labs.
It seems to have acted remarkably quickly, whatever it was.
But we've got to remember he seems to have knocked back one while he was down here.’
‘When presumably he didn't notice it tasted off,’ interjected Fenniway.
‘Well, he wouldn't necessarily notice.
Alcohol often tastes vile to people who aren't used to it.
Funny so many  get the taste, really.
He mayn't have had much before.’
‘Today's youngsters?’ said Fenniway, sceptically.
‘He was practically sixteen, remember.
Don't tell me the doctor doesn't have sherry and stuff regularly on tap in the house.’
‘Hmmm.
See your point.
Well, I don't think there's much more we can do here tonight, but before we wind things up, I think I'd like a word with that lad upstairs.
Freely.
Looked a sensible, down-to-earth type to me, and he might be a corrective to what we've just been hearing.
Do you think you could go upstairs and be with the boys in the dormitory?
Someone should be there.
I thought of asking that old fool, but I decided he'd probably unsettle them more than calm them down.’
‘What do I tell them?
About the boy's death.
They're bound to be wide awake.’
‘Tell them what we know, which is practically nothing.
We don't know how he died, but presumably it was something he ate or drank.
Not supper — emphasize that — or more of them would be affected by now.
There's no point in holding that kind of thing back.
This is going to be the sensation of the school tomorrow.
It's going to be all over town, in fact.’
‘I wouldn't like to bet on this school's future,’ said Fenniway.
‘Nor me.
And I wouldn't weep tears over it, either.
But let's not hurry the process.
Just keep things quiet and unemotional, and talk to the ones who are awake.’
When Toby came in five minutes later, Pumfrey said:
‘Things quietening down?’
‘A bit,’ said Toby.
‘Mainly because they're tired, not because they're accepting it.
Things are going to be bloody dreadful in the morning.’
‘I guess so,’ said Pumfrey.
‘And not just for the boys either.
How did you come to land up in a place like this?’
When Toby had told him, Pumfrey whistled.
‘By gum!
No salary.
I like their cheek!
Why would you accept it?’
‘You may have noticed there's a lot of unemployment about.
I had six months to fill in before I go up to Cambridge.
I didn't want to do it at school or at home.
I get a bed, and food, and a bit of pocket money from the teaching I do when I fill in.
It hasn't worked out badly.’
‘But it's a lousy school, isn't it?’
Toby considered.
‘Yes.
I sometimes think most schools are, in different ways.
The one I went to certainly was.
All penny-pinching and ludicrously outdated snobberies.
This one has some pretty dreadful teachers.
Makepeace's classes are nothing but advanced courses in riot-fomentation.
A lot of the others like McWhirter just don't seem to care.
But there are one or two perfectly good teachers as well, so far as I can judge.’
‘What about the boys?
So far I've only met Pickerage.’
‘Pickerage is a fair specimen of the boarders.
He's all right.
Comes from a pretty awful home, apparently.
No father to speak of-he's got a new family, lives in Germany, and doesn't give a damn about Malcolm.
The mother flits from flower to flower, and swoops in here on occasional state visits.
Terribly embarrassing for the boy.
I'm sorry for him.
In spite of it all, he's a nice little chap.’
‘I gather the headmaster had to slipper him last week.’
‘Er — yes,’ said Toby.
‘Any resentment there?’
Toby was puzzled by the question.
‘You mean Pickerage resented the slippering?
Good heavens, no.
Pickerage doesn't worry about a little thing like that.
And he's not the resentful type.’
‘But mischievous, I gather.
The head said he doctored the fruit cup, or something.’
‘So the headmaster believed,’ said Toby cautiously.
‘You don't?’
‘I rather doubt it.
If it was just an isolated prank (and he's capable of a prank like that), he would have told me, at least after the slippering.
On the other hand, if it was part of something bigger…’
‘Something bigger?’
‘Didn't the headmaster tell you?
He should have.
Someone hid a razor blade in the flannel of one of the boarders.
It made a fearful mess, though it was only a superficial wound.’
‘I saw a boy up there with plaster all down his cheek.
That would be him, I take it.’
‘Yes, that's Wattling.
He's a friend of Pickerage.
I do know these boys, Superintendent, and I really don't believe Pickerage is capable of anything as vicious as that was.
And especially not of aiming it at one of his friends.
That was Wattling's flannel, and Pickerage knew he just chucked it at his face every night.’
‘I see.
I can only take your word for it.
In the police force we get cynical about thirteen-year-old boys.
We only see the worst, and some of those are fairly horrible, I can tell you.
So this seems to be part of a series of incidents…or, perhaps, someone taking advantage of a series of incidents.
Now, I gather this Hilary Frome was head boy designate, splendid character all round, pink of respectability and model of responsible behaviour.
Is that right?’
Toby thought for a moment.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Aaah.’
Pumfrey leaned forward, a ferret-like expression on his face.
‘Headmaster fooled.
Is that it?’
‘Pretty much,’ admitted Toby.
‘Doesn't surprise me.
Wouldn't take much, I imagine.’
‘No.
He and his wife save any sharpness they have for money matters,’ said Toby, throwing loyalty to the winds.
‘Hilary Frome was in fact riding two horses.
All the rest of the staff knew that, and of course the boys knew it too.
For the headmaster he did a great act as the old-style schoolboy of the boys’ weeklies: ‘Play up, play up, and play the game’, and all that kind of thing.
For most of the teachers — Makepeace, for example— he was the one behind any riot, disruption, discontent or whatever.
And they were right.
He was a stirrer.
He was what they used to call a bad influence in the school.
I was beginning to be afraid…’
‘Yes?’
‘Well — about Pickerage.
Pickerage admired him tremendously.
As you can imagine, that's not unusual, especially in boarding-schools.
And Hilary had dash, and style, and good looks — all the usual things that make a schoolboy hero.
But Hilary not only encouraged this hero-worship, he really seemed to make a friend of Pickerage.
Almost a protege…’
‘You wondered how far it had gone?’
‘Yes.
For example, they were together all last Sunday.
I knew in advance, but there wasn't much I could do.
Pickerage said they were going to Frome's house, but they didn't.
So naturally, I suppose, I wondered what they did.
‘I see.
How would you sum this Frome boy up, then?
What was behind this double game?
Just mischief?’
‘Mischief?
He wasn't the mischievous sort, if you mean schoolboy mischief.
If you mean something nastier — well, maybe.
You've got to remember I didn't know him all that well.
I didn't teach him, you see, so the other teachers certainly know him — knew him — better than I did.
What I knew I certainly didn't go for.
He was a very cold character, I think.
Calculating.
Really only interested in himself.
He seemed to be always looking at himself not literally, but trying to see what effect he was making.
Posing himself against a background, if you see what I mean.
He was sort of clinical — trying things out all the time.
Like dissecting a frog, only using people and real-life situations.
For example, he enjoyed seeing how far he could push the teachers — with concealed insults, fomenting riots, with prying into their private lives.
I think if he'd driven poor little Makepeace to a nervous breakdown, his reaction would simply have been ‘so that's how far one has to go, to have that effect.’’
‘He sounds a right little charmer.
I presume that the teachers hated his guts.’
‘They loathed him.
They —’ Toby pulled himself up.
‘Well, perhaps you'd better talk to them about that.’
‘I will.
He certainly seems to have been asking for something, if not something quite as drastic as he got.
I presume you weren't enthusiastic about handing the boarders over to him?’
‘Naturally I wasn't.
I didn't exactly have a presentiment — certainly not of anything like this happening.
But I didn't like it at all.
Trouble was, I'd stood out against Crumwallis earlier this week.
When Wattling carved up his face, the head wanted to hand him over to Mrs C., without calling the doctor in.’
‘Really?’
‘And as you'll probably find out, Mrs C.'s ministrations are pretty hit and miss affairs.
He just wanted to keep things quiet, obviously.
Anything like that, if it gets around, is bad for a school.
Bad for recruitment, as you might say.
But having got my way over that, it meant I couldn't protest as I wanted to about Frome being put in charge.
I didn't even think I could explain what I was afraid of.
I didn't think Crumwallis would have understood.’
‘I wonder,’ said Mike Pumfrey.
When he had sent Toby Freely back to the boarders, he and Fenniway began to collect their things together.
‘We might as well call it a night,’ said Pumfrey, weariness having settled over his thrusting manner.
‘Get a few hours’ sleep.
It's going to be a hard day tomorrow, and we'll have to be here early.
What's it like upstairs?
Did you get anything of interest out of them?’
‘Not really.
It seems to have been a fairly ordinary evening up until the end.
Supper, telly, and so on.
Then he went off to give Pickerage his medicine.
One moment he was shouting at the boys in the dorm to keep quiet, the next thing he was in the bathroom retching, then out on the landing, heaving and crying out.
Poor little buggers are going to dream about that for weeks.
What have you got the telephone directory out for?’
‘Just looking up where this Muggeridge lives…
Hmmm.
Where's Cannonbury Road?’
‘Round the back here.
I should think if you went across Crumwallis's lawn and through the trees at the back you'd come to it.
By road you'd have to drive round, of course, but even so it wouldn't be far.’
‘Really?
Well, I have a fancy to see it, and I think we might take a look on our way home.’
So they drove round the outskirts of the Burleigh grounds, and eventually came to Cannonbury Road.
No. 28, Bill and Onyx's house, was a really shoddy little semi, thrown together by some builder after a quick buck ten or twelve years before.
It was bare, basic, meagre: mean little windows slapped planless into the wall, a miserable little square of concrete slapped over the door.
In front was a tiny apron of garden, which the street light revealed to be a shambles of children's toys and discarded garments.
The only interesting thing about the house was the top window.
Because in it, through a slit in the curtains which had been drawn as incompetently as everything else about the house had been done, a heavy man could be seen, in winceyette pyjamas, red-faced and gesturing angrily.
He was shouting at someone or something that could not be seen.
Pumfrey let down the car window.
‘You bloody tart,’ Bill Muggeridge was shouting.
‘I know what you were after.
You don't usually make much secret of it, do you?
If I'd found out where you went I'd have caught you at it.’
He caught sight, through the slit in the curtain, of the car drawn up outside.
He pulled it shut abruptly, and then turned off the light.
The policemen heard no more.
‘Interesting,’ said Pumfrey.
And then they drove home.
THE MORNING AFTER
‘Through the night of doubt and sorrow
Onward goes the pilgrim band…’
sang the boys of Burleigh School.
Presiding from the centre of the dais, Mr Crumwallis looked as if he had told wearily over every second of every minute of the watches of that night.
Gowned, dark-suited, he ought to have looked fitting, impressive.
But no boy could fail to notice the hollows of his cheeks, which seemed to have been scooped out in deep, dark channels, or his eyes, which were ringed round with black, and bleary, and haunted.
‘Brother clasps the hand of brother,
Stepping fearless through the night…’
Even the boys didn't sound convinced.
The news had spread like the Great Plague as they gathered for Assembly, and underneath the frank, animal sensationalism of their reception of the news there was uncertainty, and fear.
Death happened — they were old enough to have acknowledged that.
But not to people they knew.
Not to friends.
Not to people of their age.
And that sort of death…
One of the boys in 2B with a good memory had suddenly quoted ‘Alas, regardless of their doom the  little victims play.’
The boys around him had looked at each other.
One had laughed uncertainly, another had said, ‘Shut up.’
Then Mr Crumwallis had walked in.
Edward Crumwallis knew he ought to say something.
Say something about the death, about Hilary's death.
The thought hovered over him like the onset of a nightmare.
What words could he find?
What mere formulation could convey his feelings?
What if he should break down?
The memory hammered in his head of the dreadful phone call he had made to Dr and Mrs Frome.
Both had been at the hospital until after midnight, though they had understood from the moment they arrived that their son was dead.
When they had returned home they had disconnected the phone.
Now, this morning, Edward Crumwallis had finally spoken to Hilary's father, and the doctor's words rang in his ears:
‘I wish to hell I'd never sent him to your school.’
An influential man, Frome.
Doctors were always in some way or other community leaders, much more so than lawyers or bankers.
And Dr Frome was clearly not willing to smooth over the terrible event, to refrain from raking over the coals.
He sounded, indeed, vindictive.
Perhaps somewhere in the back of Edward Crumwallis's brain there ran a murmur telling him that Dr Frome had every right to be.
Now, if ever, between hymn and prayer, something ought to be said about Hilary.
Something brief, dignified and reverent.
Something to raise the spirits of the boys, to still speculation.
‘Then, the scattering of all shadows, And the end of toil and gloom.’
Mr Crumwallis cleared his throat.
It was no good.
Nothing would come.
‘Let us pray,’ he said.
It was his first capitulation of the day.
Dr Frome said exactly the same thing, sitting beside his wife, in the living room of Deauville, Maple Grove, when he was interviewed by Mike Pumfrey and Fenniway.
‘I wish to hell I'd never sent him there.’
It was after nine o'clock, but Dr Frome's smooth good looks were marred by stubble and red eyes.
His wife's hair was straggling over her eyes, and she had not made up to hide the ravages of the night's events.
Not a particularly admirable pair, Pumfrey decided, but at least one that cared.
Or seemed to have.
‘Why did you?’ asked Pumfrey.
‘Send him to Burleigh?’
John Frome put his head in his hands.
‘I don't know…
It was four years ago, and that was when it was clear that they couldn't hold out against comprehensivization any longer.
As you know, they dug in their heels here longer than practically anywhere else, but in the end they caved in.
We couldn't quite run to a good boarding-school, so we chose Burleigh.’
‘There was the little girl, too, you see,’ said Mrs Frome.
‘She's going to St Mary's.
And that's not cheap, unless you're very poor, and Catholic.’
‘Worst damn decision I ever made,’ said John Frome, straightening himself and blinking his eyes.
‘Hilary knew,’ said Mrs Frome.
‘He always said it was neither one thing nor the other.
We should have listened.’
‘If only they hadn't scrapped the old grammar school,’ muttered Dr Frome, and Pumfrey saw that he was beginning to erect in his mind a structure of excuses and  evasions that would justify him to himself.
‘I'd have been quite happy with that.’
Mike Pumfrey cleared his throat.
Comprehensivization, he muttered to himself, seemed to have had much the same effect on the middle-middle class in England as racial integration in schools had had on similar people in the States.
Normally he would have had little patience with the attitudes of the Fromes, but the morning after such a bereavement didn't seem the time to argue the social or political toss with them.
For once he was almost gentle.
‘Yet according to the headmaster Hilary was a most successful boy at school,’ he said.
‘About to become head boy, and so on.’
‘Yes…yes…’ agreed Dr Frome, tiredly.
‘We bought all that too.
That's why we decided to keep him there.
He's good with the soft soap, is Crumwallis.
That's why we told Hilary he'd have to stay for GCE year.
Though we knew some of the teaching was abysmal.’
‘That pathetic little Makepeace,’ said Mrs Frome.
‘Like a church mouse.
Hilary just despised him.’
‘And the science teaching was pretty poor, too,’ said her husband.
‘Maths and science — just the subjects Hilary would need if he was going to be a doctor.
I was giving up a great deal of my own time, I may say, just to supplement the inadequate teaching he got at Burleigh.
Ridiculous…
Time thrown away — now.’
‘Did you want him to become a doctor?’
‘It was a possibility.
One of the options.
But you've got to be first-rate academically to get into medical school.
Hilary always said he'd never make it, not from Burleigh…
He was also interested in Communications…
He was a very personable boy, Superintendent.
People responded  to him.
Respected him.
He could have gone anywhere, done anything.’
‘So the headmaster said,’ agreed Pumfrey cautiously.
‘What about his friends?
Did he have any especially close ones?’
‘Well, there was young Willis,’ said Mrs Frome, who had been quietly rubbing her eyes with a small handkerchief.
‘He was round here now and then.
And Peter Quigly.
Both very nice types.
We know the parents socially.
And he had such a nice little girlfriend…
Well, not girlfriend, because he was too young, but…you know.
Margaret Wilkinson was her name.
Very nicely spoken.
But we don't know the parents there, do we, John?
And we hadn't heard so much about her recently, anyway.’
‘This boy Pickerage, who he was with when — just before he died.
Had you heard of him?’
‘Was that the boy in the sick bay?
No, I'd never heard Hilary mention him,’ said Mrs Frome.
But she suddenly puckered her forehead.
‘But I have heard the name…
That's right: someone rang up and asked for him the other day.
But he wasn't a friend of Hilary's, not so far as I know.’
Frome had been sitting quiet, looking down at his hands.
At length he spoke.
‘How did it happen, Superintendent?
Do you know yet?’
‘No.
There won't be anything substantial from the labs for a few hours yet.
We do know that the headmaster spoke to him early in the evening, and suggested he might like a glass of sherry later on —’
‘Sherry?
You mean the headmaster offered his own sherry?
What a damnfool thing to do.’
‘And we know that Hilary did go and get himself one.’
‘So it could have been the headmaster who —?’
‘We're trying not to draw conclusions this early on, sir.
How used was your son to drink?’
‘Well, of course, just the occasional one, on special occasions,’ chipped in Mrs Frome, almost defensively.
‘Like Christmas, and birthdays, and occasionally out with us in the evening.
We hoped he would drink in a civilized way.’
‘So he went down,’ said Frome, as if puzzling it out, ‘and he helped himself to the headmaster's sherry.’
‘That's right.
We know too that he took a glass from the medicine cupboard in the sick bay.’
Dr Frome slapped himself violently on the thigh.
‘That's it!
I knew it!
My God!
I blame myself — a doctor.
I knew perfectly well that woman was a menace.
Supposed to be matron, and knew no more than a charwoman.
Less.
Prescribed all sorts of rubbish — just willy-nilly.
I thought it just was rubbish, and couldn't do any harm.
But she'd no idea of method, hygiene — anything.
I bet there was something left in that glass.’
‘It's a possibility, and we've thought of that.
We certainly have the impression that Mrs Crumwallis is not the person to treat sick boys.
Now, I wonder if I might trouble you.
I'd like to see Hilary's room.’
Heavily, bitterly, the Fromes led the way upstairs.
In the door leading to the kitchen Pumfrey noticed a girl of ten or so.
She was regarding them with wide, dark eyes, full of uncertainty.
But the eyes were quite dry, and not red.
Hilary Frome's bedroom — ample, handsomely decorated, as befitted the solidly middle-class status of the family residence — was as studiously bland as the face  Hilary kept for public occasions.
It was unnaturally neat, and it carefully refrained from revealing any signs of individuality.
There were school books, and one or two old Enid Blytons, but no sign of current reading tastes, nor any well-thumbed magazines.
On the wall was a framed Miro.
What kind of boy, Pumfrey marvelled, would choose a picture like that to decorate his room?
When he left he took a pile of exercise books, a scrapbook and a diary, but a first glance at their contents did not suggest that they were going to be fruitful.
The wide, dry eyes followed them from the kitchen as they took their leave.
When they arrived back at Burleigh the hallway of the headmaster's quarters was a mass of whispering groups.
Tom Tedder and Corbett Farraday were muttering by the door which led into the main school; the headmaster, towering yet crumpled, was surrounded by a little group of teachers in the centre of his hall; and by the door leading to the boarding quarters Mrs Crumwallis was going over the events of the night before with her cook, Mrs Garfitt.
‘'Eaving up, was he?’ said that lady, licking her fat lips with ghoulish relish.
‘Throwing up and 'olding 'is stomach?
Sounds like something 'e het, don't it?
Nothing from my kitchen, anyway.
What 'appened then?’
‘Then he died,’ said Mrs Crumwallis.
She seemed to lack any Dickensian sense of the poetry of death.
‘Fancy.
Died.
There on your lap.
‘Orrible for you, Mrs C. But he always was very white and fair, wasn't 'e?
Some'ow you can imagine 'im as one of those marboreal effigies in church.
Tell me again what 'appened when you got 'ome.
The shepherd's is unfreezing, so there's no rush for lunch.
You got 'ome, and you 'eard sounds, is that it?’
The headmaster's little group of himself, Septimus Coffin and Penny Warlock was joined by Mr McWhirter, limping late into school on his way to his first class.
Catching wind of the disturbance, he poked his head around the door and in his early-morning voice, like a flute with catarrh, he threw the inquiry in the direction of Mr Crumwallis.
‘Something wrong, eh?’
‘Yes,’ said Mr Crumwallis in an undertaker's voice.
‘A boy has died.’
‘Oh, is that all?’
Mr McWhirter began a painful right turn, but then a thought struck him.
‘Which one?’
‘Alas — it was Hilary Frome.’
‘Ha!
Really?
Ha!
No great loss.’
The headmaster, ignoring Mr McWhirter's privileged position, was about to enter a stinging demurrer when the phone rang.
Mr Crumwallis froze.
‘The telephone again.’
His voice was that of a breaking man.
He walked with palpable reluctance in the direction of his sitting-room.
Septimus Coffin cast a brief glance towards Iain McWhirter.
Then the various groups, still muttering anxiously to each other, began to evaporate in various directions.
Mike Pumfrey, now back in the study with Sergeant Fenniway, put his finger to his lips and picked up the extension phone.
‘My dear Mr Martins, I beg you to reconsider, to make no hasty decision,’ came the headmaster's voice, raised to a sort of wail that was anything but confidence-creating.
‘I feel sure this thing will turn out to be an unfortunate accident…
Well, it's all very well to say that accidents like that shouldn't happen, but…
Naturally you don't  want to take risks with your boy, I can see that perfectly well, but —’
Mike Pumfrey laid the receiver down gently, and raised his eyebrows at Fenniway.
‘Not the first today, I'd be willing to bet.’
‘Nor the last,’ said Fenniway.
Never had morning worn on more agonizingly slowly.
Never, even at Burleigh School, had less been taught.
Pumfrey, respecting the routine of the school, though there was little enough cause to, interviewed the teachers when they had a free period.
Bill Muggeridge, he noted with regret, had been free for the first hour, when Pumfrey and Fenniway had been busy with the Fromes, but was not free again until after lunch.
The rest were available at one time or another.
The first to come, and one of the most interesting from Pumfrey's point of view, was Tom Tedder, who sprawled easily in his chair, seemed as little tensed up as it is possible to be when involved in a murder case, and told them all they needed to know about the teachers' attitude to the school's star pupil.
‘Frightful little shit,’ he said.
‘And it didn't help his being the headmaster's publicly proclaimed ‘boy most likely’.
That just gave him the more confidence.’
‘Confidence to do what?’
‘Oh, raising riot and rebellion in the usual schoolboy way.
He was only a schoolboy, after all: we all tended to forget that.
But there was something more with Frome.
The way he needled the staff, for example.
Picked on their weakest points, twisted the knife…’
‘Yes.
Who are you thinking of?’
‘Most of us, really.
Makepeace, of course, was easy game.
But he'd take on someone like Glenda Grower, who's a much tougher customer.
Make some snide remark about what happened in her last school.’
‘Oh.
And what did happen?’
‘Some ghastly little girl accused her of lesbian advances.’
‘And is she a lesbian?’
‘Personally I'd guess not.
Since the women's movement started bringing all the lesbians out, anyone with a bit of presence gets accused of it.
And Glenda's certainly got presence.
As I say, I'd guess not, but she never talks about it, and nobody'd dare bring it up.
Except Hilary Frome.’
‘I see.
What else did he throw at you teachers?’
‘Oh, he said something to poor Miss Gilberd the other day.’
He stopped.
‘At least, he may have done.’
‘Why are you unsure?’
‘Well, at the time —’ he stopped, embarrassed, but saw he was in too far —‘I thought she might have…have made it up.
Well, I'd better tell you.
I thought she might have made it up as an excuse for coming round to see me.
She wouldn't tell me exactly what he'd said.
But, in fact, he seemed to have quite a campaign going against the staff, so he might easily have said something.’
‘What sort of thing would he have said?’
‘Oh, something about her and me.
Poor old Dorothea thinks it's a state secret, but in fact everybody giggles over it.’
‘I see.
And what about you, sir?’
‘Me?
Oh, I don't take the older boys, or only the dimmer ones in the lower streams.
I hadn't had Hilary since he was in the second year.’
‘So he'd never done anything special to you?’
Tom Tedder remembered one morning, four years back, when he had taken into class a picture he had painted, and rather liked — a picture of Florence from  Fiesole.
He remembered the admiring glances of the other boys, and the expression of ineffable contempt on the face of the young Hilary Frome, an expression that told him that even an eleven-year-old could see through him, could tell he was no good.
‘No.
He never said anything special to me,’ he said.
‘His general foulness didn't ripen till later.’
The progressive questioning of the staff made for a terrible atmosphere in the Staff Common Room.
Indeed, if they had thought about it, it would have been all too ludicrously reminiscent of being called up before the headmaster.
‘Well,’ said Dorothea Gilberd, coming in sweaty and harassed from a Geography class with 1A, ‘there's certainly no prospect of getting anything done today.’
‘Weally?’ said Mr Makepeace.
‘I found 4A tewibly quiet.’
‘I don't wonder.
That's Hilary Frome's class.
They would be.
That doesn't mean they're taking anything in.’
‘Oh, I don't ask for miwacles.
Who's with the Superintendent at the moment?’
‘McWhirter, I think,’ said Dorothea.
‘Tom went first,’ she said, artlessly revealing what was on her mind.
‘I haven't seen him since.
What's the man asking us about?’
‘Where we were yesterday after school,’ said Glenda Grower, apparently little concerned.
‘And what were our impressions of Hilary Frome.’
‘He asked me if I'd been teaching them about poisonous plants,’ said Corbett Farraday.
‘as if I would!
Of course, we did do some elementary botany…’
‘Hmmm,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘And on the subject of Hilary, what is the party line?
Are we being honest?’
‘Well, I was, in moderation,’ said Glenda.
‘The funny thing is, I felt rather rotten about telling him what I thought of Hilary.
I mean, the boy was only fifteen or sixteen.
He was a ghastly little tyke, but it is quite awful that he's dead.
People who are little horrors in school quite often grow up into all right individuals.’
‘And vice versa, of course ,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘The point about one's schooldays is that they are the most irrelevant days of one's life.’
‘Don't talk rubbish, Sep,’ said Dorothea briskly.
‘If you thought that, you wouldn't be a schoolteacher…
Oh dear, I wonder what Tom told them.’
‘Why?
Does he have anything to tell them?’
Dorothea blushed, as if automatically.
‘No, of course not.
And luckily we've both got a very good alibi for last night.
I…
I happened to have an extra ticket for the recital last night…
Holmes, the violinist, you know…and I rang up Tom on the off-chance that he'd like to come.’
Glenda Grower, out of sheer mercy, changed the subject.
‘Alibi,’ she said.
‘I notice you're all assuming that the boy was murdered.
Aren't we jumping the gun a bit?
I bet the Superintendent hasn't made up his mind about that yet, not judging by the tone of his questions.’
‘My boys in 1A aren't convinced of it either,’ chipped in Dorothea gratefully.
‘They'd like it to be murder, because that would be more sensational, and they'd like to see someone dragged off, but they really think it was an accident.
They haven't worked it out yet, but they're sure it's something to do with Mrs C. and her damned medicines.’
‘They have a point,’ said Glenda.
‘Precisely what I think.’
‘Hmmm,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘If it is…’
They all looked at him inquiringly.
‘I pwesume,’ said Percy Makepeace, ‘you think that would be the end of Burleigh.’
‘Not exactly,’ said Septimus.
‘I think it would be the end of Crumwallis at Burleigh.’
‘What's this, Sep?’ said Tom Tedder, coming in from his last class, and acting rather as if a load was now off his mind, or as if he was trying to conceal one.
‘Writing off the Crumwallises already?’
‘Only,’ said Coffin judiciously, ‘in certain circumstances.’
‘Like his lovely lady wife having inadvertently poisoned off his star pupil, you mean?
No, it wouldn't exactly foster confidence, would it?
Actually the idea that that's what happened has probably got round the parents already.
Boys talk, you know, and everyone was aware of her medicinal vagaries.
Mr C. is looking like Dr Jekyll after a nasty spell as Mr Hyde, by the by.
And he's on the phone again.’
‘Really?’ said Septimus Coffin.
And before long he drank up his coffee and slipped out.
‘Tom,’ said Dorothea urgently, ‘what was it like?
What did he ask you about?’
‘Same as everyone else, I should think.
Where I was last night, and so on.
I told him about the concert.’
‘Was that all?’
‘Then he wanted to know what I thought of young Hilary,’ said Tom.
He swallowed, as if making a decision.
‘I told him that as far as I was concerned he was junior shit of all time.
I — er — I told him about his insulting you.’
‘Oh Tom —’ wailed Dorothea.
‘You didn't!’
‘Well, after all, what's the odds?
He needs to know what a ghastly little prick the boy was.
The headmaster would  never tell him, and most of this lot will pull their punches.
And we've got perfect alibis.’
But Dorothea Gilberd was not to be comforted.
‘I don't know that alibis are all that much use,’ she said.
‘Not in poison cases.’
‘But Mrs Quigly,’ shouted the headmaster down the phone, oblivious in his desperation of the fact that his sitting-room door was slightly ajar.
‘I will not be condemned without trial in this way…
Yes, I realize you are under no obligation to keep Peter here.
But I think I can say that we have never betrayed the trust that you have reposed in us…
That is a most unwarranted slur…
My wife has never laid claim to medical knowledge, Mrs Quigly…
I must beg you to take a few days to consider…
All this will be sorted out, perhaps in a matter of hours…
Mrs Quigly!
Mrs Quigly!’
He stood by the fireplace, gazing despairingly at the mouthpiece of the telephone.
It was at this point that the door swung open.
‘I think, Mr Crumwallis,’ said Septimus Coffin, marching in, ‘that we'd better sit down and have a really good talk.’
DECLINE AND FALL
‘But that's hardly more than I paid for it!’ protested Edward Crumwallis, his voice high with outrage and fear.
‘Allowing for inflation, it's very much less than I paid for it.’
‘Quite,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘It's an unthinkable proposition.
You take no account of the way I have built the school up.’
‘Oh, I do,’ said Septimus Coffin.
‘And also of the way it is currently collapsing about your ears.’
‘Nonsense!
Fiddlesticks!
A temporary setback.’
‘Oh no.
This school will never recover as long as you and your wife are here.
Unfair, perhaps, but there it is.
Even if Frome's death has nothing to do with your wife's…ministrations, the word has spread now.
One thing parents can't afford — especially our sort of parent — is that the whisper might be put about that they had been willing to toy with their own children's safety.
Just wait and see: that phone will ring again within the next ten minutes.’
Mr Crumwallis jumped, and looked nervously at the instrument.
‘But what would we do?’
‘That's rather up to you, isn't it?
Retire gracefully for a time.
Then quietly buy another school.
I've known teachers go on to other posts in the private sector without  any trouble after far worse things than you will ever be accused of.
Or why not try some other kind of institution?
A private nursing home for old people, for example.
Under proper medical supervision, of course.’
‘You are being intolerably insulting.
I'd like to know what your interest in this is, and McWhirter's.’
‘Iain Ogilvie McWhirter, like the good Scot he is, wants to protect the capital he's already invested.
He doesn't see any way of doing that as long as you and Mrs C. remain here.
I'm like the rest: I want to preserve my job.
At the moment it looks as if the end of term will see us all thrown on the job market.
Not a happy prospect.
You know what the outlook is for unemployed teachers at the moment.’
‘I don't see why you care,’ whined the headmaster.
‘Not at your age.’
‘It's precisely because of my age that I can be quite sure there won't be any other job coming my way if I lose this one.
Well, now, you've had our offer — McWhirter's and mine.
This offer does not go up.
It goes down.’
‘What do you mean?’ said Mr Crumwallis, the note of fear back in his voice as if he understood already perfectly well.
‘This is a business deal — right?
Or as you would say, a commercial transaction.
Just like the deal you made when you bought the school.
Strict commercial principles operate-the market economy.
Every time that phone rings the future of this school looks more and more shaky.
Every parent who withdraws his boy is going to increase our difficulties, and make it less likely we'll get other boys to take their places.
We're willing to try it.
But every hour you hang on makes it more risky.
That's why every hour the offer will go down.’
‘I take this most unkindly, Coffin.
Most unkindly.
You seem to have no sense of gratitude.
It was I, you remember, who offered you a position here.’
‘At a salary less than I was earning twenty years ago in the State system.
Gratitude had nothing to do with it, as Mae West didn't say.
Right — now give me your answer: yes or no?’
‘No.
Certainly not…
I have no intention of…this is pure blackmail…
Taking advantage of a temporary situation…
A piece of rank treachery —’
Mr Crumwallis jumped a foot when the telephone rang.
Septimus Coffin, with a little bow of the head, retired and left him to it.
The bell for lunch was going when Mike Pumfrey and Sergeant Fenniway finished the main part of their initial interviews.
Only Muggeridge was still unseen.
Pumfrey sat back in his chair and his thin face, with its alert blue eyes and the bristly little moustache, assumed the look of a frustrated ferret.
‘Well, here's the picture, for what it's worth,’ he said.
‘Percival Makepeace drove to the Church of St Athelwold the Martyr at Little Tunbury on the Mere.
To inspect their incomparable rood screen — or woood screen, as he called it.
I wondered what the hell he meant, and I'm still not sure.
Twies to visit it once a year, at the vewy least.
Well, well.
Saw nobody.
Surprise, surprise.
Drove back to a late dinner.
No alibi.
Septimus Coffin went home at four-fifteen.
Read the paper, ate, listened to music, watched the television with his sister.
A sort of alibi for the whole time.’
‘But that's pretty much a wife's alibi, isn't it?’ said Sergeant Fenniway.
‘Not a great deal of use.
And his  sister is sixty-eight.
Old people go to sleep in front of the television.’
‘Don't we all?
Yes, it's a pretty shaky alibi when you come down to it.
Next, Corbett Farraday was home, at afternoon tea with his mama (who sounds a formidable body, not to say a right old battleaxe).
Then he went walking in Stanhope Wood, looking for a root of something Latin and nasty-sounding, which might be interesting when we know what Frome died of, except that if it was Corbett Farraday he would hardly flourish the matter so gaily in our faces, naive as he certainly seemed to be.
Penelope Warlock and Glenda Grower were both at home, marking.
The first rang the second at nine fifteen — not long before Hilary Frome died.
In effect, no alibi.
Iain Ogilvie McWhirter —’
‘There's a character.
Like a dried vegetable, or something.
I bet his lessons sparkle.’
‘Quite.
A machine for teaching, and — like all British industrial plants — a pretty much obsolete one at that.
Part owner of the school, though, you notice.
Which doesn't alter the fact that he has no alibi.
At home working on his Dictionary of Gaelic on Historical Principles, and struggling with The Times Literary Supplement crossword.
Wife away on a visit to her mother.
Only child, a daughter at Oxford.
But why someone like that would want to endanger his own property by killing off one of the boys is beyond me.’
‘Tedder and Miss Gilberd have the best alibis,’ said Fenniway.
‘From seven forty-five onwards, yes.
Unbreakable, I imagine.
But if something was slipped into the sherry, if Crumwallis was overheard talking to Frome, it could have been earlier.
For the period around six to seven-thirty  Tedder had no alibi at all, and Miss Gilberd only her ancient mother.’
‘That leaves Muggeridge.
There's something odd there, sir, but we've no more than a whiff of what it was.
And, talking to these teachers, I can't for the life of me see what motive any of them can have.
Quite apart from anything else, the most likely immediate consequence for them is that they lose their jobs.’
‘No small thing, these days.
And yet, they hated him.
Crumwallis, apparently, excepted.
Crumwallis — I would bet — was sexually attracted, whether he understood that himself, or not.
Otherwise they hated him, though there are degrees of honesty as to how far they admit it.’
‘Still,’ said Fenniway, ‘if schoolteachers went around killing off the kids they hate —’
‘I probably wouldn't be here myself.
I was a little demon, I can tell you.
One of them called me Hitler, do you know that?
And that was fifteen years before I grew this moustache.’
Pumfrey fingered that little bunch of bristles in fond reflection.
‘And yet, you know, there's surely more than just hatred for a disruptive influence in class.
The thing between him and the staff got pretty personal at times.
In due course we might look closer at that episode with the Gilberd: she admits after much blushing and prevarication that he accused her in the High Street delicatessen of baby-snatching — did it openly, in a loud voice.
Now Gilberd seemed eminently sane — I know the type so well from my  schooldays , and that type always kept me perfectly well under control.
But there might be other, more dangerous examples of his getting personal, and with people who are not so well balanced.
The type of teacher you get in a school like this is often enough a screwball, an outsider, or so I should guess.
The type that can't get  a job in the State system, or has lost one.
Makepeace, for example— what's under that timid exterior?
Then there's Miss Grower.
According to Tedder, she was apparently accused of lesbian advances by a girl at her old school.’
‘But she's hardly blackmailable over that, sir.
It's apparently well known.’
‘Certainly.
But there could have been other episodes, involving local girls.
And Frome could easily have heard, if they were around his own age…
It's all so nebulous.
On the surface I agree: the teachers are not likely.
A boy would have better opportunities — of doing that nasty trick with the razor blade, for example.
I suppose I'm reluctant to go into the school side before I have to because I'm not very good with kids.’
‘Aren't you, sir?’
‘No.
With my own kids, yes.
The funny thing is, all other kids kind of merge into one grey mass: one boy in a school uniform is the mirror image of the next boy in school uniform.
My kids have plenty of friends, and I can't tell one from another, or remember their names.
My wife is always going on to me about it.
Ah well, we've got one more card before we come to the boys.
Could you go along and get this Muggeridge character?’
On the way to the Staff Common Room Fenniway had a word with the constable who was taking up Pickerage's lunch, so it was well into lunch break by the time Bill was called.
He had begun to wonder whether they might not have forgotten him entirely.
Bill had heard the news that morning when he arrived at school.
He had simply said, ‘Oh Gawd’, but he had certainly looked aghast.
Since then his heart had not been in the horse vaulting or the running on the spot.
But as it never really was, the boys had not noticed the difference.
They did notice that, contrary to his usual custom, he showered at the end of the morning's gym classes; but since he put on the same grubby and sweaty old clothes he had come in, that was practically a wasted gesture.
Still, a shower perks you up.
When he was fetched from the Common Room his walk had a touch of spring, and he came into Pumfrey's presence a shade more jauntily than would have been the case if he had been interviewed earlier.
‘Ah, Mr Muggeridge,’ said Pumfrey in a businesslike tone.
‘You're the only teacher now that I haven't seen.’
‘Had classes all morning,’ said Bill.
‘You can't leave the little blighters alone in the gym.
Not with all that equipment.
Ruddy little vandals, the lot of them.’
‘Yes, I can see that.
I suppose you've got a lot of valuable stuff there.
Now, I gather you had to cry off taking your team to the Swimming Championships at Sturford last night.’
‘Well, not to say cry off,’ said Bill, settling down cosily with a grievance, like a feminist about to discourse on rape.
‘Don't see it's my bloody job anyway, not evening work like that.
They just assume I'll go, and he doesn't hand out a penny extra, not old Crumwallis.
All bloody unpaid overtime, this job.
If we had a union worth anything they'd look into it.’
‘But it was assumed you'd do it,’ said Pumfrey, cutting into his whinge, or his tactical ramblings, whichever they were.
‘However, you said you couldn't go.
Why was that?’
‘Had to stay at home to mind the kids,’ said Bill promptly.
‘You know how it is.
The Missus had to go out.’
‘The Missus’ was about as inappropriate a soubriquet for Onyx Muggeridge as could be imagined, and Mike  Pumfrey, who had heard a few scraps about her already, registered this.
‘Ah — your wife had to go out, so you had to stay home with the children?’
‘Yes, like I said.
We've got four.
All nippers.’
‘I see.
You couldn't have got a baby-sitter?’
‘Why the hell should we?
All costs bleeding money, doesn't it?’
‘Yes, of course.
But, now: were you at home with the children all evening?
From the time you left school here?’
‘Yes.
We had a bit of a fry-up.
Then the Missus went out, and I stayed home with the kids.
I tell you, they're nippers.
Can't leave them-they get up to anything.’
‘And yet, we're told that you were seen around the grounds of Burleigh yesterday evening.’
‘Seen?
‘Course I wasn't.
I was home.’
The first beads of sweat appeared on Bill Muggeridge's forehead.
‘Are you sure?
You were seen by one of the boarders.’
‘Bloody little liar.
Or else he was mistaken.
That was probably it.
It was nearly dark.’
‘When was it nearly dark, Mr Muggeridge?’
Pumfrey reflected comfortably that it was an indication of Bill Muggeridge's general dimness that he had not even had to set a trap for him.
He had made the most ancient blunder in the business quite off his own bat.
He stumbled on.
‘I mean, it was probably too dark for him to see.
It's easy to mistake people if it's half light.’
‘Come off it, Muggeridge.
You've just landed yourself in it.
Why don't you come clean and tell the truth?’
‘What do you mean?
I am telling the truth.
Look I've just remembered, I did take a walk — just to get  a breath of fresh air.’
Muggeridge once again assumed that aggrieved air, which was easy enough for him, because he felt aggrieved much of the time.
‘I needed it.
Cooped up in the house like that — stinks of babies the whole time.
I'd rather live near a fish factory than that.
Chap's got to get out, if he's used to fresh air.
Went for a walk around the school, about half past seven or so.
My house is just across the way here.’
‘I know where your house is, Muggeridge.’
Mike Pumfrey leant sharply forward, and caught Bill's shifty eye.
‘We heard you from your bedroom window, when we called round last night.
You called your wife a tart, which is your business and hers, but you also said that if you'd known where she'd gone you would have caught her at it.
And that could very well be our business as well as yours.
Come along, Muggeridge, let's have a bit of detail.’
‘You crappy sods!’ fumed Muggeridge.
‘Going round at dead of night, eavesdropping on people's conversations.
Like damned Peeping Toms.
Bet you get a cheap thrill out of that sort of thing, don't you?
You'd arrest anyone else who did it.
That your idea of detective work?’
‘Perhaps when you've got over your pet, you'll give us some answers.’
Bill considered.
Considering, for Bill, took time.
He looked like a particularly lethargic Newfoundland dog, trying to decide whether to obey an order.
‘Oh well,’ he said, going as always for the muddly middle way, and hoping to struggle along it to safety.
‘I suppose it's no skin off my nose.
I was looking for my wife.’
‘Quite,’ said Pumfrey.
‘We gathered that.’
He sat back in his chair, with an air of waiting, and expecting something more to the point.
‘Well, she'd got a date with someone.
She'd ringed off the date on the calendar in the kitchen.
Always does that, nasty little bitch.
It's her way of telling me, and saying ‘What are you going to do about it?’
I followed her.
But the trouble is, it's not something I'm trained at, and I'm heavy.
I had to keep well behind her, and then I lost her.
She came into the school grounds, I'm pretty sure she crossed the headmaster's lawn, but after that I lost her.’
‘What did you do?’
‘I went back home.
Wasted effort.’
‘I see, just like that, eh?
Hardly worth missing the swimming for.
You say she always ringed that calendar, is that right?
Presumably this has happened before, then?’
‘Ever open door,’ muttered Bill, dredging up one of the more attractive phrases from his footballing past.
‘And did you always do the Indian scout job?’ asked Pumfrey very quietly.
‘Or this time were you more worried than before?’
‘Well — she came into the school grounds.
I thought it might be with a boy.
I wouldn't put it past her, mucky little bint.
And that would be serious.
It's not much of a job, but these days I wouldn't want to get the push.’
‘You thought it might be with a boy.
Which boy?’
‘How would I know?
Any boy.’
Pumfrey looked at him with contempt.
Really, Muggeridge was one of the worst and most transparent liars he had ever encountered.
Which might be a powerful argument for his essential innocence.
Pumfrey didn't have the impression that the killer of Hilary Frome was both clumsy and stupid.
‘You give me the gripes,’ he said dispassionately.
‘I don't like to be taken for an idiot.
Do I have to spell it out for you?
You must have decided to follow her before  she went into the school grounds, because otherwise you wouldn't have opted out of the swimming.
You obviously did so because you suspected she was going with one of the boys.
You must have seen her with one of them.
Which one was it?’
Bill Muggeridge swallowed.
This sort of inquisition hadn't happened to him since his schooldays, since he had been the playground bully whose only fear in life was a particularly sharp-eyed and sharp-tongued headmaster.
He felt at bay, like a very dim minister facing a hostile House.
Unlike the minister, he finally decided to tell the truth.
‘Hilary Frome,’ he said.
‘Aaah—’ said Mike Pumfrey, and he leaned forward again, playing with his pen.
It was a sign, generally, that the inquisition was just starting.
It was a sign that, today, was to be proved false.
The scream cam from quite a way away, but it penetrated easily the thick walls of the study.
All three men jumped in their seats, and Mike Pumfrey and Fenniway were on their feet in a second and through the door.
As they reached the hallway, another scream resounded through the school — a woman's voice?
Or could it be a boy's?
It came through the door leading to the boarders' annexe.
The policemen were first through, but following close on their heels came others — the headmaster from his sitting-room, teachers from their common room.
A third scream told them where to go.
The door to the dining hall stood open.
No-one was sitting down.
Mrs Crumwallis and Mrs Garfitt had run from the serving table and were standing over a boy.
Both seemed helpless, and Mrs Garfitt was working up to hysterics.
Crouched over the end of the table, a boy was heaving up blood — a hideous red pool, soaking into  the bare boards of the floor.
His face, between heaves, was piteous and terrified.
‘Fenniway — ambulance, quick,’ said Pumfrey.
‘At once.
The rest of you, keep away from him.’
And Pumfrey went forward, hardly knowing what to do.
He sat the boy on a seat and looked down his throat.
There was, at the back, a deep gash.
The headmaster stood, helpless and horrified, by the door.
He seemed to be contemplating the magnitude of his own fall.
Two days ago — one day ago — he had been in charge of his destiny.
A man of power.
A man admired, respected, whose word was heeded.
Now…
He looked around pathetically.
What he saw was Septimus Coffin.
‘The offer,’ said the gentleman, ‘has gone down by five thousand pounds.’
‘Done,’ said Edward Crumwallis.
And then he amended it with a feeble trace of his old Manner: ‘I accept your offer.’