

PART II
Unease
Wind of March,
Halting
Then upwind from the track the noise of shunting.
Look up, straighten up, see
Swirled branches, swirled clothes in yards
Tugged at, tugging.
Light at strange times, rooflines
Seen in new positions, then sinking;
Echoes sounding from further than yesterday,
Heads liking.
You find yourself walked two miles from your room
For no reason
Tasting time in unknown parts of the town
Turning this way, that way, stopped before windows
Uncurtained, though still the shut-in season.
Unaccountably women scrub out drawers
Men are late home
And when they come their wives
Are turning things over in high parts of the house
Not crouched in the kitchen.
And suddenly you are reminded there are backs to things
As when the light is switched on behind the gauze
Backdrop that has blanked our sight till then
And the prince goes down through the wood to another exit
Brick wall till then.
A child plays out after dark
First time this year, and you hear:
She is coming
From the paths within the woods
Up the gulleys from the plain
Drumming drumming
Insects building citadels


Bud-sheaths opening with a jerk
All wing-folded creeping things
Heaving up to gasp the air
Thrumming, thrumming
Tricklings, juicings, fattenings, breathings
Sighings, heavings, spreadings, reachings
She is coming; if you listen
Spring is here.
Oh no, I do not believe
As the snow swirls again and the windows
Drip from the inside talking the warmth from our breath
I do not believe;
As the black lines creep back through the newly faced walls
I do not believe;
Dead letterbox, telephone, eyes down, arch filled
Doors shut, blinds down all day, gate locked, lease ended —; I do not believe.
Something is gathering at the edge of the meadow.
Do you not hear
The bird calling across the wet grass
The bird invisible singing from behind thick air
The blackbird's whistle carried by the rain?
I have heard —; Out of the empty season, weary August,
When for a stagnant month no call has broken
The bronze and heavy sky —; I have heard suddenly a blackbird sing
And the next thing we knew the year was dead.
Crying within walls I have heard the warning,
Blackbird's alert, Hades' bird to tell him
Prepare his riches.
So I do not believe
Hot while this damp and still clings round my head,
This heavy emptiness afflates my heart.


The steam outside is thinning against the stained windows
The houses and trees beyond stand out and come nearer.
Somewhere she is moving, prepare to receive her.
A cold fury has snatched at the little edges
The unfurling of the lime buds, the ragged wave of the elm leaf
There are shreds, silk scraps of leaf from the woods on black
pavements
Purposely pulled apart as when, torn to scraps
A page of a book is destroyed.
Shoots looking out for air are broken, fronds smashed
Harsh whirlwind is up there, black storm clouds with hard edges
No vague-sided clouds bringing softness, bringing liquor
Balmy for growing, soothing and hushed exhalations,
Like velvet nostril quivering, sleeping in hay.
Foolish greenery may have arrived out of habit
But the pellets of ice are coming, and black rain to cover it
Bowing down everything and driving it back to its cave.
She is not here.
She is nowhere here.
I do not believe.
25
‘The aim of this inquiry into the order relating to case no. 596, in the charge of Miss P. Sulkins, home visitor in the employ of the Bamborough Area Council for Social Service until last year — the pink file, sir — and transferred from the list covered by the South Midlands (Eastern Section) Administrative Area — the papers in the yellow folder, sir — is to try and establish an order of events that stretch over no little period in time, so that responsibility for the unfortunate outcome of these actions, or as some have chosen to prejudge this enquiry, lack of action, may be apportioned justly between the various bodies responsible under the Act.
This has been no small task, Mr Chairman, as a mass of conflicting evidence from a variety of sources has had to be sifted.
It has been further complicated by the fact that officers dealing with the case at the beginning of its history have left or been replaced.
This, as you know, sir, is a situation that bedevils many areas of the public service but lack of continuity in care for the young can have particularly serious results.
It was the not fault of my client, that just as the Visitor seemed to be gaining the trust of the young person who is the subject of this enquiry (she was a child when the case was first brought to their attention as in need of care and protection but is now classed as a young person) she was transferred because of area reorganisation undertaken in response to changes in government policy, and that the officer who took over the case was hospitalised shortly after she assumed her new duties.
‘But I think you will also see, sir, as the details unfold, that it is in its nature a far from simple case.
The girl comes from a large and extended family and at all times when my client and its officers were trying to obtain information and ascertain the conditions the girl was living in, their task was made more difficult, in some cases very difficult indeed, sir, by the attitude to the authorities of certain members of the girl's family.
As this meeting is in camera it is allowable at this stage to point out that certain elements in this family, being of — er — immigrant origin, ah, have a totally different conception of the role of a daughter in a family  and of parental rights, and while doing all they could to respect the traditions of minority ethnic groups, and in particular the rather dominant role of the father in such societies, in the last resort it was with the protection of a minor that the Council was concerned according to the law of this country.
This family is not a totally foreign family but as I say there were elements of interference that made the task of the County particularly onerous in this case.
Also, they come of a class of person frequently on the move from household to household so a great deal of time was wasted by officials seeking to interview relatives who were in fact temporarily with other members of the family in another part of the country, where, of course, the authority I am representing has no jurisdiction.
‘I in no way wish you to think that I am suggesting that delays and loss of documents should be treated lightly, but I would like to put forward the view that it was not within the power of my client to remedy the situation they took over from an authority since re-organised under Section 5c of the Reorganisation of Ancillary Services (Domestic) Act.
Following the inability to trace records of certain interviews and the fact that other important papers were not presented at previous hearings of this matter, the fire in the building where the former South Midland Area's archives were temporarily housed pending re-organisation was particularly unfortunate and can only be thought of as an unhappy coincidence.
As you may recall, Sir, the police did not treat this as a case of arson.
But I would like to mention that conflicting evidence is not always the result of a social worker being inexperienced and taken in easily by appearances when he or she should obviously have checked with an independent source.
As I have pointed out, sir, independent sources are very hard to come by in these sort of areas.
As I think you will agree when you have looked at all the evidence it may well not have been quite so simple in this case to determine what was the best for the girl, as we, looking back on events from this point in time, may think.
It was, I agree, unfortunate that my client could not have stepped in earlier.
It has been suggested that early alarms were ignored but I would like to emphasize that we are greatly curtailed as to actions a public body can take based only on hearsay and rumour.
I am sure you will  agree that it is in the best interests of the traditions of our society that there should be these circumspect checks and controls on what a public authority is permitted to do to interfere in the private lives of individuals, but at the same time it does make it difficult to act promptly and, in certain cases, and this must be one of them, one can only regret the outcome.’
‘Thank you, Mr Pettit.
Now I will just briefly run through what I have here to make sure we are agreed.
The subject of this care and protection order, then a minor, was found to be living, as man and wife, with her uncle —’
‘Yes, her uncle on her mother's side — her mother's brother.’
‘With her mother's brother, a man obviously considerably older than she.
When questioned they admitted that this state of affairs had been going on for some time.
Have we the report of that interview?’
‘Document A, sir.’
‘Document A. That the man, who was belligerent on several occasions at first, threatening the social worker called in by the Visitor, said it was no business of theirs as it was a family matter and that the girl's father, his own brother, had given his consent, and what more could you want, and there was no higher authority than that, and no wonder there was so much crime on the streets if the government took away the father's power, and why didn't they do something about crime on the streets instead of invading people's homes.
He challenged the social worker to find that the girl lacked anything.
He was in a far better  position financially to help her than her own parents who had a lot of children and responsibilities, whereas he had no children and everything he had would go to her.
When the subject of education was brought up and it was pointed out that the girl had not been going to school he said that she was not learning anything at school anyway, that she was much safer here than at the school she had been to, where she had been threatened with knives in the playground and that she could learn all a wife needed to know better at home.
It became obvious to the social worker that the man was quite beyond the reach of modern opinions about the education of girls.
Later he became less abusive and rather pathetically said that he kept himself to himself, that the girl was not roaming the streets getting into trouble like the girls who went to school, that  company now would be cruel and shameful to an old man who had provided her with a home, protected her and looked after her in every way.
That tallies so far?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘He mentions his brother — but I thought you said he was brother to the girl's mother?’
‘That is so, Mr Chairman, but I gather that there is a very strong bond among these people between brothers-in-law and that they regard them as we do blood brothers.
But in addition there was apparently some connection between their grandparents so they may have been cousins also.
It is a very complicated family tree, sir, which we could not pursue beyond two generations.’
‘Ah yes, I begin to see some of your difficulties.
Now, as to the girl.
When interviewed she agreed she was not ill-treated.
She said she had wanted to go home at first but had got used to it at her uncle's house now.
She stayed in mostly looking after the house and cooking and seeing to his clothes.
She said she sometimes longed to go out, to a disco or an amusement arcade and be with other girls, but her uncle was strict and didn't like her going to those places, and although she was sometimes lonely she couldn't stand the thought of going back to that school, especially now she had been away from it for so long because anyway her friends wouldn't be there any more and she would be treated like a little girl and the things they had to do would seem more stupid than ever because in her uncle s house she was treated like a grown-up, which she was anyway, and she ran the house.
That tally?’
‘In fact, sir, by the time of this interview she was mature in, well, in every way, sir, and struck the Visitor as a very competent housewife.
The house was well-kept and clean and even the garden looked well-kept, which her uncle said had been an awful mess before she came.
She was quite mature in her answers, and as you will see from Document A, sir, the Visitor got the impression — we have to rely on their experience in this sort of judgement —; that she was more or less in command of the situation and had gained poise and experience from it and that a second traumatic removal from what in fact was a secure home for her would at this stage do more harm than good, especially as the relationship  between the girl and her father was not good.
The only complaint — and she was not really complaining against her uncle, perhaps I should rather say the cause for depression — was that from time to time she was very homesick and longed to see her mother and girls of her own age.’
‘The next step was that the parents of the girl were visited?’
‘Yes, sir, after some delay due to circumstances already referred to.’
‘Quite.
By and large they bore out what the girl's uncle claimed — that it was with their consent, or even connivance, that the girl had gone to live with her uncle in the first place.
Report of that?’
‘Yes, sir, Document B, and I should here direct your attention to Document B1 which is a report of an interview with the girl's mother submitted on her behalf by the latest Visitor to have taken over the case.
She apparently told her, contrary to the impression given in the former interview covered by Document B, that she never condoned her daughter's going away — which she referred to rather dramatically as a ‘kidnap’— that she did everything she could to bring the matter to the authorities at the time, but ‘was prevented’, that she had certainly never agreed to her daughter living with her brother, that her daughter's health had suffered alarmingly, and that she never told any social worker that she had agreed.
It was all a plot to distort what she said, a plot between her husband and brother to take her daughter away from her, and her daughter had never got into any trouble while she was with her, and that she ought to be with other girls of her own age and with her own mother.
I might just interpolate here, Mr Chairman, that the school report, Document C, confirms what the mother said about the girl never being in trouble when she was at school.
The woman went on to say that the social worker had written down what her husband had told her to because she was frightened of him, and because she was a young nit-wit from college no more capable of understanding the wily ways of men like her husband than she could fly.
As you can see, sir, this lady is quite a redoubtable lady and it was with great difficulty that we persuaded her to await the outcome of this enquiry before insisting on seeing you personally, sir.’
‘But what I don't understand is why she said none of this before.
No record of such an interview was presented at any of the  previous hearings, it seems.
The mother-instinct of this ‘redoubtable’ lady seems to have developed rather late in the day.’
‘It is true none of this came out earlier.
Miss Winkelmann, the worker who presented this report, Document B1, is present, sir, if you should wish to question her on it.’
‘Can you give us any clue, Miss Winkelmann, as to why this protest came so late, and can you give us some indication of the form of these attempts she mentions to get her daughter back?
I think it is quite important to establish whether in fact the County had information at their disposal which would have enabled them to act sooner in this case.’
‘I shall ask your indulgence of a rather long exposition, Mr Chairman.
The case is a complicated one.
On the day of which we are speaking, the mother came home from work and was surprised to find her daughter not yet in from school.
She usually got in before her mother.
After two hours she no longer believed that ordinary delays were keeping her daughter, who, according to her mother, was usually very punctilious about telling her if she was going to be late and where she was going as she knew her mother worried.
There was a very strong bond between mother and daughter.
The mother first went to the school which was by now shut, but she found the caretaker who said there had been no event that might have kept anyone late at school that day.
He had not noticed her daughter, either in the stream of girls pouring out of the school gates, or leaving after them.
She next went to the houses of friends of her daughter.
According to them she had been at school that day and came out with them at the usual time and, as far as they knew, had gone the usual way home.
After this she returned to the house hoping against hope that in the interval her daughter might have returned, but there was no sign of her.
She then set out to her sister's, some considerable journey away on the other side of the town.
At this time her husband was in fact not at home.
He had businesses in the North and used regularly at this time of year at the end of the summer sales, to go the rounds of his shops, take stock, examine the books, and so on.
When she got to her sister's it was late and she was worn out so she decided to stay the night.
‘She wanted to ring the school the next day but her sister told  her you could get into trouble if your child was not attending school.
It was, however, through this sister that she eventually found out where her daughter was.
The uncle had apparently come to the school gates at the end of school and when the girl was a little way on her way home had caught up with her and taken her to his house.
When the girl's mother and aunt came round to his house to take her back he became so violent and threatening that they decided they might be endangering the girl's life by staying and arguing.
Each time the mother tried to contact the girl's father by phone she got some evasive reply from premises she thought he might have reached — either he had left the day before, or was busy with the accountant, so the poor woman set off herself to track him down.
Another brother they tried to contact was worse than useless apparently.
The men of the family always formed a very solid front to the outside world, and at times to their womenfolk, and as it had been the custom among their people for children to be looked after by the men on the mother's side of the family, especially if a brother had no issue of his own, they didn't see why the sisters were making such a fuss.
It really is very difficult to convey, sir, the immense difficulties this woman was up against, trying to give her daughter the benefits of a modern education but bound herself by a family subscribing to a quite different system of ‘mores’.
‘For this same reason once she had caught up with her husband (and been sent quickly home as being very undutiful and immoral travelling about alone and not remaining in her place at home against his return) it would have been inconceivable for her to go to the police.
The police are very unwilling to interfere in family matters and apparently when she threatened to go to the police whatever he told her he would say to them if she did report her daughter missing convinced her it would be useless for her to take such action.
She tried various tactics with her husband and brothers to no avail.
She most certainly at no time condoned what had happened to her daughter.
It was only when she ceased her household duties, refused to cook and clean, refused herself to eat, and went and sat day after day in the park, never changing her clothes, and wandering about with plastic bags full of old newspapers, that anyone took notice.
She began to be what is termed ‘a public nuisance’ going up to strangers, not begging under the  terms of the act but importuning them to help her get her daughter back.
She was a good deal teased by children playing in the parks, according to one park-keeper who was sorry for her and tried to help her, and once had her bags snatched by a gang of youths.
Finally someone spoke to a policeman about her, saying he thought it was disgraceful that such a person should be allowed to lurk about near to a play-park for the under-fives, and that ‘nutty beggar-women’ should be kept out of the parks.
After a lot of confusion at the police station I was brought in.
I later found out that the school had enquired at the house after the girl's continued absence and been given some plausible excuse for it by the father.
‘When his wife began to make life difficult for him the father ordered his brother-in-law to send back his daughter.
You can see how completely unconcerned this brutal man was about the feelings of the members of his family.
The brother-in-law, the girl's uncle, did not contest the father's authority but he had had the girl's company long enough for him to feel he couldn't bear his house without her.
He became very gloomy and depressed and according to the girl it was only then that he interfered physically with her.
He took her out to a restaurant one evening, a farewell dinner, he said, as she was going to go back and live with her mother, and he gave her a lot to eat and drink and later that night came into her room and raped her.
He knew that among his people no respectable girl would expect anyone to marry her after that and that the parents would be only too glad for him to keep her.
He had reckoned without the mother, however, who started behaving very violently, plunging the house into darkness one night trying to electrocute herself, and threatening to wreck the warehouse where her husband kept his stocks.
She has had treatment in hospital for depression and is under sedation at the present time.
‘I have nearly come to the end of what I have to say but there is one final complication if I may impose on your patience a little longer.
I hope, Mr Chairman, that when deciding on this appalling case you will take the following into consideration.
The girl herself, whether having imbibed the traditions of her family, or through the physical bond created by cohabiting, through no fault of her own, with this man, has become attached to her uncle, and  while longing to be with her mother considers herself in some sense bound to him by family arrangements as if she were indeed married to him.
After what has happened I do not think this girl will be able easily to adjust to a normal teenage existence for some time and I think any order forbidding her to see this man again would not only be unrealistic, but would place an intolerable burden on a young girl who, it seems to me, has had quite enough strain already.
She has a very strong sense of duty and a great capacity for making relationships, and so far, by some miracle, perhaps because of the very close bond between her and her mother, her experience does not seem to have coarsened her or made her cynical.
I think the mother would soon regain her health if she had her daughter back again to live with her, at least for a period.
The mother at no time neglected the child.
It was only when she was deprived of her and was frantic with worry that she started behaving in an irresponsible way towards society.
I would further recommend that a strong warning be issued to the father, pointing out to him that if he should continue to molest his wife and daughter the law allows an injunction to be brought against him, forbidding him access to the marital home.
Hades
He took her to the exit slowly
Sadly and long, looking his last at her
And when they had reached the place where the mine widened
Into a chamber, and she pausing to breathe
The unaccustomed air of the realms above —; Too sharp, too rich a mixture for her shrunk lungs —; He stopped and said ‘One last thing I must show you.
You never have seen this room in all your time
As Queen of the kingdom, and yet it is the heart
The still eye of the power that should be yours,
Power over life and death, power that through death
Can make rise up anew.
Persephone
All the time you have dwelt with me you have mourned
And looked with horror on these territories


And so they seemed obnoxious, blank and weary
And you an exile
Infinitely trapped in an airless narrow place
Dry field of dust, no gleam or warmth of day.
I will give you some ease before you go
And make you think less sickeningly of this kingdom.
I will bring you home.’
He took her into a little recess aside
At the hub of many passages, many roadways.
A high wide bed with a dark red cover
Pillows banked at one end, and wooden posts.
A silken-patterned carpet, and carved wood chest
On which stood a jar of poppies, autumn picked.
A soft fur coverlet draped on the foot of the bed.
He laid her down and held her head against him
And stroked her neck until she lay against him
Her hair a pale spread cover on his robe.
She saw the silken flash of the sheen of petals
A black hypnotic centre held them together
A soft warm air pressed on her eyes and closed them.
All was so still she could hear the tick of a beetle
Miles away chawing in Hades' hall.
Here they were safe and still, none here to stir
Flittering worrying ghosts across their path.
The stillness was the music of the earth.
Hades came over her and wrapped her close
Within his blazing darkness, spread and melted
Around her with a dark dazzle.
He moved
And a flash that shuddered up her spine to the back of her head
Then, as if fire was liquid, burst down her limbs —; Stars falling through the night —; Diffused through all her being
And became a warmth, a safeness; loosening, healing.
She lay in Hades as the bear in his skin:
Mingled, fitting, inextricable.
They slept and the earth hushed, and all paused
Who on their deathward journey were taking their way
And waited on the thresholds of their passing.


Later he fed her on fruit and smoothed her body
And took her again and again, took her down with him
Further each time into the dark of his power;
And eased some knot
That had been choking him this long time gone.
Persephone woke in the quiet dark, and peaceful
He lay there, peaceful the air about them,
Breathing, calm and easy; and a great joy
Stirred in her veins that had been sad so long,
And with a spurt of strength she turned towards him.
Persephone
She awoke sheltered by dreams
Tall trees at the edge of the wood
The arms of the night criss-crossing to shield the air;
She kept still to hold the shadows close, like a coat
But the day swallowed them, leaving her
In an open field and no trace of the place she had been.
26
When I first came out of hospital I didn't feel like going out.
While I had been in there there'd been a day or two of beautiful weather which we didn't know much about inside, although there was one big window where we used to go and sit and have a smoke — the ones who were getting better — and you could see a big tree from there, so you sort of felt it must be nice outside, and the people who came in from outside weren't so muffled up.
But then the weather changed and although things were given and flowering it was cold and windy and it seemed strange there should be all that blossom, wrong like, as if it had made a mistake and popped up at the wrong time — that was because I had felt the  warmth of those few nice days.
So I stayed in and felt shivery although after you get used to being out of hospital you do feel better for breathing real air — without all that disinfectant stuff I mean.
But I did feel cold and I tired easily.
Then one day I had to go to the Post Office for something — one of them forms I daresay — so I thought I better wrap up, I better take care, you're very vulnerable after a long illness you know, and I put my old long mack on and one of the kids' mack hats and Wellingtons and I went out in the rain, feeling, in a depressed sort of way, ‘Well, if I get ill again, what can I do?
I'm meant to be well now and it's not much cop.’
Then, after I'd walked about a bit and done my errands I suddenly felt much better.
It seemed a warm sort of rain, not a harsh wind you know.
And I felt very glad I'd come out and I lifted up my head a bit and let the rain come on to my face and I thought ‘rainwater's good for the skin anyway’.
And I looked at people I passed a bit more, and all of a sudden they did seem nice and smiled back.
And I felt like I remember sometimes feeling as a child when I was doing something a bit difficult, a bit daring.
I felt ‘Ooh, what an adventure!’
Silly, wasn't it, when all I was doing was going down the road to the Post Office?
But it was a little achievement, going out in the rain that day when there seemed nothing on earth to want to get better for, and feeling better all of a sudden.
And I had a funny thought — I suppose part of the excitement of getting out again after so long, all that oxygen —; here, this is silly, you'll laugh at this.
I did, I know.
I thought: ‘If I was a plant I'd feel like growing.’
It begins to be light
When the child comes home from school now
Lingering in puddles, satchel banging knee.
The fir tree stands still behind him
the moon and the sun stand still in the light blue sky
The moon pale, its edge mouse-eaten like cheese.
The sky is pale, like crystal, without heat
Indeterminate, like a girl waking.
The earth turns
Carrying its slugs and singing birds and light,
Bringing to the surface all its buds and shoots
Its fledgelings in new nests and baby mice.
The softened warmer side comes uppermost
Hard black clay and icy silent waters
Tilt underneath, waiting another year.
The earth turns.
It brings the twittering children, and the birds,
Busy brown creatures, chattering freckled waters.
The infant stretches to the strengthening sun
The infant stretches, sensate, wakening
And, widening with the flowers his star black eyes,
turns with the earth out to the year that opens.
27
She was frightened but she wanted to please him.
She knew it was the thing she mustn't do, mustn't let herself be persuaded into, that it was death, the end, that there was no going back, you could never get back to the same position.
It was the most irrevocable step you took in your life; but she didn't want to lose him.
All the time she was with him she longed for him to put his arm round her shoulder.
When they stood at the curb to cross the road her back ached for the support of his hand in its pit.
Everything of his she liked to touch.
If his hair swayed into her face as they settled in the bus she wanted to hold it, to rub her cheek on it, to put it to her lips, and she thought there would be no pleasure in the world like giving in to him, which she had been anticipating with impatience but anxiety for so long.
Surely then he would do anything for her, everything, always.
He had said as much.
So that it was a terrible let down to her to find it so distasteful.
This wasn't like love at all, this wasn't what she felt when they kissed, or when he put his mouth behind her ear, or rubbed his hands over her stomach, or when, alone in her own bed she had imagined he was there with her.
Now he was here it was horrible and uncomfortable and nasty and there were no lovely feelings of love.
And he was quite different.
It was really frightening how different he was.
She would never have let someone like that come home with her.
His mouth was open and drooling and his tongue lolling between his lips and his eyes staring as if he didn't see her and everything about him red, and his hands bruised her skin where he tugged at her to move her where he wanted her, and he was making awful noises and pushing at her and pushing at her without the slightest gentleness almost as if he didn't realise it was her.
And was it for this awfulness that she had taken the great jump that would divide her from the rest of her life, that she could never go back to, for this she had put herself beyond the pale and ruined her life?
She felt rubbed and sore and hurt all over and she only wanted him to stop, only to stop because she was sure he was damaging her somewhere up inside her.
And he didn't take any notice of  what she was asking or saying and he didn't take any notice of her at all.
And she really began to hate him with such little strength as she had left.
She wanted him not there, but at least if he would just stop, just for a minute, and say something to her.
And then suddenly he did stop and she was all sticky and messy and she thought he would speak to her now and comfort her or beg her in his whisper to kiss him, as he had done under the bridge the other nights they'd met.
But he lay quite dead to her and only made an irritated noise and shoved her when she started stroking his arm, for he had got what he wanted.
He had done what he had to do.
All the time he slept she lay there longing acutely for him to go, and when he did she felt the most immense relief and vowed that now she had escaped his presence she would never never put herself in that position again.
It was the best thing ever to be free and by herself again.
He had looked ridiculous blundering into his trousers.
So she washed and then slept.
And when she woke she turned with such longing to where he had lain and called his name and thought she would do anything for him, anything at all he wanted, because she loved him, she loved him, she loved him.
Put one foot before the other
Slowly
Press on the joints and lever up the hill
Carefully
Hand on rail and pause before the corner
Wait until the road is clear
Creeping
At even pace to the other wall again
And so
Haul you slowly to strength, to light of day
Until you stand, unpropped, in feeding sunshine,
Lungs aching less as air is accommodated
Dizziness passing, all your strength returning.
Persephone
After a day of rain, towards the evening
Just in time to show before the dark
Drew another sort of curtain over the air,
the rain stopped.
the sky cleared and moved back
And tiny wisps detached and movement began
A distant exchange of paces, high above
High above and far other than our world
The currents, stars, and pathways of the wind.
And at this time appeared on the edge of the field
A group of figures, huddled, in the centre
Pale and slow the one whom they were leading.
And far across the land their coming was felt
As a pathway of light like a finger moved.
Hades
As the rain falls on the earth
As the sky lowers over the dust and soothes the hard-packed clay
As the moist air leaning on it softens it, opens it,
For the tips of the threads from seeds not to be broken,
For the liquor to carry the seed to its nourishing bed,
So my dark covering has made this great fruition.
I send you fertile back into the daylight.
Shut all day was the house, shut against rain
But somewhere beyond this rain the sky is lightening,
And out of the day's ending into the sleeping rooms
Out of this quiet afternoon, through the still house
Matching the unexpected sun on the wood of the stairs,
A sudden blackbird raised his head and sang.
Persephone
So through the days her influence was felt
Creeping from the margin of the wood
Where last the light had died when she had gone.
Is it the shadow on the wall
Is it the paint
Light-shaded on the east side of the house?
The day strengthens like a woman drawing breath
The master-work of sunshine hardens now
In patterns through the pear tree on the fence.
Even when the shadow dies, the upper air
Is tightening to the pitch, and when the haze —; The sighs and exhalations of earth's night —; Is breathed away, the long stop of the held note
Will be released in the sky, and the tympany
Clash into spring.
The flash of the cymbals
Is like the sheen on swaying hair
Tossed in joyful running down the hill;
A thickening and blurring of the twigs on trees
Has opened into lime-and-lemon leaves
Earth-green, water green, gold-green of the old wheat stalk
Persephone's hair in glimpses everywhere
The blur and fuzz of spring.
Rush green, an acid green, almost the green
That gleams on rotting fish; not dark green
From the moss viridian, not emerald
But army green, dung, green of the mud
As it changes into grass and becomes clothed
Gold-green of rushes and water-roots.
Look at a bare field.
Blink, and the splash of sunlight
Is in fact a hidden bud of primrose.
We blink, the sun has dimmed, the tree stands there
But she is about, and likely to appear
In strange flashes, in corners of drab fields
A trickle of leaves, a shadow on a wall —; Dandelion against a garage — and soon oh soon


Hand to soft mouth she will call, from river banks,
From the cold clay clamped round last year's corpses,
From the blank eye of winter's malsain winds,
All her attendants; who will rise at the toll
Of a far bell carried on the sweet south air —; Her accoutrements the gay dense cover of earth.
28
They had at last somehow got together in bed in a house momentarily empty of other people, neither of them expected (momentarily) elsewhere.
They were old friends whose support of each other over the years in the trials and tribulations of love affairs, marriages, jobs, lonelinesses, had become far more important to each than any possible physical flutter.
All that turbulence went on elsewhere for each and this third circle linking two others was its own territory.
It was an open and strong relationship.
Each liked and was comfortable with the other's spouse.
The family life of each was satisfactory.
It was like brother and sister, with a tinge added, and more courteous.
And at once they had to acknowledge what probably they had known but not wished to push before the other — that physical flutter had been their bond, certainly at first, though by now there were other more convenient linkages; for they found each other very beautiful, very desirable.
They had had a pleasant walk and an easy supper.
It was relaxing for each not to have to strain for approval in the parade of love.
The early evening had been fine and then it darkened over with thundercloud and got warmer.
The house was hot when they got back into it and they walked around with nothing on in the dark rooms with windows and doors open.
‘It is like summer,’ she said, ‘being able to leave everything 
But they could not make love.
The darker skin of his thin muscled slightly furry thigh lay hard and firm on the pearly white sheen of the round of her hip, and his desire was stronger than before, but his cock was nowhere.
He eased her as he could.
‘Perhaps I shouldn't have talked about Margaret,’ she said, trying to comfort him.
‘What beautiful legs you've got,’ as he stood up to dress.
‘Well,’ he kissed her goodbye, ‘I will take my beautiful legs and my useless member away and let you sleep.’
They both knew that nothing between them was diminished, their affection could stand the disappointment of their hoped-for treat.
Greedy children,.
safely back on ordinary fare.
She slept as the wind got up and he drove with leaves whirled against his windscreen.
Suddenly she was wide awake.
There was a lot of commotion.
Something was happening.
It was raining.
It was raining in gushes, sweet soft noisy rain over all the gardens and dusty earth, sluicing the stained pavements, dampening crusty brittle walls, running down the windows.
All the gutters were full and busy, everything in the night active with the rain.
To her ears the pattering and shshing of the water gurgling in drains sounded like a sort of singing every now and then, an aural counterpart to her inward calling his name, calling him to her.
At one point nearing home in the very dark country lane overhung with soughing branches, he thought there was a tree down across the way.
It was an illusion of tired eyes, but before he got back in the car he stood, his collar open, looking up at the sky where there was nothing to see but black, and let the water splash down on his open face, his wet shirt clinging to the skin of his chest and belly.
And she felt, though comfortable in bed, as if she were standing with the rain sluicing all over her, streaming soothing over her breasts and down her thighs, warm and comforting and she hoped that he was not in difficulties on the road and that he was thinking about the rain.
It would be a fine day tomorrow, she knew.
And after that miraculous drenching, she really did sleep.
Demeter
Demeter travelled swiftly to meet her daughter
And everywhere she stepped, after she'd gone
Little stars of flowers began to grow.
Passing she looked at the flanks of the fields with interest
And as her eyes moved on, a yellow-green haze
Disturbed the hard line of the smooth brown surface,
Soft down on a young chin, imperceptible
Except to those that love them.
Persephone
See, the earth is garlanded for you —; The brown bare outlines thickened and gone vague,
Gaps filled up with fronds; and little shoots
Exploring over ditches twine around
All spare pared dead wood they can clamber on
Venturing forth as all things do this season.
The tendril of the vine waves in the morning
To greet the sun and as the light looks over
Earth's edge, sparkling the grass, the sappy stems
Show all their workings, vulnerable, pale, pellucid.
The earth is garlanded and wine jugs cooling
Everything swept and everything decked for welcome
Open doors, open arms, open faces, eyes raised, eyes looking,
Young men in clean shirts, laughing; laughing in doorways
Waiting for something to ride to; waiting, expecting
Ready for your return.
You see this rain
Slanting out of a copper sky
Falling from the middle of the air
Not higher than the trees or buildings
Immense light still bright behind the edges
And the woman in a sunhat running out to save the washing,
And you hear it, how it soothes with its gentle patter
The crinkled earth:
Big soft drops you can separately hear, splashing;
A black rag flaps across the corner of the eye —; Blackbird homing from green —; And this rain is trickling down gulleys, into the splits
Of hard old tracks, stamped hard with sorrowing feet
Cracking with weariness and desiccation.
And if a seed, pushed by the winter wind
And rotted as a useless wisp of hay
Is licked into the light and rained upon
There stands your wheat.
Rain, you are loosening something in my bones
Soft fingers draw back coverings in my head.
Something undoes with a little lurch, rose
Of blood opening in the body
Body that pumps these rivers of the world —; Torrents of love to make the grass grow,
Persephone's moist breath in the rising corn.
I hope no one is miserable on this day.
the sun sparkles and the fresh earth tingles
And the air wafts in great gulps of fragrant verdure.
the dance of the motes at midday is like stringed music
Vibrant and perky, gay and sweet to the ear.
It falls and it lifts and it lilts and is never still
But runs on with just rhythm and clear notes, and as counterpart
the brooklet over stones
So cleaned, so rounded, runs on with it too.
High above the sea a speck hovers,
And far below the creaming dash of water —; So far, it looks like lace lazing around
Rocks that, this high, lose their jaggedness.
So high you do not hear the crash, only the wind
Sighing in thrift and grasses that lean out
Against the sky.
And as the buzzard travels, and the lark lifts
Higher and higher its eternal bubble
Of piercing sound that never breaks, until
the sky is one blue
Except for dancing points when you stare up,
Whose heart does not leap and travel as far,
And who has not felt the strength that love of the world
Would give to one who leapt out into its air?
And could we shout with the lark or crash with the sea
Who would not shout across the bulks of the hills
And up the inland valleys clothed and quiet
That she has come back into our world again:
Fruitbearer, bringing riches, Persephone.
I hope no one is miserable on her day.
Persephone
Come into the fields, wife
Now that the night has fallen;.
Let us look at the stalks
And see if they soon will be ready,
Ready for the grain in the flower
The gift of the Goddess, nestling.
The stars I shoot into you
That burst and fall in your rivers
Will float in a shower on the land
And the flower will burst on the stem.
Demeter
‘Demeter, see, the corn at last is sprouting
And the old ewe that three times has miscarried
Delivered of a healthy lamb last night.
Demeter, praise be, this benison is yours
Demeter, life renewer, great Goddess.’
‘The valley is beautiful: Persephone makes it so
Your fruit will set, but only by her doing.
The liquors and the fibres of my body
Can only be revivified by hers.
Her comely flesh and growing bones it is
Conveying health to your stock and to your seed.
The firstling, the milk teeth, the forming corn
Are hers.
And when she has gathered all her tribute
She brings it to me, and from this comes my strength.
The spring and its doings are hers.
But she is mine.
See in the milky kernel of the wheat grain
Her shining teeth
In the sheathed silky bud of the white hedge rose
Her firm and tender little pointed breasts
Tight holding their hard fruit
And like a twisty flower where insects seek honey


Are the convolutes of her ears
Whose drum of skin receives the breezes’ whisper
As shells do the sea's murmur.’
O tiger, O leaping animal
Skin that the sun reverberates on,
Green lancing sticks whirling the air that lies
Bright white about your points
O repetition
Of birds for the first time ever heard,
Persephone out of the house of darkness:
Sun, voices, spring.
29
Thank you, Mr Chairman, for that most generous introduction.
It made me a little uneasy.
I looked around for this other speaker, this eminent historian who had been right in the middle of the action, this acute analyst who assembled with such thoroughness the material I too had worked on, who had packed it into enlightening and readable volumes.
And then I realised it was meant to be me.
But I come here to address you, in all humility, because I am very interested in the subject of your conference; and with the vanity of an old man I would like to take part, not as an outsider addressing budding scientists — a bit of ‘general studies’ thrown in for relaxation between the serious business — but as a fellow enquirer into the workings of the brain.
I see from the programme, that you have ahead of you Professor Dorrf's report of current work at Bell, also presentation of material on recordal systems, and many other gifts straight from the horses' mouths.
I would not, if I could, trespass on these pastures.
But the brain and questions of its function, and the part ‘memory’(and I put it in quotes) or rather, a consideration of memory, can play in furthering our understanding of this function, belongs of course to everyone as a human being, from the stupidest person who cannot read or write to the top people in biochemical research.
So my talk is going to be a personal one.
I see that the title is down as Historical Memory, but I would prefer to call it, if it must have a title, Memory of History.
The tricks the memory plays can be extremely annoying.
As an historian I know how valuable a commodity — and I mean valuable in terms of hard cash — it ought to be in these days when the whole of life, our own present as well as the past, seems to reach us pre-packaged in the form of interviews and telly-probe.
But I am thinking back to the days before the war — the ‘39–45 war in Europe, that is — when a reporter was actually expected to know the place he was writing about.
I was in Europe for those crucial years — the Mediterranean, the Balkans, and then of course the Polish Corridor, Berlin.
And I was there again, briefly, as the war drew to its close.
I knew what was going on, all right.
I wasn't stupid and nor was the highly efficient organisation whose representative in Europe I was.
But in those rare flashes when one can shed the present self and all it is in command of I realise that there were really only two occasions when I did personally feel the times on my pulse in such a way that I remember them, and not what I have since reconstructed of them.
It is those two occasions I am going to tell you about.
Here I think I am probably going to disappoint you.
It was not, alas, I who had been inadvertently left alone for two minutes in an antechamber where by chance lay the plan of the Althaus plumbing system — to prove, as so much that is missing does, the crucial piece of evidence when, later, people were trying to fit together the events that fired the conflagration of the civilised world.
Nor was I the innocent bystander taking his lunchtime beer in his local, to whom Shmekov slipped the information, two hours before the police grabbed him, that altered the Alliance's whole strategy towards the opposing’ powers in the Southern Apex.
I am going to tell you of two glimpses that have retained their clarity for me over the years while important and famous things have faded.
Both were on railway stations, the first in a town in Eastern Germany.
I was drawn, by the figure of a woman looking at it, to a child's face at the window of a train that was beginning to move.
The little girl seemed to be with a group, the carriage was dense with bulky figures, and I had the impression someone was trying to get her away from the window.
She seemed to cling to the surface of the glass with her poor little face.
It was quite white and her eyes, two great black lamps, fixed on the woman.
The child's face moved not a muscle.
The mouth was shut.
The woman was very tall and straight.
She was wrapped from head to foot in an old-fashioned opera cloak, of blue velvet.
It was autumn and the air was beginning to nip.
She struck me as prosperous and gave the impression of being a celebrity — an actress or a singer I supposed.
Suddenly she flung out her hands towards the window and her face up so that the hood fell back from her head and the cloak streamed behind, held only by a brooch at her throat.
A mass of thick brown hair tumbled down.
‘Klara,’ she  screamed, ‘Klara, wink mir doch zu, mein Kind, wink mir doch zu (wave to me, my child, only wave).’
The child's face remained frozen at the window and was slowly carried sideways down the wooden platform.
Then the carriage came to a curve in the track and the window could be seen no more.
The other memory is of a suburban station in the South of England.
It was spring and the war in Europe was drawing to a close.
I was travelling up from the English coast on my way to London to arrange the final leg of my journey home.
I had originally crossed the Atlantic thinking I would be away a few months, but the brief tour had stretched into years.
The only other person in the carriage was a young woman.
Few people travelled at that time who didn't have to.
She had pale hair pulled back severely, and a black beret.
Her coat, old and worn but once good, was also black.
She was very thin and sat quite still in a corner.
She looked out of the window but hardly seemed to register what she saw.
She shuddered every now and then and pulled the coat lapel across her neck, although it seemed to me quite a warm day.
The train was slow and stopped several times for no reason we knew of and with no apparent likelihood of continuing.
I offered her a cigarette and a drink of coffee from a flask I had.
You young people have no idea what it was like for people in Europe then to be offered a cigarette or a piece of chocolate or something like real coffee.
She looked at these objects in my hands for some time and then raised her eyes to my face.
As she did so the sunlight that was splashing through the trees along the track, caught that part of her hair that was not covered and, ill as she obviously was, it shone like pale gold, as if it was a source not reflection, of light.
From my experiences in the Occupied Countries I could tell she was starved.
Very haltingly she began to respond to my conversation.
She had been caught in the South of France at the outbreak of war.
She had been visiting relatives there.
She had worked for the Underground movement, involved in forging passports and papers for people trying to escape across the Channel; had been discovered but saved from death by a German, who had raped her and kept her as his own prisoner.
Finally, he had to hide her in a cellar.
Her life had become inextricably involved with him.
She had grown to womanhood through him.
He was the only man she had ever known and now the only human being she saw.
The last few months she didn't  me and fed me when he could, and cared for me.
He had had an English half-sister, much older than him.
He said I reminded him of her.
Of course he had to leave when they retreated.’
She had stayed in the cellar for what she thought was about three days and then realised that she hadn't felt the vibration of gunfire for some time, perhaps a day and a night.
She decided to risk going out; she would soon be too weak to move.
She expected to be shot the instant she emerged.
But there was no one there.
She walked through miles of deserted rubble and there wasn't a soul.
She thought the strange light must be due to her dizziness but then she realised it was spring and the sun was shining.
Later she worked out that she had been kept underground for four months.
Luckily she had walked, or tottered, in the right direction, and after days which she could no longer recall, sleeping in barns and eating raw eggs when she could find them, she woke up in a Red Cross Hospital.
These clothes she had on had once belonged to some Duchess, she said.
She had shared a blanket with her in a cave in the Marais.
She laughed, and it was the laugh still of a young girl.
‘You meet all sorts in the Underground, you know.’
The Duchess had been shot at the time she herself was captured.
I felt she wore these dark garments in some sense to keep the spirit of her friend alive.
She was now at last returning home.
Her mother had been informed and would probably be at the station.
She lapsed into a deep silence which I did not try to disturb.
The effort of talking after those months in silence and darkness must have taken the little strength she had.
She was obviously delighted with all the green of the fields and copses of Kent, the railway banks seemed to be opening in flower under our very eyes as the train went through the sunshine.
The twigs on the brakes were all beaded and bulging as with countless white droplets but it was not frost or rain but the swelling of buds.
Our carriage was at the front of the train so that when she got out she was right at the end of the platform beyond the canopy with its wooden fretwork coping, in the middle of fields.
You have to imagine something very bare.
There were no notices, no signs, nothing that could indicate where he was to a traveller, so that the clean worn wood of the country platform and the solid unadorned brick of the little building seemed very much a part of the wooded  slope at the back of it.
This was one of the places where the train seemed to feel no reason for going on.
The driver got down from the cab and walked slowly down the platform and disappeared through a solid wooden door.
It was very quiet and the noises from the wood became distinguishable, as if the wood itself had suddenly moved down nearer the track.
There had been little birdsong in the devastated places I had come from and I think it was the striking on my ear of the calling of a blackbird, so meaningful somehow as it sounded out clearly from the delicious chatter in those trees that made me feel the war was over.
I looked at a block of sun on the platform where the light came through some missing roofing.
I listened to the birds singing and watched a curl of grey-blue smoke rising into the sky from the station's brick chimney, and winter and the war seemed unbelievable.
This place must have stood here like this for all those years, and I imagined it retaining always this season, a pocket of perpetual spring — almost a source of spring from which the frozen bare earth in other places could be revivified, as those old maps depict in each corner a Wind holding in his bursting cheeks the force of the wind everywhere.
Of course it only gradually came to mean all this to me through the succeeding years, through my memory of it.
At the time I was worn out, still reacting no doubt from living for years on end in fear and dread.
I just sat, looking at the lovely day, glad the train was in no hurry.
The girl moved a few slow paces down the empty platform — she had asked me not to get out and help her — and then she stopped.
Her straight little black-clothed back looked very distinct and lonely in all that green and blue and sunlight.
I followed her gaze down the long empty platform and there at the other end stood a tall figure.
There was no one else.
It seemed a long moment while they remained thus immobile and then the young woman put her head and shoulders down and rushed like an eight-year-old, knees doubling up and arms pounding.
At the same time the woman moved, incredibly quickly —; she seemed to glide quite upright, and they met just beyond the platform roof in the sunlight.
As the girl tilted her face up to her tall mother her hat fell off and, the mother's fingers clasping the head, the hair came loose and fell down the black coat like a cascade of shining water, as soft-looking as a swathe of new mown grass.
Now you will forgive an old man for indulging in his memories.
Your chairman was kind enough — before he let me loose on this most patient audience — to say that my attitude, for an historian, was very unhistorical and I took it that that was meant as praise.
Some of my former colleagues would agree that my recent work is unhistorical but on the contrary condemn it for this — or rather they would condemn it did they not resort to the easier course of dismissing it as the gutterings of a senile mind.
But I think that in this company I can dare to make a few observations without being thought altogether gaga.
Perhaps this is where eighteen and eighty are in accord — for at eighty it is more important to be interesting, whereas no doubt at sixty it is necessary to be right.
Now, what I want to say before we partake of some refreshment is this.
It may seem sentimental to wish to see in this return of the young woman to her mother, in a spring in England half a life-time ago, the restoration to her agonized parent of that child snatched in a darker place, a darker time.
This is the fabrication of fiction, you will say.
Of course our historical mind forbids this comfort.
Whatever lucky chances there were and miraculous escapes, all through history there have been  despoliations , deprivations, tearings asunder, deaths and devastations, and among those to whom nothing is restored must be people around us, people we see.
But memory, you see, is not just a recorder, it is a pattern-maker.
You are all familiar with the theories that pattern-making is not a characteristic of the brain but is the way it works, its very nature.
This is certainly so of memory and it is so of art.
So I would like to leave you with this suggestion that art, better than a scientifically-constructed computer, is a useful analogy for the brain, and that the more that can be found out about the workings of memory, the more usefully shall we be able to understand the links between them.
30
The scene is laid first in the Leewood Arms, a pub with a garden in an unspecified part of W.11 in London, and later in Pete and Ellie's flat one block away from the former pad of the Leewood Road (Demolition Protest) Commune.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE:
Pete and Ellie, members of the commune now living together as a couple.
John, a visitor from the past
Pete is a bony Londoner with a sallow but healthy skin and clean floppy fair hair, Ellie an attractive girl in her early twenties, her light greenish hazel almond-shaped eyes showing her to be of mixed blood.
John, an older man, reveals his unease by his rather fast speech punctuated by a high-pitched too-frequent laugh.
SCENE 1: In the Leewood Arms.
John speaks first.
JOHN.
No Ellie?
PETE.
She said she hopes to see you later, round at the flat.
JOHN.
Party?
PETE.
No, but she wants me to bring you back for a meal.
She said she'd get on with the cooking better if I came down here on my own.
JOHN.
Ellie cooking?
What's happened, man?
I've never known Ellie  voluntairily stop home to cook when all of us been sitting around in the boozer chewin' the fat.
What you done to her, Pete man?
Chained her up?
Why, don't you remember that 'casion in the Compasses when Ellie —;
PETE.
I do remember.
No, well, listen John.
I couldn't really tell you much on the phone, and anyway we can talk now.
It's not that  she wouldn't have liked to come, but we've got a baby now.
A live one this time.
JOHN.
Gee, that's great, man, great.
Great-great-great.
But she could've brought it.
I see plenty of females has their little bubbies wiz 'em.
See round.
That's what the Garden's for.
PETE.
She'd rather not.
She says the smoke in the pub's not good for it.
JOHN.
Smoke?
You given up smoking then?
PETE.
(Sliding back momentarily into their old way of talking to put John at ease.)
No, man, course not.
But we don't, like, smoke, like, where the baby sleeps.
Anyway, like I said, she wants to make you some food, man.
JOHN.
Well, I don't know 'bout that.
I wouldn't want to put Ellie out.
Why don't you and me go some place, see who's out and about down the Grove?
Don't worry, man.
I got dough.
Let's go and rouse a little action, huh?
See who's home.
Get it together, huh?
PETE.
I don't think you'd find many of the old lot.
Most of them have moved off since they broke the squat.
JOHN.
Joe?
PETE.
Joe went back to Ireland.
His mother's got a place there.
Ben got busted so Pru took the kids to Glasgow to live with her Mum.
I saw her once or twice since, before the Coconut closed, but not for ages now.
Hein — you knew he was a qualified dentist?
He said he only needed to do two or three locums at these school clinics to see him round the other half of the world and he went off.
You heard about Anna.
JOHN.
No.
PETE.
No?
Oh.
(Pete goes to the bar to get more drinks.
It is noticeable that John does not.)
Long pause.
JOHN.
Thanks, pal.
Well.
PETE.
Well.
Well, there was an accident.
Nobody really knew  what happened.
You know how rotten that house was.
Apparently someone had taken a piece of wood for the fire.
It seems the piece they took was holding up a window sash.
Anna had been mixing it, and she felt sick, so she went to put her head out of the window.
The whole frame gave and part of the wall crashed down as well.
It was after that we got moved.
JOHN.
Sad, man, sad.
Sad-sad-sad.
You want a draw?
(John draws deeply on his joint and seems to be gathering his strength for an onslaught.
He takes a breath and then:) those lousy beaks. those lackeys.
Breaking up life, killing innocent people, that's what they do.
All the time I was away what kept me going was thinking of you here, a real live community, people really living, people really loving.
We created something here, something live and good and untrammelled by the rigor mortis of this dying, stinking society clinging with its preying claws so hard to its privileges because it knows it's dying, only it wants to kill everything else too, only able to say thou Shalt Not because it's envious, because it's cold and impotent — they only have to sniff a little bit of genius, of freedom, of life, and they're on to it with the, lackey hounds tearing it up, and for why?
(As his speech progresses the Amero-West Indian is dropped and a Scottish hectoring sharpness enters the vowels and consonants.)
Because they're frightened we will reveal their rottenness to the people, they're frightened that we will reveal the truth to the people, and once the truth is revealed to the people they won't be able to cow them and keep them from making a free society, a society of human beings.
Killjoys.
Robbers.
PETE.
John, I'm not a public meeting.
JOHN.
(More natural.)
But you know I'm right.
You agreed with me.
What's happened to you?
It was through me you read Fanon.
It was me put you all on to the Om prayer.
It was me who warned you of the Fascist element infiltrating at Danino's.
You were all political innocents, a dupe for the Pigs and the Pigs' masters before I joined you.
It was me who gave those Scottish kids, hounded by the bourgeois religious repression of their homes, a shelter from the hounds of persecution.
PETE.
Those Scottish boys are in detention.
JOHN.
There you are.
On your own you couldn't even protect innocent children left in your care from the Fascist thugs.
The Pig police take innocent children and let the real criminals, sitting in Westminster, sitting in board rooms, go free.
PETE.
Five of those innocent children knocked down an old woman of 79.
When she was found they reckoned she'd been lying there for three hours.
They could not get the strap she was clinging to out of her hand.
Presumably it had once been attached to her bag.
One of the boys said later there had only been a tin of cat food and a bus pass and an old purse with a pound and a key in it anyway, and that they wouldn't have had to hit her if she hadn't clung so hard to her handbag.
They threw it away.
She was hardly a capitalist.
JOHN.
Unfortunately the innocents get hurt, never the criminals behind the scenes.
Revolution is built on the sacrifice of the innocents.
PETE.
(Remorselessly.)
Before they left the house the boys also urinated all over the murals of Kamala and the Wheel you painted in the top room and smashed the player Ron had built, slashing the recorder with a knife.
JOHN.
Oh.
PETE.
(Gentle.)
John, we were so pleased when you rang, man.
Ellie wants to see you.
Please come home and we'll have the meal she's doing and if you've nowhere to go you're very welcome to stay.
Things have changed, as you see, but we haven't joined the ranks of the bourgeoisie exactly.
We make do with the dole and Ellie's going in with a friend who's just started a café which'll help with the food.
Ellie's seen her Mum once or twice.
She's been very good.
She sent clothes for the baby.
But we haven't changed our way of thinking.
JOHN.
(Very nasty.)
Well, well, well.
Who'd've thought little Pete and Ellie would be turn-coats.
Little Pete and Ellie who used to hang on the very words of Uncle John.
We may have been poor and ignorant in Glasgow but ratting on our friends was something we left to the narks, the narks and the prosperous classes.
And there were friends in those days.
(The switch to the Scottish accent  is sudden.)
Not just each of for himsel' and the devil tak the hin'most.
Low and poor as we were we knew the value of brotherhood.
There was very little else we did have in those days.
Och, weil.
That's this  rrotten worrld I suppose.
PETE.
We haven't ratted on our friends.
I've just said, you're welcome to stay.
JOHN.
If I've nowhere to go.
Well, maybe I have and maybe I haven't.
That's no slur when there's thousands homeless through the crimes of the property dealers.
Now that the little spot of reality I'd made in this mean city has been so lightly abandoned by those I'd thought it would be safe with — but you won't catch me compromising with the lackeys.
You know perfectly well that under the present system someone who sticks to his principles and speaks out against injustice isn't going to get a job or a council flat.
PETE.
You seem to forget it was you who left the Road not us, John.
JOHN.
(Shifting.)
Well, I'd heard someone had told the police where I was hanging out.
PETE.
The police knew we were there.
It was an open squat.
JOHN.
Yes, well, when one has spoken out for freedom against dictatorship there are other people gunning for one.
They don't forget so easily where I come from.
The forces of oppression in Glasgow had their eyes even on schoolchildren then.
PETE.
The police didn't say it was for public speaking.
JOHN.
They came?
What did they say?
Who squealed to them?
PETE.
When did we ever take any notice of what the fuzz said?
Come on, John.
I said to Ellie I'd be back, with you in tow, by 8.
It's nearly 9 now.
Let's go.
SCENE 2: Pete and Ellie's flat.
Ellie comes to the door.
She has a clean apron round her neat waist and her hair smoothed back.
She holds out both her hands to John.
ELLIE.
Come on in.
Jo-ohn!
JOHN.
E-ellie!
You're looking great, just great.
ELLIE.
It's great to see you, John.
(She brings in the food.)
Sit down.
Grab a spoon.
I'm starving.
I thought you'd spirited Pete off somewhere.
JOHN.
(Eating hungrily.)
This's good, man.
Vair good.
(After some minutes.)
My, that was good, man.
Best meal I've had in weeks.
ELLIE.
Have some more.
JOHN.
Well, just a wee scoopfu' mebbee.
Later.
PETE.
Ellie, go slow with that booze.
ELLIE.
I'm all right.
I waited an hour for you to come, and, from the look of it, I've got quite a bit to catch up on.
I'm tired you know, Pete.
I'm entitled to a drink.
The place doesn't get cleaned up and Jonquil put to sleep and a meal ready just by sitting on your arse in a pub.
PETE.
I do know, Ellie.
But take it easy all the same.
JOHN.
You've got it real nice, here, real nice, I must say.
Matches?
Ta.
You going to join me or you passed up that too?
ELLIE.
Here, give.
PETE.
Ellie.
ELLIE.
Oh stow it, Pete.
JOHN.
(As he gets drunker he gets nastier.)
Yes, real nice, haven't you?
I see they didn't smash up your discs and equipment Pete.
Amazing what influence can do.
You've really got what it takes — or sumpin' like that.
What you tell the fuzz to get them to leave you alone?
ELLIE.
What do you mean?
PETE.
Here, Ellie.
Have a drag.
ELLIE.
I want to know what he means by that remark.
JOHN.
Anything more in that bottle?
PETE.
I'm afraid not, John.
ELLIE.
And it s not much good keeking in the kitchen.
There's only dirty pans there.
PETE.
Ellie!
Don't!
John goes into the kitchen.
ELLIE.
Well, you know what he's like, always on the cadge.
He could've brought something.
PETE.
I wouldn't have wanted him to.
ELLIE.
Pete, where's he really from?
He's changed his accent again.
PETE.
(Relieved at her friendliness he hugs her.)
Oh Ellie, love you.
His rather was English and his mother Scottish.
They went to live in Glasgow when he was three and his father, who was a solicitor, got taken into his father-in-law's firm and became a partner when the old man got past it.
He said his mother died when he was away at school in the South of England when he was ten.
ELLIE.
Oh, poor old John.
PETE.
Sh.
Don't let on you know any of that.
(To John.)
Find anything?
JOHN.
Tell you what, you dear folks.
I'll go and get a bottle of something down the road.
ELLIE.
No really, don't do that.
We don't want any more, do we Pete?
PETE.
Oh I don't know.
If you feel like it John, that'd be nice.
(Aside to Ellie.)
Let him, Ellie, let him.
A breath of air might help.
Later.
PETE.
Whisky!
John — you shouldn't have.
JOHN.
I thought Ellie here needed a little pepping up.
It's so quiet here, I suppose you usually go beddy-byes at 10 and Pete does the washing up while little wifey puts her feet up.
Cheers, Ellie, you've quite domesticated him.
ELLIE.
Yes, Pete did do the washing up while you were out — we wouldn't have expected you to do it.
And, unlike you, John, we're not married.
JOHN.
Me, murrid?
ELLIE.
Well, she said she was your wife, the woman who came to the squat, and that since the payments for the children had stopped she was —;
JOHN.
Ah the bitches, the bloody bourgeois bitches, once they get their claws into a man and draw blood they nae mair let go, ye ken.
I suppose the Pigs put her on to me.
ELLIE.
No, the Pigs were on to something about some holiday fund that disappeared — some scheme for sending kids in Homes on a holiday that people in a pub had contributed to — fraud, they called it.
I suppose you'd call it ‘Glorious theft for the sake of the Revolution’.
JOHN.
You're all the same, you women; that bitch was nae mair ma wif than —
ELLIE.
Have you ever seen a dead baby, John?
PETE.
Ellie, please.
What on earth has that got to do with it?
Why bring it up now?
You shouldn't drink whisky.
You're tired.
ELLIE.
I fucking am tired.
Anyway, I'm asking John, not you.
Have you?
JOHN.
Why, ye ken in the tenements of Glasgow every mither had watched one or two, or mebbee three of her bairns die.
The infant mortality rate in 1936 in Glasgow in that part of the city was ⅗ of the births.
ELLIE.
And where were you born, John?
JOHN.
Me, why?
I don't see what you're driving at.
What's that got to do wi' it?
ELLIE.
Don't you know?
PETE.
Ellie!
JOHN.
Yes of course I know.
I was born in a place called Denham.
ELLIE.
In Scotland?
JOHN.
In Buckinghamshire.
But my mother was a Scot and it was true of the Glasgow of her time.
ELLIE.
So you've never seen a baby die?
JOHN.
No.
ELLIE.
No, I thought not.
PETE.
There's no merit in it you know, Ellie.
ELLIE.
I know that, Pete.
God I'm not claiming merit.
If anyone knows about lack of merit it's me.
But if he hasn't seen that he can't go round preaching to other people about their morals.
Excuse me.
(She tries to get past them.)
JOHN.
Now, now Ellie man, calm down.
I'm sorry if I've upset you.
Here, have a swig of this.
(She pushes the bottle away.
He is so alarmed he gets his accents muddled.)
I tek your pint.
I quite tek yer point.
I know you had a terrible time and the last thing I meant to do was to upset you.
I've a great admiration for you, you know Ellie, a great admiration.
(She leaves the room.)
I'd best be going Pete.
PETE.
You won't stay?
She'll calm down soon.
She's tired and she's not used to whisky now.
JOHN.
No, no, I'll be going.
Thanks for the offer…
I wouldn't exactly fit in here I can see.
PETE.
Take what's left of the whisky then.
JOHN.
Yes, ta.
Say goodbye to Ellie for me and thanks for the food.
PETE.
She'll be back in a minute.
JOHN.
I won't stop now.
But Pete, I may be a bit of a shit mysel' and not exactly a paragon of virtues, and mebbee I'm not what I made people think I was, but that doesn't mean that it isn't true —; the greed of the bourgeoisie, the oppression, the need to show it up for what it is.
You know that.
You see how easily these people win.
But that's the trouble with women, their thinking's never separate from what they feel in their belly.
That's why I had to  leave, man, that's why I had to get free.
No ideas, only feelings.
The minute a bitch has that burden in her belly, bang goes your chance of pure thought, of civilisation.
But I wouldn't have thought it of Ellie.
PETE.
You wouldn't get much of a civilisation without it, though.
Ellie returns.
JOHN.
Ah Ellie.
I'm off now.
Thank you for the meal.
I'm sorry if I was offensive.
It was a bit of a shock, you see, coming back and finding everyone had moved out, the happiest time of your life just a pile of rubble.
ELLIE.
Would you like to see the baby on the way out?
She won't wake if you're quiet.
PETE.
As long as you don't breathe near her.
ELLIE.
Oh Pete, I'm not that fussy am I?
She's quite strong now.
JOHN.
How old's the wee bairn?
ELLIE.
She's four months.
The three grown people stand looking down on the sleeping infant whose soft breathing seems to have spread the tawny bloom over its ivory skin.
It sleeps on, oblivious of everything but the source of life within it that is strengthening it daily.
They kiss and John departs.
CURTAIN 
31
She had gone to bed early thinking of the luxury of a long night's rest but woke from sleep unwell.
It was more a feeling of alarm than pain.
It wasn't like any other sickening or illness she had known.
She thought separately of her head, her chest, her shoulders and arms, her belly, her thighs.
There was no pain and yet there seemed something the matter with each part.
There was something wrong everywhere.
It was as if the blood had been drained from her, leaving no strength, but it wasn't a peaceful emptiness.
Something definitely was going wrong, as if life was draining out secretly through her body and all the parts, empty of blood and strength now, were being gradually drawn down, away from their station and function.
She was deadly weary but could not rest.
She was too frightened to rest though she kept still.
She was very frightened and felt she was dying, irreversibly something was happening, there was a sort of imminence but she could not pinpoint it.
There was just this immense dread in her chest and belly.
She felt very cold.
She got up carefully.
Her head was dull but not unbearable.
She was a bit shaky but she got the children's breakfast and cleared up Bob's.
He had gone early because he was going on a surveying job.
It wasn't a warm day though it was meant to be spring, and she felt colder thinking of him standing about in the mud of a building site.
He later told her he began to feel unwell at about 8 and at 10 doubled over with what he thought was a stitch.
He knew it was 10 because the brickies had gone for their breakfast and he smelt bacon.
She lay down after she'd got the children to school.
Nothing had gone wrong with the first two pregnancies.
Perhaps this was just a new form of indigestion.
Indigestion made you feel funny things.
The sickness lightened a little and her spirits rose, but when she got up she felt sticky warmth between her thighs.
She put her finger to the soaked nylon mesh.
It was blood trickling down her leg.
She managed to ring her doctor but felt there was little point as she was convinced she had lost the baby.
They put a red blanket over her in the ambulance and it was soft to her touch but then the pain did come, up in the wall of her back as if something was being pulled away like the backing from sticking plaster.
She was very aware of her dirty jacket smelling of cooking, her blood-soaked trousers and her uncleaned shoes.
She woke up some hours later and everything was clean and white and she was clean and was lying in a fresh cotton garment between stiff sheets.
She supposed she had lost the baby but she herself felt reasonably comfortable apart from a plastic pipe stuck into the back of her hand which was sore and meant she couldn't move.
She did not put her other hand down to feel her body.
She didn't want to come against the flat slack flesh.
She did not ring for a nurse because she didn't want to have to seem cheerful and she remembered from the two births of her live children, which had gone well, that this was a rule in hospitals.
However, one came in soon and asked her how she felt.
‘Not too bad,’ she said.
‘How long will I have to have that?’
‘Not long, luv.
We're just putting back some of the blood you lost.
You're certainly looking a lot better than when they brought you in.
You're a lucky girl, you know.
‘Am I?’ she said.
‘I suppose so.’
Did the nurse mean that she had nearly died herself?
‘Come on, cheer up.
We can't have you down in the dumps like this.
That wouldn't be good for the baby, would it?
If we hadn't got you up here pretty quick you could've lost it, you know.’
‘You mean, I didn't lose the baby?
The baby's still there?’
Her right hand shot down to feel her bulge and she cried out with the pain of the needle pulling.
and then laughed at what she'd done.
The nurse came to the bed to fix it and as she bent her head down the woman threw her left hand round the warm brown neck and pulled it to her.
‘Oh, thank you, thank you,’ she said as the tears rushed down her face into the nurse's hair.
32
It was not only because he wanted no extra work that the husband had tried to persuade his wife she had enough on her plate without insisting on a birthday party for their four-year-old.
‘It's too much for you Ciss; you know the baby will need feeding in the middle of it and he'll get all upset and really Jo-Jo would be quite happy if you just filled the bread bin with sponge fingers and sat her in front of it.
A party at that age is ridiculous.’
‘Just because the children are easy to please, why shouldn't I make a bit of effort?
It's as much for the older children as for Jo-Jo.
Being unsociable can be very catching.
I don't want them growing up like the Hales.
I must say, they are a gloomy lot, aren't they?
Now, if you could just pop down to Paine's and get three or four bottles of orange squash, that would save me tomorrow.
they'll still be open.’
When he came back she had cleared away the supper things and was pressing out biscuit fish with her eldest child's toy cooking set.
As they put the presents at the bottom of the sleeping child's bed she said anxiously: ‘Are you sure you think the umbrella's a good idea?
It might be a danger.’
‘No, of course not.
She'll love it.
She won't be able to get it up on her own anyway.
She'll just have it when she goes out with you.
The four healthy children lay sound asleep, their breaths coming and going almost visibly in the light from the street lamp that came through the flowered cotton curtains.
It was a warm night and Jo-Jo, wakeful and excited earlier, had kicked the bedclothes off with her feet, and one leg had slid over the edge of the bed until her toes touched the floor.
The baby had just begun sleeping all through the night so had joined his siblings.
‘What a  nestful .
Don't they smell nice?
Come on, Ciss.
You must get some sleep.’
‘Only because they've been bathed.’
She left the room reluctantly.
They sank immediately into deep sleep.
Four hours later, before it was yet light, the wife heard a  movement from the children's room.
The baby wasn't crying.
She heard stealthy steps.
As the door to the parents' room opened, she held her breath.
She was so tired these days she was prone to strange fears.
Their bed had a wooden footboard and she saw a flicker of movement behind it in the half-light.
It was a peculiar bobbing movement travelling irregularly along the top of the board.
As this thing got near the end obviously making for her side, away from the door, she realised what the round blob was —; it was the nub of the umbrella they had bought their daughter.
She came round the corner, this tiny thing who did not reach to the top of the bed board even with the extension of the umbrella.
She came along sedately in the middle of the night in complete confidence, the umbrella raised and perfect, with a look of absolute bliss on her face to show her mother what she had got for a present.
Demeter
And so Demeter in the lengthening days,
Demeter and her daughter
Went through the land; and even far in the hills,
Mewed in town alleys, or closed in wooded cliffs
Men felt their passing, and tired heads lifted up,
A sniff in the air, a gleam of sky, a lightening
A strengthening in their fibre, and back to work
They urged now, opening barns, turning mould
Urging and expecting, looking up
Unscrewing windows, lifting shutters, lingering
To see which way the wind blew, looking
Outward, seeing the world;
And all to do, and wanting to.
Coats  loosened , straight standing, welcoming the time:
Hoping, expecting, never mind for what —; Just busy in it.


Demeter and her daughter covered the land
Steadily without hurry, all complete
Staying sometimes in places where the mother
Had rested in her sorrow, and their people
Found themselves rewarded, and the land
Returning swiftly to health; and they knew
Their Goddess present, life instinct in the core:
The bare tree crowning, the cold bare sky hazed over
With leaf, with birds, with shiftings, with light pouring
Over hard edges, filling life in the bowl
Of their fields, of their homes, of their bones, and into their children.
33
He did not hear the usual ‘Yoo hoo’ as he came in.
Wherever she was, upstairs, in the garden, in the quiet little back room overlooking the hedged side-patch of grass, she always seemed aware of his entry and made a point of leaving what she was doing to greet him.
But he heard a clattering from the kitchen and there she was, on her haunches on the floor.
There was nowhere for him to put his feet.
Grids, bits of oven, bowls of scummy water, soap, scrubbing brush, lay all around her.
He picked up a rubber glove whose open end was sucking in brown greasy water.
There was steam and a smell of cleaning powder.
‘What on earth are you up to, Janet?
Darling, that can't be good for you.
I thought you were meant to be watching your blood pressure.’
She swivelled round, one arm rubbing away in the oven.
‘But it's very good for the oven.
I haven't forgotten your dinner.
It's all laid out in the back room.
Cold, I'm afraid, but you could heat some soup if you want — the top's done.
Carry on and eat.
I'll have something later when I've finished this.’
‘Sweetie, you know I said if there was anything heavy that needed doing you were to wait until I got in and I'd do it.
Surely  you been up to?’
‘Now, Tom, do go and have your meal if you want it so I can get cleared up.
I want to be in that room soon and I shall need the table.’
She clattered with the grids, rather excessively he thought, twisting round to reach for them beyond the bowl of soapy water.
‘Don't stretch like that.
You'll rupture something.
Why didn't you ask me to pass it?’
‘Tom, dear, by the time I've asked you to pass something, and you've said what and where is it and didn't I mean the other one, I can get this oven done and the baby born I should think.’
She worked all the while, each hand doing something and no move wasted, as if she was in an obstacle race.
He supposed she was doing it because she wanted to.
‘Have a break.
At least come and eat something.’
‘I'll come in a minute.’
As he was finishing, exerting himself not to feel guilty, she came in drying her hands.
‘Well, that's done, and the kettle's on.
Oof!’
He went to make the tea.
Everything was back in place, cloths wrung out, sink shining.
‘Come on now, feet up.’
‘No, don't make me too comfortable.
I've got a lot to do.
While I'm down here I'll do out these cupboards.
I tell you what, while you're on your feet, get me the cutlery drawer out and the metal polish.
I can do that while I sit and have my tea.’
She opened a cupboard to get some rag, and plastic bags rolled out, so, on her knees, both arms working, she at once emptied the shelves.
‘Bring a damp cloth when you come, tom.’
‘Hang on, I'm looking for the metal polish.
And have we any more sugar?
I can never find anything when you've had a sort out.’
So she got the cloth herself.
‘Damn, I forgot to get sugar.
I did so much shopping I just didn't feel like carrying any more — I've cooked for days so I can concentrate here.’
‘And so you needn't use your clean oven.’
‘Well, of course, that too.
Now, sweetie, get me a bit of newspaper from the box, and dump all the silver on it, and while I'm at it, you might get the vase and candlestick from the sitting  room, and I'll do your trophy if you like.’
‘Janet, what is all this?
You're supposed to be taking things easy, and I come home after a day's work and a beastly journey hoping for some restoration and some intelligent company.
You let everything go for weeks and weeks and obviously find just getting a meal tiring enough and you know I don't want you to do anything that's too much for you.
Honestly, the house is fine as it is.
Then suddenly you want to do everything at once— things you don't touch all year must be done now.
You'll be wanting me to scrape out the gutters next.’
‘I hadn't thought of it, but it would be a good idea to clear them before we get more rain.
This patch of dry weather won't last forever.’
She got the newspaper herself.
‘Come and talk to me while I do the silver.’
‘You haven't asked anyone in tomorrow, have you?’
‘No, I have not — I'm far too busy.
That's just it, Tom.
You'll have to forgive me, and I promise I won't do anything to harm the baby.
I was getting so fed up, week after week and not doing a thing, not feeling like doing a thing.
I think it was that perpetual low cloud, it seemed to creep right into the house, and then those terrible winds.
I felt I could hardly lift my arm to comb my hair it was such an effort; but most of all I got so depressed knowing everything was piling up and I wasn't doing anything about it, and soon I wouldn't be able to.
‘So when I woke up this morning, early for a change, and the sun was actually shining, I suddenly felt lighter.
I found myself just doing things without even thinking about them — my fingers seemed to work away on their own.
And it was heavenly to feel active again.
as if I'd only been half awake before so no wonder I couldn't do anything.’
‘And you've been on the go, no doubt, ever since.’
‘Oh, I have.
I've got a lot done.
And I feel so much better for it.
Honestly, I think I would have damaged something inside me if I had sat still.
I've had a marvellous clear out — got every single shirt on to the line — and when you take that off you could put it in the bucket so I can get it out tomorrow.’
He noticed there were no lampshades on the lights, and that the mantelpiece was bare and the cushions without covers.
‘Are you coming up?
Call it a day now, for goodness’ sake.’
But the parabola of her impetus was not yet come to rest.
‘I'll be up soon.
Go and warm the bed for me.’
Now he had gone up she needn't modify her actions to spare his feelings.
She knew he thought she was putting it on, showing off — well, perhaps she was, but to herself not to him.
She cleaned the paintwork in the little dining-room and wiping and fondling each one put back her ornaments: a thick blue French glass bowl, a round-bellied wine bottle with a candle in it, the clock, a school photograph of her two born children in a silver frame.
It did look nice polished.
The little one was podgy with puppy fat and a front tooth missing and a ravishing smile and hair all over the place.
The older one more solemn and neat, hand carefully on younger brother's shoulder.
That must have been Pete's first year at school.
And a card ‘Happy Easter to My Mum’ with a by now much bedraggled feather stuck on a drawing of, she supposed, an egg, that Clarissa had done at Nursery School; and a hyacinth in a pot that Tom had got for Mother's Day.
She took a deep sniff of it.
Heavenly!
What a marvellous flower it was, so fresh, so luscious, and such a smell.
She ironed the covers and as she sat sewing them up round the cushions she felt her energy ebb and realised she was very chilly, and oh how the flesh above her knees ached!
Quickly she stowed the silver away, put up the lampshade and left the others on the table.
The kitchen floor was all splodged with greasy soapy splashes, so she used the last of the hot water to wash it.
What a boon really hot water was.
How quietly gleaming the kitchen was.
No noise, nothing out of place, nothing left dirty.
How nice to come down tomorrow and open the door to the same calm welcoming atmosphere, the floor all sweet and clean and ungritty.
She heard a car go up the road and then still heard it as it travelled some way along the road at the top, and realised the wind must be coming from the south for the sound to come to her so  distinctly .
A barking broke out for a bit and then was still.
It must be late, there was an eerie splash of light, a bar across the taps and the edge of the table — the moon had moved to the gap between the two houses opposite, to a position where a finger of light came through the kitchen window.
It seemed almost to speak to her.
It had appeared, it would  move on, but for this moment it was there for her — almost as if it had waited for her to be alone.
Just filling out to the half, it looked strangely unfinished.
All was straight, her house, all was ready.
Like an x-ray her mind went through walls to every room and every cupboard and felt everything clean and orderly and done within them.
And a great relaxation rippled through her brain to her muscles and nerves.
She would sit down for one minute and then she would go and warm herself beside Tom.
How comfortable it would be up against his warm back.
She sat bent over with her arms held under her womb, supporting the weight of it a little.
And then she straightened up, a bit shivery but not with cold, and opened her blouse and unwrapped her skirt, and pushed her belly and breasts forward into the shaft of the moon so that the light lay across her.
Oh, it would be a wonderful baby.
She felt marvellously well.
34
Ah, this is the life, this is the life.
Steam of pouring coffee.
Inhalation gulp ah delicious.
Vigour.
They had cleared up yesterday, thank goodness.
A slant of sun on large clean table, dancing barley-sugar splashes through the marmalade jar.
Dig of knife scoop on to crusty toast.
Nothing better, not zabaglione, not boeuf flamande or praline paté from Switzerland or bifstek au poivre in Dieppe, not the most exquisite ten-hour long preparing meal and succulence in restaurants, or home-made lemon mousse, no délices, nothing like good fresh bread lightly toasted, cool with butter juicy with chunky marmalade, and coffee on the nose on the palate down the throat gulp.
Ah, oh, sigh, gorgeous.
Everybody gone, house quiet, free day, stretching, stretch of limbs to the day, stretch after night, day ahead, exciting.
Special article on Latin America, read that later, perhaps little wandel down to pub garden at lunch carrying the paper, treat outing ½ pint and seeing the world, back to nice clean house still one's own no interruptions.
Go out to get not let it come in.
Eight o'clock now, everyone gone, everything cleared up, pile of brown envelopes already in pillar box, reading this quite dense exceptionally good book on cities before 8.30 in the morning, get those seeds in today, but now vigorous black letters on smooth white page, really getting down to it; all in gear, everything clicking in evenly going round, peace and activity suspended in an active stillness like a basket on a wave, Moses rocking in the rippling bullrushes all that coiled sleeping force.
Ah, this is the life, no doubt, another cup while the coffee's hot and fresh, toast some more.
—‘mm.
35
The telephone rang at last at 9.30.
‘I expected you in at 5 for your tea.
(Yes it is.)
I was just telling your Dad it was you.
I said I was just…
What?
Where are you?
We were worried.
(No, Fred, nothing wrong.
Give me a chance to find out for goodness’ sake.
I can't hear a word the child's saying with you going on.)
Where are you?
There seems a lot of noise.
Oh, Julie's.
I can't hear you very well.’
‘Hang on, I'll turn the radio down.’
And then the child's voice came loud and clear:
‘Mum, can I stay at Julie's?
Because I'm going to help her with her paper round tomorrow so she can get it done early — the people don't come before 7 and we've got to be at the bus terminus by 8.30; because that's when we've arranged to meet —; meet our friends of course and so if I help her with her round she can get it done in time.
We're all going swimming — Julie's lending me a costume.
She's got two, well, actually, one's her sister's but she doesn't use it any more and Mum — we went to the fair.
Julie's big brother gave us the money.
It was terrific.
I went in one of them cage things and I got it over — well, you have to push with your legs and you sort of pull with your arms and nobody else could do it.
But I did.
Julie couldn't and she's bigger than me.
Julie's frightened of the high things.
She screamed and felt sick.
But I like the scary ones.
Well, of course you go over with it, you're inside it, see.
It was terrific, Mum; and we're going again tonight.
I mean, can I?
Because there are more people there on Saturday and all the people we know will be there and it's more fun when there's a crowd.
Please, Mum, I'm not tired.
Anyway, I thought if I stayed at Julie's we could have an early night and I'd be here in the morning.
And Mum, Mum.
I wan a coconut.
Yes, I mean I won one.
We haven't eaten it I'm bringing it for you.
No, you didn't have to knock it off you had to choose thingies on a card.
It was good at the fair, Mum.
And Mum, if Dave and Anna call round for me tomorrow morning can you tell them we've gone to the Prince Charles baths and to come there, and Mum, I went to the shoemender's to collect my sandals, but they were shut and I need them for tomorrow evening because — Oh, thanks Mum.
Yes, yes I will.
Of course I will, Mum.
See you tomorrow when you come in from work.
And Mum: Mum, thanks for letting me go to the fair.’
36
‘Oughtn't you to be fetching Lisa — she's been there since 3 and if they're having a party tonight they'd probably like to get her off their hands.’
David Carlson didn't really like his daughter staying for hours at the Davis's.
The house was very mucky and rotting food spilled in the side alley next to it which attracted the most bleary-eyed flea-ridden dogs.
He always noticed pools of oil and empty coke cans round the house if ever he passed that way.
The whole street's youth seemed to tend their motor cycles outside it.
But also he had imbibed long years of his wife's punctuality and orderliness.
She was most welcoming and wanted their children to have their friends in, she was a neighbourly woman, but if those children were still what she called ‘hanging around’ by the time dinner was ready and she was held up in the business of getting the evening meal dealt with, it put her out.
She liked everybody to be busy at something.
She liked them to come, but  she liked them to go.
‘Oh, they're not like that.
There's always someone to keep an eye on the kids, and it doesn't seem to bother them having children round and up till all hours.
I don't think the children go to bed till the adults do.
I never see fewer than six or seven young men sitting around in the kitchen when I go in there, I've never worked out who's a brother or a cousin or what.
They sit around waiting for Daryl.
I don't know how Mrs Davis does it.
She just lets them hang around, they never seem to give her a hand.
I don't know how she can ever get on with anything.
Of course, she's got no life of her own.
She just lives through her children.’
The Davises had originally come from Grenada and the Carlsons had got to to know them because their eldest child and Daryl had been friends at school.
When Lisa, a late addition, had come along, it had been very helpful to have such a friendly place to leave her occasionally.
She loved it because there were children of her own age, of every age, and they adored her because she was such a pretty baby to spoil.
When Mrs Carlson went round she had a glass of something, excused herself from a chicken leg saying they had just eaten dinner.
There were great pots of food steaming on the stove and dishes piled with fruit on the sideboard — pineapples, bananas, strange plum-looking fruit, and fruits she didn't know the names of.
As soon as she could, without appearing rude, she said she'd better take Lisa home.
Daryl, a very tall thin young man with a neatly-trimmed beard, with a red knitted stocking tammy buffon'd up on his hair, with thin features and a beautiful skin, more black than brown (his mother's face was a shiny cinnamon) black and pointed like the African in pictures of the three kings, came down the steps into the kitchen with this tiny fair mite at the bottom of his long arm holding his hand.
She was also clutching his knee and he was swinging her up on his foot at every step and she was screaming and laughing.
When they came into the light her mother saw the child's face covered in blood and felt faint.
Lisa ran to her mother holding out a brilliant sticky red ball.
‘Daryl's give me a pomganny for his birthday,’ she said, shoving it at her mother's mouth for her to taste.
Mrs Davis wiped the juice from the child's face and hands.
‘That was for you to take home,’ Daryl said, ‘you weren't meant to eat it now.’
He swung her up so she was on his upper arm, patting his face quite hard and pulling at his beard.
‘Aiee, Lisa don't do that man.
That doesn't some off, that's fixed on that is.’
‘Come along Lisa, you must come now.
Thank you ever so much Mrs Davis.
Say goodbye now, Lisa.
Daddy's waiting.’
‘Bye, darling, come again soon.’
37
He had chosen not to go with his parents to buy plants.
This was a day to do something on, a day to use.
The sun splashed and faded on the bath as he lay in hot water.
The hair of his bush floated and he made a swell in the water with his hand to make it ride up and down like seaweed over waves.
You could understand the connection made between hair and being manly but when you came to think of it, it wasn't really true.
There was Pete in his class who really needed to shave twice a day, who had a deep voice and a very hairy chest, and he was a known bender; and there was Stuart, who couldn't look at a cloud or a diagram in TD lessons or even sometimes a house without seeing a version of the female anatomy, and lie was as smooth as a babe.
‘Seen any good houses lately, Stu?’ he would ask when he saw him.
Giggling at his own hilarious wit he heaved himself out of the bath.
He padded about in his freedom with a towel knotted round his waist and put some toast to grill.
On his way to mop up the bathroom he stood before a mirror admiring his Egyptian slimness of hip.
It was a zig-zag orange and blue striped towel, and it should have been dazzling white cotton, with a gold bracelet on his lean bronzed strong-muscled forearm.
He ripped his muscles, bent his arm, pulled a scowling face lovingly at himself and said ‘Dig that crazy muscle, baby.
Never mind the bath water, feel the rinse.’
‘Hey, Stu,’ he heard himself say, ‘thought of a good one today as I reclined in my boudoir.’
God — sniff — he dashed down  and burnt his fingers yanking the smoking toast from under the grill.
If only there was someone here to tell these brilliant things to.
He was noticing everything, the way the light played on a broken brick in the wall opposite and sometimes it looked hollow and sometimes it looked a bulge, which proved that you couldn't say that what you saw, however carefully, scientifically, you analysed it, was a scientific fact.
But if what you saw was an illusion then how could you use the fact of that, to prove it was an illusion?
Oh, that was brill.
He'd dumbfound Stu with that.
Illusion and reality, that was real philosophy, real thought.
That was deep, man, deep; the meaning of life.
He put some more toast on and watched this time.
The sun faded.
The brick wall outside the window looked dark and gloomy.
He tried to grasp what he had been rehearsing but he seemed to have lost it.
The sunlight and cloud came and went, rode over and away on, just as possibilities of what he would do next did.
One minute he was full of longing to get on with the things that swam into his mind: sorting his stamps, cleaning his sports gear, starting his diary, writing his play.
The next it was unbearably sad to think about any of them.
He went into his room and put on a record while he decided what to do and for a time became lost in the music.
He clicked and jolted his head funky-chicken fashion and pushed out his lower abdomen in syncopated spastic jerks.
‘Na, na, na, baby’ ducking his head down and shaking it, his elbows bent up and his clicking fingers held high behind his ears, while he footed round the room.
‘Na, na, na.
Tha's not my way, baby, Tha's not my way.’
‘Yao-hoo’ he let out as the record ended.
With an ache that almost made him bend over, he longed for the hours before evening to be done.
He had told them he had things to do at home, had saved up the day for solitude.
Now he felt he would burst if he couldn't impart all that was going on in his mind.
It wasn't real till it was let out and tried on the air and approved.
That was another discovery.
‘You know, Cookie,’ he heard himself saying, ‘until you say a thing….’
He went out and got the potatoes for his mother, bought a doughnut and put the kettle on when he came in.
It was lovely out.
He'd settle down now.
He did a crossword while the tea brewed.
He'd forgotten the stamp hinges.
He'd go and get them.
It had really been wonderful out, soft on the face with a little breeze moving things about a bit, the streets busy, everyone moving around, cyclists swerving in loops — no hands.
He should have gone out earlier.
Then it clouded over, purply and menacing.
A few large splashes fell and then a lot.
That was the end of that then.
Shit.
The house darkened.
He poured another cup of tea and sat in dejection in the kitchen.
He reversed his decision not to ring Stuart.
There was no reply.
Of course, he had said he was going to help out at MacDowell's Dad's wallpaper shop.
That was that then.
The rain sheeted down and there was nothing whatever to do.
All the happening was going on for other people miles away.
Here no one would call, no letter come, no ring startle the weight of quiet.
His parents were probably having coffee and pastries in a place among people; Stu would be laughing and larking about with his mates at the wallpaper shop.
The boss brought in cans of lager for their break.
Cookie would be coining it at the greengrocer's stall, munching fruit and putting on the courtesy act to old ladies.
Marie — he couldn't imagine what a girl would be doing in the morning.
He had a picture of her sitting permanently on the edge of a table at Dubal's swinging one leg and looking out at him from the group she was with.
He could only imagine girls in the evening when they all walked along and Marie stopped in front of a shop window to see that her clothes and hair were as she wanted and they all came up behind her and did the same so they were like a group photograph on a record sleeve, wiggling their fingers and poking out their tongues and saying ‘Yoo-hoo’ to their reflections.
That had been a great evening.
He wanted to be where something was happening.
He heaved himself up, out of his day-dreaming as he had out of the bath, and took out his stamps.
It was a long time since he'd looked at them.
He hadn't concentrated on one thing for years now as he had when he'd started collecting stamps at the age of nine, so careful, so worried, so never leaving anything for a minute that could be done straight away by him.
An hour passed while he ordered pages and laid damp stamps on blotting paper with tweezers.
He was much more content now, though melancholy about himself and what he'd come to.
He'd keep it in good order from now on.
Buy a new book with a padded leather cover.
Keep them to show his sons.
The telephone rang.
He ran.
It was Stu.
‘What's the old recluse up to, then?’
‘Didn't you go to the shop, then?’
‘Yep, I'm there now.
We're all going to the Bird and Baby.
MacDowell's got a load to deliver and he wants a hand so we'll do it in the lunch hour; new headquarters of the respected firm of MacDowell and Co: ye esteemed Eagle and Child public house to be found (if it be not removed by ye demolition men) at the corner of — you feel like coming then?
Or are we deep in mystic thought, O sage?’
‘Mystic thought can wait, you bet.
Eagle and Child it is.
Or rather would be, Stu boy, but we-ell, the thing is, y'know, there's a little thing called money, cash, geld, spondooliks, like, whereof which I have not got.’
‘Oh never mind, come on.
MacDowell'll pay.’
‘Boy, have I mighty thoughts to tell thee, O Stewpot.
Great, great.
See you in half an hour.’
He pushed everything dirty in the kitchen into the sink.
He prinked himself before the glass where formerly he had gazed.
He patted his hair to the right state of fluffiness, turned his trousers up the right amount of cuff, gave a quick loving look.
He was all right now.
And how he was all right!
He'd put his stamps away later.
He intended, as he hurried out, to be back in time to clear up before his Mum got back.
There were probably as good as two hours ahead when he would be among company, among conversation, in the throng, the best time of day to be out and about and in a pub, in the middle of it all, all going on, him with it.
The spring rain soaked him but it was warm and he licked it as it trickled down his lip.
With a whoop he leapt over a huge spreading puddle where a drain was blocked with litter.
He was in good nick, in good shape.
He could jump the road, never mind the puddle.
He could jump the traffic blocked in the downpour.
Nothing would stop him.
38
‘He's just taking advantage of you.
You can see that, can't you?’
‘Oh yes.
But if there was no advantage for him he wouldn't come.’
‘But that's totally undignified.
He treats you abominably and you never say a thing because, you say, he doesn't like women who complain.
And then the minute he wants something — which is only ever one thing — you're all over him, making it easy for him and when he's got what he want he says ‘Thank you very much.
That was nice.
See you soon.’
And you don't hear a squeak from him for months and months.
And you never say you'd like to be taken out for a change, or ring him up when you want a bit of company?’
‘I did ring him up once.
He'd come round and it had been so nice, and we seemed to be so comfortable with each other, not just in bed you know, and it didn't occur to me we wouldn't do things together and see each other .
And I felt so happy and excited so I did ring him up.’
‘And?’
‘Well, he was busy at the time, you see.
I think he had people with him.
It wasn't convenient to talk.’
‘Not convenient!
Not convenient to him, but he expects you to be available the minute he wants.
Do you ever say it isn't convenient for you?
It can't have been very convenient for you that time he rang up in the middle of the night drunk after someone else's party.’
‘I did ask him why he hadn't let me know on his way there that he would be coming later.
I should have liked to be able to look forward to seeing him, but he said he didn't know how the evening would turn out.’
‘You mean he couldn't pick up anyone grander, so he fell back on you.’
‘I suppose so.’
Ruth, haven't you an ounce of self-respect?
So you just let yourself be used by a drunken lecher.’
‘I suppose it seems like that, but it would have been silly to say  no when he was prepared to come, after I'd been so sad not to see him.
If you'd rather see someone than not, you don't say no when they do turn up, just because they don't come more often.’
‘It's not how often, it's the appalling attitude.
It's so bloody selfish and greedy.
Oh, Milord mustn't lose one precious minute of his time or attention when he has better things to do.
He mustn't be expected to make an effort when he doesn't feel like it, he mustn't risk being hemmed in or bored, but everyone has to be ever so careful of his feelings, poor sensitive soul, and when he wants a good fuck he comes to obliging loving little Ruth because he can relieve himself and have his morale boosted without having to do a damned thing about it but get himself into your bed.’
‘Oh, Jessie.’
‘Well, that's what it is, isn't it?
Why are the words more vulgar than the behaviour?
I bet he never even brings you anything when he comes.’
‘No, he doesn't.’
‘And don't you mind?’
‘Well, he's not that sort of person.
Of course I'd like the other things, but it's just not relevant to the relationship.’
‘But you give him presents.’
‘Well, I like giving presents.’
‘So he gets everything on a plate and you get nothing but insults and disturbance, and upset because you can't help thinking about him for weeks afterwards.
Don't forget, I've seen you in some states, Ruth, practically off your rocker wasting away wrapped up in that sod.
He's just using you instead of a prostitute.
Only he gets it free.’
‘It doesn't seem like that when he's here.’
‘When he's here, once in a blue moon.
It's just that I can't bear to see someone like you, Ruth, made miserable so worthlessly, and until you get some feeling of respect for yourself you're never going to snap out of it, and you'll go on being used as a doormat.
A little bit of anger on your own behalf would be a very positive thing in this case, Ruth.
I see you being gnawed away with longing, week after week.
It's entirely negative.’
‘I know it's feeble, Jess, and silly, but I've never been one to stand up for my rights, so to speak.
I couldn't say ‘Why don't you do this for me?’ or ‘I want this or that.’
If it worked, which it  wouldn't, I wouldn't want it that way.
I want him to want to be with me and do things.
It's not the things themselves.
Obviously I wouldn't be happy with someone who is so selfish and so uninterested in me, so I suppose he's doing me a favour, really, making it so clear.
It's just that when I see him I forget all that.
He seems so full of promise.
It's just that I like him and it's silly to pretend I don't for the sake of pride.
He is a rude horrible selfish man, I quite see that, but I like him personally, if you can understand that.
And it's not true that I don't get anything out of it when I see him.
I can't explain.
I don't think it's the sort of thing that can be explained unless you can understand it without explanation.
For instance, the morning after one night when he'd stayed until about 5, so I'd had very little sleep, I walked around, phased out really, feeling a little bit of an invalid, rather frail and light-headed, but very peaceful, walking carefully so as not to jolt anything, and I felt I was nursing a bit of heaven.
And as I came back down this mucky road from the High Street, which, as you know, can be a pretty depressing trek home especially if you're tired, it all seemed bright somehow, and welcoming.
The people seemed kindly and one or two nodded or greeted me.
And all the babies suddenly looked so nice.’
They left the hot dance hall, which was a hut at one end of the village, and at once got on to their cycles.
39
They wanted to be out, away.
They would go on and on at great speed.
Fragrance of leafage, hyacinth and narcissus, came to them over hedges at certain points like bursts of music as a door opens.
They caught it in their onrush.
The strong wafts added to the feeling that the lights, the blackness, the vigour in the air, the strength in their limbs, was burning more intensely.
The one in front pedalled furiously, head low, and then, head up, let the bike ride, face lifted, up to the sky, the sky that was giving out stars as the earth put on flowers.
‘Come on, come on’ and then only the buzz of the chain free-wheeling and the rush of the air: and two stars, a red, a white, shooting down the dark tunnel of road between the hedges as the bike sped on.
The other caught up round the corner and there were two shadowy forms, skimming silently along together, two waverings of light bouncing and jolting to the fore, and two points of red winking at the same level behind, travelling on.
‘Hey, look; look up there!’
In the huge sky were myriads of pinpricks, age old stars, tiny eyelets in the velvet.
As the bikes bowled down the dark lane, so the circle of the sky seemed to wheel the other way.
And then, across this orderly slow progression where all was held in a great round, three lights moving together pursued their way, little glow-worms busily creeping in a straight line across the dome, one green, one red, in movement, then one white at the same pace; now one winking now the other, as if flashing messages.
Strange man-made star-bird among the immortals.
The road levelled out, trees over-arching.
Past dark houses they went, on and on, past houses where fires had died, hours since, only ash lifting a little in closed rooms, life breathing low, old bones, slow movements, dying fires.
But the fire in them burnt like a bud of blue flame, swelling, growing, until they felt it would flame into a shower of stars, reaching into the velvet darkness, the little frail wobbly lights of their bikes signalling to the lights of the travelling plane, their mounts leaping up over humps, over rises in the road, up and away into the intoxicating night.
40
It had been a dark and rainy day.
It would be, she thought, on my half-day free from the shop.
So she had stayed in and got the dinner prepared early, she could just shove it in the oven and it would look after itself.
As she bent up from the oven, up out of the kitchen, a shaft of watery sun manifested itself on the floor like a dim splash of paint.
She went up to her bedroom and there it was flooded with golden light, the clouds were rapidly drawing away, almost peeling back in the sky and, not yet quite behind the roofs, a dazzling gold was leaking all round the edges of a lilac cloud.
But its brightness was dimming quickly and its shafts withdrawing from the near buildings and then further and further away across the roofs, so that she ran out into it to catch some before it should go beyond her reach.
She walked further up the hill to where the golden light still came unhindered, following from one patch of sunlight to another as they fell through gaps in the houses, until she was in a little cul-de-sac quite open to it, ending at a railway.
She stood against a fence warm to the touch, and out of which the warmth had brought the smell of creosote and basked, her face up to the sky, her eyes nearly shut, letting the fiery sinking ball make red patterns through her flickering lids.
Suddenly she was in shadow and only the upper sky was lit with fingers of smoky orange and then an acid burnt lemon from the disappeared orb, but she walked on round unfamiliar roads in what was rapidly becoming dusk.
The birds had stopped and then, after a pause, there was a solitary run of song and then no more.
She came to a point where she could see far over the town, she had instinctively gone up following the fleeing daylight, and the mist over there under a sky that was greyish and purplish and darkening again, became apparent because it was being lit up from those distant buildings and streets, the points of light vibrating through the moisture.
Cars moving over the high track of the flyover began to sweep it with their head-lamps as they travelled on to it and the dusk gathered in patches below.
But up here things were still clear.
She had meant only to run up the road for a breath of air when the rain stopped and she had been drawn on into the spring evening until now she had half an hour's brisk walk to get home.
She really should go out at unaccustomed times more often, she thought.
Dinner half an hour earlier or later was neither here nor there.
It was ridiculous to miss such a beautiful exciting time of day for a mark on a clock.
As she came through the side roads to her house she heard a few trial notes on a wind instrument of some sort — a clarinet, was it? a run of notes that seemed to carry on where the last solitary trill of the bird had stopped, and then a beat, beat, beat of a bass  and a drum slowly swinging in, and the band, trying out their numbers high up in a house, lilted together into a piece, melancholy at base with gay little twiddles from the clarinet bravely calling that nightfall was not the end of hope, not a closure — a little bit of swing filtering over back gardens to draw people out, out into the spring night, a beat along the channels of their blood suggesting that this hour, as the light dies, as the dusk creeps along the ground, is not an ending but a beginning.
Demeter
Come, my daughter, we have done our work
The life you bring with you has set in motion
Every urge to the light, that light returned
As you return.
Everywhere sap is rising Siphoned from some source by power, effective, Your presence gives me.
The lengthening day that pushes back your train Of clinging shadow, but keeps you here, has woken The seeds from the sleep they fell to when you went Down with them to darkness, the dread time When nothing could reach you, when you were hid away, And I retreated, sorrowing, hidden also; And seed cast in the barren furrow rotted And trees withered and died; and in the womb Of many a beast the embryo miscarried And then no germination; and the earth sickened When in the womb of darkness you were stifled.
All that is over, and we have recovered And threefold more, for your return, have blessed These fields and pastures.
And food and sacrifice Of fresh first fruits, crisp bud, green shoot, the corn Plumping in the ear, waving in harvest Can be expected.
Come, let us leave these fruiting lovely valleys Where we have laboured, to the men who till them And start the journey to our cloud-wreathed home Where you will live with me among the gods In joy on lofty Olympus.
Someone says ‘Summer,
Someone says ‘I love
And more than solstice moves
And more than muscle.
On flattened grass the slumped cow heavy chews.
The corn lies open to the sky above
And larks, a piercing point above the blue
Needle invisibly and the whole bowl fill.
Slowly the great sun through the heaven moves
Taking the day so still and steady with him.
Without hurry Demeter walks through the land.
The thistles bloom on the honeyed hill and the gorse
Pops in the hot noon silence on the moors.
Sitting and stretching his legs, a man at a café
Misting his glass looks deep in the liquor and sighs
To match the hush of the foliage stirring above
Green metal tables, patterns of leaves through sunlight.
He writes his cards and clinks the ice in his glass.
The oil on the road shimmers, and he sees the heat
Haze of distant waters; the wide land
Stretching beyond the town; meadows asleep
Cows, cow parsley, small boys coming to fish
By week-long undisturbed streams.
Dangling from bridge
Brown legs, fishing tackle, close eager dusty heads
While out in the meadows the buzz of summer drones
Long after the boys have gone, time
Sleepy, unbroken, day following day
As dawn and evening haul the globe around
In regular breathing like a child asleep
Feeding all the while within its drowsing.
The wave holds its line of foam — then covers the shore,
Above the same small spot the buzzard hovers,
The man on the cliff receives the node of the sky,
The weighted bee lies still within the calyx.
Slowly the drop collects.
One more ooze of liquid and it will be
Big enough to make a sun of the light.
Slowly the pool fills till the brim is reached
Echo of trickle in basin is gradually dimmed,
Sharp edge of the sound of water dulled in fullness.
Gradually the lake rises and spreads out its silk
An open eye within the secret hills
Fed silently by many secret waters.
Slowly the fish in the lake swells and the skin stretches
Become a bag of eggs when the light touches it.
The peony loosens and the sunflower turns.
The noon swings and stretches, keeping
The dark a long way off at each end of the day
Far, far,
And even at midnight the fishes feed and swim.
Slowly the drop collects and carefully
The spider travels day-long to and fro 
All summer building.
We look at the field path near the edge of dream
And pause like someone coming out of a wood.
In a minute the fields will shift into focus
With a path to walk on through the long ‘now’ of summer.
41
The man in the car was making his last call.
He usually left this shop to the end because they rarely gave him an order and the road was one he hated.
He didn't want to start his day with that.
Every time he drove along that narrow strip of tarmac the stupidity, lack of taste, destructiveness, wastefulness, limitedness of human beings when left to their own devices was borne in on him.
Here was a most lovely situation, a sandspit which had been built up into a peninsula.
On his left — but for the bungaloid eruption —; there would have been sand dunes going down to the deep blue sea of the Channel; the stretch of golden sand — had it not been for the litter — making a gentle curve for five miles.
The bay was defined by fine trees at the top of cliffs at one side, and at the westward extremity towards the open sea a strange cluster of white rocks split off from the chalk cliff.
Because they were of different sizes, people considered the group a family.
They called them Harry, Mrs Harry and little Harry.
To his right was the stretch of water enclosed, except for a narrow outlet, by the peninsula.
It was therefore still affected by the tides, indeed more than usually so.
In the harbour you got a secondary ebb and flow between the main tides.
The place he was making for was at the end of the spit of land and he was driving directly into the sun.
It blazed naked out of a sky that could not remember what cloud was.
He was not spared one concrete-balconied construction, one flat-topped esplanade of shops, one lowly bungalow surrounded by pebbles and called The Palms, one swinging wooden board with ‘rustic’ letters cut in it announcing that the frosted aluminium-framed windows and crazy pavings dotted with fountain bowls and outsize cupids, and pergolas leading nowhere, were part of a residence called Ourranch.
On his right in the luminous water of the second flood of the day were dotted little green islands, and the chug of an occasional motor boat echoed from beyond the marshy river mouths on the far side of the stretch of water, rivers full of reeds and duck, up which were villages with stone bridges and beyond which was heathland and peace.
Two pairs of feet, black underneath at the bottom of plump dark brown legs, stuck through the railings of a balcony which was boarded on the upper half.
Two children were squirting water on to the cars that passed.
A head of black silky hair came very slowly over the top of the rail until two dark cherry-like eyes could see over the top.
The child obviously thought he was thus invisible.
Then a girl said ‘Tony, don't.
I told you just to count them.’
The man proceeded a few jolting feet at a time through the excruciating heat.
What a lousy place for children to be stuck in.
All the loveliness, all the things they could do, on the shore, in the water, exploring the heathland, and they sit above the road breathing in fumes with a plastic bottle for a plaything.
The road was so hot the tarmac was melting.
The children were not even at the back of the house away from the road.
Poverty of mind, lack of imagination.
The car three ahead of him moved three yards.
He went into gear.
The car in front of him did not budge.
So much enrichment to be had and that's all that's offered them.
Growing up seeing nothing but these truly ghastly buildings, never using anything that isn't made of shoddy material, how could such children become people who would recognise and choose anything that's beautiful?
As he passed again on the other side of the road on his way back forty minutes later he was caught up in the very worst time of day for traffic.
It was the very best time for the children.
Today by some bonus of chance they were being left there to enjoy it and had not been interrupted with a call for tea or to go for a swim with Dad who had just come home.
It was the best time because not only were there so many cars, but they went slowly enough for Denise to write down their numbers and makes as Tony shouted them out.
Sometimes there were extras.
One day just below their balcony a man had got out of his car and gone to the car in front and opened that car's door and started shouting at the man inside, and then the car behind had started hooting and others had joined in.
Everything they had on the balcony got smeared with tar because the floor of it had been macadamed.
This was the time of afternoon when they popped the tar.
In some extraordinary way it seemed hotter now than at midday when the blistering sun was  overhead; such faint breeze as there might be from the water seemed to fall utterly it this turn of the tide.
They had erected a little shelter, an old curtain spread across one corner of the balcony and held up by a clothes horse and a chair.
One edge of the curtain trailed in the bowl of water Tony filled his squirt from.
Denise crouched under the shelter.
The other corner was Tony's look-out.
They did not sit on the floor.
It would have burned them.
It was scorching hot to touch.
They had two towels they wetted in the by now black water to save the skin of their thighs.
There was a new bubble of tar forming.
It was nearly ready to pop.
They had a steel knitting needle.
At the same time not only was there another G number but it was the same make of car as the last five G numbers had been and it was the same colour as three out of the last ten cars that had passed the other way.
For a moment they were disappointed when Denise realised it was in fact the same car as one already written down.
Tony thought the man was coming back for him because he'd squirted water at him so he hid, but the man waved to Denise and she waved back.
It was a pity they would have to cross the car off.
They never put the same car twice, that was cheating.
‘We could have another list, a list for the ones who come again.
Perhaps he'll come again tomorrow and then we could put a star for 3, and the one who gets most stars, wins.’
She was in her dream of order, Tony was in his seventh heaven popping the tar bubble.
The sun in the end got to the horizon.
The road emptied and the tide with a lazy paw had reached up and taken away most of the day's leavings on the beach.
It did not of course reach the bowl of scummy water, dirty plastic debris and filthy rags and bits of wood on the balcony.
‘Why, Mummy,’ the child was asking in the bath, tickling her little bottom moving up and down on the sandy deposit at the bottom of the bath until Tony had nowhere for his legs, ‘when the sky is blue very very blue all over and you look at it is it white?’
She supposed it was magic, probably it only happened when you swung your head up in a certain way, she would test that tomorrow, and as she dropped asleep it lay alongside the tickets of paper with the numbers she had written, and the tar bubbles and the sun that made red horses and brown splotches when she closed her eyes.
It had been the best day yet.
42
The farmer got out of his car to open the gate and stood for a moment at the bend in the road.
Here the fenceless field spread out to the ditch which was edged with hawthorn, elder and hazel marking its further boundary, a huge stretch of green-gold already lightening.
The beards of the barley gave it a restless white ripple like tossed water whenever a breeze ran through the field.
The ears were in fine condition.
The yield would be maximum if there were no freak storms.
His eye was watching the barley while he was thinking about the outing he had decided to give himself that evening.
It was the week his wife took the kids to her sister's caravan at Robin Hood's Bay.
The weather had been fine for some days and the mood was right.
Perhaps there would be little silvery marks, stretch marks in the skin of her belly, silvery green like the barley field.
He thought he saw a movement other than the wind in the distance against the hedge on the far side of the field.
Who had the cheek to walk through his corn?
There was someone in the field, two of them.
How on earth had they suddenly appeared there?
There had been a path there once but it had been ploughed up and incorporated into the field long ago.
Two women, he saw now, one big and heavy, the other slighter.
They looked large against the light pouring down over the flat land.
He was watching them to see which way they would go.
His eyes glazed on the swaying barley and the two figures standing far on the edge.
He leaned against the hot metal of his car that the sun polished and with his mouth slightly open looked at his ripening field.
It was quite still for the breeze had dropped and he vaguely registered that the women seemed to have gone.
Perhaps they had been on the other side of the ditch all the time and were hidden by it now.
43
He lay in bed all afternoon with the light of the summer sky travelling up the walls and slowly across the ceiling.
In the morning he had woken with energy racing through him at a pace too uneven to harness.
Later he realised he had known even at six on that June morning that the time left would be short before the surge of pain crashed through his head.
He did what he could, battling against the discrepancy between the clock's time and the racing migraine.
He had managed to collect the lawn-mower from the ironmonger's in the village.
It was being sharpened there and he wanted to have the grass mown by the time his wife and children came back.
The wait in the ironmonger's and the noises of cars and motor bikes turning and revving in the street worsened the pressure at the back of his neck so that as he finally got the machine into his van and thought of the relief of reaching home and doing the mowing, black tadpoles shot across his vision, zigzagging through all dimensions.
By the time he reached home his only aim was to get the van into the garage and find the strength to get up the stairs and to bed.
He resented this interruption of the month with his family.
He had taken his boys to the river, they had played tennis with some people they had got to know at the boathouse; he had gone mushrooming in the early morning with the youngest one, whom the lethargy of youth had not yet struck.
In the midday heat they had foraged in shady woods for berries and interesting objects, to emerge from shadow to the fields' glaring yellow, heat coming in buffeting waves across the metallic corn.
Most of the time it was rigid and still under the hot sky but on the occasions when it swayed, though no one noticed a breeze, there was a tiny ticking noise of brittle head against dry stalk.
In the early morning they had got drenched in the grass that waved up to his small son's back, and when the sun struck the dew it was like the silent explosion of a crystal bowl.
By the time he had managed to crawl on to the bed, dragging such scarves as he could find to shield his eyes, for the curtains were only flimsy cotton of a summer rented house, all annoyance, all regret for the wasted day, all intentions, all straining for activity, was gone, absorbed into the panic that connected — as if there was a piston rod — his throbbing head, the lights crossing behind his eyeballs and his churning stomach.
He still felt the movement of the van and the racing motion of the imagined mowing as, in his turbulent mind's eye that would not release its trapped images, he let go the clutch on the handle and the motor mower leapt and jolted into movement.
As the pain became more intense there was less and less space for his mind to wander over things, undone things that suddenly took on ridiculous and unrealistic urgency, but his thoughts were still churning with his innards and he could not keep out stray fragments of enacted scenes any more than he could stop the brilliant black fish from swimming in the air past his eyes.
He considered whether he could tell if they were black or very brightly coloured; and if black, why did they have the brilliance that usually attached to colour?
And was there any real difference, if what you saw made the same impression somewhere on the receiving end of sight?
He tried to make a connection between this and something he had heard, or read, about the illusion of the face in a looking-glass in that famous picture — by Goya was it, or Velasquez — some Spaniard, no — was Velasquez Spanish, wasn't he making a mistake there, wasn't he Italian?
No, that was oh that chap who had painted Venice such a lot, absolutely recognisable, he could see the frontages of the palaces now, what was the man's name, the sort of name you know so well you couldn't think of it when it wasn't in your mind.
Guardi, was it?
No.
Oh well, let it slip.
Anyway, someone pointed out that the face in the mirror was obviously not the face of the woman looking into it, something to do with the angle at which the mirror was held, and what theory they attached to that, whether it had been intended, or a mistake, or even an overpainting at a later date — he did not remember that he had known about that.
And he knew there had been something in connection with his wife he was going to think about that picture.
Something she had said that had reminded him of it; something she had said about it?
The connection slipped.
He had thought he was thinking so clearly.
Everything was melting into other things.
The pressure of pain on his temples let go for a minute to rearrange itself further back.
He heard a pigeon going over and over  its announcement with that bounce at the end which sent it always back to the beginning again — coo coooo cou-cou; coo cooo cou-cou.
The renewed buzzing of a fly trapped in the corner of the pane ceased to seem quite so near.
If he could sleep now…
He was jolted back.
Had he secured the garage door?
He had no memory of doing so.
He could see the van rolling down the slope.
Its doors shot open and the mower lay smashed on the ground, the effort he had spent himself on, wasted.
Then he began to find it impossible to withdraw his mind from a vision of this house empty, and of the rooms he would be returning to.
Was the fiction of this bit of family life upsetting the delicate balance of connection he had achieved with his separated wife?
Why could they not always live together like this?
And if this only worked because it was not ‘real life’ why did it work now?
Or — and something came apart in his stomach and turned a revolution and plummeted downwards — were they all politely and patiently waiting with well-controlled longing because it would not be too long now before they could get home and carry on with the lives they preferred without him?
Could they only stand it because it was for a short unreal interval, whereas for him it was the real bit of his life, this little pocket of otherness, of ‘unreality’, but for him it had been central, the power house, the full granary, the fulcrum.
Again he felt himself thinking brilliantly, knowing at the same time that the words he heard in his head would sound ridiculous if used in speech.
He probably couldn't even speak clearly enough at this point for anyone to hear him properly.
If only he could be sick.
If someone would come he could ask them to check the brake on the van.
He turned with difficulty and got the keys out of the pocket of his trousers and put them on the chair seat.
The effort exhausted him although he could not comfortably lie still and his temples tightened.
The light seemed very bright.
He longed for thick felt against those dancing panes of fire.
There were cars and aeroplanes droning.
A door banged and he felt the vibration of footsteps and smelt cigarette smoke.
If only his eldest sons wouldn't smoke.
Perhaps he had brought it on them by not being there.
Then he was violently sick into the bowl he had brought up with him, and retched and shook and thought his head must split and some black spidery demon come out of it, as in pictures of exorcism, dragging its poison with it.
When someone came into the room he realised he had gone out in a sweet unconscious.
In the split second he woke he felt wonderfully light and at ease, comfortable in his skin, all his limbs absolutely relaxed in the right order and oh so comfortable where they were.
Entire and accessible to the front of his mind was what he had been trying to recall his wife had said about the picture, but it wasn't about the picture.
She had told him once as they lay at peace in bed that the sleep after childbirth, an unconsciousness that might only last a split second, was the most complete sleep she had ever known and when you woke from it you felt you had been elsewhere for a hundred years.
His head was cleaned of pain and the pain in going had taken away with it all the niggle, the circular gloomy gnawing, all thought.
He wasn't thinking at all, just breathing.
The evening sun of a perfect day was painting the wall above the chest of drawers in such a pretty soft way.
He said to his wife who was in there with the youngest boy — he thought he spoke clearly but she could hardly hear him —‘What a lovely day it's been.
Did you get what you wanted?’ and a wave of feeling that the day had been good came with the words.
He had floated into unknown, and as soon as he was well, unknowable, realms.
Where the wings of pain had dropped him, there had miraculously been infinite but unblinding light, a great strenuous joy that was somehow calm, like a crystal bowl that you do not drink out of, and now he had been floated back to the comfortable shore of his cool clean bed.
‘I'll stay here for a bit, Jamey,’ he said to reassure this youngest child, for children get worried if you don't speak.
‘I'll get up soon and we'll have a game of draughts.
But I'll stay here for a bit longer.
We'll do everything tomorrow.’
And the great full summer world, instead of being a throbbing and a weight and a grinding torture, stretched its arms towards him, a lush open welcoming meadow he could never have enough of and was all there, all his, waiting.
‘I want to tell you,’ he said to his wife but he veered away from the effort which would dim it, tangle, it, and he chose something banal and not what was in his mind.
‘Just rest now,’ she said.
‘I'll bring you some hot water, or can you drink tea yet?’
‘Yes, tea.
But I want to tell you’— the echo of the chock of a bat against a ball reached him with its moment's delay, and a blackbird ran its first trill through the evening.
The sunshaft on the wall was dimming  and the sky thickening ever so slightly to an evident blue —‘how beautiful’.
Well, she was, but he was not going to make false compliments when he felt so true, so just, so clarified.
‘How beautiful the summer is,’ he said.
44
They lay at the top of the hill.
They had just strength to drop their bikes, get over the stile and fall under the hedge.
Their hearts were going bang bang bang bang and the younger of the two had an excruciating bursting pain in the middle of the chest that stabbed every time a sobbing gasp came.
Gradually the haze and sweat cleared from their eyes and they focussed over the open valley they had cycled up from.
The field stretched in a long oblong down the valley side, filling their eyes.
Over on the other side they could make out the chimney of the paper works among rising woods.
A glass roof flashed in the sun, far, far.
The bang of the younger one's heart seemed to go right through the earth like thundering horses.
After a bit they sat up and watched the welcome breeze work like an animal through the silver-green barley.
This way and that it rippled and shivered and then was still, a great sea.
The older boy thought of the achievement of getting to the top of Glory Hill without getting off.
None of the boys he knew had done it.
The younger one cared about nothing now.
They were there.
The ground supported them.
It was done.
45
She had been advised that gentle exercise was good.
Swimming, for instance.
She had given up her job the week before.
She had stayed at work up to the proper time to get the full benefits and she had felt important enough, leaving to have a baby, for the loneliness to be kept at bay for the time leading up to her last day.
There was no reason to hang on at work.
There had been presents and people who had not bothered with her much during the ten years she had worked there became friendly.
Because she was going she became much more obviously part of the firm.
There were conflabs in the typing pool and that bossy Marianne going importantly round to areas she normally never trespassed in and June — had felt it was on account of her.
And sure enough, there was a little gathering and some sherry and crisps and olives in Mr Drummond's office, and a very generous cheque and warmth and real kindliness.
But of course all that was because she was leaving.
She had worked ten years in the West End and had no friends in the suburb where she and Ron had been lucky to get the second floor of a house when they married two years ago.
She was a quick worker and her knitting and sewing, her cleaning of the two rooms and kitchen, her preparing of the evening meal against Ron's return, her visits to the clinic and her regular letters to her mother in Darlington to report thereon, did not fill the day.
She had called in at the office once since she left and had been greeted with pleasure.
She had a cup of tea and then after half an hour there was nothing for it but to go.
She wouldn't try again.
She felt the heat so the idea of swimming appealed to her but she was shy of exposing her swelled body in a bathing costume.
She remembered the mocking boys in swimming pools from her childhood.
But she had to do something, go somewhere to get through the day.
She found out there was a swimming pool on the far side of the common that stretched beyond the railway line.
She had not been that way before.
There were groves of trees and the fresh green shade dappled with the strong sun outside raised her spirits.
They were having a very settled patch of weather.
There were not many people at the pool on this weekday morning.
It was  fairly clean and pleasant and there was a paved bit at one end where the trees from behind the fence cast a bit of shade.
The pool attendant was doing his morning training, up and down he went, thick dark-burnt shoulder heaving in and out of the water like a gleaming seal's head.
A woman stood at the shallow end, her hand under the chin of a small child, encouraging it along.
Two Indian boys were diving, again and again, from the boards.
Apart from the splash of the water, and the squeak and thump of the diving boards, the calls of the Indians to each other and an occasional squeal of delight from the child, it was still, and a thrush, lodged in a tree on the common beyond, dominated for minutes together the air above the sequestered pool.
She swam about a bit and felt comfortable.
It was a good thing to do.
More people began to come in, so that she was no longer alone on the paved bit with her magazine and her sandwiches and her towel.
But she didn't mind.
She didn't mind that she was obviously alone.
She didn't want anyone to talk to her so she could be seen not to be alone.
Her pregnancy made it acceptable that she was just there, soaking in the sun, not looking for anything, not seeking, not doing anything.
It was not necessary.
The great mound and its cargo represented her doing, her being.
She was sheltered and hidden behind it.
She didn't have to justify herself or explain anything more about herself.
She stayed for hours, not worrying, not thinking; not seeing herself doing things, which was her usual way of planning ahead, chopping herbs, washing salad, seeing her hands arranging things on plates, hearing her voice ask for things in shops.
This must be, she sleepily considered, what they meant by ‘living in the present’.
It meant you weren't there.
No, it meant you were there but it was for other people to do something about it — if anything had to be done.
You didn't have to bother about it, anyway.
It was heavenly.
She must wake herself up.
It was really very hot.
She hoped she would not get sunstroke.
But the baby would have got some benefit.
Surely this strong sun would have got through the thin wall of her stretched skin and warmed the baby.
She was glad to get home, to wash the grit from the paths off her feet, to sit down in the cool unglaring indoors.
The meal was easy to prepare.
She didn't do anything extra.
She had done enough.
46
He was already thinking of what he would write to her as he turned into the main road:
‘Darling
Darling darling, I feel that I am the luckiest man on earth and I want you to know that I know I am.
I am still rather surprised that I had the good sense for once in my life to follow my hunch and come and see you.
I must admit I acted with the thought that I could interest you, that some attention would not be unwelcome — I hope I am not so insensitive as to force my company on anyone without some indication on their part — and there was interest, wasn't there?
I felt there was when you wrote to me to explain why you wouldn't be at home that day.
But I never dared to think we should discover that we both felt the same way.
Oh my darling, I am too happy and excited to be able to write all the things I want to say to you, so much is crowding in, so much has happened in such a short while and I want to pin down some of this marvellous feeling before it all rushes by and becomes more accepted — because, Betty, I do feel that we accept each other, there is a tolerance, a straightness between us that makes it all possible.
There is so much I want to say, I feel I can't spare one minute from you when I might be with you telling it all to you.
But it is a good thing that we shall have an interval away from each other.
For one thing it gives me the opportunity to write to you, and also I must have time to draw breath and come to terms with this astounding piece of good fortune that has befallen me.
I cannot hope to think clearly when you are near me.
Good fortune can be as bewildering as a hard blow sometimes.
That you should have been there all the while and me not know it all this time!
And how easily I might have missed you by not saying anything, but no, you have too much good sense, you would not have stood by and said nothing, would you?
You would have helped me, as you did so sweetly yesterday.
I cannot believe my luck that nobody else had the sense to carry you off but  that you should still be there for me and that —’ Well, that could be taken two ways, on second thoughts that might not be the thing to say, no; ‘my luck that you should want me in the same way that I want you.
I never thought it would happen to me!’
Would the right thing be to seem more experienced or less experienced?
Ah, the car was going well.
They had done a good job at that garage.
He was glad he had assets.
She would need to be driven about in a presentable car.
She was a woman of class, of taste.
He would take her to good restaurants.
He hated eating out alone.
They would go for weekends to comfortable but not flashy hotels, show her places he knew.
There was that very nice place in Keswick where he'd always longed to take a smart woman to stay a day or two.
They would go mid-week when he had to go up there for Joskiss's; they need not be vulgar weekend lovers.
The car was going superbly.
He glanced to the right.
What a view, the squally shower had cleared and the whole of the dale was shot across with beams of sun from behind a strange thunderous purple cloud.
Strange light, or was it his eyes?
After all, he'd had very little sleep.
With a short break in the early evening for a stroll to the pub for a drink and a sandwich, they had spent nearly seventeen hours continuously in bed.
She had made him some breakfast about 7.30.
They had drunk pots of strong black coffee and he had to leave at 8.
His mind had been on the office.
He wanted to be there by 10.
And so the words welled up.
He liked to think of her being pleased at getting a letter.
He would enjoy expressing himself to her.
Yes, he must get on now, into the day ahead.
He was looking forward to it.
All his memoranda had been circulated and should have been digested by now.
If he got in early enough he could lunch with George.
George had a discreet nature and he knew what was better left unsaid in public.
There were one or two points in what he was going to say that he wanted to sound out on George.
He felt full of power.
The years of work and attention were bearing fruit now, and suddenly this stroke of luck with Betty.
Oh Betty, Betty he thought.
He put his foot on the accelerator, he wanted to get there.
He thought of the pleasure old man Joskiss would take as his protégé — for he was his protégé — presented their case.
Here he was, in this superb humming machine, eating  the miles up, with a superb woman of his own.
If he went on coming down here, perhaps he'd get a boat.
He could keep it in Betty's garage in the winter.
It would surely be a directorship within a couple of years, less even if luck went his way and certainly it seemed to be doing so just now.
Fortune was smiling on him, it was all coming together, and it was right it should.
He looked ahead to where the road curved openly up to the left, free road ahead, that's where he was going up on that open road ahead with this great sense of power behind his eyes, behind his shoulders, in his thighs.
He was back in bed with Betty, getting there, getting there, his foot on the accelerator as he shot across the main road that took a steady morning stream of vehicles to the coast.
He had a fraction of a second to be surprised at finding himself in the middle of all this traffic, when up there, that was his road, up there, that's where he should have been by now.
He had driven straight into a brick lorry, and car and driver coalesced in the final spasm.
47
They had found a patch of clean sand half-shaded by the rocks that were heaped on one side of the little cove.
They would not have felt at ease if the beach had been entirely unpeopled, and indeed it was not, but over here balls would not bounce nor running youngsters kick sand up on to their towels, and there was the shade essential for Jack, which his wife had still to remind him about.
‘Surely you know by now, Jack.
Why do you need telling every time?’
‘I don't suppose we sit out in the sun above twice a year.
I like to hear you tell me things for me own good, anyway.’
‘I should've thought you'd be tired of that by now.
I've been doing it without you taking much notice for thirty years.’
‘Well, I'd feel strange if I didn't hear it, put it that way.
Too much peace makes a man feel he isn't at home.’
‘Eh, Jack.
That's not fair.
I've done everything for peace, you know I have.’
‘I know.
I know.
I was only joking.
And very well you have done too.’
They lay, their legs getting slightly burnt.
It was a very hot still afternoon and May had swathed her head in garments to keep off the glare.
From under these came a sleepy: ‘Jack!’
He lifted one eyelid and the dazzle from the burnished water seemed to prize under it.
‘Mm?’
‘I do wish Lottie would find herself a nice man and settle down.
I'm not happy about her, you know.’
‘Oh, you're always worrying about that sister of yours.
If you ask me, if she hadn't been so fussed over by you and your Mum she'd have turned round and faced up to things and been a lot happier.
It's not that I'm not fond of her, you know that, May, but I daresay her life must suit her.
From what I can see I don't think Lottie wants a nice man.
A nice man would bore your sister Lottie.’
‘She's got a lot of talent, you know Jack, if only she could find an outlet for it.
She needs someone to look after her though.’
‘Hm.
I suppose one reason we've got on so well, May, is that you don't go around resenting things and feeling you're wasted on ordinary mortals.
I'd say you're twice as clever as your Mum thinks Lottie is.’
He ever so slightly increased the pressure of his hand, which, with hers within it, rested on the sand.
And as ever the response was warm and immediate.
In his dozing he wondered if she had been bored with him.
She had been too busy looking after people to pay much attention to the way her life was going, but compared with Lottie's life and his brother and sister-in-law's, theirs had been very humdrum.
He had kept the same job, they had lived in the same house, they had rented the same seaside bungalow for a summer holiday, year in year out.
May had stepped out of routine only if relatives, more needy she thought but in Jack's private opinion more selfish and feckless, had called on her help, or on account of their children, now grown up and living away from home.
He knew May was not unhappy, but he didn't like to think he may have bored her.
That would be a poor return for all the care she had given him, all the comfort, all the support.
All he had wanted was to make her comfortable and look after her.
In her dozing, her mind also wide awake, she thought about her sister.
Her mother had always been obsessed with Lottie's wasted opportunities, and that had let May out.
She didn't mind the carping too much.
Her mother was a very old woman, what could you do?— because she knew there was always Jack, where she was estimated.
Jack was extraordinarily straight.
He never pretended to feelings he didn't have and if he thought she'd made a fool of herself he'd say so, but never to do her down, never to boost himself at her expense.
He had been wonderful about her family whom he did not pretend to like, never made an issue of her going there and he let her run on about them when she got home.
Sometimes she fell into their style — endless crisis-discussions and grumbling about how other members of the family had behaved, or should have behaved to each other.
The most he'd say would be ‘Come on now, ease up.
It's not my family you know,’ because it was better for her to stop.
Oh, he'd had a lot of silly nonsense to put up with, but that was only on the surface, he knew that really, and now that the children were off their hands they could be together more and she'd be less hasty.
She felt they were slipping back to their earlier life.
They'd never needed to say much.
They had both had their fill of talk as children from critical families.
It must seem dull from the outside.
Her children couldn't understand that she didn't want a different life.
She didn't wish to dampen their enthusiasm by explaining that views from windows, various sorts of furniture or food, were much the same to her.
She had what she had and the rest didn't affect her that much.
If the people she was with were unhappy, that got her down, but you couldn't change that by getting new curtains.
Yes, it was dull.
And thank goodness.
It came to her very sharply, like an overwhelming odour, the atmosphere she had longed to escape from when she was young, the fearful excitement of her childhood when her father would periodically erupt on to his adoring family, loaded with presents and suggestions for marvellous outings.
He had been a mining engineer and away for months at a time.
After a few days the household would be creeping around ‘not to disturb Dad’ who was sulking in his room bored to death with his family, and the children would be trying to comfort a depressed and weeping Mum who had so looked forward to her handsome popular brilliant husband's return and  didn't know what she had done wrong.
At least May didn't feel boring when she was with Jack.
He wondered if he should tell her how he hankered for nothing outside their life, of how his cup was full enough.
Women, they said, liked to be told the obvious.
Perhaps they hadn't the confidence they always seemed to have.
But you didn't have to keep explaining yourself to May.
He thought of the terrible need Lottie had, and the old mother come to that, for praise about the silliest things.
Pathetic in a woman of fifty, more so in one of eighty.
Lottie and her collection of hangers-on!
‘Oh, grow up,’ he wanted to say to her.
Now May, the fullness of middle age suited someone like May.
She was more sure, more relaxed now.
She seemed to have settled into herself.
Ripe.
Yes.
Silly of women to try and be young all the while.
After all, it was the middle of life that it was all moving towards really.
Mature, that was the word.
Like cheese.
No, of the sun.
They used it of the sun, didn't they?
‘What you thinking, Jack?’
‘I was thinking what's the point you lying in the sun if you swathe yourself up like a woman in purdah.
And I was thinking it's about time to go and have our tea.’
‘You mustn't mind if the children don't stay very long when they come, Jack.
It isn't very exciting here for young people.’
‘Yes, I've known for some time that if you want a bit of peace you only have to bore people enough and they'll leave you to it.’
‘Jack!’
‘Silly, you know I'm looking forward to them coming as much as you are.
It's just I don't feel the need to have them round me any more, and I think that suits them and it's silly to make them pretend the contrary.’
‘And I was thinking, Jack —’
‘You're doing too much thinking.
Let's go back to the bungalow in the cool for a bit.
Let's go and have a lay down.’
‘We're laying down here…— that our marriage is rather like the summer, day after day the same, very still, very peaceful.
We've done everything we had to do, really, and we can just sit back and watch it all now.’
She dozed deeper.
‘For another two weeks you can.
Come on, May, you've been in the sun long enough.
You make it sound as if we're about eighty.
Come on, rouse yourself.’
She woke, exclaiming that she  must have dropped off in the heat.
‘give me the bag then,’ he said.
‘Let's get back inside now or you'll feel bad tomorrow.
A human being isn't like a cornfield, you know.
Too much sun's not good for you.’
‘Well, no dear, I don't think I would mistake you for a stook of corn.
More like a boiled lobster.’
They both looked at his legs and laughed.
‘But you know what I mean, Jack.’
He didn't bother deciding which of the things she'd said to him she was referring to.
‘Of course I know,’ he answered.
‘And I know I'm a lucky man.
Come on, I'm parched.’
Consider this drop of water and this lilac
The water can be dew on the grass, can be
Pool, or lake or ditch that mirrors sky
Torrent that dashes your arm away, or a quantity
Pumped into a basin — many forms.
And lilac may be standing by the shed
Shaking its head of dew, or swayed in thunder
Or brown-edged mush draggled in puddles, may be
Clean reflection in the lake, sand-bottomed.
And love is a climate, is a way of light
Falling at certain angles (when the earth turns
Bending it into the dark, somewhere day shines)
Which we move in or out of, like a season.
I lie in the meadow, or I kiss your child
I draw on feeling banked up for that time.
The thin red streak shooting in spring through the dark
Has opened to a bowl.
It is held, it is still
It receives the sky's distillations.
The insects feed.
Persephone
Every step I take
Somewhere hedges break
Out into myriad leaves;
The soil heaves
With every step I take.
Every breath I draw
Somewhere glaciers thaw
Into a thousand streams;
Sleep is shot with dreams
At every breath I draw.
Every leaf I make —
Every babe I wake
I push from dust;
Back to my store must
Come every leaf I make.
Persephone and Demeter
You come up drenched with sex
Hazy with the sleep that broods the seed.
Everything goes soft at the knees, as if fumed with poppy.
Eyes glaze and glisten, listening to far waters
Trickling and seeping within, beyond the passes
The sweet good streams unbending from the ice
Where iron-cold has lessened its grip, far in the ranges
And blood unblocks, and the knot in the drum is loosened
And all falls in tune on the ear, and the gears mesh.
Everywhere you step — as sperm of horses
Springs a track of mushrooms in a field —; The seed jolts and joins, and somehow a new thing jerks
Out of the honed hard grain that had nothing in it.


You surge upwards, but in this heavy heat
The heat that bakes the clay, that bakes the seed
And from which comes the bread, I come to fullness.
You come up narrow and fresh; but I the fruit
The care, the thickening, maturing of the wheat
The berries in the harvest.
Stay still, my child, stay still and stay with me.
It is enough, earth's richness, why move on?
Why alter, why not hold forever now?
Mother you do not see, I cannot harbour.
Yes, dripping with power I come from the hidden kingdom
From mysteries you do not want to look at.
Harvest is your desire, not mine; for you
To sit with a child in your lap and the sun on the wheat
Is everything there is to aim for.
You are done.
But I must move, must travel, must explore
Deeper and deeper, and further, further seeking
And I can only feed your gladsome earth
Because I know, I am, the riches, the terror
That you can never know, or have forgotten
In that blessed sleep that touches the being of those
Who cross
From one world to another, Hades to daylight.
The spirit touches the lip of the babe: ‘Be silent’
The spirit touches its eyelid: ‘From now be blind;
Only feel and smell the warmth of your mother.’
Mother, Hypnos has given you sun and goodness
And hidden the roots of your power in my knowledge, my being.
Blind window flashing from the roof
Looks out towards the unseen sea
(Beneficence of iodine
Carried inland on the southern breeze)
As a face is tilted (eyes elsewhere)
Up to the sun, up for the grace of love.
Heavy with summer's apogée
The trees are hanging in distant squares;
Petrol and tarmac shimmer there.
There is no hope, but no more need to hope.
The long note is held quavering
Stick on a drumskin is still.
48
It had been a pearl of a day at five, and fine since, for the last day of the fair.
The forecast thunderous cloud seemed to be keeping off.
There were going to be fireworks to finish, ‘at dusk’ according to the poster on the park gates.
All through the hot week people crept along the streets, hugging the edge of shade that buildings provided, half a foot and one side of an arm at least out of the burning sun, though still sweating.
Office workers who on the first day possible in the early year had rushed out in their lunch hour to cover any patch of grass with bare legs and arms, floral patterns and jackets, as if some strange immediate growth had been brought out by the sun, to die back in the early afternoon, had by now got the habit of staying in the dark bowels of buildings when they could.
They would be trapped in sun and light enough crossing the great unwinking glare and oven breath on their journey home.
But by the time strands of sounds of the fair floated up from the park, people were beginning to get home, wash, relax and pick up again.
As the great ball of fire sent shafts of heat more obtusely across the town they began to turn their energies outwards again.
The glare dimmed and outlines of roofs and trees and angles at street junctions, lampposts, signs, doorways, scaffolding and cranes — too molten to look up at at two in the afternoon — calmed into focus, became distinct against the astounding pure clarity of the sky, and later became so sharp and clear that looking at them was like a note you could not hear but only sense within the ear by some change in vibration.
And though not a leaf or outline moved, there seemed more air, and a fresh little welcome breath from time to time near one's skin.
The woman had promised the youngest child that she should go to the fair, but she must go when it suited her mother.
She would not agree to her going on her own.
The woman was tired.
She had spent the day nonstop before and after work preparing for the weekend.
At last the grease and stickiness from the meal was cleared, the whole house was straight and cleaned and orderly.
Blinds drawn down in the heat of the day had made an  oasis of quiet shadow, a source of energy that could be drawn on now like a pool of pure water guarded from the dust of the track.
She would have liked to sit down and enjoy it, or at least take the child early so she had some evening left when they got back.
‘It's no good till later, Mum.
Honestly, there are hardly any people there.’
Her husband was away visiting his ailing mother, and the rest of the family was out.
The peace of the evening stretched before her, enough of light and sun left for her not to feel cheated of her daytime.
That was what she liked about the summer.
The day was not impatient.
It waited for you.
You did not have to rush and worry that it would have disappeared by the time you caught up with it.
You could start another, different, private day all over again when normal work was done.
She thought fairs dangerous, though.
It wasn't just that machinery might burst apart causing disasters, but the things they sold to eat were risky, especially in this heat.
She had seen the little plastic bowls of grey water at the back of the hot-dog stall in which the woman rinsed her horrible cloth; she knew what the lavatories in the park were like.
God knows what they made the candy-floss out of— the colours alone looked poisonous.
And it could be such a disappointment.
A child clutching its small amount of pocket-money was so rooked, so palmed off with rubbish.
The rides were short, the games rigged.
But there were other things, things she remembered hearing had happened, although she did not want to alarm her daughter by warning her against them.
Fairgrounds attracted strange people.
Unsavoury characters lurked at fairs and with the crowds jostling, and the dark, there was cover for more than pickpocketing.
So she could not let her go alone but must stand in the crowds being shoved, the smell of greasy food and litter breathed over her in this hot air, and the constant blare of noise grinding at her.
Well, but the child had been good and she would not deprive her of saying to her friends on Monday ‘I went to the fair’.
One or two turns would probably suffice and anyway the money would not go far at this year's prices.
When they went down the road the air was getting pleasant.
Groups of people were drifting leisuredly towards the park.
Clusters with prams on pavements stopped to talk to groups coming the other way.
Two boys were fondling a large panting dog they had on a lead.
The big fat greengrocer sat under the canopy that covered his produce.
His bulk bulged over the invisible box he perched on.
He sat among his piles of fruit mopping his brow with a clean tea towel and pushed a piece of melon at the face of his grandson, a babe in arms.
Catching sight of Catherine he insisted on giving her a piece.
The shy ten-year-old did not want to take it because she had her new skirt on and a clean blouse and was intent on the fair.
A large-limbed young man got up from one of the tables outside a pub, and, like a policeman, stood in the middle of the road, his palm held up high above his head towards the cars while a very slow old lady got across the road.
He then swept the car forward with an extravagant gesture of a bow and rejoined his mates who were laughing and calling out to him.
The same leisured friendly atmosphere prevailed among the crowds in the park.
The paths were thickening as people slowly converged on that part where the machinery was getting into motion, but plenty else was going on far over by the tennis courts, by the children's playground.
Couples were strolling around, or sitting on seats rocking prams.
There was a slow setting across, a perpetual ripple of movement, not restless, not disturbing.
Here was this summer evening, their forms seemed to say, to be enjoyed by all, going on for a long time yet, with more ahead, and the fair when they felt like it, and the fireworks.
As the light withdrew from the grass and the dips in the turf and those paths that were beneath overhanging branches, and collected higher in the sky, the flashing and the music of the fairground became more prominent.
Catherine agreed that now was the right time to go there.
She gravely tried the things she liked, and sat solemnly in a bumping car with one of a family who lived in the road at the back of their house.
He said she could come with him if she didn't want to go on her own and she didn't know how to say no.
He let her hold the steering wheel, but she didn't want to go again.
She didn't like the bumps.
What she did like was a roundabout where you went up and down gradually as over waves, in a car that swung slightly but didn't turn.
It went faster and with more noise than the roundabouts for little children with engines and ducks and bicycles  fixed on.
But it did not take your breath quite away and you were not turned upside down, which she hated.
Round and round she went, just scared enough to hold on tight to the pole, the wind blowing back her spread of straight golden hair.
It fluttered up and down on her shoulders when the machine slowed.
Round she went, mouth slightly parted, eyes seeing who knew what in that circle of lights running into a liquid line as the machine quickened; in the faces, all one blur below her as she was swung out to them and back away from them again; in the dark caverns of leaves away above in the trees which seemed so distant, so other, lit in strange patches by the wandering spotlights, strange shadows feeling their way over branches as the lighted islands in the gathering dark turned and twirled, swayed, shuddered, slowed and came to rest.
Catherine had spent her pound.
Her mother bought her a double ice-cream to lick while they walked away.
The child was full of gratitude to her mother for having left the peace of the house so she could come, but of course she wanted to stay among the people.
Everyone else was going to stay for hours yet.
Just as they were leaving she did at last catch sight of some friends from school.
Her mother waited while she pushed her way through the crowds jammed round the booths.
‘She'll be all right with us.’
They all came over to talk, friendly, polite children.
‘We're not going on the big dipper.
Our Dad's here too, and he won't let us go on anything dangerous.
We'll stay together.
We'll look after her.’
‘Mum, please, I'll be all right.
I won't go on any more things.
I don't want to.
I'll just be with my friends.’
‘All right then, be sensible.
I tell you what, I might come back in an hour when the fireworks start.
If I do I'll go to the bit of railing by the drinking fountain.
But if we don't find each other, don't worry, come home straight after the fireworks.
I think they'll have them up there by the café.
I'll go and do something for an hour.
I might stay in.
I'll see how I feel.’
‘You don't have to come if you don't want to, Mum.
I'll be all right.’
‘Of course you will, darling, enjoy yourselves.’
‘Oh we will.’
She took a step or two, and then turned back.
Catherine's heart sank.
Her mother had thought of some new worry.
Some fresh picture of danger had sprung into her mind.
Perhaps she was only going to warn her yet again not to trip over the electric cables.
The woman looked in her purse.
There were two pound notes.
Something jolted under her diaphragm.
Hadn't there been a fiver?
Then she remembered she'd put the children's money for Monday on one side already, and Rory had collected his shoes from the menders.
She fingered the notes, casting her mind forward.
She could leave the blanket another week at the cleaners.
That wouldn't hurt.
She took out one of the pounds and gave it to her daughter.
‘Don't buy any of that candy-floss, mind.
If you're hungry have something to eat when you get home.’
It was worth more than £1 to her to see the child's face; and again as she watched from beyond the crowd — for she waited a little once she got free of the press.
Catherine was right.
It was lovely at the fair.
‘Let me never forget’— her anxiety relaxed into a peaceful seriousness —‘the beauty of that sight’.
There was her daughter going round in that car, clean hair flying, her good face not alarmed but alert, perhaps a hint of scare, a rather solemn smile when she caught sight of her friends — every time she came round she smiled at them, so proud — soaring up there, graceful, absorbed in the movement, not moving herself.
As she walked the woman breathed a great breath of warm night air and syringa, a waft of lime trees came with a burst of music as the big dipper swung into action; smells of beer, cigar, shampoo, sweat through clean clothes, intermingled with the night exhalations of leaves and grass.
The sexuality in the air was like a gauze backdrop in a theatre.
If a light is shone you see a whole background, and then it sinks into invisibility as if there were no wood, lake, palace among rocks, and winding paths.
She had reached the edge of the park and looked down the slopes to the fair in the dell on the far side.
There was litter, shoddiness, people here were no less commercial (the contrary, they were trying to get in three days enough to balance out the winter), no less hasty.
They had no more taste or imagination, they were no more honest; but there was a feeling of celebration, of cohesion, of festival.
It was a peak everyone had worked up to all week, in a way through all the dark dreary closed early part of the year.
They were open, ready, belonging, pausing at the fulcrum.
There wouldn't be anyone, she thought, who could get hold of someone tonight, who wouldn't be in some  blotto clinch later; but it would be mutual, a tenderness of lust, like the balmy air, not rough.
The intertwined limbs against a dark tree she passed as she left the park seemed beautiful to her.
A pity Derek wasn't home, but only in a way.
It left her free to be moved by the whole range of feeling, which was fragmented by personal action: the enmeshed lovers, the pleasure of the children, the beauty of her daughter, the fondling of the gentle night air, the great sky deepening gradually but surely, as it was being veiled in film on film of darker blues and velvets, it was all for her.
She didn't any longer need Derek absolutely here and now for her to feel the throb in her blood of full summer throwing its haze of satisfaction over everything that came to her senses.
She passed on up the street liking and not being detained by the people there and reached her house.
It was so still, so quiet.
At the back occasional noises of activity from the park broke across the air; she sat in the front room cool enough now to sew.
She had some soft material she was making into a blouse.
It lay on her bare knee soothing to her skin.
She was embroidering the collar with poppies.
The thread was clean, her hands were not sweating.
She saw her hand, brown, veined, slender, as if a separate thing from her.
It had done a lot, that hand.
It seemed to have a life of its own as the needle ate up the cloth.
Cotton smelled so nice.
This heavenly bit of peace.
Nothing stirred in the clean house.
The doors of the rooms were open and patterns of light slid imperceptibly down the landing walls, feeling their way, as if on tiptoe across the threshold.
She would not go down for the fireworks.
She had had enough of being out among the crowd, enough excitement.
She had seen plenty of fireworks in her life.
She would let be.
But after an hour she had sewed enough and she felt a shift in the air.
She heard a sudden tap tap.
A little breeze had got up and the bottom of a blind over an open window was being knocked on the sill.
Catherine might need a cardigan.
She would go down after all.
She had had her timeless hour.
The child might prefer not to come home alone.
They started the fireworks when there was still rather too much light in the sky, although it was dark under the trees over in the dell.
Then suddenly the stars began to show up and people gathered round the ropes and paid attention.
And ‘oh’ they went  as their heads tipped back, and ‘oo-oo-oh’as the slow rain of fireflies sank through the air to invisibility against the earth.
Something in the blood adjusted to the expectation of the flight, the whoosh, the pause while it hung silent and concentrated in the air, and then the burst, first upon the ear and then the scattering upon the sky; and then the relief of the fall as it died down, back again, done with, on the ground.
It is a visual equivalent of flowering, she thought, as the last petal jerks back and the calyx lies open, defenceless, the pollen blown, come to its end; and of the flowering of the body as it lets go, and offers up its clenched treasure, in the rush through narrow flight, in the relief of its settling, falling, dying, coming to its end.
And perhaps real death would be like that for the body, the final sinking and rest home of a pulsing star.
High red serpents swayed up to hang for a lingering minute and fade; busy green heads with white tails thrashed hither and thither and then dived to death.
Some were sudden and burst out in a blaze, some were gradual and soundless and floated about in bits like tinsel blown and scattered, extinguishing one neither knew nor cared where.
The sky was quite dark now, with remote insignificant stars above the trees away from where the fireworks were, and the air was full of the smell of gunpowder.
The noise from the fair had lulled.
There was a really wonderful rocket.
A terrific whoosh rushed up that surprised even those waiting for it.
High, high it went, travelling at speed.
It would escape, it would burst, if at all, if ever, only beyond their sight up among the undiscernible stars.
And then, when it had vanished, it appeared suddenly above their heads, an astounding burst hanging there, myriads of bits of light yet together, a unity.
And then, slowly, arbitrarily, in wandering divagations, every thousand fleck of light, myriads of tadpoles of fire dispersing floated down through the summer night and somewhere came to rest, black specks, on the earth again.
PART III
In those days in autumn when it is fine
The brick of the old church is such a red
The house next to it white, such a white
Ultimate, and the paint extreme of black.
The essence of all substance stands and declares.
Babies turn and look at their mothers
Boys lie on turf with dogs on no restless business,
Traffic waits without swearing, with open hand
as if to say ‘Pass by, pass by you all
I, only guardian to wait and hold.
The beautiful girl, a joy — she is not searching,
The ugly old, relaxed, are not bitter.
Nobody barges into any other;
Day's fulcrum at the point before the year plunges.’
We have not thought to expect anything further
Yet as we unbend from looking at the grass
Moving too quickly, slightly giddy from the blades
There is a luminosity, world of light — gentle:
We catch it as we straighten.
Though some of the grass is brown, it is rooted
And the mud it is rooted in gives off this light
That swells out from the patch of herbage, and shines
Up at the red brick walls, the paint, the washed sky,
And the eye that looks stores up the life for it —; Part of it
Grass become flesh and flesh exhaling light —; As the seed
Which keeps the tree entire within its thought
Holds the strength for the plant against the season
We all know is coming after this day dies.
Nearer the wall she swings, nearer, nearer
Each time slowing the circle, each time hearkening
Pausing to catch the stillness in the earth.
Hades
Waiting
Waiting for one last drop that will be the berry
Waiting for the drop to colour, and darken the plum
Waiting for pin-pricks of mercury to run together
The last one received and all within the round
Listening
Listening for the knock that chinks on the place that is hollow
Listening for the foot to halt and the steps to end there
The stopping of sound telling the ear she is here now.
Persephone
Nearer the wall these days lingering, faltering,
In her walk in the meadow taking a wider sweep;
Halting near this tumble of old bricks
Nettled, unsavoury,
She seems to examine the tufts, the ruined embrasures
If anyone comes that way.
And when they have gone
Relaxes into her musing; drawn it seems,
Pulled more and more to this unkempt edge of the field.
On the bush touched by autumn one fiery leaf
Blazes a clarion, calling across the sunshine;
On the bush by the wall one fiery leaf and one bird
Calling; announcing an approach, slowly from a distance.
Messages go out like an arrow over the wood;
Gather your strengths now, harbour them together
For soon a busyness, a stir, a progress
Will arrive at these portals, collecting from all directions
To pause before the tunnel wind absorbs them
Mustering for the journey to Hades' halls.
49
The mother had taken a house by the sea for a month for her daughter's health and it turned out to be an Indian summer that year.
When they came up the grassy track that led to the headland, out of the wood that clothed the side of the valley where the village was, the girl was delighted and her mother relieved that she liked it.
She had been listless for some time and the woman could only hope that moving her right away from the influence of the people she went around with into these beautiful surroundings might bring her back to herself.
She had been surprised in the end that her daughter had agreed to come, she had been so arbitrary and changeable lately, and there had been no way of knowing what would please her, and what bring out her bitter scornful sneer.
It was a two-storey white house nestling just within the last gentle curve up to the headland.
The back rooms looked into the soil of the hill, but the front over the richly clad valley and shining estuary on each arm of which were clusters of houses that thinned to scattered dwellings dotted among trees on the promontories.
If you walked up the brow at the back of the house you were in two minutes up on a great closely cropped bare turfy expanse, looking down at the sea; and to the left all the indentations of the coastline, the bays, the beaches and coves within them, the tumble of rocks at the bottom of some sheer cliff, far west to lonely and uninhabitable shores, was visible.
If you looked up to the right there was just a green shoulder and endless sky, day after day blue.
The house itself had one big comfortable room taking up the front with a glassed-in porch that caught the sun, and would have been called a conservatory in a grander house.
The rooms at the back were of course dark and pokey and the cupboards had a strange sickening shut-up smell that remained however much they aired them.
They stayed mainly in the front room where there were rugs on a black-flagged floor that made it wonderfully cool to come into from the burning heat of the headland.
In a cupboard the girl had found a string bundle which turned out to be a  hammock, and she spent hours lying in it.
Her mother would have been happier if she had seen her walking or going off swimming, but after all, she was resting and that's what she had brought her here for, and perhaps she was turning things over in her mind.
After one or two walks over the hills together the girl preferred to stay at home so the mother went on her own; on one of these occasions Peony had actually tidied up and got tea ready and gone a little way along the track to meet her mother when she saw her coming up the hill.
And she was quite like her old self again for the rest of that day, her mother thought, showing her a great clump of Mont Bretia she had found behind an old stone wall that went up out of sight across the turf.
‘Perhaps it was built as a wind break,’ she said, ‘there doesn't seem to be anything to keep in or out except the wind here.’
The idea of the futile brave attempt to soften the life up here — for it would have been hard and isolated when the house was built and savage in the winter — trying to set a garden on this soil, in this salt air, appealed to her.
It was what was in her immediate life she was fed up with — anything distant or in the past could bring out her interest.
Another thing that drew her was what was called the ‘power house’.
This was a wooden hut in which there was some old machinery that generated electricity for the house.
Its working was rather fitful and it failed in a couple of astounding thunderstorms they had.
Mother and daughter were glad of each other 's company then, while the electric storm boomed and crashed around them in the black night, as if aiming for this one exposed place.
It was difficult to keep the flickering candles alight, even, because of the draughts sweeping across the floors, lifting the rugs up as if there was an animal under them.
The next day was fair and washed with a spent air about it and strangely there seemed no damage to the house and none of the crumbling-looking old stones on the outer wall had fallen.
‘They knew their job when they built this,’ the woman said.
They were both slightly embarrassed at how they had clung to each other when the thunder crashed and how the daughter had nestled in, practically under, her mother's nightgown when the sheeting rain slashed down around them, beating on the windows, just as when she was a little girl.
Peony went off to the power house and got the machine turning again.
She was good with her hands and was rather  pleased to be more competent than her mother in this.
But after the first explorations and when they had absorbed the impact of the delight of the situation, the girl began to be restless.
The village was four miles away, the walk back a long climb in the sun.
Her mother of course was aware that fifteen does not relish the solitude that fifty does, and came back from the village one day when Peony had been particularly silent and lumpish, with the news that Mrs Price who kept an antique shop had her grandchildren staying with her, and she was invited to go round and play tennis with them and have tea.
‘Tennis!
I suppose they're very good and all in white and very ‘county’ like those awful people you got to ask me over and it turned out they weren't expecting me at all and there were four of them anyway.
No thanks.
I'll make my own friends if I want to.
But I might as well wait till we go home.’
‘As you wish.
But if you do feel like it, you only have to call in at the shop.
Why not, Peony?
They might be nice.’
‘Oh, I expect they'll be nice, ever so nice.
I just don't want.
If you're so keen, why don't you go?’
‘I'm quite happy here,’ and she would have been if only Peony could be pleased.
Next day Peony said she was going to post a letter, did her mother want anything from the village?
In The Beehive the woman said ‘You must be Mrs Dummett's daughter.
I'd recognise you as her daughter anywhere.
What a likeness!’
Peony preferred to be regarded for herself and not just as a stamp of her mother's, for her mother was beautiful, but Peony knew that although she did look the pattern of her mother, she had not her beauty or her presence.
Her mother was the one who was always at the centre of any gathering, it was her attention, never Peony's they wanted.
To people who went on about their likeness the girl was assiduous in pointing out that every feature when compared was different, but they were recognisable instantly as mother and daughter, as the woman in the shop said, they were from the same mould.
She accepted the invitation.
She bought plimsolls in the morning and washed her hair and sat in the conservatory drying it.
She said to her mother not to worry about when she got back.
She imagined that after playing tennis and having tea, they would  go on somewhere and she would like to be available to go with them.
Perhaps they would go down to the harbour in the evening and watch the yachts coming in to the anchorage, and sit with other groups at the chairs and tables outside the Bell Inn.
Perhaps these young people went sailing themselves.
They would walk in the dusk by the water, listening to the lapping of the tide against the boats, and there would be someone there, perhaps, whom she would understand, appeal to more than his usual friends, for she could do things like deal with electricity and mend things, and she had not always lived in England, that was interesting, and she did not just giggle and think about clothes, and he would find her a relief to talk to, this rather exceptional, different person, someone with imagination.
She was back at 6, her plimsolls still very white.
‘Did you have a good game?’ her mother asked.
‘Quite nice, but I didn't want to stay.
I wanted to come home when we finished playing, but it would have seemed rude not to stay to tea when the granny had made it.
I talked to her mostly — about Georgian furniture.
Anyway, I thought I'd come back and be with you for the evening in case you were lonely.’
Her mother had made some scones and pies in her afternoon leisure and picked some flowers in case the child came back in need of cheering up, so they ate some supper and then went out to the headland.
The sun still shed a great sparkle on the sea but the heat had gone from it and the dusk was gathering back in the valley.
Little lights were springing up in the woods as if the houses thus made apparent had been magicked into position on that instant.
‘They were quite nice really,’ she told her mother as they strolled and paused and looked and mused, ‘but they were really good tennis players.
It was nice of them to let me join in, they were very patient, but you could see they were itching for a good game and I'm just hopeless.
I suppose the most annoying thing was that I couldn't stop saying ‘sorry’ all the time.
They play every day, you see, this girl and her cousin and the two boys they know.
It was a beautiful place with an orchard and then the tennis court, but I'm not their sort really.
I — I don't think I'm anyone's sort.’
‘Well, you're my sort, darling.’
Peony was grateful but the fact that it was true didn't help.
If she was her mother's sort then she would never never get among the life that everybody else seemed to get.
‘I'm sure you're too sensitive.
You  did say was I going to the Swimming Gala on Monday and if I wanted to go along with them to go round before, at least the granny said to go round, but I said I wasn't sure what I was doing.’
‘Oh, Peony.’
‘I don't want just to tag along, Mum, and anyway, I told you, I'm not their sort.
Anyway, I like it up here.
It's beautiful here.’
And she was her mother's sort.
On Monday the endless time to fill suddenly collapsed, for Mrs Dummett developed a violent bilious attack.
She had not her usual antidote with her.
Peony set off to the chemist urgently.
If she could get there before the long closure for lunch-hour he would make her up a preparation, and Peony could get it back to her mother and possibly get back again to the harbour for the Swimming Gala.
Earlier her plan had been to go down to the village a little before the gala on the pretext of shopping and finding out the times of the events and perhaps look in at the antique shop (for Mrs Price was on the Gala committee) and let it be known she would join the young people, but now that her mother was ill that was out of the question, she pushed it on one side, the urgent thing was to get to the chemist's and get the stuff up to her mother.
She went very rapidly indeed but she knew what a long morning it would seem to her mother lying there alone unable to move.
It was a long distance down the great side of the hill, through the woods down to the estuary.
She could then either wait for the ferry, which was sporadic, or go back up to the head of the estuary and up to where the river was narrow enough for a bridge.
If the ferry boat was there it would be quicker, if not she would have lost precious time by not taking the direct path to the bridge.
She tried to make out from the hill, as she jogged down the track, whether the ferryboat was plying among the craft in the harbour.
There was a lot of activity, surely someone would take her across.
But when she got there the ferryman was not around.
All the boats were getting ready for the regatta that afternoon, bailing out dinghies, coiling ropes, and smells of food frying wafted across the smell of the estuary.
She preferred the additional wearisome walk, half an hour up and half an hour back down on the other side, to bothering one of these absorbed people.
One man in a clean white polo-necked pullover unbent from the cockpit as she passed.
‘Nice day,’ he said as she measured  distances with her eyes.
‘Yes,’ she said and hurried on.
The girl in the chemist's shop said the chemist would make up the prescription the minute he got back from the bank.
She supposed he had been held up because it was Regatta day.
Peony felt that she and her urgency were out of place in the holiday mood of bustly leisure that had settled over the drowsy little place.
It was very hot and her head was beginning to ache.
By the time the medicine was ready the ferryman had materialised and she slumped with great relief on to the cross seat, wishing the crossing was a little longer.
It had taken her so long to walk round, it took hardly more than three minutes in the boat.
The instant she set foot on the land she must set off, all uphill, to the point.
She should have got something to drink while she waited for the chemist but she hadn't thought of it then.
Her throat stung with dryness.
The man who had greeted her was on the deck of his boat cleaning something.
’‘You're in an awful hurry,’ he said.
‘You won't have any breath left for the races.’
‘Races?’
‘Aren't you going in for the Swimming Gala?’
‘Oh, well, I don't think I'll be able to.’
‘You look worn out.
Rest a bit.
Here —’ he shoved some gear off the wooden slats of the cockpit, ‘sit down for a bit.’
She hesitated, but not for the reason he imagined.
‘It's quite safe and so am I.’ He laughed.
He was indeed not what Mrs Price's grandchildren and their friends would have thought prepossessing.
He had a tooth missing which showed because he grinned a lot, and the rest were stained, and he was not reticent.
‘Oh, it's not that,’ she said.
‘It's just that I haven't time.
Now she had to sit in his boat or he would be insulted and she was glad to rest.
She'd get a move on once she was up from the harbour.
At least she hadn't had to wait over the lunch-hour.
He wanted to show her his boat which he was very proud of; and it, and he, were immensely attractive to her.
She liked the way the compass sat in its wooden box but swung free and the cleats and little pegs and everything secured with little wood or brass polished and shined fitments, and the charts in their rack behind wooden clips, smooth and varnished.
He seemed to think she would be capable on a boat.
He thought it a great feat that she had got in from the Point in an hour and a quarter.
He said he had a daughter about her age but she didn't really like sailing.
‘When my wife comes back with the shopping we're going to try out this new jib; she'll be back any minute.
Why don't you come with us and  I'll show you how she sails?’
‘Oh, but I can't.
I've got to get back.’
‘It wouldn't take more than half an hour.
You'll go faster for a rest.’
She definitely couldn't, though she thanked him and looked longingly at the boat.
Would he think her very rude and stand-offish now?
Perhaps he thought she was refusing because of his broken tooth.
She wished more than anything that she could say yes, or at least explain that if it had been left to her she would have come with all the will in the world, but there was her mother.
Hours seemed to pass.
He would think it funny when she had said she had to hurry if she just went on sitting there, so she got up to go.
‘I've got the kettle on for a cup of tea.’
Oh, tea, lovely tea down her sore prickly throat.
But she felt she couldn't stay and drink tea and then just go off, it wouldn't be right to be slaking her thirst and sitting here chatting with her mother lying ill wondering what had happened.
‘I really don't think I can,’ she said, ‘my mother's ill.’
‘Oh well, as you like — you just looked a bit whacked — off you go then.
She could wait ten minutes though without dying, you know.
Perhaps you'll get back for the Gala.’
When she reached the house, in record time, full of worry, her mother seemed calmer.
‘I don't know if it will do any good,’ she said as she looked at the medicine, ‘but it might.
I'll try it.’
She seemed totally unaware of the difficulties Peony had overcome to bring her the medicine so soon.
She welcomed the tea she made and said, when her daughter could no longer contain the fact of her marathon, ‘Oh there was no need to hurry like that, darling.
It was sweet of you to go; I just thought I better get something but once these attacks start it's a bit too late to take anything really.
You shouldn't worry so.
I probably looked worse than I was.
It will wear itself out.’
The girl spent a long time wondering whether she could pluck up courage to mention she'd thought of going to the Swimming Gala if her mother really felt there was nothing she could do.
Of course, if she had been going to get there in time for the beginning, she should have rushed back straight away , out upset at such times was the very worst thing for her mother and it would upset her to think that Peony wanted to go out immediately she'd got in.
What should she want to go out for?
She had been out and the mother left alone and ill, all morning.
By three o'clock she had asked her several times if there was  anything she wanted, brought her biscuits and tea and watched the clock for an hour.
She wouldn't be able to join in the races now, but she could get there for the prize-giving at the end of them, and for the diving display, and this time, if the yacht was there, she would stop.
‘I wouldn't have thought you'd want to go all down there again, dear, haven't you had enough walking for one day?
It's up to you.
But I'd rather you weren't late, if you don't mind.
I don't feel up to coming and looking for you and it's quite worrying alone up here when one can't move around.
Enjoy yourself.’
‘I'm sure I shall now,’ Peony thought, the more bitterly because she had been repressing her disappointment.
Soon, however, the swing of her downhill striding left her mind free for an image of the yacht and the clean white pullover and the laughing interested, face of the yachtsman.
She watched the last races and the diving display.
She was very tired.
She watched groups of people come round the winners, groups of friends going into the two pubs on the harbour street, people hailing each other, saving places of vantage on the wall for their friends.
No one spoke to her except the woman at the public toilets.
She did see the yachtsman as she trekked back to start on the long walk home, and she went towards him.
‘Oh, you made it to the Gala then?’
‘Yes,’ she said and stopped.
‘Mother all right?’
‘Yes, thank you.
She is better now.’
As he said no more there was nothing for it but to walk on.
The next time she came down to the village was after a day or two.
She looked for the yacht but another boat was on the mooring it had used.
As she stood on the quayside looking, a little yappy dog scuttered up from the cabin snarling at her bare toes a few inches from the deck, and a woman in maroon trousers and a yellow and orange flowered bikini top bulged over with fiery red flesh looked crossly at Peony.
‘Never mind, Tiddy dear, was you fwighted den?’ she said to the dog.
Tears, partly of fright at the sudden yap, had sprung into Peony's eyes.
‘If only…’ she thought, ‘if only I had…’and returned to the house on the headland.
Draw the curtain on their room
So that the moon's long fingers, broken
By thin cotton, shall not harm
These beautiful beings of the sun'
Warm and soft and animal
Almost fragrant to the mouth.
Let a little moonlight in
So the night air comes and goes
Not shut up, not spirit sealed,
But protected, made at home.
Heat of day and year, has passed
Dreaded dark is yet ahead.
Cold but fruitful harvest moon
I dim a little of your light
Lest too soon you make my children
Creatures of your glittering night.
Persephone
She looked back on the whole expanse of land
That she had walked towards, pale, seeking, joyful,
Months before, bringing back life to the earth.
Golden and brown and dried and harvested
Shone on by the temperate sun, it stretched
And nothing she could think could raise her arm
To set things going, nor no raise of head
To look into another's eyes, and smile.
She walked, as half in dream, under sycamores
Thinned from the luxury of summer now.
Their floppy yellow leaves batted the sunlight
Reflection to reflection, and the warm wind.
Lifted the light covering, so that dappled blue
Splashed on the path she walked beneath the trees.
She went out to the dykes on the edge by the water
Where flat brown ploughland met the darkening sea,
Tide at low flood held still by a spent moon,
Brown of the shore-mud colouring the green.
Far inland her fellows played and sang
Locked in a lush valley, weary to her now.
She sat among coarse dune-grass and fixed on the distant
Pale horizon that vaporised into sky,
Incredibly far, utterly swept and empty.
After some time she roused and took her way
Back inland to gardens, to town parks
Deserted in this quiet noon but for the sweepers
Leaning on rakes and watching the slow leaves sinking.
She found a soft mound of them behind a shed
And in the afternoon warmth she sank and slept.
Hades
Nearer she comes to the wall, nearer
Longer lingering each time, shorter
The periods of time out in the open meadow,
Drawn by the taint of what she tasted


Nearer to the ground droops her head
Slower she walks away and sooner, sooner
Returns each time to listen.
And I wait
For she is coming, coming.
She is mine.
Persephone
Now when the sun strokes my face
And the leaves fall
They are soft and soothing as they cover my body
Not brittle on my arms and neck, not dry yet
They are like the silk petal
Of some left poppy in an autumn jar
Black stamen all revealed, red dropped away
Like an eye open.
Why do I need this sleep that covers me
As these leaves do, nothing complete, nothing heavy
But masking, blurring, changing?
Is there memory in dreams? for I had a sense
Of another sleep, a different arousal, a time when I breathed
And woke to rain falling on houses, on gardens,
Where I live now
That do not know my past as my sleep does.
But these hold, perhaps, a life that some time else
Waking elsewhere, I'll be struck and sad to have lost.
So, as the year turns, wherever I am
The stirrings of the shadows come towards me
And I must give them quittance.
In the sunlight
I sense the drum that beats beneath the roots
And in the black world sometimes through my trance
Drifts conflict, longing, birdsong, to remind
Me, as through yards of water, that up there,
Somewhere up there I cannot see or hear,
The earth and and my mother and the great day waits
Waits and gathers strength for my return.
51
Wednesday.
You suggested that while you were away I should continue with my diary and record anything I would wish to talk to you about.
I shall try to do so and also follow your suggestion of writing down my dreams at the time of waking.
As you know, I have great faith that I shall receive help from you.
I feel I am at last in the hands of someone who will bring me back to health, to life.
I have set down the following experience as one that has haunted me for many years.
I could not write anything here yesterday because I was too desolate at the thought that I could hot come and talk to you.
There are long stretches when I forget this experience totally, so much so that when it suddenly comes into my mind again it is each time with the shock of newness.
It concerns a place.
As you suggested, I have set down what significance I think this experience has for me.
On the occasions I have returned it has usually been late afternoon.
As far as I can remember it has always been a hot one, in that season beloved of medieval lyricists.
As I linger in the grassy cart tracks joining two fields that sleep in afternoon idleness, the smell of Rayless Mayweed crushed underfoot overcomes the other pleasant hay and pasture odours.
The bleached shafts of a cart of a design current for centuries stick up very high against the flawless blue sky.
It is country, but populated.
Knowing that the village is close at hand, that the inn and the villagers will be awake for hours yet of summer light to welcome me, I linger, enjoying that expectancy of pleasure that is perhaps the most pleasurable part of a journey home.
Later, in a company or people whose paths have crossed throughout the day, promising each other further meetings as they prepare, with a sort of leisured bustle which is its own end, for some special occasion, I stroll down the hard stamped dirt roads from which the heat of day is withdrawing.
Everywhere people are sitting or standing outside, some on wooden benches outside their houses.
I walk unhurried but purposefully and, with gratified surprise but with recognition, I come across the house I have been seeking.
It is secluded but not shut off.
Inside the two  women who keep the inn serve through the hatch that opens on to the one room.
It is all of wood.
I have never elsewhere come across the style of this interior, although I recognise it as in a very common tradition.
We sit talking, the door wide to the humming summer air.
After a short while we go off, saying we'll be back in an hour or two, to stay; the night is long, the people are gathering.
I am excited and absorbed in my purpose to return to the inn but I never find my way there again.
After a long searching, entangled in other happenings, detained by pointless encounters far from the village, I wake, and that place whose spirit so often but always so briefly has been within my reach, is once more lost forever.
The sureness with which I carry out all motions on this return journey, the knowledge that is part of the recognition, overwhelmingly convinces me, in the dream and on waking, that I have often, often been there, although, as you know, I never lived in the country as a child, and all the lore that I needed for my little articles on Nature was garnered later from various sources.
The only outings I remember being taken on as a child were once with the school to the zoo and once by my mother to a seaside promenade.
There was nothing green there, only a high concrete wall, and beyond it a huge stretch of agitated grey water that frightened me.
It was freezing cold and we didn't go inside anywhere.
What I mourned — even in the dream I feel the sadness coming — is what I never had, the unattainable.
Fulfilled happiness, like the circle, leaves no ends dangling to sway in our dreams, waking or night-time.
The pain lies in the reminder how far, how irrevocably, hopelessly far we are from what we might once have had, from what was so nearly within the grasp.
Between waking and full consciousness I see clearly that I should never have so casually left the inn once I had got there, taking it for granted I could get back quite simply.
Even awake I feel that if I had sat on there, I might have kept it forever.
Whatever has gone wrong, it was all our fault, but we are trapped in helplessness, and as we contemplate the dull ruins of the fabric of our lives in the light that shines from our visions of what might have been, our ‘real’ life seems messier and drabber, and we weep in self-pity for the golden afternoons that never were ours.
For everyone, I suppose, there is such a place, a place that is not, for it is a country of the mind — the medieval city, the ‘fertile land between the two rivers’, my village of the heart's desire.
I think you would say that the details, important to the sufferer are immaterial to the state of mind.
They merely mirror a greed, a longing to achieve what we have no will to work for.
I can see that now.
And this is what I think the dream is trying to tell me, a message so clear now you have shown me the way to understand these voices speaking to us from the hinterland, so to speak.
It is this: the pain of loss corrupts our waking hours, what we think is a beautiful light from the imagination is the gleam of poison cast over the furnishings of our minds.
It is hopeless beauty that brings the tears to the eyes, a beauty we give to the dead hopes of our past.
No one has loved us as we did ourselves, and nostalgia extends self-love through time.
It is the knowledge of our grossness that causes us, like Caliban, to cry to sleep again.
The longing for home embodies the feeling of loss not of a place, but of time, and, if I understand your teaching aright, we must not cling to it, but turn outward to the real world.
So it was something in my subconscious trying to push me from infantile dependency to maturation that brought it about that, in the dream, I could not find the inn again.
Thursday.
This morning rang up my sister and said I would visit her tomorrow.
Cannot write much here today.
I am finding it difficult to keep up this diary knowing you are away.
I could do it when I thought of you in your house waiting to hear it all at my next visit.
But have tried to follow your instructions and arrange to see people.
Mrs Pitt was rude to me again today when I came out of the bathroom.
She is the one who needs treatment.
Friday.
Rang up Doreen and told her I cannot come after all.
Evening.
Turned on the radio to listen to a play, but it was stupid, so went to bed.
Saturday.
v. depressed yesterday, Friday.
Had the dream again last night.
At least it was recognisably the same track and the same  inn I came to.
But when I was there it was all different.
I looked out of the window and it was the back garden of Dr Jane's house, and when Mrs Pitt came up to serve me and I complained Dr Jane laughed, and it was really Dr Jane all the time and the whole place was horrible and dark and dirty and when I got outside to follow my friends the ones who were usually in the dream there weren't any people and we were in a sort of studio and the village and the inn it was so obvious now I felt a fool for going in and sitting down and expecting to be served was the crudest sort of cardboard stage set like a model for a child's history lesson and the colours were horrible and it smelt of a sort of horrible glue and ——
Dear Dr Jane, Tuesday.
As you will be expecting me for a visit on your return tomorrow I am writing to let you know I shall not be attending your sessions again.
Yours sincerely, V. Hynes.
P.S. I would rather be ‘disturbed’ that ‘normal’like you.
I don't suppose you're even capable of having dreams like the ones I used to have before they sent me to you.
And I'd rather have the things I used to see than your phoney talk any day.
V.H. 
Dear Dr Miller, Wednesday.
I was very pleased to hear that you will be leading the sessions I am to attend.
I think you will find me co-operative as I have taken pains to become informed on my condition and related states.
Indeed, this was what caused the split between Dr Jane and myself.
He did not seem able to deal with anyone who wished to work from understanding, or able to think for himself.
I suppose he felt threatened.
I have great faith that I shall receive help from you.
I feel I shall at last be in the hands of someone who will bring me back to health, to life.
It might help you to know that I have been writing down my dreams on waking, an accepted practice, I believe, in some circles, and perhaps of more use in my case than  in some as I am by profession a writer.
You will let me know of course if you think it better to discontinue this when I start the new treatment.
Whatever you advise I shall do my humble best to concur.
Yours sincerely
V. Hynes.
P.S. Dr Jane was kind enough to give me a time early in the day.
As I do not sleep well I find I am very tired in the afternoon.
V.H. 
Look through the pane
What do you see?
A person moving
Away from me.
Look on the hill
What do you see?
The sap retreating
Down in the tree.
Look on the meadow
What is there?
The grass shrivelling
Dead like hair.
And on the road
That leads to the farm?
The place is shut up
The people are gone.
52
The man had her address and was going to write, but by the time he'd got home had decided not to.
‘Let it lapse,’ he thought.
They'd had a good time, it had given him a good holiday, her too.
Silly to have bother of it when he needn't.
Enough to do picking up the threads of his own life.
Julia —; should he?
He tried to imagine her crossing to the phone, sitting down on the chair, legs slightly apart.
The image didn't really spring into life, rather vague, figure behind glass, partly Julia, partly the girl he'd met on holiday.
Time enough.
She'd probably ring him tomorrow.
Leave it to her.
Give him a free evening.
He unpacked and put everything away immediately and strolled down to the canal.
Nice excuse not to cook — no food in the fridge, too late to shop.
The trees were heavy with full foliage and here and there some were beginning to dry and turn.
There was a rather thundery purple-grey sky and the big trees were swaying about, like restless tied animals.
There will be no more growth now till next year, he thought.
They have reached their peak.
They can only go down now.
In a small pub by a bridge he had a drink and a salad.
He could not think clearly at all of any women he knew or had known.
Immense relief not to be accompanied — man or woman.
He settled, spread on the seat, smiled.
There was a group of three at the bar, two men and a woman.
The one with his arm round her calling her darling was much older than she was and rather older than the thin other man.
The vociferous one had a cape and a velvet waistcoat and was either more than a little tipsy, or had been so so often he could behave no other way.
He spoke so that you could not avoid hearing his conversation.
At the moment it was the traditional tale of going up to Jackson's at 10 in the morning after an all-night session at Dobell's — wine we drank in those days, Poppet, wine that was wine not this filthy MUCK — and demanding double portions of oysters all round and when it came to pay no one had a penny, so Dobell, who even then still had the charm of a boy of twenty, and a slim waist to go with it, said he  would bring in one of the engravings from his collection, and Gaston, who always recognised a gentleman — not like the CLODS who run  hostelries nowadays — with tears in his eyes said it was an honour, an honour to serve Mr Dobell and his friends.
‘I think Dobell did take him in something, later.
Lucky Dobell isn't around now to see what the place has come to.’
It was something then, to be an artist, and there were people like Gaston around to recognise it, whereas the English, ba, what did the English know of the art of LIVING?
The woman was in a white dress with thin bronzed arms, and thin goldened hair in a page-boy cut with a white band round it to match the dress, and good legs and shoes.
They would have included him very willingly, he could sense that.
The theatrical man occasionally glanced towards him looking for an opening; but he didn't let himself be drawn in.
He was quite comfortable as he was.
There was nothing new.
In the past two weeks he had had enough of being outgoing, talking to strangers, spending time money and love of a sort.
He wasn't interested now.
Back to work on Monday, back to his own life now.
He smiled at them as he went out.
Nice the air was outside.
Quite a few leaves underfoot here and there autumn almost upon us, next thing you knew when you looked round the trees were bare, the people hurrying home of an evening, winter upon you.
He went the long way home, but did not go down the little gang plank to the barge of a friend of his — a woman who kept ten or so cats on board and brewed some awful drink out of peaches.
Not going into his local, not going anywhere near the street Julia lived in.
No.
Hoarding possibilities, he would just go home by himself.
The squirrel has nothing on this:
Bags and bundles, bags within bags, each labelled,
Jars, in order of size, scalded, sealed
Each summer thing as it's finished with, laid mended
Washed and wrapped, away in its proper drawer,
Drawers cleaned and sweetened with mothball and lavender.
Stage by stage the whole place is turned over
You almost think they want the winter to come
They eye the toys of summer thinking ‘surely
I could get that put away, I could get that seen to’.
Coal-holes rendered, cupboards whitewashed, pans
Scoured or replaced; gutters scraped, brickwork pointed
Boxes of things from hardware shops, pickling spice
Sugar massed in the kitchen, storage jars
Stacks of wood for the saw and always some job
Waiting for men in the evening; and then some days
A secret bustle that they cannot share:
‘Hurry up and get done — I've got so-and-so coming.’
You say: ‘By spring the nails and tools will be rusty
Cobwebs covering the jars, things going mouldy
The door swinging on a hinge you could put your fist through
The spirit flown from the health.
You cannot stop it, the decay in time
You cannot keep all safe against the winter.
One little puff, and your feeble defences go down
In the face of what they're up against:
The long bare shelf, the dark ooze through the wall.
Black tide of time will wash above your house.
When the waters sink in the spring, what will be there?
The wind kills action, however full your shed,
Furnishings rot and crumble into dust
Of no more strength and substance against inertia
Than a black rag left by a tramp in a derelict ditch
Keeps off the cold.
There is no need to do this scraping and sorting.’


They look past you as you speak and it seems they see
Morning and afternoon encircled in one light
And the wind, high up, making a parabola
Of all the daylight hours until a dimming
Near tea-time brings a sudden night, surprise
After the harmless blue day when the sky
Tossed beyond the trees
And grey little vapours crept along the ground.
They look past you and smile, but not at you;
And when they have cleared go round to see some neighbour.
The women have seen the horizon drawing nearer
Hurry hurry, they say, we must get done
Now is the time, while there is light, while yet we can.
While the wind waits we must ensure the harvest
While the earth waits we must prepare the season
Gather gather in a short frenzy of effort —; A few days left alone would do it —; We do this for the future to grow out of:
A concentration of thought, a hidden communing
Stowing in the dark, filling, sealing, storing,
Assuring the stock, planting next year in this year.
One last reach to direct the good powers to us
And then we can sleep.
53
The night of the wedding party had been clear and beautiful.
The happy voices, the beat of the band, had drifted out of the open window to the street, including the neighbourhood in the festivities.
People going out of the crush for a breather and intimate talk away from the throng could linger without the girls needing the pretty shawls they had brought out to cover their bare arms.
But the next morning was cloudy.
It was still warm, but close, and very quiet, muffled.
They had the wedding in the big upper room that occupied the whole of the second floor of their Auntie's pub.
It wasn't really their Auntie's pub, but she worked there and it had been convenient to make all the arrangements on a friendly family footing.
The landlord was glad to leave preparing the room to Auntie Hetty and Philippa, and it meant they could pop in and out during the week bringing now the cake stand, now extra vases for flowers.
They were a large family, much married in the neighbourhood, and certain members of it spent quite a lot of money in his pub.
He found it worth while to put himself to the trouble of finishing touches.
The drink order would be a large one.
They were people who really let themselves go on high days and holidays, not likely to fuss about anything left over.
When Philippa arrived outside the pub she almost felt ashamed of her approval and excitement and admiration of the evening before.
It was as if she had come to the wrong place, as if the magic that shrivelled Cinderella's full satins to limp rag had breathed over this place, enchantment vanished in the wood, only the old dank trees still and always there.
Shut, the place looked very shabby.
She did not wish to have any connection with it now.
The pavement outside and the walls round the side of the building were stained with spilt drink, vomit and dried runnels of urine.
Through the early hours the close air had kept in the smell of grease and vinegar from fish papers littering the street in both directions from the fish and chip shop two or three doors down.
There was plenty of broken glass and several glasses left on the window sills and the pavement, and  of course, little piles of fag ends that barren, saving themselves journeys to the dustbins, had tipped out of the doors after everyone had gone.
Philippa had come early because she wanted to get in in the hope of finding an earring she had lost, before the cleaner started on the room.
She had hardly been able to sleep, anyway.
This was to have been a double wedding, her twin sister, Corrie's and hers, celebrated on the day of their grandparents' Golden Wedding anniversary.
But her own engagement had been broken off.
By the time Corrie's wedding took place Philippa was over the worst of her sadness and in a good position to enjoy it to the full —; the closest to the centre of the ceremonies, yet fancy free; and she had had a very good time — much affectionate sympathy from aunts and cousins, and husbands of aunts and cousins, and admiration and flirtation and kissing enough.
Everyone was relaxed and happy at that wedding, everyone included in the goodwill, genial and unconstricted.
She and the cleaner stood a good while before the blear-eyed landlord stumbled to unbolt the door.
He said nothing, merely walked away leaving them to push it open and then shut it after them, and on Philippa explaining to his departing back that she wanted to look for her earring and take back the vases and one or two things ‘out of his way’, he said as ungraciously as he could ‘I suppose so’.
Thank goodness, she thought, she had not taken up his hinting last night.
She blushed at the thought that she had half considered it, that the pressure on her hand and admiration had added something to her pleasure, that it had made her feel successful.
As she went upstairs she saw him toss something in a little glass down his throat in one gulp and she saw the swollen nicotine-stained fingers and the watery bad-tempered eyes.
Oh, she was glad she was going away.
Last night she had rather regretted that she was, so many possible associations burgeoned, seemed to welcome, so much activity with aunts and uncles, cousins and children of these connected families, a really pleasant time opening up.
And of course, when Corrie left, changed into her new suit, her mother, emotional after the ceremony, had had another little upset at the fact that she was going away too, just when she needed some comfort for one daughter's departure.
But this morning it had all gone.
Her sister Corrie had gone.
Everyone had gone except this boorish man and his sleazy dirty  place, and the poor old decrepit cleaner, who didn't seem particularly dismayed at the sight that greeted their eyes when they went into the room where the reception had been held.
There were long streaks of stickiness on the floor to which ash had stuck, glasses with remnants of drink, some with cigarette stubs disintegrating in them, some tipped over in puddles of booze, plates with remnants of food and cigarettes that had smouldered out among them.
And a sickening stench of stale alcohol and stale smoke and an awful smell from the lavatories.
The whole corridor had a black patina that stuck to the soles of her shoes as she walked on it, cigarettes smeared in spilt liquor with the occasional squashed sandwich mashed in.
The cleaner wasn't surprised.
‘People are pigs when they enjoy themselves.’
‘But it wasn't that sort of wedding,’ Philippa said.
‘It was really nice and the room looked lovely and I didn't notice anyone getting very drunk or anything.
It was all family and friends, you know.
Of course, we had a good time and there was plenty to drink but nobody got silly as far as I can remember.’
‘I expect it was after you left.
It usually starts after the bride's gone.’
She was collecting glasses and plates from all over, slinging the contents in a vile bucket, and Philippa noticed that she wasn't particularly careful where she stubbed out the cigarette that dropped a little trail of ash wherever she went.
Philippa didn't find her earring.
She hadn't really expected to, she realised.
She got two of the vases.
The third she found broken, knocked over on to its side, the water dripping from a puddle on the windowsill on to a seat below and through that on to the floor, and the flowers scattered and brown-edged, as if they'd been picked for their beauty and freshness by a little girl and then loosed regardlessly on the path from her sticky hands as she ran off to do something else.
It wasn't really the earring she'd come for, then.
Perhaps she sought some prolongation of that feeling of joy and unity and excitement, the festival holiday feeling, the warm inclusion, yes, even being embraced by those formidable satiny bosoms and kissing the soft powdery cheeks of the old women, had made her feel part of it all.
At one point she had joined a group of these elderly relatives, women either widowed, de-childed or, their men at the bar talking men's talk, temporarily joined in huddle with  sisters.
They were sitting on a bench waiting for the toilets and wanted Philippa to sit with them.
‘Don't you want to go then?
I suppose you don't need to like us old people,’ and entered into detailed descriptions of the state of their bladders and allied organs, and operations; and then the jokes and the guffaws and laughter and the pokings and teasing turned to sexual matters, and Philippa felt ashamed for them, these shrivelled old dames, with dazzling movable white teeth, among them some whom surgery permitted to continue without wombs, without breasts, so gloating on the idea of dicks and holes and hairy entrances and moist lips, and cheeks and cracks, and their skinny stiff twisted hands, the thought of them pawing and patting revolted her, but of course they wanted to touch her, her shining hair, her firm face, her lovely arms.
‘It'll be your turn soon, Philly,’ one of them, who didn't know of her broken engagement, said.
‘Someone's going to be a lucky man.
Ah, if I had my time again…’
‘You'd do the same, Teresa.’
‘Yes, I daresay, but twice as hard.’
This wag regarded as a great joke.
One put her hand on Philippa's leg, and patted and gripped so it quite hurt her, up on her thigh.
‘You take it while you can get it, my love, you take my advice.
There's nothing like it.
Nothing.
I took everything I could get when I was young and I don't regret it.
I was married young, of course, and he was well pleased.
'Course, we didn't have telly in those days, and couldn't afford holidays or anything like that.
So we concentrated on the pleasure we could get for nothing.
I still think of him, though I lost him before we was fifty — that's more than thirty years ago now dear.
Oh, he had a lovely lump of flesh.
No, I don't regret it.’
‘Yes, and look at you now,’ thought Philippa, ‘woe betide anything in trousers that came your way, you filthy old hag.’
Another said mournfully, ‘Don't you let them impose on you, dear.
Time enough.
You keep your freedom as long as you can.
You young girls can call the tune nowadays.
Of course it wasn't so in my day.
I've had nine, so I ought to know.
And it's the first one that traps you.
Once a man's lumbered you with one, he's got you where he wants you — in the kitchen and in the bed.
You lead your own life as long as you can.
It's a long time at the sink.’
As Philippa disentangled herself she heard them on some well-worn tale.
‘And when she fell for her thirteenth I said, ‘Can't you get him to leave you alone’(not that that's what she wanted, knowing her), and she said, ‘Well, what can I do?
He a big man and if I say I'm not well he says he'll have it up the back then and…’ and I said ‘Well, you'll just have to put a stopper in it then, won't you?’
Haw, haw, haw.’
But they had made her feel restless with their talk and it was in that mood that she'd let the landlord get close to her by the open landing window as he was bringing up some more beer.
She had been rather grateful to him at the time.
But now she was glad she would have nothing more to do with this place.
‘But why must you go away, just when Corrie's leaving me?’ her mother had asked when she'd told her she had fixed up a job as a nanny with a family in the north which would give her a better chance of training as nursery nurse.
‘Mother, it's best for me to go, really.
And it's not so far.
I'll get time off.
I'll be coming back to see you.’
, And much as she had disliked the old women when they were grasping at her and joking about her, she did notice that they comforted her mother, talking about her two lovely clever daughters, and made her join in a bit of a singsong and made her laugh.
After all, they were family, friends from long ago.
Anyway, she seemed to cheer up a bit listening to their trite old remarks about it coming to everybody, and after that her mother had been all right and seemed to accept it.
She probably just had to have her little weep as part of the whole business.
As she went out she caught sight of herself in the mirror at the back of the counter.
She looked tired pale and dispirited.
As well as the two vases and the cake stand, she was clutching the remnants of the shrivelled flowers.
She stopped and looked full face into the mirror, as if , among the distorted outlines of the bar she was standing in as it stretched far into the mirror-room that swallowed it up and pulled it into strange shapes, she was looking for something not apparent in the real room.
She picked up her things again and made for the dim daylight outside, rather relieved it wasn't a bright day.
She was longing to go somewhere away from all this, among people who didn't know her, quiet and dark where nothing happened.
As the door clicked to behind her she had an image of the bunch of flowers on the counter, their stained reflection gleaming in the glass.
‘Let them lie there,’ she thought.
They were finished anyway.