

3 Testing the Rational Expectations Hypothesis
In this chapter we consider some of the basic issues involved in testing the rational expectations hypothesis.
As in the previous chapter we shall at this stage keep the discussion fairly general, leaving more precise discussion to later chapters, in which we consider tests of rational expectations in specific contexts.
We first consider tests of the rational expectations hypothesis in those relatively few cases when the expected variable is directly measured.
We then consider the more usual problem facing us: how to test the rational expectations hypothesis when the expected variable is not directly observed or measured.
The central, distinctive idea here is that the rational expectations hypothesis can be seen as imposing restrictions on what we should observe in the world, and so the validity of rational expectations can be tested by testing for the validity of those restrictions.
3.1 DIRECT TESTS OF RATIONALITY
Imagine that we could directly observe a particular person's or group's expectation formed last period of the current period's value of an economic variable.
We might think of this variable as the retail price index and label its current value P, but it could be any economic variable.
Possession of such direct observations on expectations would allow us to test the validity of the rational expectations hypothesis in two ways.
The first, and weaker test, would exploit one of the central predictions of the rational expectations hypothesis which we explained in chapter 2: that forecast errors arise from the inherent unpredictability or stochastic nature  of the variable and should exhibit no pattern; that is, they should not be predictable on the basis of any information available at the time the forecast is made; and the forecast errors should, on average, be zero.
For the variable we are considering, this prediction implies that the difference between the current value of the retail price index and the expectation of that index formed last period will be a serially uncorrelated random variable with mean zero, that is: where P t is the actual value of the current retail price index, is the expectation of P t , formed in period , and v t is the random forecast error, which is uncorrelated with any information available in period  or earlier.
If we could directly observe  then we could use the data on P t and  in the regression: where α and α 1 are coefficients to be estimated and  t is a random error with zero mean and constant variance.
If the prediction of the rational expectations hypothesis embodied in equation (3.1) is correct then the regression in equation (3.2) should yield an estimate of α 1 which implies that α 1 is zero, and an estimate of α 1 which implies that α 1 is unity.
More formally, the regression should yield results such that the joint null hypothesis  cannot be rejected.
(In the next section we discuss how ‘restrictions’ such as α = 0 and α 1 = 1 can be tested.)
We should also observe that the error term in the regression,t , is a serially uncorrelated random error; that is, it should exhibit no pattern since, under the hypothesis of rational expectations, it is the forecasting error.
The test of the null hypothesis, H is called a test of the ‘unbiasedness property’ of rational expectations.
It is also referred to as a ‘weak test’.
Direct observations on what people are expecting allow a second and stronger test of the rational expectations hypothesis.
This test is based on the following implications of the hypothesis: if expectations of a variable are rational, they are formed in accordance with the process determining that variable and therefore they will depend upon any set of past variables in exactly the same way as the variable itself depends upon that set of past variables.
This property of rational expectations is known as the ‘efficiency property’.
As an illustration take the link between P t and its own past values,…
Imagine that we regress the actual price index on its own past values: where the, β i 's are the coefficients to be estimated and  is a zero mean, constant variance, random error.
Since we are assuming that we have direct observations on , we can carry out a regression of , on exactly the same variables as those on the right-hand side of equation (3.3).
That is, we can estimate the following equation: where the γ i 's are the coefficients to be estimated and  is a zero mean, constant variance, random error.
If the rational expectations hypothesis is correct we should find, provided that we have a large enough sample, that the coefficient estimated on each variable in equation (3.3) is approximately the same as the coefficient estimated on the same variable in equation (3.4); that is, β 1 should equal γ 1 , β 2 should equal γ 2 , and so on .
More formally, we can test the rational expectations hypothesis by testing the joint null hypothesis,.
Rejection of H would imply a rejection of the rational expectations hypothesis.
The reason why the two sets of coefficients in equations (3.3) and (3.4) should be the same under rational expectations can be seen clearly if we subtract equation (3.4) from equation (3.3) to obtain:
The left-hand side of equation (3.5) must equal a random variable, as shown in equation (3.1), which it will if  for all i.
Another way of putting this is that under rational expectations the forecast error,, is independent of all lagged information, in this case lagged prices.
Both of the tests we have examined require direct observations of the expected variable.
As we explained in chapter 1, for most variables we do not have such direct observations and cannot therefore  carry out the tests.
But for some variables we do, and some economists have used the available data to carry out these tests of the rational expectations hypothesis.
One of the first studies to test the unbiasedness property was by Turnovsky (1970).
He used data from a survey which had asked ‘informed business economists’ their predictions for six and twelve months ahead for a number of economic series which included the consumers' price index for the period 1954–69 in the US.
He found that the only period to be consistent with rational expectations was from 1962 to 1969.
That is, for the period 1954–64, using the six month ahead predictions, in the regression shown above in equation (3.2) he obtained an estimate of α of 1.137 with an estimated standard error of 0.306 and an estimate of α 1 of 0.184 with an estimated standard error of 0.17.
Therefore α appears to be non-zero and α 1 appears to be less that unity, which refutes the hypothesis that these expectations were rationally formed.
For the period 1962–9, however, Turnovsky obtained an estimate of α which was not significantly different from zero and an estimate of α 1 of 1.039 with an estimated standard error of 0.083, which implies that the hypothesis that α 1 is equal to unity cannot be rejected.
So, for this period, the expectations did satisfy the unbiasedness property of rational expectations.
The twelve month ahead forecasts gave similar results.
A number of other researchers have investigated this same data set (see, e.g., Pesando, 1975; Carlson, 1977; Pearce, 1979; Figlewski and Wachtel, 1981), but their conclusions are mixed and no decisive case for or against rational expectations emerges.
Another data set of interest rate expectations of a panel of money-market professionals has been extensively analysed by Benjamin Friedman (1980).
He found that survey respondents did not make unbiased predictions and that they did not efficiently exploit the information contained in past interest rate movements, and concludes that his results are ‘mixed to unfavourable’ to the hypothesis that expectations are rational.
One other implication of the rational expectations hypothesis is apparent from an examination of equation (3.1).
Because the term  is uncorrelated with the forecast error, v t (if they were correlated superior forecasts could be obtained, thus violating the rational expectations hypothesis), if we rewrite equation (3.1) as: and take the variance of both sides of the equation, we obtain:
There is no covariance on the right-hand side of the above equation because the terms  and v t are uncorrelated.
A prediction of the rational expectations hypothesis is therefore that the variation in the actual series,, should exceed the variation in the anticipated series,, if .
Lovell (1986) reviews around a dozen papers which have carried out tests of the rational expectations hypothesis using direct survey data.
Among them is one by Muth (1985) which applies the above variance inequality test to some data on anticipated and realized production levels for some firms in Pittsburgh between 1957 and 1970.
The findings were that for a majority of the firms the variance of anticipations exceeded the variance of the realizations, which is inconsistent with the rational expectations hypothesis.
Lovell's overall conclusion on the results of the tests he surveyed is pessimistic: he writes ‘…it seems to me that the weight of empirical evidence is sufficiently strong to compel us to suspend belief in the hypothesis of rational expectations, pending the accumulation of additional empirical evidence’(Lovell, 1986, p.12).
On the face of it then, the direct evidence from sample surveys of businessmen's expectations seems to provide very little, if any, support for the rational expectations hypothesis.
There are, however, a number of reasons why we should be cautious about interpreting the results of tests which use this type of data.
First, when the questions asked in the surveys are qualitative in nature (for example: Do you expect the inflation rate to rise, fall, stay the same?), any quantitative index we use to measure the response is likely to be a crude indicator of the magnitude of the true underlying expectation and is likely to contain measurement errors.
Such errors, as we show in the next section, induce biases into least-squares estimators.
For example, α 1 in equation (3.2) may be biased downwards from its true value of one if the variable  is measured with error.
Second, even if the questions posed in the surveys are quantitative in nature (for example: What do you expect the inflation rate to be in the next year?) and the average expectations elicited from the surveys in a particular market appear biased and inefficient, only a few  ‘sophisticated’ individuals operating in that market could make the market function as if rational expectations were operating, even though many of the individuals operating in the market are not behaving rationally.
When attempting to explain market behaviour, the rational expectations hypothesis will be valid in such cases.
3.2 MEASURING A RATIONAL EXPECTATION OF A VARIABLE BY ITS ACTUAL VALUE
In this section we shall begin to consider how we might estimate a macroeconomic model of the economy which includes rational expectations, but where the expectation of the variable is not directly observed.
We shall show first that what might appear to be an obvious way to proceed is not in fact likely to be valid and that a more subtle approach is required.
Then we shall show that this more subtle procedure is a valid way of estimating a macroeconomic model which incorporates rational expectations and that it allows us to test rational expectations conditional on the economic model with which it is combined.
To see why an obvious procedure may not be valid we will consider a simple example.
Suppose that the macroeconomic model we are estimating states that consumption expenditure in period t depends upon what people in period t — 1 expect their income will be in period t, that is: where C t is desired consumption expenditure, is expected income,t is a random error with zero mean and constant variance, α is a constant, and α:1 is the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of expected income.
Now suppose that we wish to estimate the value of α:1 , the MPC out of expected income.
If we believe that expectations about Y t are formed rationally then we must also believe that the actual value of Y t diverges from the value that people expect, by a random error which we label v t .
Thus the rationality of expectations implies that:
Since the actual value of income diverges from the expected value by only a random error it is tempting to replace the expected income term in equation (3.6) with actual income and rewrite equation (3.6) as:
To estimate the MPC t α 1 , it might be thought that we could carry out the following regression: where  is an error term, and treat the value obtained for  as an estimate of the MPC t α:1 .
It might appear to be an attractive feature of the rational expectations hypothesis that it suggests such a simple method of incorporating expectations into macroeconomic models; that is, use of the actual value of a variable to measure the expectation of it.
Unfortunately, this method is not valid.
If expectations are rational than equation (3.7) implies that Y t is (positively) correlated with v t .
Furthermore, if equation (3.8) is true, then  in equation (3.9) must in fact equal .
Therefore, in equation (3.9) Y t and  must be correlated since they both depend upon v t .
The consequence of this correlation between the explanatory variable and the equation error in equation (3.9) will be to bias the estimator of  away from the true MPC t α:1 and towards zero.
The intuitive reason for this result is as follows.
High (or low) values for v t imply, through equation (3.7), high (or low) values for actual income, but no change in expected income and therefore, from equation (3.6), no change in consumption expenditure.
But, we are using actual income to measure expected income, and so a positive value for v t will suggest that there has been a rise in expected income with no accompanying rise in consumption expenditure.
Similarly, a negative value for v t will suggest a fall in expected income but no accompanying fall in consumption expenditure.
So, to the extent that changes in Y t are due to such changes in v t rather than will appear to be unaffected by expected income as we measure it, and therefore we shall obtain an estimate of α 1 which will tend to be less than the true value of α:1 .
This downward bias will be more severe the more that changes in actual income are due to changes in v t rather than changes in expected  income; in other words, the more inaccurate our measure of expected income is, the greater is the severity of the bias.
More formally, if equations (3.6)—(3.8) are the ‘truth’ and we carry out an ordinary least-squares regression of C t on Y t , as shown in equation (3.9), then, assuming that we have a very large sample so that we can use population variances in place of sample variances, our estimator of  will tend to the conventional formula: where  is the covariance between C and Y and  is the variance of Y.
We can derive the term  as the covariance between Y and the terms on the right-hand side of equation (3.8) since these terms in sum equal C. Thus, assuming that Y t and  t are uncorrelated we have:
Now, assuming that  and v t are uncorrelated we can derive, from equation (3.7), an expression for  as:
Thus, our estimator of  will tend to:
So, will equal α t only if the variance of v t is zero.
This will be the case if v t is always zero and hence, from equation (3.7), our measure of expected income is perfectly accurate.
If our measure of expected income is perfectly inaccurate in the sense that all changes in Y t reflect variations in v t , not  then  will tend to zero because  will tend to unity.
The problem essentially is that instead of estimating the true MPC t α t , in equation (3.6) we are in fact estimating the composite function in equation (3.13).
To be able to obtain a separate estimate of α t we need more information.
One source of information could be  knowledge of the variance of v,, for then we could obtain the variance of Y t , from our sample and hence an estimate of α t , from equation (3.13).
An alternative procedure is to find ‘instrumental variables’ for Y t which are uncorrelated with v *;, and obtain an instrumental variable estimate of α 1 .
(For a discussion of instrumental variable estimation see Johnston (1984), and for its application in rational expectations models see Wickens (1982).)
Notice that the error v t in equation (3.7) can be interpreted as a ‘measurement error’ in the variable Y. We are trying to measure expectations, but can only obtain an indicator which is the true variable  plus a random measurement error.
The analysis leading to equation (3.13) is sometimes known as ‘errors in variables’ or measurement error analysis.
3.3 TESTING THE RESTRICTIONS IMPLIED BY RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS
A more fruitful method of incorporating rational expectations into a macroeconomic model makes use of the central idea of rational expectations that economic variables are determined by processes.
Suppose that the process determining Y t in the above example is: where X and Z are unspecified variables that determine Y t the  's are coefficients and v t is a random error with zero mean and constant variance.
It follows that if expectations are rational we can write:
Substituting this expression for  into the consumption expenditure equation (3.6) we obtain:
It is clear from equations (3.14) and (3.16) that we could employ a two-stage procedure to obtain estimators of α t , α t and the  's, which are ‘consistent’ in the formal statistical sense.
This means that as we use more and more observations we would expect the  means of our estimators to tend towards their true values while the variability of the estimators decreases.
The first step of the two-stage procedure is to regress Y t on the set of variables  and , as in equation (3.14), and thereby secure estimates of the  's.
These estimated  's can then be used to estimate  from equation (3.15), that is: where over a variable or coefficient denotes our estimate of the variable or coefficient.
The second stage of the procedure would then be to regress C t on our estimate of  given in equation (3.17).
Notice that only one variable,, is being used in this regression.
The four elements which together add up to  have been combined to form the single variable , and C t is regressed on this single variable.
The resulting estimators of the constant term and the MPC out of expected income would be consistent estimators of α and α t respectively.
The problem experienced when using actual income to measure expected income would disappear under this two-stage procedure, since the source of the problem was the correlation between v t and the measure used for .
As equation (3.17) indicates, our measure of expected income is no longer correlated with the error term v t , since v t does not appear in equation (3.17), and so the problem no longer occurs.
Therefore the rational expectations hypothesis suggests a valid method of incorporating additional information when estimating macroeconomic models which contain expectation terms.
The key element in it is that the process determining the variable about which variables are being formed has to be estimated alongside the rest of the model.
A further and very important advantage of this method is that it suggests a way of testing the validity of the rational expectations hypothesis itself.
To see this consider again the consumption expenditure model we have been discussing.
If we measure expected income in accordance with our estimate of the process determining income, that is by equation (3.17); and if consumption expenditure is determined in accordance with equation (3.6) then, as we have shown, it follows that we can write C t as:
But this implies that if we regressed C t on the three variables  and  entered separately, rather than as a sum as in equation (3.18), we should observe that the coefficients estimated on these three variables are approximately all the same, as they are all estimates of α t , provided that we have specified the model correctly.
Thus the rationality of expectations imposes restrictions on what we should find when we estimate equation (3.18).
This is a common feature of the rational expectations hypothesis and it provides an obvious way of testing the hypothesis, for if on estimating equation (3.18) we found ‘widely different’ coefficients on , widely different estimates of α t , then it would suggest that either equation (3.6) is untrue or expectations are not formed rationally.
So, to test the rational expectations hypothesis, on the assumption that the rest of the model (in our example (3.6) and (3.14)) is specified correctly, we can test the validity of the restrictions imposed by the assumption of rational expectations.
To do this, of course, we have to be more precise about the meaning of the phrase ‘widely different’.
The precise statistical formulae for testing the validity of restrictions may appear complex but the essential idea behind them is simple.
If a restriction is imposed on a model of a particular variable's behaviour, then if that restriction is valid its imposition should not affect the model's success in explaining the variable's behaviour, whereas if the restriction is invalid it should.
To make clear how we can formally test for the validity of restrictions we shall consider first of all the following simple linear regression model: where Y, X and Z are variables, the  's are coefficients and v t is an error with a zero mean and a constant variance.
Suppose that we have a theory which predicts that  in equation (3.19).
If we had a large enough sample of observations on Y t , X t and Z t we would expect a linear regression of Y t on X t and Z t to yield the result that the estimates of  1 and  22 were the same — except for sampling variation — if it really is true that  .
Another way of putting this is that if we impose the restriction that  by adding X and Z together to form a single variable (X + Z), and carry out the regression: if β 1 really is equal to β 2 in the process generating Y t then the estimates of β and β 1 from equation (3.20), in a large sample, should not differ very much from the estimates from equation (3.19).
Furthermore, the ability of the regression equation (3.20) to explain the behaviour of Y t should not be any worse than the ability of equation (3.19) to do the same.
If, on the other hand, our hypothesis  is false, the estimates of β 0 and β 1 from equation (3.20) are likely to be very different from those obtained from equation (3.19), and the ability of equation (3.20) to explain the behaviour of Y is likely to be very much worse than that of equation (3.19).
But what precisely do ‘very different’ and ‘ability to explain behaviour’mean in this context?
What precise statistical procedure can be applied to test whether the coefficients and explanatory power of equation (3.19), the unrestricted model, are significantly different from those in equation (3.20), the restricted model?
A sensible way to proceed is to compare the estimated sum of square residuals from equation (3.19), say, with those obtained from equation (3.20) where the restrictions have been imposed, where the denotes an estimated value of the variable.
Intuitively, if the hypothesis that  is true we would expect  and  to be approximately equal in a large sample, since that implies that both models explain the behaviour of Y equally well.
Imposing a restriction which is true should not worsen the ability of the explanatory variables to explain the dependent variable or, alternatively, relaxing the restriction and allowing the estimators of  to be different should not lead to a much better fitting equation if  are in fact not different.
If it is assumed that v t and  t are normally distributed, it can be shown that the ratio  is distributed as an F-variate with g and n -k degrees of freedom, where g is the number of restrictions, n is the number of observations and k is the total number of coefficients being estimated in the unrestricted model.
In our example there is only one restriction, and the unrestricted coefficients are β, β 1 and  β:2 , so k = 3.
For a proof that the above distribution is distributed as F, see Maddala (1977).
Thus, to test the restrictions in our simple example we would estimate equations (3.19) and (3.20) separately and, from the sum of square residuals for each regression, compute the F-test statistic given above; then, compare the result with the critical F value, given the appropriate degrees of freedom, and reject the hypothesis that the restrictions are valid if the computed F statistic is higher than the critical value from tables of the F distribution.
The test is equally valid for a set of restrictions.
For example, in equation (3.19) we might wish to test the null hypothesis that  and, simultaneously, that .
Provided that the restrictions are all independent, none of them are just rearrangements or multiples of other restrictions, we proceed as before.
Imposing the restrictions on equation (3.19) we obtain:
Once again we compute the formula , where the  come from the unrestricted model in equation (3.19) and the  now come from the regression of Y t on the variable .
In this case we have two restrictions so g = 2, while k, the number of coefficients estimated in the unrestricted model, remains at a value of 3.
One problem with the above test of a set of restrictions is that, strictly, it can only be applied when the model is linear and the restrictions themselves are linear.
Thus, if in our example we had the non-linear restriction  it would not really be valid to use the F distribution.
Another test which, like the F-test, is based on the sum of square residuals, but which can be used in much more general situations, is the likelihood ratio test.
It can be shown that for large samples the statistic , called the likelihood ratio test statistic, is distributed as a chi-square variate with g degrees of freedom where, as before, g is the number of restrictions and ‘log’ stands for natural logarithm.
Once again the  's are computed from the model with restrictions imposed and the  's from the unrestricted model.
The crucial difference with the likelihood ratio test is that the models that provide the  's and  's can be highly non-linear.
The drawback is that the likelihood ratio test statistic is only distributed as a chi-square when n is very large, and misleading  results may be obtained in small samples.
The intuition behind the test is once again that if the restrictions are valid we would expect the sum of square residuals, and hence their logarithms, to be approximately the same in both the restricted and the unrestricted models.
Notice that for small differences the expression []is approximately equal to the formula  which appears in the F statistic.
With linear restrictions on a linear model, then, the F-test is to be preferred for it is valid for any sample size: in most other cases the likelihood ratio test could be used.
The restrictions generated by rational expectations models are very often non-linear and are also imposed across equations rather than in a single equation.
As an example, take the consumption function model discussed in sections 3.2 and 3.3.
There, from the following two equations: and the assumption of rationality we derived the following two-equation model:
As we noted earlier, the coefficients on each variable in the consumption relationship are restricted to equal the coefficients on the same variable in the process determining income multiplied by the MPC, α t .
Because of the non-linearity of the cross-equation restrictions we cannot use the F-test in this case, but we can use the likelihood ratio.
As the restrictions arise in a two-equation model (rather than the single equation we considered before), we now require a method of summarizing the variation in both equation errors so that we can compare an unrestricted with a restricted model.
We begin by defining the variance-covariance matrix of the equation errors as:
Next, we define the generalized variance as the determinant of the  variance-covariance matrix , which, for the two-equation case, is defined as:
Now, consider the completely unrestricted model, by which we mean a model in which C t and Y t are regressed on the same variables as in equations (3.16) and (3.14) but the coefficients attached to each variable are not restricted in any way: where the π's are coefficients and the  's are serially uncorrelated random errors.
We define the variance-covariance matrix for this unrestricted model's equation errors as:
Then, the generalized variance of the equation errors for the unrestricted model is given by det .
In general, it can be shown that for a large sample of size, n, and where all the elements of the matrices  and  are unrestricted, the statistic: is distributed as a chi-square variate with g degrees of freedom where, once again , g is the number of restrictions on the model.
The estimates of  and , and , are formed from the sample variances and covariances of the estimated residuals from the relevant equations.
The intuition behind this result is much the same as before.
If the restrictions are valid we would expect the generalized variance from the restricted and unrestricted models to be approximately the same.
The likelihood ratio test statistic shown above is a formalization of this.
The test can easily be generalized to the case of more than two equations.
3.4 OBSERVATIONAL EQUIVALENCE, EXCLUSION RESTRICTIONS AND REGIME BREAKS
The simple consumption function model used above to illustrate the idea of restrictions can also be used to illustrate certain other  issues in the econometrics of rational expectations.
The first of these is the problem of observational equivalence, a problem first discussed in the context of rational expectations models by Sargent (1976a).
The problem, simply stated, is that for any rational expectations model one can always specify a non-rational expectations model which has exactly the same implications for a given set of data, even though it may have other implications which are quite different.
Because the two models have exactly the same implications for the data one cannot use the data to discriminate between them: the two models are observationally equivalent.
As an illustration of this problem take equation (3.6) as our model of consumption, C t , and equation (3.14) as the process determining Y t .
The assumption of rational expectations implies that we can write , and thereby derive equations (3.16) and (3.14) as the rational expectation consumption model.
Now consider an alternative model in which equation (3.14) is still the true process determining Y t , but in which expectations are formed in the following irrational way: where the  's are coefficients, and  is an irrational expectation of Y t formed in period t -1.
Provided that the  's are not identical to the  's, equation (3.23) represents an irrational way of forming expectations, since it implies that expectations are being formed in a way which is inconsistent with the true process; that is, equation (3.14).
Assume next an alternative model of consumption: where the  's are coefficients.
Substituting for  in equation (3.24) using equation (3.23), we can derive:
Now under certain conditions equation (3.25) is identical to equation (3.16).
These conditions are:
Since the imposition of these conditions on equation (3.25) gives an equation which is identical to equation (3.16) we have derived a model of consumption which has a different underlying theory of consumption and assumes irrational expectations, but which has exactly the same implications for the data as our rational expectations consumption model.
No examination of the data could discriminate between them.
Despite this observational equivalence of the two models they are different models and have different implications.
For example, imagine that for whatever reason the coefficient attached to  in equation (3.14) increased to .
If the rational expectations model of consumption is correct then this change in the process through which Y t is determined should affect the behaviour of C t ; that is, consumption should now behave according to :
The very fact that the process about which expectations are being formed has altered should, under the rational expectations model, alter the response of consumption to .
The same is not true of the non-rational expectations model.
There is nothing within that model to imply a change in the response of consumption to  as a result of a change in the Y t process: expectations in this model are not being formed in accordance with the process driving Y t , so a change in that process does not imply any change in the expectations forming process.
So although the two models are observationally equivalent they are different in that they make different predictions about what would happen if the economic environment changed.
Of course, if the economic environment-in this case the process driving Y t — did change in the way we have assumed, then the two models would cease to be observationally equivalent.
Clearly it cannot be the case that  and that  if  4 is non-zero, and so condition (iii) above cannot hold in both environments.
The possibility exists then to discriminate between the two models if there is a break in the process determining Y t ; that is, if there is what is called a regime  break, a break in the process about which expectations are being formed.
In rational expectations models such regime breaks should result in a change in the way expectations are formed and hence in the behaviour of the variable influenced by expectations.
In other models no such response is implied.
In our example the behaviour of consumption should show an observable change as a result of the regime break, whereas under the alternative model it should not.
If one can identify regime breaks then one can discriminate between models which were previously observationally equivalent.
In our example if the assumed regime break occurs we can discriminate between the two models by testing the implication that the coefficient on  in equation (3.16) has increased to  after the regime break.
Examples of such tests of rational expectations models using regime breaks are given in Attfield and Duck (1986) and Bean (1984).
An alternative way of dealing with the problem of observational equivalence is to impose a priori what are called exclusion restrictions.
What this amounts to is that on theoretical grounds one excludes certain possibilities and hence excludes the possibility of an observationally equivalent model.
For example, it may be that there is no theoretical reason whatsoever why the variables  and  should affect consumption except through their influence on Y t .
That is, there may be no theoretical reason for the coefficients  and  being other than zero.
If zero values for  and  can be imposed on theoretical grounds then the conditions necessary for the non-rational expectations observationally equivalent model can be ruled out as implausible.
Thus if the data satisfy the restrictions implied by equations (3.14) and (3.16) it can be taken as support for the rational expectations model of consumption: the observationally equivalent non-rational expectations model is ruled out on theoretical grounds.
Exclusion restrictions are a frequent feature of empirical studies involving rational expectations.
The major difficulty with them is that in most contexts it is not in general possible on theoretical grounds alone to exclude the influence of one variable on another.
The typical economic variables used in empirical studies, variables such as output, prices and interest rates, are such that it is usually  possible to think of some reason why any one of them might exert an independent influence on another.
As a result the imposition of exclusion restrictions is often a controversial matter.
3.5 EXAMPLE 1: SPOT AND FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES
We now provide two examples of ways in which rational expectations has introduced restrictions which can be tested using the methods we have just described.
In the first, which we cover in this section, we examine the relationship between spot and forward exchange rates, and in the second we examine the relationship between the rates of return on assets with differing terms.
These are not meant to be comprehensive surveys of the literature, but are simply designed to illustrate the application of rational expectations to specific areas.
Later we devote a full chapter to the application of rational expectations to the theory and estimation of the aggregate consumption function.
The material that follows in this chapter made be skipped by the reader, if desired, without interfering with the book's continuity.
The first example in particular illustrates two features of many tests of rational expectations models.
First, it is not always possible to test rational expectations per se, but only jointly with other, supplementary assumptions.
Second, rational expectations often introduces restrictions which may be tested against the data.
The expectation of the future value of a currency is, strictly speaking, unobservable.
Yet the foreign exchange market (like many other asset markets) has one feature which may provide a good indicator of what agents' expectations are.
It is possible to buy and sell foreign exchange in ‘futures’ markets: that is, it is possible to conclude a contract now to buy foreign exchange at some specific future date at a price specified now.
These markets are known as forward exchange markets.
Thus, someone who knows that he or she will want to buy dollars (with pounds) in three months time could either agree a price for that transaction now (that is, buy in the forward market) or wait three months and buy in the ‘spot’ market (the market in which foreign exchange is bought and sold immediately, or ‘on the spot’).
What will the rational agent do?
If he expects the price of dollars — the exchange rate — in the spot market to be the same as the current forward price, then a rational  agent would be indifferent between the transactions under certain conditions.
What are these conditions?
The first is that the agent is risk neutral.
The advantage of the forward market is that the transaction is risk-free: the price is specified now, with certainty.
In contrast, the future spot price cannot be known with certainty precisely because it is a future price.
A risk-averse individual would only be indifferent between transacting on the forward market and transacting on the future spot market if the terms he expects on the uncertain future spot market were sufficiently more favourable than the forward market to encourage him to take the risk.
But the risk-neutral trader in foreign exchange will not need more favourable terms: he will be indifferent between transacting in the forward and future spot markets, provided that the expected future spot rate is the same as the forward rate offered currently.
There is a second condition required for a rational agent to be indifferent between equal forward and expected future spot rates.
Suppose that there are costs associated with transactions in the foreign exchange markets (brokers' fees and so on).
If the costs of transactions in forward and spot markets are the same, then risk neutral traders will again be indifferent between the same forward and expected future spot rates.
But imagine that transactions costs are greater in the forward market (and there is some evidence to suggest that they might be) than they are in the spot market.
Here again a rational trader will want sufficiently advantageous terms in the forward market to compensate for the extra costs of transacting.
The forward rate may not be equal to the expected future spot rate.
There may be other reasons why forward and expected future spot rates may not be equal (for example, Frenkel and Razin (1980) show that stochastic prices may result in a divergence between the two, but admit that this effect is of little significance in practice).
It is therefore important to distinguish two hypotheses.
The first is referred to as the efficient markets hypothesis.
This says that agents use all the available information to forecast the future spot rate; that is, they form rational expectations of the future exchange rate.
The market efficiency hypothesis states that the market behaves as if traders possessed rational expectations.
Thus market efficiency implies: where  is a serially independent forecast error with mean zero, and s is the logarithm of the spot rate (we take logarithms to avoid a problem that arises with exchange rates because of Seigel's paradox — see Seigel (1972)).
Moreover, the error term is uncorrelated with any lagged (and therefore known) variable.
Clearly, market efficiency on its own is not testable as the expectations term on the right-hand side of equation (3.27) is not observable.
The second hypothesis, referred to by Bilson (1981) as the ‘speculative efficiency’ hypothesis, requires that the forward rate is equal to the expected future spot rate:
Here f t denotes the logarithm of the forward rate at time t for foreign exchange transactions which will take place at time t + 1.
Equation (3.28) depends for its validity on risk-neutrality and identical transactions costs in forward and spot markets.
Combining equations (3.27) and (3.28) we obtain the speculative efficiency hypothesis as:
It is now clear that tests of equation (3.29) are not tests of ‘market efficiency’ or rational expectations on its own, for equation (3.29) could only be derived with the auxiliary assumptions of risk-neutrality and identical transaction costs.
For this reason, Bilson's term ‘speculative efficiency’ helps to emphasize that we have two hypotheses in equation (3.29): rational expectations and the equality of forward and expected future spot rates.
Nevertheless, equation (3.29)(or something very like it) has formed the basis of a large number of tests of rational expectations in the foreign exchange market.
(a) Weak tests
A weak test of speculative efficiency involves estimation of the following: where α and β are parameters and  is an error term.
If speculative efficiency is valid in the foreign exchange market, then we would expect to find the null hypothesis   to be true.
Estimation of equation (3.30) may give parameter estimates such that α is non-zero and β is not unity, and the null hypothesis is rejected.
If such tests have been correctly carried out (statistically speaking) market efficiency (as opposed to speculative efficiency) may still be valid.
Suppose, for example, that risk-averse traders will only trade in the future spot market if the terms being offered there are sufficiently attractive to compensate for the extra risks incurred in delay.
A trader seeking to buy dollars (for example) in the forward market will buy at a forward rate which is less advantageous to him (that is , if the exchange rate is defined as the sterling price of a dollar, f t may be greater than ).
On the other hand, traders buying sterling with dollars will be prepared to trade in the forward market at a rate that is also less attractive to them when compared with the expected future spot rate (in this case f t will be less than ).
If the values of UK purchases of dollars and of US purchases of sterling are roughly equal, dealers in the foreign exchange market will be able to balance their books at a forward rate that is equal to the expected future spot rate.
UK and US traders will happily buy in the forward market at a rate that is equal to the future spot rate, but without the latter's uncertainty.
However, if the forward market is ‘unbalanced’ in some way (for example, if the value of UK purchases of dollars forward is greater than the value of US purchases of sterling) then the market forward rate may depart from the expected future spot rate.
If then follows that the sign of the risk premium cannot be decided a priori.
Suppose that risk considerations mean that , where α is a constant.
This would be true if there are more purchases of dollars by risk-averse buyers in the forward market than sales by risk-averse sellers.
Market efficiency now implies:
In this case estimation of equation (3.30) will lead to a non-zero intercept.
Note that the market is still efficient and is using all current information in its forecast of the exchange rate.
Speculative efficiency does not hold because of the presence of a risk premium.
It still appears to be possible to test for market efficiency, for equation (3.31) predicts that the coefficient of f t will be 1.
If equation (3.30) were estimated by ordinary least-squares techniques (which assume that the error term,, is uncorrelated  with f t ) then an estimator of the coefficient β may still be biased downwards.
Why may this arise?
The answer lies in the fact that the risk premium may not be a simple constant (α in the example) but is likely to fluctuate from period to period.
Thus we may write , where  t is a random, serially independent variable designed to pick up the random movements in the risk premium.
The forward rate is now a ‘noisy’ predictor of the future spot rate.
Cosset (1984) provides evidence that the risk premium is highly volatile and random, and Cornell (1977) has shown that the risk premium changes sign over time but has a mean of zero.
The spot rate equation is now:
If equation (3.32) were the true model, it may now be clear why ordinary least-squares estimators of the parameters in equation (3.30) will lead to biased estimators of the coefficients in equation (3.32).
In particular, the estimator of β may be less than unity.
This is because f t and  t are positively correlated, so that f t and  will be negatively correlated.
This will lead to a downward bias in the estimator of β.
It is possible to employ statistical techniques that take into account the correlation between f t and the error (instrumental variable estimation, for example), but some of these methods are not statistically efficient, so that the standard errors of the estimators may be inflated.
This further complicates our task, which is to discover whether β is statistically different from one.
The discussion in this section would suggest that one would be  surprised if the joint hypothesis that α = 0 and β = l were satisfied in the ordinary least-squares estimation of equation (3.30), even when market efficiency is true.
Many weak tests, that is tests of the coefficients in equation (3.30), have failed to reject the speculative efficiency hypothesis.
The results of some recent studies for the pound-dollar, franc-dollar, mark-dollar and lira-dollar exchange rates are set out in table 3.1.
The three studies reported in the table adopt different estimation methods.
Edwards (1983) uses ‘seemingly unrelated regression’, a method which allows the errors in each of the equations for the four exchange rates to be correlated with one another.
This arises from the fact that that all four exchange rates involve the dollar: an unexpected shock which affects the dollar — an unexpected change in the US money supply, for example— will affect all four currencies simultaneously.
Frenkel (1981) uses instrumental variable estimation and Baillie et al.(1983) use ordinary least-squares.
Despite the use of very different techniques, the results of each study are remarkably similar.
For the pound-dollar, the mark-dollar and the lira-dollar the hypothesis that α = 0 and β = 1 cannot be rejected at the 5 per cent level.
The speculative efficiency hypothesis cannot be rejected for these currencies.
In each of the three studies, speculative efficiency can be rejected for the French franc — dollar rate, both because the constant is non-zero and the coefficient on the forward rate is less than unity.
These results are typical of the others: the speculative efficiency hypothesis is rejected for some but not for other exchange rates.
The weak tests are inconclusive.
Of course where we fail to reject  it does not follow that speculative efficiency is true, only that these weak tests have failed to reject it.
The tests reported in table 3.1 may be insufficiently powerful to allow rejection.
One possible reason for this is that both forward and spot rates may be strongly time-trended.
If s and f are both on a strong upward (or downward) trend, it may be difficult to obtain true estimates of the parameters α and β.
For this reason Bilson (1981) wrote the speculative efficiency hypothesis as: where the right-hand side is the rate of change of the exchange rate and  is called the ‘forward premium’.
Again speculative efficiency implies that α t = 0 and β = 1.
Using ordinary least-squares to estimate the parameters in equation (3.33), Bilson obtains mixed results.
For the pound-dollar and mark-dollar rates the speculative efficiency hypothesis is not rejected (although the Durbin-Watson test statistic indicated the presence of serial correlation in the equation error for the pound-dollar).
In the case of the franc-dollar and lira-dollar the speculative efficiency hypothesis was rejected both because the estimate of β was different from unity and because the errors showed signs of serial correlation (in the case of the lira-dollar).
(b) Testing restrictions
In a rather different approach the assumption of speculative efficiency may be tested by exploiting the cross-equation restrictions    that it implies.
This approach has been adopted by Baillie et al.(1983) and Hakkio (1981).
In order to see how speculative efficiency imposes restrictions of this sort we shall present a simplified version of the Baillie et al.and Hakkio models.
Suppose that s t and f t follow a simple first order autoregressive process of the form: where  i and β i are coefficients, and  is a random error which is serially uncorrelated with mean zero.
Speculative efficiency implies that  where f t is assumed to be the forward rate for trading two periods forward.
Taking expectations of this expression conditional on information dated t t we can write: since 
TABLE 3.1 Weak tests of speculative efficiency ()
Leading the first equation in (3.34) by two periods and taking expectations of both equations in (3.34), conditional on information dated t t we can write:
Since speculative efficiency implies that the difference between  is zero, and noting that , we must have the following restriction on the model in equations (3.34):
This restriction is satisfied when:
These conditions can be rearranged to give:
Imposing these restrictions, we can write equations (3.34) as:
These two equations can be estimated imposing the non-linear restrictions between the coefficients that are implied by speculative efficiency.
The likelihood of the model given by equations (3.36) may be compared with the likelihood of an unrestricted model which is given by: where , is a random error which is serially uncorrelated with mean zero.
If speculative efficiency is true, we would expect the likelihood from the unrestricted model to differ insignificantly from that of the restricted model.
This example illustrates the general point made earlier in this chapter; namely, that rational expectations introduces restrictions across equations which may be tested using the likelihood ratio test (or something similar).
In practice the processes for s and f described in equations (3.34) are unlikely to be this simple.
Even if we restrict the process to include only lagged values of s and f, it is highly likely that longer lags in s and f will have an effect on their current values.
A lengthening of the lags in equations (3.34) and the lengthening of the period covered in the forward rate will not change the type of restrictions imposed, but they will greatly complicate them.
Indeed, the cross-equation restrictions may become so complicated as to make computation of the restricted model difficult or impossible in practice.
For this reason Hakkio was obliged to limit himself to four lagged terms in equations (3.34) even when there was firm evidence of longer lags.
The likelihood ratio tests of the restrictions conducted by Hakkio rejected the speculative efficiency hypothesis for five exchange rates (gilder-dollar, mark-dollar, Canadian dollar — US dollar, Swiss franc — dollar and pound-dollar).
Using similar methods, Baillie et al.(1983) investigated the speculative efficiency hypothesis using weekly data for six dollar-exchange rates (pound, mark, lira, French franc, Canadian dollar and Swiss franc).
They avoided the necessity of computing the restricted model by estimating the unrestricted model and testing the restrictions using the Wald test.
This test examines the validity of the restrictions without the need to estimate the restricted model.
The Wald test is equivalent to the likelihood ratio test in large  samples.
Baillie et al.reject the speculative efficiency hypothesis in all cases.
The tests carried out by Hakkio and Baillie et al.are more powerful than the weak tests described at the beginning of this section.
But there may be reasons to think that they may reject the null hypothesis of speculative efficiency even when the latter is in fact true.
The tests they use are large-sample tests, and the distributions of the test statistics they use (such as the likelihood ratio) are not known exactly for small samples.
The application of these tests may increase the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is in fact true.
There is no straightforward way, at present, of evaluating the quantitative importance of this problem.
3.6 EXAMPLE 2: THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES
We turn now to the second example of the way in which rational expectations introduces restrictions which can be tested.
In particular, we will see how the assumption of rational expectations places certain testable restrictions on the relationship between long-run and short-run interest rates.
The bond market at any time t consists of a number of outstanding bonds with differing maturity dates.
At one end of the scale there are short-term bonds which are about to be redeemed, and at the other end long-term bonds — perpetuities — which will never be redeemed.
The term structure of interest rates is the relationship between the rates of return on bonds with different maturity dates.
In a world of perfect certainty and perfect foresight the traditional view of the term structure is that long-run interest rates are simply averages of future short-term rates, so that: where  denotes the ‘one-period’ rate, that is the market rate of interest at time t on bonds with one period to maturity; and  denotes the ‘n-period’rate, that is the market interest rate at time t on bonds with n periods to maturity.
Equation (3.37) tells us that if short-term rates are constant at time t and for the following n -1 periods the n-period rate will equal the one-period rate.
In a world of uncertainty it may be assumed that equation (3.37) becomes:
That is, individuals at time t can observe the current market short rate,, and the current market rate on a bond which has maturity date n,.
However, they have to form expectations about future short rates.
This is where the theory of rational expectations emerges once again.
We will see that if individuals are rational the manner in which they form the expectations in equation (3.38) places certain testable restrictions on the underlying model.
Following the work of Sargent (1979) we will work with a model in first differences, so we define:
Then, subtracting equation (3.39) from equation (3.38) gives:
Now suppose that at time t -1 the only information available to individuals is contained in the set .
For example, may consist of just  and a  the most recent changes in the short and long rates.
Then, taking expectations of the left-hand side of equation (3.40) conditional on  yields: which is in accordance with our definition of rational expectations.
Likewise, taking expectations of the first term on the right-hand side of equation (3.40) gives .
The expectation of the second term on the right-hand side of equation (3.40) is:
Taking expectation of all the remaining terms in equation (3.40) produces:
Now assume that the only information available is  and  , and suppose that we write the vector autoregression (VAR): where  and  are random errors with zero means, and are uncorrelated with  and .
Now, the important point about the rational expectations assumptions which lead to equation (3.42) is that they impose restrictions on equation (3.43b).
To see the form of the restrictions we will work with the very simple case when n = 2.
The relationship in equation (3.42) now becomes:
From the equations in (3.43) we can deduce that: since .
These expressions enable us to obtain the expectations on the right-hand side of equation (3.44).
That is, is obtained directly from equation (3.45a) and  can be obtained by noting that:
Then, using equations (3.45) we have: so 
We can now rewrite equation (3.44) as:
But, from the unrestricted equation in (3.43b) we have that:
Comparing equation (3.46) with equation (3.47) we see that rational expectations imposes the restrictions that: and  or, alternatively: and 
In other words, if the assumption of rational expectations is correct we would expect that a regression of the two equations in equation (3.43), using a large sample of observations, would produce estimates of γ and δ approximately equal to the expressions on the right-hand sides of equations (3.48a) and (3.48b) evaluated at the estimates of α and β.
Moreover, we could test the restrictions by comparing the likelihood for the unrestricted equations in (3.43) with the restricted version where the right-hand sides of equations (3.48) replace γ and δ in equation (3.43b).
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the likelihood ratio test statistic could then be compared with a chi-square variate with, in this case, two degrees of freedom since there are two restrictions on the model.
Now suppose that we have data on a one-period rate and on a three-period rate, so that n = 3.
The term structure in equation (3.38) now becomes: and the unrestricted VAR in equation (3.43) becomes:
Carrying out similar substitutions to the ones that led to equations (3.45) we obtain:
Clearly then, as n becomes larger the restrictions placed upon the γ and δ coefficients become more complex.
Sargent (1979) generalizes the model to the case in which: with the unrestricted VAR: In this case the restrictions on the γ i 's and the δ i 'S in equation (3.51b) are complicated non-linear functions of the α i 's and β i 's .
Sargent's derivation of the restrictions for the general case need not concern us here.
What we do need to know, however, is how these complex restrictions can be imposed on the term structure model so that the rational expectations assumptions can be tested.
Sargent's suggested solution to this problem can be seen by looking at the simple n = 3 case, which led to the restrictions of equation (3.50).
He suggests that we first obtain estimates of α and β, say and , from an ordinary least-squares regression of equation (3.49a).
We then set γ and δ on the right-hand side of equations (3.50) to zero and obtain:
These estimated values of γ and δ, γ (1); and δ (1);, are then substituted into the right-hand side of the equations in (3.50) together with the original estimates of α and β to give:
The values of γ (2); and δ (2): are then inserted into the right-hand side of equations (3.50) and so on until the method converges; that is, until the differences between γ (k); and δ (k); and between γ (k); and δ (k-l); from iteration k to k -1 become negligible.
At this point we will have found values of γ and δ that satisfy the non-linear equations in (3.50).
In fact, Sargent shows how the restrictions can be incorporated into a maximum likelihood procedure so that the restrictions can be tested using the likelihood ratio.
Sargent applies the above method to the model in equations (3.51) with m = 4 using quarterly data on the five-year government   bond rate and the 91-day Treasury bill rate for the period 1953(2) to 1971(4) in the US: we reproduce his results in table 3.2.
The unrestricted estimates were obtained by ordinary least-squares while the maximum likelihood estimates were obtained with all the restrictions on the γ and δ coefficients imposed.
The likelihood ratio test statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the restrictions are correct is 8.58, which has to be compared with a chi-square variate with eight degrees of freedom.
At the 5 per cent significance level the critical value of chi-square is 15.5.
Therefore, the rational expectations restrictions cannot be rejected.
TABLE 3.2 Term structure of interest rates: estimates for a five-year bond rate and 91-day Treasury bill rate
The above procedure gives a flavour of how the assumption of rational expectations can be used to give a model of the term structure of interest rates which can be tested.
It should be pointed out, however, that Sargent's empirical results have not gone unchallenged.
Shiller (1980) argues, for example, that Sargent's method of first differencing his data imposes further restrictions on the stochastic properties of his model which he does not test.
Attfield and Duck (1982) found that they could reject the rational expectations theory of the term structure of interest rates when they applied the above model to three-monthly, five-yearly and ten-yearly rates of interest in the UK.
3.7 SUMMARY
In this chapter we have considered alternative tests of rational expectations.
Direct estimates of expected variables are relatively  rare.
Studies using those that do exist provide little support for the rational expectations hypothesis.
In the more general case, in which there is no direct estimate of the expected variable, one cannot merely see the actual value of a variable as a measure of the rational expectation of that variable, despite the fact that the two should differ only by a random error.
But it is possible to use the process determining a variable to generate a measure of the rational expectation of that variable, and this method has the attractive feature of allowing a formal statistical test of a model which includes rational expectations.
This feature occurs because rational expectations generally implies restrictions on the coefficients of the model, and if the restrictions are valid then imposing them should not worsen the model's explanatory power.
We have also presented two examples of how rational expectations introduce testable restrictions: in the first we examined the relationship between the spot and the forward exchange rates and in the second we examined the implications for the term structure of interest rates.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Reviews of some of the literature on tests of the rational expectations hypothesis using direct survey data can be found in chapter 1 of Sheffrin (1983), chapter 3 of Hudson (1982) and part III of Pesaran (1987).
Good reviews of the method of maximum likelihood estimation and testing are in chapters 3 and 5 of Harvey (1981) and in Cramer (1986).
Methods of incorporating rational expectations assumptions into economic models and estimating and testing the models are discussed in Wallis (1980), Revankar (1980), Hoffman and Schmidt (1981), part II of Pesaran (1987) and in Lucas and Sargent (1981).
Further discussions of the observational equivalence problem can be found in McCallum (1979), chapters 4 and 5 of Begg (1982), Buiter (1983), chapter 10 of Minford and Peel (1983), in Abel and Mishkin (1983) and in chapter 6 of Pesaran (1987).
4 Rational Expectations and a Flexible-price Macroeconomic Model
One of the first and most dramatic applications of rational expectations was to a flexible-price version of Friedman's (1968) natural rate hypothesis.
The initial aim of this application was to show that in a model in which agents were fully rational, even to the extent of having rational expectations, movements in nominal spending could still affect aggregate real output or employment.
Such an effect was hard to reconcile with classical microeconomic theory, which suggests that if agents act optimally then decisions about real variables such as output would be influenced only by other real variables, and not by nominal variables.
Thus output might be altered by a technological breakthrough, or by changes in the structure of taxation which affected the choice between work and leisure, or by changes in other real variables, but should not be affected by a change in nominal spending: such changes should affect the price at which the available output is sold and not the quantity of output itself.
But a lot of evidence appeared to suggest that variations in nominal spending had, at times, marked effects on real variables.
The strongest single piece of such evidence was the Great Depression in the 1930s, when a large slump in nominal spending appeared to induce a large fall in output and a large rise in unemployment.
Other influential evidence was provided by Phillips (1958) who showed that for the UK for almost 100 years before the late 1950s there appeared to exist a stable relationship — which became known as the Phillips curve — between a real variable, unemployment, and the rate of change of a nominal variable, nominal wages.
Friedman's statement of the natural rate hypothesis went a long way towards reconciling such evidence with basic classical theory.
His central assumption was that agents are not perfectly informed about prices in markets other than their own.
From this he showed that they could be temporarily fooled into changing real output by nominal spending movements, the effects of which on prices they had not fully expected.
However, Friedman did not explicitly introduce rationality of expectations into the natural rate hypothesis, and indeed appeared to favour the use of an adaptive expectations model, at least for the US at the time he was writing.
It is clear that one of the aims of early rational expectations theorists, Lucas (1972) in particular, was to show that Friedman's apparent theoretical reconciliation of optimal behaviour with the broad facts could be extended to cover rationality of expectations.
This chapter explains how that aim was achieved.
The model obtained by combining rational expectations and the simple natural rate hypothesis produces a particularly dramatic policy conclusion, and one which gave rational expectations some initial notoriety, for it suggested that the Keynesian approach to macroeconomic policy which governments in many countries had adopted after the Second World War was at best unnecessary and at worst harmful.
We explain these policy implications in this chapter.
In following chapters we discuss the criticisms levelled at the rational expectations — simple natural rate model and its empirical relevance.
4.1 THE AGGREGATE DEMAND CURVE
In figure 4.1 we have drawn a conventional IS-LM diagram.
The IS curve shows combinations of the level of real income and the level of the nominal interest rate, i, for which it is true that the aggregate demand for output equals the actual quantity of output.
It is drawn for given levels of certain key variables, such as the level of real government expenditure, tax rates and the level of autonomous expenditure.
The LM curve shows combinations of the level of real income and the nominal interest rate for which it is true that the quantity of money demanded equals the quantity of money supplied.
It too is drawn on the assumption that the values of certain key variables are given, in this case the quantity of money and, importantly, the general level of prices.
Let the relevant IS curve be the one labelled IS and the   relevant LM curve be initially the one drawn for the general level of prices, P, and labelled LM.
The point at which these two curves intersect gives the equilibrium interest rate and the equilibrium level of aggregate demand, i and Y respectively.
This level of aggregate demand, Y, is the equilibrium level in the sense that if that level of output, Y, is actually produced each period then all that output and no more will be willingly demanded each period.
Clearly, the equilibrium level of aggregate demand is dependent on the positions of the IS and LM curves.
In particular, if the general level of prices is higher at, say, P 1 the LM curve will be to the left of LM at, say, LM, and the equilibrium level of aggregate demand will be lower at Y 1 .
And if the general level of prices is higher still at, say, P 2 the LM curve would be even further to the left at, say, LM 2 giving an even lower equilibrium level of aggregate demand, Y 2 
FIGURE 4.1 Equilibrium output at different prices.
In figure 4.2 we draw the line which plots the different values of P 1 the general level of prices, against the equilibrium levels of aggregate demand which they generate, given the values of all the other variables which determine the positions of the IS and LM curves, such as the level of real government expenditure and the nominal quantity of money.
We label this line AD and shall refer   to it as the aggregate demand curve.
It shows for any general level of prices what, ceteris paribus, the equilibrium level of aggregate demand is.
Clearly, P Y, P 1 Y 1 and P 2 Y 2 are combinations of P and Y lying on this line.
FIGURE 4.2 The aggregate demand curve.
The intuitive explanation for the negative slope of the aggregate demand curve is that a higher price implies, ceteris paribus, a lower real quantity of money in the economy since the real quantity of money is defined to be the nominal quantity of money, M, divided by the general level of prices, P 1 that is M÷P, One way in which people may respond to finding themselves with less real money than they had before is by selling off holdings of bonds to rebuild their holdings of money.
But this can only work at the individual level: it cannot work for the economy as a whole since the quantity of nominal money is fixed, and so one person obtains more money by selling bonds only with the result that someone else — the person who buys the bonds — finds himself with less.
The general attempt to sell bonds will tend to drive down the price of bonds and raise their rate of interest, and this will help eliminate the excess demand for money, since the higher the rate of interest the lower the demand for money.
But the rise in the rate of interest will do something else too: it will depress investment expenditure and thereby cause a fall in aggregate demand.
As a consequence the  equilibrium level of aggregate demand will fall.
Thus a rise in the price level leads to a fall in the equilibrium level of aggregate demand.
The position of the aggregate demand curve is determined by the values of all the variables other than the general level of prices which determine the positions of the IS and LM curves, such as real government expenditure and the nominal quantity of money in the economy.
A rise in either government expenditure or the quantity of money will shift the aggregate demand curve to the right, the exact size of the effect depending upon the slopes of the IS and LM curves.
The effect on the aggregate demand curve of a change in real government expenditure or the quantity of money can be derived diagrammatically by shifting the IS and LM curves, whichever is appropriate, or, intuitively, along the following lines.
A rise in government expenditure adds directly to aggregate spending and hence will tend to increase the equilibrium level of aggregate demand.
Of course, the financing of such an increase in government spending by the sale of an equivalent quantity of government bonds will tend to raise interest rates and thus choke off some private expenditure, but unless the interest elasticity of private expenditure is very high, or the interest elasticity of the demand for money very low, the net effect of an increase in government spending will be significantly to raise the equilibrium level of aggregate demand at any price level.
Thus a rise in real government expenditure shifts the aggregate demand curve to the right.
A rise in the nominal quantity of money will have the same effect, although the route here is slightly different.
The rise in the quantity of money leads, ceteris paribus, to a rise in the real quantity of money.
One way people might respond to finding themselves with more real money than they want would be to use their excess holdings of money to buy bonds.
The general attempt to do this will drive the interest rate on bonds down and thereby stimulate investment expenditure and hence aggregate demand.
Provided that investment expenditure is significantly influenced by changes in the rate of interest, the rise in the quantity of money will significantly shift the aggregate demand curve to the right.
There are many differences of opinion amongst economists about the relative power of fiscal policy and monetary policy to influence the position of the aggregate demand curve, but these debates are of no great concern to the question we are dealing with  here.
What is more important for our purposes is the way in which the aggregate demand curve interacts with the aggregate supply curve to determine the equilibrium general level of prices and the equilibrium level of output; we are especially interested in the nature of that interaction when expectations are rational.
To understand that interaction we must first analyse the flexible-price, natural rate version of the aggregate supply curve.
4.2 THE FLEXIBLE-PRICE — NATURAL RATE AGGREGATE SUPPLY CURVE
Imagine the economy as consisting of a large number of geographically separate markets.
It may help to think of each of these markets as being located on its own island.
On every island, that is in every market, the same type of good is bought and sold each period.
It is a one-good economy, but that one good is traded in many separate markets.
Furthermore, on each island the price of the good adjusts each period to equate the supply of the good on that island and the demand for the good on that island.
In each period, on each island there are a large number of suppliers and demanders.
They trade with each other and then, next period, may find themselves on different islands and the whole process is repeated.
Prices throughout this economy are fully flexible and competitively determined, that is they move to equate supply and demand, and no individual exerts any significant influence on price.
In the previous section we analysed the factors determining aggregate demand in this economy, in other words the aggregate demand curve.
To derive an aggregate supply curve we shall assume that suppliers are primarily influenced by the relative price of the good on their island.
If the price of the good in their market is, for whatever reason, known to be higher than its average price in the whole economy they will take advantage of this high relative price and supply a higher quantity of the good than they otherwise would.
The total level of output supplied when the relative price of the good on all islands is correctly perceived we shall call the natural level of aggregate output.
But why should the relative price of the good on any island ever change?
Why should the price of the good established on one island ever be any different from the price of the good established on any other island?
After all, it is  the same good which is being traded on each island.
The answer is because of the relative demand shifts between islands which, we shall assume, are a significant feature of the economy.
One way of conceiving of this is that in any period there are in some islands a greater than average number of demanders, and in others a smaller number than average.
This produces in some islands higher than average demand and in others lower than average demand.
Of course, over the whole economy these relative demand changes sum to zero, and aggregate or average demand is given by the aggregate demand curve derived in section 4.1.
But any individual market or island may experience somewhat higher or lower demand than average, those with lower than average demand cancelling out those with higher than average demand.
(If these perturbations around the average do not cancel each other out, they cannot be reflecting purely relative demand changes because there would be some net aggregate effect.)
In those islands where demand is relatively high the equilibrium price of the good will be relatively high and in those islands where demand is relatively low the price of the good will be relatively low.
So, given the set-up of the model, in particular given that in any one period people can only buy or sell in the island on which they are located, different equilibrium prices can be established for the same good.
What would be the relationship between the general level of prices, or the average price of the good in this economy, and the total or aggregate quantity of output supplied?
The answer to this question depends upon the amount of information that people have about what is happening in the economy.
If suppliers know not only the current price in their own market but also the current price in all other markets the aggregate level of output will be independent of the average level of prices.
For if their own equilibrium price rises by 10 per cent and the average of all other prices rises by 10 per cent too, then they will not increase output because they know that there has been no increase in the relative price of the good on their island.
If their own price rises by 10 per cent and they know that on average other prices have risen by 5 per cent then they will increase their output.
But in the nature of averages the price on some other island(s) must have risen by less than 5 per cent.
For simplicity, imagine that on one island the price of the good has not risen at all.
On this latter island output will be lower than normal because of the known fall in the relative price of the good on  that island.
Given symmetric behaviour aggregate output in this case too will remain at its natural level: the increase in output in one market cancelling out the fall in output on the other.
So in both cases aggregate output will remain at its natural level in the face of a change in the general level of prices.
On the other hand, if we assume that there is imperfect information, in the sense that suppliers and demanders know the current price for the good on their island but only get to know the price in other markets with a one-period time lag, the relationship between aggregate supply and the general level of prices becomes much more subtle.
For now if you, as a supplier, observe a rise in the price of the good on your island of 10 per cent you cannot be certain whether all other markets are experiencing the same rise on average.
If they are you would not want to raise output above its natural level because there has been no rise in your relative price.
But if they are experiencing on average a smaller rise, you would want to raise output, taking advantage of the high relative price on your island; and if they are experiencing a larger rise you would want to reduce supply.
So in order to decide what quantity to supply you would have to form an expectation of the average, economy-wide price of the good.
You would then compare this with the actual price on your island, and depending upon whether your actual price is higher, lower or the same as your expectation of the average price you would supply a quantity of output which is higher, lower or the same as your natural level.
And what is true for you would be true for every other supplier: they too will supply more than the natural level if the price on their island is above what they expected the average price to be, and less if it is below.
So the aggregate level of output will be above its natural level if the average price level is above the economy-wide expectation of it, below it if the average price level is below the economy-wide expectation of it, and equal to its natural level if the average level of prices equals the economy-wide expectation of it.
For an economy such as the one we have imagined in which there is imperfect information in the sense we have described, the relationship between aggregate supply and the general level of prices can be depicted as it is in figure 4.3.
The aggregate natural level of output is labelled y n .
The vertical line from y n shows the relationship between output and the price level when the actual price level is correctly forecast — the long-run aggregate supply   curve.
As we have shown, correct expectations imply that aggregate output will equal its natural level.
(This is quite consistent with some suppliers who face a relatively low level of demand producing below normal, while those who face a relatively high level of demand produce above normal, the two groups offsetting each other.)
FIGURE 4.3 The long- and short-run aggregate supply curves.
The line labelled SS is drawn on the assumption that the general expectation of the average level of prices is P.
If this expectation is correct and the average price level is P then, of course, the aggregate level of output will equal its natural level — that is why this line cuts the vertical line from y n at P.
But if the average level of prices is above the level generally expected, P, then, as we have shown, the quantity of output will be above its natural level, whereas if the general level of prices is below the level expected, then aggregate output will be below its natural level.
Thus the relationship between the general level of prices and aggregate output when the expected price level is held constant at P — the short-run aggregate supply curve — can be depicted as an upward-sloping line which cuts the vertical line from y n at price level P.
If we had assumed that the expected level of prices was P 1 and had drawn the relationship between the general  level of prices and aggregate output on that assumption we would have drawn the short-run aggregate supply curve as an upward-sloping line which cuts the vertical line from y n at P 1 .
This aggregate supply curve is of fundamental importance to the macroeconomic policy conclusions often drawn from the rational expectations hypothesis.
The crucially important aspect of it is that changes in the level of prices which are foreseen, or are expected, have no effect on the level of output.
Only unforeseen or unexpected price changes will cause output to deviate from its natural level.
To understand this result we have to combine the aggregate demand curve derived in section 4.1 with our aggregate supply curve and consider how the equilibrium level of prices and the equilibrium level of real output are determined.
4.3 AGGREGATE DEMAND AND EQUILIBRIUM OUTPUT
Imagine that an economy's aggregate demand curve is AD in figure 4.4 and that its natural level of output is y n .
If the expectation of the general level of prices in this economy is P, the relevant short-run supply curve is the line labelled SS.
It is clear from the diagram that if the price level is P, the economy is in  full equilibrium in the sense that the expected price level is equal to the actual price level and the level of output is therefore equal to its natural level.
From this initial position of full equilibrium consider what happens if there is a shift in the aggregate demand curve from AD to AD 1 ?
If expectations of the price level remain at P then the economy will move up the line SS since this is the relevant short-run supply curve.
Output will rise to Y 1 and prices will rise to P 1 .
It is this rise in the average level of prices above the level people are expecting, P, which stimulates the rise in output: on the typical island suppliers are tending to find a price higher than they guess the average price level to be and are responding by increasing their output and, since this is happening typically and not merely on one island, aggregate output is stimulated.
FIGURE 4.4 The interaction of aggregate supply and demand.
But this is not the only possible way in which the economy might respond to the upward shift of the aggregate demand curve.
Another possibility is that as the aggregate demand curve rises from AD to AD 1 the expected level of prices rises to P 2 , and the relevant short-run supply curve is the line labelled SS 1 .
In this case there is no increase in output.
Output remains at its natural level, while prices rise from P to P 2 .
The reason why there is no increase in output is that the typical supplier has correctly realized that the price on his island is rising at the same rate as the average level of prices, and there has therefore been no change in his relative price and so no incentive to raise output above its natural level.
While these two possibilities are interesting special cases they by no means exhaust the ways in which the economy could respond to the shift in the aggregate demand curve that we have assumed.
If expectations of the general level of prices rose to some level between P and P 2 then there would be some stimulus to output and some rise in prices.
If expectations of the general level of prices rose above P 2 then there would be a fall in output and a rise in prices above P 2 .
And if expectations of the general level of prices fell below P there could be a fall in prices and a rise in output.
All these cases can be simply illustrated using the apparatus depicted in figure 4.4; we leave it to the reader to do so.
The important point for our purposes is that until some assumption is made about the generally expected price level we cannot rule out any response of the economy to the upward shift in the aggregate demand curve.
As we show in the next section, the assumption  that expectations of the general price level are rational severely restricts the possible ways in which the economy can respond to the assumed change in aggregate demand.
It thus turns a model which is untestable, since no conceivable data could prove it wrong, into a testable one.
4.4 RANDOM AND SYSTEMATIC MOVEMENTS IN AGGREGATE DEMAND
To see what these restrictions are we must first recall the emphasis placed in chapter 2 on variables being determined by processes.
The variable we are interested in here is the variable which has caused the shift in the aggregate demand curve.
It may be a change in government expenditure, it may be a change in the quantity of money, or it may be a change in some other variable.
It does not really matter for our purposes what the variable is.
What does matter is that if we view that variable and all other variables affecting the aggregate demand curve as being determined by processes, the aggregate demand curve itself can be seen as the result of a process and shifts in the aggregate demand curve occur in line with that process.
Of course, they may be due to the stochastic component of the process and therefore be unpredictable, or they may be due to the systematic or predictable component.
From this point of view the relevant question to ask about the shift of the aggregate demand curve in figure 4.4 from AD to AD 1 is: Was it predictable on the basis of the available information relating to the process determining aggregate demand?
To put that another way, would a person who was using all the available information concerning the process determining aggregate demand have predicted that the position of the aggregate demand curve was going to be AD 1 ?
If the answer to that question is ‘yes’, then the rational expectations hypothesis implies that the generally expected position of the aggregate demand curve will be AD 1 .
In that case the rational expectation of the average price level must be P 2 .
For if the generally expected price level is P 2 the relevant aggregate supply curve will be the one labelled SS 1 which cuts the expected aggregate demand curve AD 1 to give a price level equal to the one that is expected, P 2 .
So, if the rational person thinks that the aggregate demand curve will be at AD 1 he must also expect a price level  of P 2 .
If he expected any other price level he would not be acting rationally since he would not be forming his expectation of the price level in line with the process determining it; that is, the aggregate supply and demand process depicted in figure 4.4.
For example, if, despite expecting the aggregate demand curve to be at AD 1 , people in general expected a price level of P, the actual price level will not be P: thus expectations and the model are in conflict.
The only price level which it is rational to expect if the position of the aggregate demand curve is expected to be AD 1 is P 2 , since only this expectation will generate an actual price level equal to it.
Therefore, if the shift in the aggregate demand curve from AD to AD 1 is predictable on the available information relating to the process determining aggregate demand, the expected price level will be P 2 , the relevant aggregate supply curve will be the one labelled SS 1 and the upward shift in the aggregate demand curve will have no effect on the aggregate level of output.
This is an extremely important result, both because of its policy implications which we shall consider later in this chapter and because of the scope it offers for testing the rational expectations hypothesis.
It implies that those movements in aggregate demand which are predictable will have no effect on real output and, by implication, employment or unemployment, but will only affect prices.
Rational people will predict them and thereby annul any effect they might have on real variables.
Now consider the result of assuming that the shift in the aggregate demand curve from AD to AD 1 was entirely unpredictable, the result of a positive value for the random error term in the process determining aggregate demand.
Since the shift in demand was not predictable, even rational people would not have expected it, and so the typical supplier would be finding the price of the good on her island higher than she was initially expecting the average price to be.
This might lead her to change her expectation of the average level of prices; after all, if she is rational she must know that unpredictable movements in aggregate demand can occur and that one symptom of them is that the price in her island is higher than she was expecting the average to be.
So the very fact that she observes her price to be higher than the average price level she was originally expecting may make her adjust upwards her expected average price level.
But she also knows that relative shifts  in demand occur and that these too can lead to her price being higher than the average.
So she may believe that her price is higher than she initially expected because of a relative demand shift in her favour, which she might just as well take advantage of by supplying more output.
She faces what is known as a signal extraction problem.
The signal she wishes to extract, or the information she wants, is the precise size of the random aggregate influence on her good in that period and the precise size of the random relative demand influence.
But the information she actually obtains from observing the price of her good tells her the total effect of these two influences and not their individual effects.
Somehow she has to try to extract the information she wants from the information she gets.
This is the signal extraction problem.
Exactly how a rational person will solve it we shall show later on.
For the moment notice that if the typical supplier infers that her price is higher than she was initially expecting solely because of a relative demand shift in her favour, then the typical expected average price level will remain at P and the rise in the aggregate demand curve will lead to a rise in output equal to y 1 -y n .
If, on the other hand, she infers that there has been a random upward shift in the aggregate demand curve which, by its very nature, affects all markets alike she will infer that the average level of price has risen to P 2 .
The typical expectation of the average level of prices will rise to P 2 and the shift in aggregate demand will have no effect on real output.
If she partly infers a higher average price level than she was originally expecting and partly infers a relative demand increase then the generally expected price level will be somewhere between P and P 2 , and hence there will be some increase in aggregate output above its natural level.
As we have said, later on in the chapter we shall consider what might determine the extent to which the observation that the price in your market is higher than you were originally expecting leads you to raise your expectation of what the average price level is.
The result, which we obtain there, is that in general it will be rational for agents to infer from an own price higher than initially expected that there have been both positive aggregate and positive relative demand shocks.
As a result a random increase in aggregate demand is likely to produce a positive deviation of aggregate output from its natural level.
This occurs to the extent that the typical supplier mistakenly thinks that the higher price for the good on her island  is due to a relative demand shift in her favour.
By a similar argument a random decrease in aggregate demand will cause the typical agent to find the price in her market lower than she was initially expecting; she will partly (mistakenly) infer from this that her relative price is low and will supply less output.
We can now state the central result of applying the rational expectations hypothesis to the aggregate demand — aggregate supply model that we have been using in this chapter.
Changes in desired nominal spending, that is shifts in the aggregate demand curve, can affect real output even when expectations are rational, but only if those changes in aggregate demand are random and unpredictable.
Predictable, systematic changes in aggregate demand will affect prices but not output.
4.5 THE VOLATILITY OF AGGREGATE DEMAND
Under rational expectations, movements in aggregate demand can affect real output if those movements are random because, faced with an unexpectedly high price for the good on her island, the typical supplier will at least partly infer that there has been some positive, relative demand shock on her island.
The reason why a rational person would draw this inference is that an unexpectedly high price can be due to a positive aggregate demand shock or a positive relative demand shock, and it can of course arise from a combination of the two.
Since this is the nature of the economic environment within which the agent operates it is rational for the agent to use that information about her environment to draw inferences from the information that she has about the current state of the economy, that is to solve her signal extraction problem.
And if these random shocks in aggregate and relative demand are normally distributed so that larger (absolute) values are less likely to occur than smaller ones, it is rational to infer from an unexpectedly high price in any market that this is due partly to a positive aggregate demand shock and partly to a positive relative demand shock.
Similarly, an unexpectedly low price will be attributed partly to a negative aggregate demand shock and partly to a negative relative demand shock.
(The assumption that large (absolute) shocks are less likely than small ones makes it irrational to infer from an unexpectedly high price that there has been a  negative shock to, say, aggregate demand outweighed by a large positive shock to relative demand.)
The question now becomes that of deciding what precise proportion of any unexpectedly high price is due to the aggregate demand shock and what proportion is due to the relative demand shock.
The precise answer to this question requires a mathematical statement of the model, which we leave until later in this chapter, but the general answer, which both has policy implications and can serve as the basis for a subtle test of the model, is this: under rational expectations the proportions of any unexpectedly high price which are attributed to the aggregate and relative demand shocks respectively should be based on the true process determining that unexpectedly high price; that is, on the true likelihood of any unexpectedly high price being due to a random aggregate demand increase or to a favourable relative demand shock.
So, in an economy in which relative demand shocks are typically smaller than aggregate demand shocks, the rational agent would attribute most of an unexpectedly high price to a positive aggregate demand shock — that, from knowledge of the economy, is the more likely reason.
But in an economy in which the reverse is true and relative demand shocks are large compared to aggregate demand shocks it would be rational to attribute most of an unexpectedly high price to a relative demand shock — that, again, is the more likely reason.
Therefore the signal extraction problem will yield different solutions depending upon the economic environment: economies with highly volatile aggregate demand movements will, ceteris paribus, be economies in which agents will attribute a high proportion of any unexpectedly high or low price to an aggregate demand shock; economies with highly stable aggregate demand will, ceteris paribus , be economies in which agents will attribute a low proportion of any unexpectedly high or low price to an aggregate demand shock.
But, as we showed earlier, if a positive aggregate demand shock occurs, and if the unexpectedly high local price to which it leads is attributed by agents wholly to an aggregate demand shock, then that movement in aggregate demand, although it is random, will have no effect on real output; it will merely induce a change in the expected and actual level of prices.
On the other hand, if the same shock to aggregate demand occurs and is attributed by agents wholly to a relative demand movement, then that aggregate  demand shock will have its maximum impact on real output.
In general, the higher the proportion of unexpected local price movements attributed to aggregate demand shocks the smaller the effect on real output of any aggregate demand shock.
And from our analysis of the signal extraction problem we can deduce that economies with highly volatile aggregate demand will be economies in which a high proportion of unexpected local price movements are attributed to aggregate demand shocks, and will therefore be economies in which shocks to aggregate demand have little impact on real output.
We consider below the implications this result has for policy, and in chapter 6 we show how it can serve as the basis for an empirical test of the model.
But first we briefly state the main result of this chapter so far.
It is possible to extend Friedman's reconciliation of the broad principles of rationality and the perceived facts about the relationship between movements in nominal spending and real variables to allow for rationality of expectations.
This reconciliation suggests that systematic movements in aggregate demand will have no effect on real variables such as output or employment.
However, random aggregate demand movements can induce changes in these real variables: they do so by causing rational agents to become temporarily confused between relative and aggregate demand shocks.
The extent to which such confusion occurs is related to the volatility of relative and aggregate demand shocks.
4.6 A FORMAL STATEMENT OF THE RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODEL
In this section we present a formal statement of the simplified rational expectations aggregate supply and demand model discussed above.
We thereby demonstrate rigorously the results we have obtained more intuitively above, and also illustrate a mathematical technique which is often used in rational expectations models.
The mathematics in this section may appear difficult, but in fact is only straightforward algebra.
As we have explained above, we are imagining that the economy consists of a large number of geographically separate markets or islands.
We shall index these markets or islands by the subscript  , where  z can be any number between 1 and the number of islands in the economy, N. We begin the model by writing down the supply of output in the  th market as  where is the quantity of output supplied in market  in period t; p ()t is the price of output in market  in period t; Formula; is the expectation formed in market  of the economy-wide average price of output in period t, p t , using all the information available in the  th market at the beginning of period t; and β and β:1 are coefficients, where β 1 is positive.
All variables are defined as natural logarithms.
This equation is merely a formal statement of the idea that the quantity of output supplied is primarily determined by the local price relative to suppliers' expectations of the economy-wide average price of output.
If the local price and the expected price are the same, then output will equal its natural rate, β.
Remember that the information available in the  th market at the beginning of period t includes knowledge of all past aggregate and local variables and of p ()t , but does not include knowledge of any other current price.
The next equation of the model formally states a simple hypothesis about demand in each market: where  is the quantity of output demanded in the  th market; is the quantity of nominal money held by consumers in the  th market in period t; and α is a coefficient.
Once again, all variables are defined as natural logarithms.
This equation states that the major influence on demand in the  th market is the expected real quantity of money holdings of consumers in the  th market; that is, their actual nominal holdings deflated by their expectation of the aggregate price level.
The actual nominal money holdings of consumers in the  th market can by definition be looked upon as the economy-wide average quantity of money plus the deviation of the actual from the average.
We shall assume that this deviation is a random variable,, with mean of zero and constant variance,.
So we have: where m t is the economy-wide average quantity of nominal money.
We can thus rewrite the demand function, equation (4.2), as 
We can thus identify two influences on demand in any market.
The first is common to all markets and is the average nominal quantity of money in the economy deflated by the expectation held in the particular market of the average price level.
This is the term .
The second influence,, is a random variable, the value of which can be positive or negative in any period but has a mean value of zero.
Its presence can perhaps most easily be seen as resulting from more (or fewer) demanders than average being located in the  th market.
The first of these influences represents the influence of aggregate demand since the key term, m t , is an economy-wide average: its influence is not specific to one particular market — it affects all markets and hence is not indexed on .
In terms of the aggregate demand curve developed in section 4.1 this specification is a simplification: it ignores the influence on aggregate demand of variables other than the quantity of money.
The second influence represents relative demand shifts between markets.
If  is positive then the  th market is experiencing a relative demand shift in its favour — demand is higher than average.
If  is negative then the  th market is experiencing an unfavourable relative demand shift — demand is lower than average.
Of course, if we were to add up the  term in every market/island in the economy we would have the answer zero — the markets with below-average demand cancel out those with above-average demand.
The fourth equation of the model describes the process by which the average quantity of nominal money holdings is determined.
To keep things as simple as possible we shall assume that the quantity of money is determined by the government in accordance with the following process: where g is a constant and v t is a random, serially uncorrelated error with zero mean and constant variance .
This equation states that the average quantity of money in the economy equals its value last period, plus a constant, g, plus a random serially uncorrelated error term, v t .
Since the term m t is a logarithm it follows that  is a measure of the proportionate rate of growth of the quantity of money.
We shall assume that g is known and we shall treat g as the predictable component of monetary growth; on the other hand, v t is not known and is therefore the unpredictable component.
As we explained in section 4.2, the model we are considering assumes that prices in each market move each period to equate supply and demand in each market.
Thus for each island we can write the following:
Combining equations (4.1) and (4.4)—(4.6) and solving for the equilibrium price in the  th market gives  This equation is not yet a true solution for p ()t since it contains a term in  and, as we have emphasized, a rational expectation is one formed in accordance with the true process or solution for the variable concerned.
So until we know the solution we cannot write in an expression for .
A solution would be an expression for p ()t , in terms of all the variables in the model which are predetermined or exogenous.
In this case the only predetermined variable is  and the exogenous variables are g, v t and .
We might conjecture that the general form of the solution for  which we seek is as follows:
That is, we assume that the solution for p () links p () to all the predetermined or exogenous variables in a simple, linear equation; that is , there are no expressions in, for example , or .
The rationale for this is that all the equations of the model are linear and so we would expect the solution to be linear.
Of course, we do not yet know the precise values of the coefficients of the solution, the π's, but we can now begin to work them out.
This method of solving the model is therefore called the method of undetermined coefficients.
First note that at the end of period t -1, but before period t each agent knows the value of  and g.
Furthermore, under  rational expectations each participant knows the values of the π's the coefficients of the solution for p ()t shown in equation (4.8).
They can thus form an expectation of p ()t conditional on the information that they have at the end of period t -1.
At the end of period t -1 the best guess any agent can make of the values of v t and t(z) t the aggregate and relative demand shocks in the coming period, is that they will be zero.
Therefore it must be the case that this rational but conditional expectation of the price the agent will find in his local market in period t will be: where  is the expectation formed on the basis of information available at the end of period t -1 about p ()t .
When trading in period t begins and the agent becomes aware of the price in his market, p ()t , it is clear from equation (4.8) that this amounts to becoming aware of .
But since he knew the first three elements of this expression before he observed his local price, it follows that the observation of his local price amounts to an observation of .
That is, he observes the combined impact on his local price of the current aggregate and relative demand shocks.
What he does not observe, but would wish to, is their separate effects, the value of  and the value of .
This is, in a more mathematical form, the signal extraction problem discussed earlier: how to work out the values of  and  separately from knowledge of .
It turns out that the best he can do is to form his expectation of  and  in accordance with the following formulae: where 
The intuitive explanation for this has already been discussed: the greater the proportion of the variance of the composite disturbance term which is due to the variance of  the more sensible it is to attribute more of any period's composite disturbance to .
The variance of  is  and the variance of the composite disturbance term is  provided that v and t are uncorrelated — hence the formula for γ given above.
More formally, if one were to use all the known past values of  in a regression of  one would, by the conventional ordinary least-squares formula, estimate the coefficient on  to be γ and one would estimate a constant of zero.
This is the best equation one could use to forecast the current value of  that is  given knowledge of the current composite disturbance, and is therefore the one which rational agents will use to forecast  given their information.
Since p ()t is the price of the good in the  th market, p t , the economy-wide average price of the good, p t , can be seen as the sum of all these individual prices divided by N, the number of markets.
The solution for p t can therefore be derived by summing the solution for p ()t shown in equation (4.8) and dividing by N. The results will be:
Notice that in deriving this expression we have used the result that on summation the expressions in  cancel out because they represent relative demand shocks which sum to zero.
The other terms, for example, are all the same in each market, so on averaging they occur in the same form as they do in an individual market.
Since equation (4.10) is the solution of p t if follows that the rational expectation in the  th market at period t of p t will be formed in accordance with it, given the information available in the  th market at period t.
This information includes the   and g, but does not include v t .
But we have just worked out what the rational expectation of  is, and we can therefore write:
We now have two equations which both describe the process determining p ()t ; equation (4.8), and equation (4.7) with equation (4.11) substituted for the term in .
Since they both describe the process of the same variable, they must both give the same answer as each other for p ()t , whatever the values of , g, v t and  in any period.
Thus for all possible values of these variables the following must be true:
This equality is guaranteed to hold for any values of m, g and so on if the constant terms on both sides of the equality are identically equal, and if the pair of coefficients attached to each variable are identically equal.
And so the conditions for the equality always to hold can be written:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
These five conditions can be solved for the five π's, giving:
The fact that π 3 and π 4 are equal implies that the value for γ can be written more simply as .
Substituting these values for the π's in equations (4.8) and (4.1) and using equation (4.1) we can write the expression for output in the  th market,, as:
The equivalent expression for aggregate or average output, γ t , is  or, more conveniently,
The two major results we derived more intuitively in the earlier sections of this chapter are apparent from equation (4.14).
First, only the unpredictable component of monetary growth v t affects real output.
The predictable component, g, does not appear in equation (4.14), which means that it does not influence real output.
Second, the greater the variance of v, that is the greater the unpredictability of monetary growth, the less is the influence of any given value of v on real output.
This result is apparent from the presence of the term  in the denominator of the second term in equation(4.14).
The model's implications for inflation and the Phillips curve can be also be shown formally.
The solutions for the π's suggest that the solution for the aggregate price level is:
Using equation (4.5) we can rewrite this as:
Since p t is the log of the price level, the first difference of p t , p t , is a measure of the inflation rate, P 1 .
Similarly, the first difference of m t is a measure of the rate of growth of the quantity of money, M t .
So, by first differencing equation (4.16) we can derive the model's implication for inflation, as:
Notice that, in the absence of any shocks, inflation equals the rate of growth of the money supply.
Expected inflation, can be defined as  once again, this follows from the fact that p is defined as a logarithm and hence the difference between the expected logarithm of the price level in period t and the logarithm of the actual price level in period t -1 is a measure of the expected rate of change of actual prices between the two periods.
The economy-wide expectation of the aggregate price level is given by summing equation (4.11) over : which we can rewrite as:
By lagging equation (4.16) we obtain the expression for  as 
Subtracting this from equation (4.19) gives the expected inflation rate as:
The difference between actual and expected inflation can be found by subtracting equation (4.21) from equation (4.17), giving:
The expression for aggregate output, that is equation (4.13), can now be rewritten in terms of P 1 — Pte using the implication of equation (4.22) that  and using the solution for π 3 :
Thus aggregate output is equal to its natural rate, β and some positive function of the difference between actual and expected inflation.
We now assume that there is a natural rate of unemployment, U n and that the relationship between unemployment and output is given by: where β 2 is a negative constant.
This merely states that when output is at its natural rate, unemployment is at its natural level; and that when real output is above (below) its natural level, unemployment will be below (above) its natural level.
Such an assumption is a plausible one: in booms unemployment is low and in slumps it is high.
Combining equations (4.23) and (4.24) we can generate the natural rate Phillips curve in one of two forms:
Both equations convey the essential message of the natural rate hypothesis: that a stable negative relationship between inflation and unemployment exists only when expectations of inflation are constant.
4.7 POLICY IMPLICATIONS
(a) Keynesian policy ineffectiveness
Imagine a government that follows the typically Keynesian approach to macroeconomic policy, relaxing fiscal or monetary  policy whenever the economy moves into a recession and tightening fiscal or monetary policy when the economy is booming.
In the standard Keynesian view of macroeconomics such a policy will soften the fluctuations in real output and other real variables to which any economy is prone and which are due to fluctuations in private-sector spending.
Many governments have pursued this general approach to economic policy since the 1940s, and a vast amount of economic research has gone into forecasting recessions and booms, and estimating large-scale models of the economy with the aim of enabling governments to carry out such a policy successfully.
The model that we have explained above suggests that this approach to policy, and by implication the economic research undertaken to improve it, are flawed.
The essence of the flaw is that as the process by which aggregate demand is determined becomes known and therefore predictable, rational people will predict the changes in aggregate demand that governments engineer.
And as we have seen, predicted changes in aggregate demand will have no effect on real output, or real economic activity — they will only affect prices.
Thus Keynesian economic policy is either impotent — or approaching impotence — as the process by which aggregate demand is determined becomes known.
This impotence is inherent in the Keynesian approach to policy and not merely a feature of a specific version of that approach; for by its very nature it makes government influences on aggregate demand predictable in that it links government policy changes to the current or past state of the economy.
Even if government policy is linked to the future state of the economy in the sense that it is influenced by the predictions of some government economic model, these predictions can be currently ascertained and used to make government policy predictable.
And it is precisely its predictability which renders it impotent.
The only possible way in which a government might try to use its ability to affect aggregate demand, in order to influence the level of aggregate output, would be to introduce random movements in its policies and hence random movements in aggregate demand which, as we have shown above, would produce deviations of aggregate output away from its natural level.
But to be effective these random changes in government expenditure or the money supply, or whatever, would have to be unpredictable; and that  means unpredictable to the government too, for if the government could predict them, then so could others.
Their effect would be not to stabilize output but to increase the fluctuations of output around its natural level — the precise opposite of what Keynesian policies aim to achieve.
Therefore a key implication of the rational expectations hypothesis when combined with the aggregate demand — aggregate supply model developed above is that the Keynesian approach to macroeconomic stabilization policy is badly flawed.
Much of the controversy which originally surrounded the rational expectations hypothesis was because of this implication.
(b) The Lucas critique
Further doubt is cast on the Keynesian approach to macroeconomic policy by what is known as the Lucas critique (see Lucas, 1976).
This critique has wide applicability but it is convenient to discuss it here.
Keynesian stabilization policy involves manipulation by the government of the instruments of macroeconomic policy, such as government expenditure, tax rates, interest rates and so on.
In order for such a policy to be successful and efficient the government has to have some idea of the size of any changes in tax rates and so on required to stabilize the economy, and some idea of when precisely such changes are required.
To give them this idea economists have put a considerable amount of research effort into estimating models of the economy.
These models, some of which involve hundreds of equations, are then used to simulate the effects of different policies.
Such policy simulation forms the basis of the advice that economists give to governments about what policies they should actually undertake.
It is common practice in this sort of exercise to take the estimated coefficients of the model — its structure — as given and independent of whatever policies are being carried out or considered.
If this assumption is incorrect, if the structure of the model is in fact dependent upon the policies being carried out, then a model of the economy estimated in a period when one set of policies, one policy regime, was in operation will give misleading advice about what to expect under a different policy regime.
Lucas argues that rational expectations implies that just such a dependence of the structure of many macroeconomic  models on the policy regime is likely to exist, and that existing estimated macroeconomic models are likely to be quite misleading.
We can show Lucas's argument using the model developed in section 4.6.
Recall that we assumed that the nominal quantity of money in the economy, m t , was determined in the following simple way: where g is a known constant; and v t is a random, serially uncorrelated variable with mean zero, which represents the unpredictable component of the quantity of money, and which we might think of as arising because of, say, faults in the government's monetary control techniques.
Equation (4.27) can be seen as representing a simple monetary policy regime: a different value for g, or the inclusion of other influences on the quantity of money, would indicate a different policy regime.
We also derived the result that aggregate output, y t , would be disturbed from its natural level, β only by the unpredictable component of the quantity of money, v t .
Thus we derived  where  is a positive coefficient (see equation (4.14) above).
Now, since from equation (4.27) we can write  we can rewrite equation (4.28) as: where 
Now although equation (4.29) is derived from a rational expectations model, it does not look like one on the surface.
For if one ignores the relationship between the  's and β, and g, equation (4.29) seems to say that the level of real output can be raised by an increase in the quantity of money, regardless of whether or not that increase is predictable.
To put that another way: imagine an economist attempting to estimate a model of real output in this economy.
And imagine that this economist is not working within the rational expectations framework and so makes no distinction between the predictable and unpredictable components of the money supply.
Equation (4.29) shows that this economist will find that real output can be perfectly explained by  the change in the money supply.
Equation (4.29) will therefore be part of this economist's model, which he uses to advise the government.
Of course, he does not realize that the constant, is really  and that .
To him, and  1 are just numbers which are, from his perspective, the structure of his model and which, once estimated, he takes as given.
Taking equation (4.29) to represent the economist's model, it is easy to see that he would recommend to a government that if it wished to achieve a higher level of real output it should raise the rate of growth of the quantity of money.
Assume that the government takes this advice so that the process describing the quantity of money becomes: where h is a positive constant.
Will this succeed in raising the level of output?
The model shown in equation (4.29) suggests, if we take the  's as given, that it will.
But the  's should not be taken as given: in particular, is dependent upon the money supply process.
If this process changes to the one shown in equation (4.30) and if equation (4.28) is really the truth then the value of  will change to .
In other words, the constant term in the economist's model — equation (4.29)— will fall, and by such an extent to ensure that the level of real output on average will equal the same as it did before, even though monetary growth is higher under the new policy regime.
The economist's model has proved to be unstable in the face of a policy regime change and has provided unreliable advice.
We have used a simple model to illustrate the Lucas critique, but since the point is an important one with wide applications it is worth stating it more generally.
The essence of it is that if expectations of a variable are rational they will be determined by the process governing that variable.
Thus expectations about policy will be determined by the process governing that policy, the ‘policy regime’; and changes in policy regime will alter the precise way in which people form their expectations about policy.
Estimated models of the economy which do not allow for changes in expectations when policy regimes change are therefore likely to be seriously flawed, in that they will begin to predict the behaviour of the economy badly whenever a policy regime change occurs.
By implication, these models should not be used, as they often are, to evaluate different policy regimes, since it is precisely when a different policy regime is adopted that they become unreliable.
To put that another way, there are reasons for thinking that what an econometric model builder might believe is a good estimate of the constant structure of the economy is in fact no such thing, but rather an estimate of a relationship or group of relationships which are dependent upon a particular policy regime.
If the policy regime changes then so will what was thought to be the constant structure.
Economists should therefore be cautious in making recommendations about policy changes.
Such changes may well alter what appeared to be the constant structure of the economy itself, and these changes also have to be allowed for when evaluating different policies.
More fundamentally, the Lucas point can be seen as suggesting that the constant structure of the economy, which it is a major aim of the macroeconomist to reveal, is much more deeply hidden than econometric model builders might previously have thought.
As a result the Keynesian approach to policy-setting may be difficult to carry out successfully.
(c) Friedman's x per cent growth rule
A more positive policy implication of the model is the apparent support for the approach to macroeconomic policy, especially monetary policy, advocated by a number of economists, notably Friedman (1959).
In sharp contrast to Keynes and his followers, these economists have suggested that monetary policy should not be changed in response to any booms or recessions which the economy experiences: it should not be more expansionary in a recession and more restrictive in a boom.
Rather, the government should bind itself (or even be constitutionally bound) to expand the quantity of money each period at some specified percentage rate of growth, x per cent.
The precise value of x in any year should be announced well in advance in, say, a five-year plan, and should be strictly adhered to.
The actual state of the economy should not, except in quite exceptional circumstances, induce the government to depart from its announced strategy, its x per cent rule.
The proponents of this approach to policy claim that it will encourage a more stable background in which the private sector can make its own investment and spending plans with greater certainty about future government policy; that it will prevent abrupt  and damaging shifts of policy; and that it will make government manipulation of monetary policy for electoral purposes more  difficult .
For all these reasons some economists have for years advocated this approach to monetary policy and during the 1970s a number of governments began at least to pay lip service to it by announcing target rates of growth for the money supply over the coming year.
However, within the simple aggregate supply and demand framework that we have developed above it has always been possible to show that, if expectations of inflation are not rational, then Friedman's x per cent growth rule for the quantity of money will be inferior to some other policy which links monetary growth to the current or past state of the economy.
Here, inferiority means that Friedman's x per cent growth rule would imply greater fluctuations of real output around its natural level than would a policy of appropriately varying monetary policy as the economy moved into boom or recession.
The intuitive reason for this inferiority is that irrational expectations always offer some scope for a government to ‘fool’ people systematically.
We have already seen a number of examples of this.
Take the case in which the price level expected next period is always equal to this period's actual price level.
Then, if there is, for whatever reason, a large permanent fall in aggregate demand there will be an immediate fall in prices and a drop in output.
Expectations of the price level will fall only gradually to their new equilibrium level, and while they do so output will remain below its natural level.
If the government is locked into a policy of expanding the money supply at some pre-announced rate it cannot do anything about this possibly severe recession.
But if it is not bound by such a policy it can induce a large increase in the money supply and prevent the recession, or at least bring it to an end quickly.
Thus the more flexible monetary policy is superior to the Friedman x per cent growth rule.
But if expectations are rational then this superiority disappears, for if the fall in aggregate demand assumed above were predictable, it would have no effect on real output and would not need to be countered by a change of monetary policy.
And if it were unpredictable, then while it would have an immediate effect on  output , this could not be prevented by government policy since the government would not be able to foresee the fall in aggregate  demand.
The result that Friedman's approach to monetary policy is no longer inferior to a more ‘flexible’ approach, once one incorporates rational expectations into the basic aggregate supply and demand model, was demonstrated more formally and generally by Sargent and Wallace (1975) and is sometimes known as the Sargent-Wallace proposition.
Some additional support for a simple x per cent rule for the money supply is provided by the analysis explained earlier about the volatility of aggregate demand.
For that analysis suggests that if aggregate demand shocks are kept to a minimum, ideally at zero, economic agents will be best able to recognize and respond to relative demand shocks even though they do not observe any other current prices than their own.
This is, of course, because, in the absence of aggregate demand shocks, any unexpectedly high price must be due to a relative demand shock.
The more predictable aggregate demand is, the less will rational agents be fooled into supplying quantities of output that they would not have supplied had they had perfect information.
In this sense the more predictable aggregate demand is, the more efficient the economy is.
If monetary policy is the key influence on aggregate demand then since the x per cent rule is extremely easy to understand aggregate demand will be highly predictable, provided of course that the authorities are successful in adhering to their rule.
A more complex rule, linking monetary policy to last period's unemployment rate or balance of payments deficit or whatever, may be less easy to understand and more subject to error because of, for example , inaccuracies in the balance of payments figures.
It may therefore produce greater uncertainty about aggregate demand.
So this analysis too suggests some support for Friedman's x per cent rule.
In fact, the rational expectations hypothesis is sometimes seen as providing support for the ‘strong’ version of the Friedman approach to monetary policy in which the x per cent rule is made constitutionally binding.
The reason for this is essentially that if expectations are rational, the government has an incentive to ‘cheat’ on its monetary rule which it does not have under other forms of expectations formation.
For example, from the model derived above it is clear that output will be raised above its normal rate only if people in general are fooled into believing that the average price level is lower than it actually is.
If expectations are formed, say, adaptively then it is always possible to specify a rule  for government policy which will consistently fool people.
For example, if the expected price level always equals last period's price level then, by linking the change in the money supply to last period's price level, it will always be possible to ensure that the actual price level exceeds the expected price level and hence that output is kept above its natural level.
Such a policy would work even if it were fully announced, provided that expectations were formed in the way we have assumed.
Thus there is no incentive for the government to cheat on this way of conducting monetary policy — that is, to follow a different policy from the one that is announced-for it can fool people without cheating.
Consequently, there is little need to prevent cheating by making the government's announced monetary policy constitutionally binding.
But if expectations are rationally formed, the government cannot expect a policy of linking the change in the money supply to the previous price level to succeed, for people will not be fooled by it.
On the contrary, they will change their method of forming expectations in line with the process announced for determining the money supply and hence aggregate demand.
This will be true whatever the process determining monetary policy is.
Thus the only way by which the government might achieve a higher level of output would be by cheating, by not following the rule it says it will follow.
The fact that governments could cheat like this will clearly be known to rational agents and might introduce some uncertainty about government policy.
This uncertainty could be partly removed by making government policy constitutionally binding (but only ‘partly’, since constitutions can be changed too).
(d) Time-inconsistency
The possibility of cheating and some of the issues which it raises have been more formally explored by Barro and Gordon (1983) and Barro (1985) within a Phillips curve framework.
The Phillips curve (more formally derived above) shows a negative relationship between wage or price inflation and unemployment.
Within the aggregate supply — aggregate demand framework of this chapter such a relationship can be seen to occur because if aggregate demand increases and firms can sell their goods for a higher price, they can afford to offer workers higher nominal wages.
If workers  in employment or those unemployed are not fully aware of the general nature of the price increases in the economy, it may look to them as if these nominal wage increases represent higher real wages.
They may therefore take up the offer more speedily than they otherwise would, or be more reluctant to leave their existing job to search for another job.
Either way, the rise in prices is likely to be associated with a lower level of unemployment.
However, this is only true if the aggregate demand change and associated price change are unanticipated.
So, for a given level of inflationary expectations, say zero, a high rate of inflation will be associated with a low level of unemployment and a low level of inflation will be associated with a high level of unemployment; that is, there will exist a stable Phillips curve.
But if the expected rate of inflation changes then the Phillips curve will shift.
For example, if expected inflation rises to 5 per cent then actual inflation of 5 per cent no longer fools anyone: hence unemployment will be the same as it was when actual and expected inflation were both zero.
Similarly, just as when expectations of inflation were zero actual inflation of 5 per cent might sufficiently fool workers to generate an unemployment rate of 3 per cent, now, if expectations of inflation are 5 per cent , actual inflation would need to be 10 per cent to fool them by the same amount as before and hence generate the same unemployment rate of 3 per cent .
In other words, an increase in expected inflation of 5 percentage points shifts the Phillips curve upwards by 5 percentage points.
Another way of putting this is to say that there are many possible Phillips curves — one for each level of expected inflation.
Since an increase in expected inflation of  percentage points shifts the Phillips curve vertically by  percentage points, it follows that the level of unemployment at which expected and actual inflation are equal is the same for all possible values of expected inflation.
This level of unemployment is called the natural level of unemployment.
In figure 4.5 we draw a set of Phillips curves.
Imagine for the moment that expectations of inflation are zero and so the relevant Phillips curve for the moment is the one labelled .
Imagine also that we can define a set of ‘iso-vote’ lines: these are similar to indifference curves and each one shows combinations of inflation and unemployment which would yield the government equal popularity.
Since inflation and unemployment are both unpopular these iso-vote lines are downward-sloping, and the  further away from the origin they are the lower the popularity they imply.
Their bowed shape can be justified on the assumption that both inflation and unemployment become increasingly unpopular the higher they are.
Given that expectations of inflation are zero, and hence the relevant Phillips curve is  what is the maximum popularity the government can achieve through manipulation of monetary or aggregate demand policy?
If expectations are fixed then the answer is that the government can achieve point A on the iso-vote line V 1 by expanding aggregate demand to generate inflation of P 1 and unemployment of U 1 .
It cannot do any better than this since this is the iso-vote line which is tangential to the relevant Phillips curve.
However, if agents are rational and aware of the economic environment in which they operate — here summarized by the shape of the Phillips curves and iso-vote lines, and by the government's objective of maximizing V — then V 1 is not a feasible equilibrium.
It implies a level of inflation higher than  people are expecting.
Nor is point B on the iso-vote line labelled V feasible, a point which involves inflation and expected inflation of zero and unemployment at its natural rate.
If that position were to occur agents would be aware that the government would be tempted to create higher inflation to achieve iso-vote line V 1 ; they would come to expect that higher inflation and hence the relevant Phillips curve would not be the one labelled .
FIGURE 4.5 The Phillips curve and time-inconsistent policy.
For a full equilibrium two conditions must be fulfilled: first the economy must be at the natural level of unemployment, where expectations of inflation are correct; and second the government must have no incentive to fool people by stimulating aggregate demand.
Such a position occurs at point C in figure 4.5.
Here the iso-vote line, V 2 , is tangential to the relevant Phillips curve,, at the natural level of unemployment.
So at this point expectations of inflation are correct, and given those expectations the government cannot achieve a higher iso-vote line.
But this full equilibrium position, at C, is inferior to the one at which inflation is zero and unemployment is equal to its natural rate, point B. This is clear from the fact that both have the same unemployment rate, but point C has a higher inflation rate; it is also indicated by the fact that at point C the popularity of the government is lower than it is at point B. We therefore have the odd result that the position which is optimal, point B, is not feasible, whereas the position that is feasible is sub-optimal.
In terminology which is due to Kydland and Prescott (1977), the optimal position point B is said to be time-inconsistent.
Loosely, a policy is said to be time-inconsistent if, once it has been adopted, there is an incentive at some later date to renege or cheat on it.
Other examples in economics are the promise of an investment subsidy at some future date to encourage firms to invest: when the future date occurs and the investments has been carried out it is tempting for the government to renege on its promise.
In the present context the time-inconsistency problem suggests that the optimal combination of unemployment and inflation can only be achieved if there is some effective restraint to prevent the government from cheating on a commitment to zero inflation.
An independent Central Bank might provide such a restraint, and so might the constitutional amendment, suggested in Friedman and Friedman (1980), which obliges the government to expand the money stock at some fixed rate and which would make cheating  on this obligation illegal.
Thus the rational expectation hypothesis can be seen as supporting Friedman's policy recommendation.
At the same time it can be used to explain why in the absence of such effective restraints most governments have experienced positive inflation in the past 40 years.
Barro and Gordon (1983) consider this analysis in more depth and use it to explain certain other macroeconomic phenomena such as the rising trend in unemployment and inflation, and the use of apparently ineffective countercyclical monetary policy by a number of governments.
4.8 SUMMARY
In chapters 6 and 7 we consider the empirical evidence relating to the model we have developed in this chapter.
Before that we consider in the next chapter some of the criticisms of the model and of the major results we have derived from it.
It is worthwhile restating here what those results are.
Shifts in aggregate demand will affect real output if they are random and unpredictable.
Furthermore, such shifts will have less effect on output the more unpredictable aggregate demand is.
Attempts to stabilize an economy's real output by systematic manipulation of aggregate demand will fail since, by making aggregate demand predictable, they also render it ineffective.
Governments should aim to make their policy instruments as predictable as possible so as to minimize confusion and hence undesirable fluctuations in output.
This all provides some support for an approach to policy quite different from that associated with Keynes, which has dominated policy-making since the 1940s.
This new approach emphasizes the need for governments to operate macroeconomic policy in accordance with simple and predetermined rules which, on the whole, do not link policy to the current or past state of the economy.
The emphasis on rules is further supported by consideration of the political influences on policy-setters.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1967)(see also Phelps, 1970) are the seminal statements of the natural rate hypothesis.
Barro (1976), Lucas (1972, 1975) are equally influential, formal statements of the rational expectations hypothesis within a natural rate framework.
Kydland and Prescott (1977) analyse in some detail the problem of the time-inconsistency of policy.
A useful introduction to the more technical aspects of the application of rational expectations can be found in Minford and Peel (1983).
Open economy models with rational expectations are discussed in Dornbusch (1976), Calvo and Rodriguez (1977), Barro (1978b), Cox (1980) and Duck (1984).
5 Criticisms of the Flexible-price Rational Expectations Model
It is hardly surprising that such a powerful attack on conventional macroeconomic policy as that outlined in the previous chapter has provoked a number of counter-attacks.
We shall consider these counter-attacks under two broad headings: those which maintain the assumption of price flexibility; and those which do not.
5.1 CRITICISMS WHICH MAINTAIN PRICE FLEXIBILITY
In this first category we consider three main criticisms:(a) that the model developed in chapter 4 cannot account for a major feature of all economies;(b) that the model relies for all its results on very simple specifications of the aggregate supply and demand curves; and (c) that even if one accepts the model as it stands governments might effectively stabilize the economy if they possess better information about the economy than the private sector, or indeed if different parts of the private sector possess different information.
(a) Serial correlation in aggregate real variables
The model developed so far suggests that only random movements in aggregate demand will cause real aggregate output to deviate from its natural or normal level.
These random movements in aggregate demand are of course unpredictable and exhibit no clear pattern.
The model therefore implies that the deviations of output from its natural rate should also be unpredictable and exhibit no pattern.
But it is a common and easily observed fact that measures of aggregate output in any economy tend to be positively serially  correlated; that is, a higher than average value for aggregate output in any period is more often than not followed by a higher than average value next period and, similarly, a low value in any period is more likely to be followed by another low one than by a high one.
To put it more simply, all economies experience booms and slumps, many of which are quite drawn out or persistent.
This persistence might be seen as an obvious contradiction of the prediction that deviations of output from its natural level should be random and hence a clear refutation of the rational expectations version of the aggregate supply and demand model developed above.
This is true, but of no great significance since it is easy to modify the model developed above and make it immune from this particular criticism, while ensuring that all its important features are retained.
Such modification involves specifying some form of propagation mechanism which converts serially uncorrelated shifts in aggregate demand into serially correlated movements in aggregate output.
One obvious propagation mechanism is provided by stocks of finished goods.
Firms might hold such stocks so that when faced with an unexpectedly high level of demand they can meet it without recourse to a sharp and possibly very costly increase in production.
So if an unexpected rise in demand occurs, they meet it partly by producing more and partly by running down their stocks of finished goods.
But such a response implies that next period their stocks of goods will be lower than they feel is optimal, and they will therefore want to build them up again by producing more next period than they otherwise would.
If they do this slowly then production will be higher than normal for a number of periods until stocks of goods are back at their optimal level.
But this implies that a single random increase in aggregate demand in the current period can set up a serially correlated movement or boom in real output over a number of subsequent periods.
Similarly, a single random decrease in aggregate demand could set up a multiperiod recession (see Blinder and Fischer, 1981; Demery and Duck, 1985; Duck, 1986).
All the results derived from the simpler model explained in the previous chapter could also be derived from one which allows stocks of finished goods to play this role.
It will still be the case that only random aggregate demand will affect real output, and the more unpredictable aggregate demand is, the less effect it has on output.
The policy conclusions drawn from the simpler model  will also still follow.
Other propagation mechanisms could be introduced with much the same result.
For example, if it is costly for firms to hire more labour or adjust their capital stock it will be optimal for them to spread out over time their response to any relative price signals they receive.
So, in this case too, a random increase in aggregate demand will typically produce a ‘strung out’ response in aggregate output.
None of the major implications derived from the simple model would be affected by the introduction of these mechanisms.
This criticism of the model is thus more a criticism of the form in which it is put than of its substance; the form can be changed to take account of the criticism without changing any matter of substance.
(b) The simplicity of the model
A more telling criticism of the results we have derived from the rational expectations aggregate demand-supply model concerns their reliance on extremely simple specifications of the aggregate supply and demand curves.
Minor changes in specification can alter the implications of the model significantly.
For example, imagine a rise in the basic rate of income tax which is fully announced and anticipated.
Standard economic theory suggests that this is likely to have an effect on the willingness of the population to work.
The exact size or direction of the effect does not matter; what does is that there is a possibility of some effect.
Thus a fully anticipated change in fiscal policy is quite likely to have some effect on real output in that it affects the willingness of the population to work to produce output.
Another, and more important, possible change of specification concerns the relative price term which enters the supply function.
In the previous chapter we have defined this relative price term as the current price in the local market relative to the expected current average price across all markets.
It has been argued that supply is more likely to show a positive response to relative price increases which are thought to be temporary than those that are thought to be permanent.
Certainly the evidence from empirical studies of the supply of labour, for example, suggest little response of labour supply to long-term real wage increases.
But this does not rule out a high response to real wage changes which are thought to be temporary: for example, suppliers of labour may well want to take advantage of a temporarily high real wage by supplying more labour, taking leisure (that is , supplying less labour) when the real wage has fallen back.
Within the present context, one way of taking account of this ‘intertemporal’ dimension to supply is to model suppliers as responding to the local price relative to their expectation of next period's average price.
If this (expected) relative price is high then it will give suppliers an incentive to produce and sell more this period and hold the proceeds in monetary form, in anticipation that their real value will increase as the average price level falls next period.
If the (expected) relative price is low then it will pay suppliers not to supply as much because they will be anticipating a drop in the real value of the proceeds.
A similar relative price term may affect the demand for the good as well: if demanders feel that the price of the good is high relative to its likely future value, they may well delay purchases until the price is lower.
If supply is modelled as a function of this ‘intertemporal’ relative price term, one implication is that a permanent rise in the rate of growth of aggregate demand and hence in the rate of inflation may permanently reduce the quantity of output supplied, since it permanently reduces the real rate of return on holding the proceeds from sales in the form of money.
Thus fully anticipated changes in the rate of growth of aggregate demand may affect the level of real output even where expectations are rational.
This point, together with a proof that stabilizing monetary policy can have a role within rational expectations models which emphasize ‘intertemporal substitution’, can be made after modifying the island parable model developed earlier.
The first modification is to respecify the relative price term in the supply function as  and allow a similar term to influence demand; the second is to respecify the major influence on aggregate demand as  where  is the expectation of the change in the money stock between periods t and t + 1.
This second modification makes the model more in line with that developed by Barro (1976), and is justified on the grounds that what motivates agents' spending this period is their desire to have a sum of real money available next period.
Such a specification allows us to make the point about stabilization policy mentioned above, and to point out an error in Barro's influential  paper that was originally uncovered by Marini (1985).
A third modification is to introduce an explicit private-sector aggregate demand shock and to eliminate the random component of monetary growth.
The fully modified system consists of the following equations:
Equations (5.1) and (5.2) have already been explained:t is the aggregate demand shock which is assumed to follow the ‘random walk’ process shown in equation (5.3), that is it equals its value in the previous period plus  t , a serially uncorrelated random error with zero mean and constant variance .
Equation (5.4) is a respecification of the process driving the quantity of money: it assumes that the quantity of money in period t equals its value in period t -1 plus a constant, g, plus a function of the shocks to aggregate demand in periods t -1 and t -2.
The γ's are constant coefficients and are policy parameters: the government can choose their value in order to stabilize output.
One aim of this respecified model is to show that the choice of the γ's is not irrelevant to the behaviour of output, and hence that there is a stabilizing role for monetary policy even in a flexible-price rational expectations model.
The technique we use to solve this model (that of undetermined coefficients) is as described in the previous chapter.
Briefly, we can write an expression for  as 
We can also assume a solution for  of the following form:
Since all the terms in equation (5.6) except  and  are known at the end of period t -1, it follows that observation of the local price,, amounts to an observation of .
And from this we can deduce that 
Equation (5.6) implies that the process driving the average price level, p, can be written as 
By updating this one period we can derive the process for next period's price,, as  which, after substituting for m t and  t from equations (5.3) and (5.4) respectively, we can write as 
From this equation and equation (5.7) we can derive:
And by updating equation (5.4) and using equation (5.7) we can also derive:
Substituting equations (5.11) and (5.12) into equation (5.5), and setting the result identically equal to equation (5.6), allows us to solve for the π's and obtain the following solution for output in the  th market,:
The aggregate equivalent of equation (5.13) is simply
Two features of equations (5.13) and (5.14) are important.
The first is that the constant component of monetary growth, g, does now exert an influence on real output.
However, the method by which a change in predictable monetary growth leads to a change in aggregate real output is not the familiar one — a higher rate of growth does not fool people into supplying more output.
Indeed, it does not lead to a rise in output at all, but to a fall.
An increase in the anticipated growth of the money supply raises the anticipated inflation rate and thereby lowers the attractiveness of holding the proceeds of output sales.
Therefore output will be lowered.
One way of thinking of this result is that variations in g cause simultaneous variations in the actual and the natural level of output: a higher value for g implies a lower natural and actual level of output.
Variations in g then do not lead to deviations of output from its natural level, which is the result derived in chapter 4.
However, even this argument cannot overcome the second feature of equations (5.13) and (5.14): that while the policy parameter γ 1 does not appear in either equation, the policy parameter γ 2 does.
In other words the choice of the parameter γ 2 affects the behaviour of real output, while the choice of γ 1 does not.
This suggests that governments can use monetary policy to stabilize output by appropriate selection of γ 2 that is, by appropriately selecting the link between the money stock and the aggregate demand shock two periods before.
Barro (1976) appears to have overlooked this point.
He considered the link between the money stock and aggregate demand shock only one period before, that is the policy parameter γ 1 and found, as we have, that the size of that policy parameter was unimportant.
He thus concluded that stabilization policy was unimportant.
But this is true only of stabilization which links the money stock to last period's aggregate demand shock; it is not true in the more general case in which the money stock is linked to earlier aggregate demand shocks.
To see clearly that the selection of the parameter γ 2 affects the distribution of output around its natural level, we follow Barro's procedure and first derive what real output in a typical market would be if there were full current information; that is, if everyone knew the current value  of all the shocks affecting the economy.
We might think of this full information value of output,, as the value of output which government policy is trying to achieve even though there is not full information; or, more loosely, one might think of it or its aggregate equivalent as the natural level of output.
If everyone knows the value of the current shocks then we can replace equation (5.7) with the following:
Then, following the procedure outlined above, and using equation (5.7a) rather than equation (5.7) to obtain expressions for  we can derive the following:
The difference between the full information value of output in the  th market and the actual value with imperfect information is, from equations (5.13) and (5.15),
It is clear from this expression that the difference between full information output and actual output can be made zero each period; that is, perfect stabilization policy can be achieved, if the government sets the policy parameter γ 2 equal to -1.
Any other setting for γ 2 would be less efficient.
Thus even in the type of rational expectations model used by Barro to show that stabilization policy was ineffective, such policy can be shown to be at least potentially effective.
The intuition behind this result is as follows.
By setting γ 2 equal to -1 the government can ensure that next period's price level is immune to current shocks.
This immunity arises because any aggregate demand disturbance will induce the government to change the money supply in such a way as to nullify the effect of the aggregate demand disturbance on the future price level.
So an aggregate demand disturbance in period t will raise prices in period t but leave prices in period t + 1 unchanged.
In such circumstances agents do not have to concern themselves with whether an unexpectedly high price in period t is due to a relative or aggregate demand shock.
The two shocks have identical effects: they both leave prices in period t + 1 unaffected and they both induce a difference between prices in period t and t + 1 which can be responded  to by increasing output in accordance with equation (5.1).
So by selecting the appropriate value for γ 2 the government can render the distinction between aggregate and relative demand shocks irrelevant and create for agents a situation similar to one of full current information.
Selecting a value for γ 1 cannot achieve the same result because such a policy leaves the distinction between an aggregate and a relative demand shock no less important than before: a positive relative demand shock will raise current prices above expected future ones; a positive aggregate demand shock will not.
For example, if γ 1 is -1 then a positive aggregate demand shock in period t, will imply expected values for  and for  lower, ceteris paribus , by an amount -t .
But from equation (5.5) the former affects prices this period by an amount -t and the latter affects prices next period by an amount -t .
So the selection of this value for γ 1 causes no change in the price term which influences supply,.
This will be true whatever the value of γ 1 ; therefore whatever value of γ 1 is selected it cannot make the distinction between aggregate and relative demand shocks any less important.
This is essentially the point made by Barro (1976).
The point he overlooked, which was pointed out by Marini (1985), is that this argument only applies to ‘γ 1 .
By linking monetary policy to further lags in aggregate demand shocks one can establish a potential role for monetary policy even within Barro's rational expectations framework.
Of course, this analysis only provides a potential role for monetary policy.
In more realistic models the optimum value for γ 2 would depend upon the structural parameters of the economy.
For example, if we had assumed in the above model that  where  is a fraction, then the optimum value for γ 2 would be a complex function of  and .
For monetary policy to be successful the values of these parameters would need to be known.
If they are not, then governments may well select a value for γ 2 which makes the performance of the economy worse rather than better.
However, this analysis is important in showing that it is not rational expectations itself which produces the result that monetary policy cannot be used to stabilize real variables in the economy; rather, it is the combination of rational expectations and a particular class of model.
(c) Asymmetric information
The same point can be made by considering models which assume that different agents in the economy have access to a different quality of information.
So far we have considered models in which all agents face the same information problem, although obviously agents in the island model have different information depending upon which island they are located on.
In this section we consider two situations in which different agents have access to different types of information.
The first, and simplest, is where the government has access to better information than the private sector; the second is where consumers have better access than producers to information about current shocks.
The first case can be dealt with quite simply.
Imagine a random decrease in aggregate demand which, for the private sector, is unpredictable.
In the absence of any change in government policy this unpredictable downward shift in the aggregate demand curve would induce a fall in real output.
If the downward shift in aggregate demand was also unpredictable to the government, then clearly the government could take no steps to offset it.
But if it had better-information about what was likely to happen in the economy than the private sector, the government could take such measures.
In the case we are considering this would involve some increase in government spending or some increase in the quantity of money, or some combination of both.
Provided that the government acted efficiently, the result would be that the aggregate demand curve would not shift down: the tendency for it to do so would be offset by government action.
Hence there would be no fall in real output — the government would have successfully stabilized it.
There is no inconsistency between this result and rational expectations: as far as the private sector is concerned there has been a negative unpredictable random movement in private-sector aggregate demand offset by a positive, unpredictable random movement in the money supply or government spending.
The fact that the two random movements are linked is no help to the private sector in predicting them.
Thus, in rational expectations models in which the government has an informational advantage, there is scope for the government to use policy to stabilize output.
The question is: How important are such differences or asymmetries in information likely to be?
On the whole it seems difficult  to believe they are very important.
Most macroeconomic data are published fairly quickly, and any delay is often due more to the time it takes to collect them than a strict publication lag.
Government models of the economy have their counterpart in private sector models of the economy which, although not exactly the same, nevertheless exhibit much the same features.
Besides, it is often the case that the government model is known to those outside government.
Furthermore, of course, if the government did possess an important informational advantage there would be a strong incentive for the private sector to obtain the same information, so one might expect the advantage to be gradually eroded.
The same objections might also be applied to models which suggest a role for government policy arising out of asymmetries of information between groups in the private sector.
To illustrate these models we consider a simplified version of the intertemporal substitution model developed above: we shall assume that consumers or demanders have full current information, but suppliers do not.
Because of this asymmetry of information, expectations differ between suppliers and demanders, a fact we recognize by indexing the expectations terms by s and d for suppliers and demanders respectively.
Supply in each market is determined by the difference between the price in each market and suppliers’ expectations of next period's price level.
Demand is determined by the difference between the price in each market and demander's expectations of next period's price level, and also by the expected real value of next period's money balances.
Further influences on demand are a relative demand shock, and a private-sector aggregate demand shock,t which is assumed to follow the process shown in equation (5.3).
The equations of the model are:
In the money supply equation we adopt a policy rule which Barro (1976) showed would lead to policy ineffectiveness; that is, we assume that the quantity of money is linked only to the once-lagged value of :
Using the technique of undetermined coefficients we can write the process for  as 
We assume that demanders know the value of all current shocks, but suppliers do not, so we can write:
Substituting these expressions for the respective expectations terms and using the technique of undetermined coefficients, we obtain: and hence,
With γ 2 assumed equal to zero, the full information value of  can be written, as from equation (5.15), and so the difference between  and  can be written as 
It is clear from this equation that the selection of the policy parameter γ 1 is now important for the distribution of output around its full information value.
In fact, in the simple case above, the optimum setting for this parameter is -1, for then aggregate  demand shocks cause no change in either actual or full information output.
The reason for this is that with γ t set to -1 a shock increase to aggregate demand, that is a positive value for  t , will induce the authorities to reduce next period's money supply by an amount equal to -t .
Since the expected value of next period's money supply enters the current demand function, and since demanders are assumed to know the value of  t , it follows that, in general, demand will be immunized from the influence of  t .
Because of this, the only shock that can disturb current prices from the value they are expected to take next period is a relative demand shock.
With only this single shock affecting prices the signal extraction problem facing suppliers disappears: they can infer with confidence from their local price what the relative demand shock is.
If suppliers had the same, full information that demanders have, or if demanders had the same, imperfect information that suppliers have, the setting of γ 1 would be irrelevant.
In the former case this is because there would be full information, and in the latter case the reason for the irrelevance of γ t was explained when we discussed the intertemporal substitution model.
This illustrates one particular case in which differences in information amongst economic agents allows policy to be effective even within a full price flexible rational expectations model.
Other cases are discussed in Turnovsky (1980), Weiss (1980) and King (1982).
5.2 THE IMPLICATIONS OF ASSUMING PRICE STICKINESS
In the previous chapter the theory of rational expectations was combined with a macroeconomic model which assumed full price flexibility: on each island, each period the price of the good moved to equate supply and demand.
A major result of that model was that systematic aggregate demand policies would be ineffective in stabilizing real output, employment and other real variables.
It is commonly agreed that while in some markets prices move in the way the model assumes — very quickly to equate changes in supply and demand — in other markets they do not.
For example, in the foreign exchange market or the stock markets the prices of currencies or stocks and shares change by the hour to equate supply and demand.
The prices of certain goods (such as agricultural produce) also seem to respond very promptly to changes in supply and demand.
Even in certain labour markets, for example casual day labour, the price of labour can move apparently very freely.
But there are other markets in which prices appear to move sluggishly and to be, at least in the short run, unresponsive to changes in supply and demand.
Many labour markets appear to fall into this category, with wage rates being determined through complex institutional arrangements and bargaining processes which seem to imply that they will be less than fully flexible.
The prices of certain goods too — notably manufactured goods — appear to be ‘administered’, or set for some time so that they do not respond immediately to changes in supply and demand.
Of course, prices may appear to be more sticky than they actually are, for there are many ways of changing the ‘price’ of a good without changing the amount of ‘s printed on the good's label.
For example, a firm could offer better after-sales service for a microcomputer or a longer guarantee for a television; it could waive delivery charges for a new table or throw in a set of free wine glasses with the purchase of petrol.
All such measures can be seen as changing the terms on which a good is bought, a broad interpretation of its price, without necessarily changing the quoted price for the good.
Thus the fact that quoted prices appear to be inflexible may not necessarily imply that prices broadly interpreted are.
Furthermore, pointing to inflexibility in some prices does not by itself show that the assumption of general price flexibility is unreasonable.
It may be that the cited deviations from price flexibility are empirically unimportant; that is, they do not significantly affect the ‘average’ behaviour of prices.
However, following a study of prices in the US, Carlton (1986) has recently concluded that the degree of price rigidity in many industries is significant.
He found that it is not unusual in some industries for prices to individual buyers to remain unchanged for several years.
And in one case study Cecchetti (1986) has shown that the news-stand price of magazines has been very rigid (Reader's Digest changed its price six times between 1950 and 1980).
Of course, the fact that a price may be constant over a given interval of time may not itself mean that it is inflexible; the price could be equal to its equilibrium value and the latter could in fact be constant as well .
To demonstrate, then, that prices are inflexible in the sense that we mean in the remainder of this chapter, it has  to be established that the price may deviate from its equilibrium value over a given interval.
Since the equilibrium price is not observed, tests for sticky prices thus require a model of the equilibrium price.
For this reason prices may appear flexible or otherwise, depending on the theory of the equilibrium price used in the test.
Despite these considerations many economists believe that the tendency of prices to remain unchanged over several periods suggests strongly that they are not in equilibrium, as one would expect the equilibrium price to have changed over that interval.
Most economists would agree then that there is, at the very least, prima-facie evidence that a significant number of prices are not fully flexible, and that one ought therefore to consider the implications of sticky prices in macroeconomic models.
In the rest of this chapter we shall drop the assumption that prices are fully flexible and examine the implications of assuming that they are either fixed or at least move only slowly to their equilibrium values.
We shall maintain the assumption that expectations are rational, and show that it is not this assumption per se which leads to the ineffectiveness of systematic stabilization policy but its combination with (inter alia) the assumption of price flexibility.
Thus even if expectations are fully rational there may be a role for systematic stabilization policy provided that prices are sufficiently inflexible.
(a) The McCallum Model
We begin the analysis of sticky prices by recalling the policy implications of the flexible-price model developed in the previous chapter.
In figure 5.1, AD represents the level of aggregate demand (rationally) expected to prevail at time t.
The typical expectation of the general price level is therefore P.
If the actual level of aggregate demand is greater than that expected (say, AD, in figure 5.1), the actual level of prices will move above P to equate supply and demand, and output will rise above Y n .
The reason for the rise in output is the familiar one: the unexpectedly high level of aggregate demand has led to the typical supplier observing an unexpectedly high price.
Partly misinterpreting this as due to a favourable relative demand shift the typical supplier increases output to take advantage of what (wrongly) appears to be a high relative price.
Any rise in aggregate demand which was rationally  anticipated would have had no such effect — it would merely have led to a rise in prices.
Systematic changes in the instruments of monetary and fiscal policy would produce only predictable changes in aggregate demand and therefore cannot be used to stabilize real output — policy is ineffective.
How would the implications of this model be changed if prices were temporarily fixed or ‘sticky’?
The answer depends upon the precise nature of price rigidity.
The definition of price stickiness which we shall employ in this section does not in fact alter very much the policy implications of the model developed in the previous chapter, although it may have implications for the test of that model.
This definition was suggested by McCallum (1977, 1978).
In his model firms set prices at the end of period t -1 to cover period t.
Once set, prices cannot be changed within period t.
At the end of period t prices are then set for period t + 1, and so on.
In this sense prices in period t are sticky: they are set one period in advance and are then unresponsive to the level of demand which actually occurs in period t.
McCallum assumes that firms set their prices for period t in the following way.
Given all the information available to them at the end of period t -1, firms expect that the position of the aggregate demand curve in period t will be AD in figure 5.1.
Firms aim to set prices so that their  expected level of production is in each period (in total) Y n .
Given that the typical firm expects the aggregate demand curve to be AD, it follows that the general level of prices set at period t -1 for period t will be P.
FIGURE 5.1 Sticky prices and excess demand.
If the actual aggregate demand curve is AD, the general level of prices will be P and the level of output will be Y n , but what happens if the aggregate demand curve is higher than expected, say at AD 1 ?
Of course, such a shift in the level of aggregate demand can only occur, given rational expectations, if it is the result of a random, unpredictable movement in, for example , monetary or fiscal policy.
It cannot occur through any systematic movement or it would have been predicted.
But if such a random movement occurs, how will firms react to it?
In particular, given that prices have already been set and cannot be changed, what will happen to real output?
The answer requires some specification of a ‘quantity rule’; that is, a description of agents' behaviour when, because of price stickiness, disequilibrium prevails.
To understand the need for some quantity rule, consider figure 5.1 again.
It is clear from that figure that at the price level P the level of actual aggregate demand is Y 1 , whereas firms initially wanted to produce Y n .
In other words, there is excess demand for goods.
Output could be as high as Y 1 if firms adopt the rule of producing whatever is demanded, or as low as Y n if firms decide to produce only what they planned initially.
The quantity rule determines where between these two extremes the level of output will actually be.
A frequently invoked quantity rule is that if there is disequilibrium, that is a difference between the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied, the actual quantity traded will equal the minimum of demand or supply.
So if there is excess supply the quantity actually traded will be the quantity demanded, and if there is excess demand the quantity actually traded will be the quantity supplied.
The rationale for this quantity rule is that it implies that no agents are forced to buy or sell quantities in excess of their wishes, so the rule preserves the principle of voluntary exchange.
In the present context this rule would imply that output will equal Y n in figure 5.1 with the gap 1 -Y n being unsatisfied excess demand.
So the result of the unanticipated movement in aggregate demand is merely to create excess demand: prices are already fixed at P and the quantity rule implies that output remains at Y n .
An alternative quantity rule sets output equal to the level of demand.
The rationale here is that firms may wish to preserve customer goodwill by preventing shortages.
They may therefore agree to sell at price level P whatever is demanded.
In figure 5.1 this implies that output would rise to Y 1 if aggregate demand unexpectedly rose to AD 1 .
Clearly, then, different quantity rules imply different solutions for output.
With the ‘minimum’ quantity rule, unexpectedly high levels of aggregate demand do not raise output above y n but unexpectedly low levels of aggregate demand will depress output below y n (the reader may wish to verify this by imagining an actual aggregate demand curve to the left of AD).
Setting output equal to aggregate demand means that output will exceed y n when aggregate demand is unexpectedly high and output will fall below y n when aggregate demand is unexpectedly low.
Whatever the rule, the mechanism by which random movements in aggregate demand lead to fluctuations in output is not the same as the one explained in chapter 4.
There the random movement in aggregate demand leads to an unexpectedly high price and it is this which induces a rise in output.
But here such a change in price cannot occur since prices are fixed at the end of period t -1 and their values are therefore known.
Thus in McCallum's model unexpected fluctuations in aggregate demand can cause changes in real output even though they do not cause unexpected movements in prices.
In this model, as with others discussed in the remainder of this chapter, changes in aggregate demand can be said to have real output effects because of imperfect competition (that is, price stickiness), whereas real effects of such changes discussed in the previous chapter arose because of imperfect information.
This difference may account for the fact that although there is now a great deal of empirical evidence linking monetary or aggregate demand shocks to real output fluctuations — evidence which we shall discuss in later chapters — the evidence that unexpected price changes affect output is much weaker (see, for example, Fair, 1979)
What happens to the ‘policy ineffectiveness proposition’ in this model?
McCallum assumes that the government decides its monetary and fiscal policies for period t at the end of period t -1 and cannot or does not change them in period t.
In this sense he assumes that government policy is subject to the same degree of  stickiness as prices.
Since aggregate demand policies are decided on the basis of the information available at the end of period t -1, it follows that the systematic component of aggregate demand will, as before, have no effect on real output.
For, by definition, the systematic element in aggregate demand can be predicted at the end of period t -1 and will be reflected purely in the prices firms set at the end of that period for the next period.
The stickiness in prices assumed in the model is not sufficiently severe to change the key result of chapter 4: only the random component of aggregate demand can affect real output.
Thus the policy ineffectiveness proposition can survive in a model in which prices exhibit some degree of stickiness, provided that the policy instruments exhibit the same degree of stickiness.
More generally, prices could be sticky and yet the major implication of the flexible-price model developed in chapter 4 could still be true.
The shorter the period over which prices are sticky in relation to the period over which government policy instruments are sticky, the more likely it is that the policy implications of chapter 4 will remain.
To complete this section we present a simplified formal version of the McCallum model.
In this version we shall in fact assume that it is wages that are set by trade unions one period in advance and that prices are flexible; that is, we shall examine a sticky wage rather than a sticky price model.
In the quantity trading rule for the labour market we shall assume that employment is determined by the demand for labour.
We further assume that the demand for labour is a function of the real wage so that we can write  where n t is the logarithm of the demand for labour or the level of employment at time t t w t is the logarithm of the nominal wage rate at time t t p t is the logarithm of the price level at time t t and α is a positive constant.
Now assume that the wage set at the end of period t -1 for period t is determined by 
This assumes, for simplicity, that workers are anxious to keep their wage in period t in line with the (rationally) expected level of prices for that period.
Given the existence of an aggregate production  function of the form , an expression for the logarithm of output can be obtained by substituting equation (5.29) into equation (5.28) and then substituting the resulting equation into the production function.
This gives: where for simplicity we have assumed that αβ = 1.
Equation (5.30) is the aggregate supply curve: firms will produce more output if the price level is higher than that expected by workers or their trade union.
Now assume a simple aggregate demand function of the following form: where m t is the logarithm of the money supply in period t; and v t is an aggregate demand shock.
Setting aggregate demand (equation (5.31)) equal to aggregate supply (equation (5.30)) and solving for the price level we obtain 
Taking expectations of equation (5.32) and collecting terms, we can derive 
Substituting equation (5.33) into equation (5.32) gives 
Equations (5.34) and (5.33) may be substituted back into equation (5.30) to give the following solution for output:
The policy implications of equation (5.35) are identical to those of chapter 4 and discussed less formally above: only the random and unpredictable component of monetary policy has real effects.
(b) The Fischer-Phelps-Taylor model
In a contrasting approach, a number of writers have introduced the possibility that private agents, such as firms or workers, may bind themselves to fixed prices over periods long enough to permit within-period reaction by policy-makers.
In such models the policy  ineffectiveness proposition no longer holds, even though expectations are assumed to be rational.
The original application of rational expectations to this type of sticky price model was by Fischer (1977), Phelps and Taylor (1977) and later by Taylor (1979).
For simplicity we shall refer to this model in what follows as the Fischer model.
As with the McCallum model we shall begin by illustrating the models with the use of the aggregate supply and demand model of chapter 4, and follow this with a more formal presentation of the model.
Imagine an economy in which firms, for whatever reason, agree to fix prices at the end of period t to cover period t + 1 and t + 2 and not to alter these prices in either period t + 1 or t + 2 if circumstances differ from those expected at the close of period t.
Similarly, at the end of period t + 2 firms set prices to cover periods t + 3 and t + 4 and these prices may not be altered in periods t + 3 and t + 4.
In other words, prices are set at the end of every even period (0, 2, 4, and so on) to cover the next two periods.
In deciding what prices to set, firms form expectations (which, of course, we shall assume are rational) of what the price level is likely to be in the next two periods.
Using figure 5.1 again we might imagine that firms, at the end of period 0, expect that the position of the aggregate demand curve will be AD in period 1.
For simplicity we shall also assume that firms expect that the position of the aggregate demand curve in period 2 will also be AD.
Given their (rational) expectations, firms agree to set prices at P in periods 1 and 2 and therefore expect to produce a level of output in both periods equal to y n .
But imagine that the aggregate demand curve is at AD in period 1 but shifts out to AD 1 in period 2: What will happen then?
The answer, of course, depends upon the quantity rule that firms employ, in particular how they react to a higher level of demand than they were expecting.
If firms are anxious to maintain customer goodwill and therefore agree to produce whatever is demanded at the set price, then the effective supply curve for periods 1 and 2 is the horizontal line from P.
Thus, in period 2, if the aggregate demand curve is in fact AD 1 , output will rise to Y 1 , price remaining at P.
Of course, if aggregate demand were to fall below the level indicated by AD, then the level of output would fall below y n .
It is now straightforward to show how government policies, even anticipated ones, can stabilize real output in this model of ‘sticky’ prices.
Imagine that firms have set their prices at the end of period 0 to give a price level of P in periods 1 and 2.
They have done this because they rationally expect the aggregate demand curve to be AD in periods 1 and 2.
Imagine that private-sector investment, a component of aggregate demand, turns out to be unexpectedly high in period 2, so that in period 2 the aggregate demand curve is in fact AD 1 .
In the absence of any change in government policy, and if firms are following the quantity rule of setting output equal to demand, output will rise to Y 1 in period 2.
It is important to realize that firms may have enough information at the end of period 1 to predict the rise in aggregate demand in period 2, so that the rise in aggregate demand from period 1 to period 2 is anticipated at the end of period 1.
But the rise in aggregate demand was not anticipated at the end of period 0 when the price was set.
Despite their ability to predict the coming rise in aggregate demand, firms are obliged to keep prices at P and to produce Y 1 .
Thus, in this model, even anticipated movements in aggregate demand may affect the level of output.
Whether or not they do depends upon their timing.
If they can be anticipated at the end of one of the even periods they will have no effect on real output: prices will merely adjust to keep output at its natural rate y n .
But if they can only be anticipated at the end of one of the odd periods, they will have an effect on real output because prices are fixed.
Furthermore, government policy can now be used to stabilize real output.
For if at the end of period 1 a rise in aggregate demand is predictable, the government could reduce its own spending and thereby maintain the position of the aggregate demand curve at AD and hence maintain aggregate real output at y n .
Such a policy would work even if, at the end of period 1, it was perfectly predictable.
It does not rely for its efficacy on the government having access to better information for, as we have said, firms may well be able to anticipate the rise in aggregate demand between period 1 and 2.
What it does rely on is the government's ability to change its policy instruments more quickly than firms can change prices.
The government can therefore act to avoid unwanted macroeconomic effects of ‘market failure’, or the failure of prices to move to clear markets.
As with the McCallum model, we now present a more formal  statement of the Fischer model.
We shall also assume that wages rather than prices are set in advance, so that our formal model is one of ‘wage stickiness’ rather than‘price stickiness’.
Imagine an economy in which the wage rate for half its workers is set at the end of every even period to cover the following two periods, while the wage rate for the other half is set at the end of every odd period, again to cover the following two periods.
The ‘overlapping’ nature of the contracts in this economy is set out diagrammatically in figure 5.2.
Note the wage rate at any point in time (t) is made up of an average of wages which were set one period earlier and those set two periods before.
As with the formal McCallum model above, the level of employment for both groups of workers is determined by the demand for labour, so the aggregate level of employment is given by  since w t (the aggregate wage) is defined as .
This definition follows from the assumption that half the labour force establish contracts in even periods and half in odd periods.
Note that we are assuming that both sets of firms sell their output at the  price p t and that they have identical real wage elasticities of demand (-α): that is, the firms are identical in every respect other than the timing of their wage contracts.
FIGURE 5.2 Overlapping contracts.
If it is an even number, then  was in fact set two periods earlier and  was set at the close of the previous period.
If t is odd, then  was set at the end of the previous period and  was set two periods earlier.
This feature is illustrated in figure 5.2, in which it can be seen that in period 3 (odd) w t was set the end of the period 2 (even) but  was actually set two periods earlier in period 1 (odd).
Both groups of workers set their wage rates given their (rational) expectations of the level of prices in the two periods covered by the wage contract.
Again, for simplicity we shall assume that the price level is believed to remain unchanged over the period of the contract, so we can write:
Notice that workers who set their wages at the end of even periods believed, in the even period t -1, that the price level in odd period t would remain unchanged in period t + 1.
Similarly, we assume that workers who set their wages at the end of odd periods believed, in the odd period t -2, that the price level would be the same in periods t -1 and t.
Consider the case in which t is odd.
Given an aggregate production function of the form  we can substitute the relevant rows of equation (5.37) into equation (5.36), and substitute the resulting expressions into the production function to give: where we again have assumed for simplicity that αβ = 1.
Output is thus affected by the deviation of the price level from both that expected by workers in period t -1 and in period t -2.
The  former reflects the effects of contracts formed last period currently in their first period, and the latter reflects the effects of contracts formed two periods ago now in their second period.
Assume again a simple aggregate demand curve of the form given in equation (5.31), which we repeat here for convenience:
Setting aggregate supply (equation (5.38)) equal to aggregate demand (equation (5.31)) we obtain an expression for the price level:
Of course, this is not a solution as there are expectation terms to be solved on the right-hand side.
To solve these terms, by taking expectations of equation (5.39) conditional on information dated t -2 we obtain: and by taking expectations conditional on information dated t -1 we obtain:
Substituting these expressions for expectations back into the price equation we can write:
By substituting equations (5.42),(5.41) and (5.40) into the expression for aggregate supply, equation (5.38), we obtain the solution:
Now imagine that v t is in fact a random walk given by where  t is a serially independent random variable.
This states that other non-monetary effects on aggregate demand (such as private investment expenditure) are determined by their values in the previous period plus a random or surprise term.
To show how policy can be effective in this model we first consider the case in which the authorities simply set the money supply to be constant, so that and  are zero (that is, expectations are always correct).
In this case the solution for y t , which we denote by , is 
Now imagine that the authorities followed a simple rule linking the money supply in period t to the aggregate demand shock in period .
The rule we shall consider is 
It follows from this rule that  and .
Thus  and .
Given this, our solution for output, which we denote by  is now 
It is now clear that the variation in  is greater than that of  because the former has the additional term in  which does not appear in equation (5.46).
Thus the monetary authorities could reduce the variation in output by adopting a simple rule that links the level of money supply to the lagged shock to aggregate demand, and this dominates the more simple rule that just set money supply equal to a constant that was independent of the state of aggregate demand.
(c) Sticky prices and general equilibrium
The sticky price models we have considered so far tend merely to ‘tack on’ the assumption of sticky prices to the sort of model developed in chapter 4.
In recent years a number of economists have developed models which make price stickiness and the ensuing failure of markets to clear central to their analysis.
In these models much attention has been focused on the interaction between markets which fail to clear, and the mechanisms by which agents' actions are coordinated when prices are sticky.
Early macroeconomic models with quantity rationing were developed by Solow and Stiglitz (1968), Barro and Grossman (1971) and Malinvaud (1977).
In what follows the main ideas of these models are  discussed in general terms and the implications of allowing expectations to be rational within them are very briefly mentioned.
We do not have the space in this book to discuss the models in any depth; the interested reader is referred to Muellbauer and Portes (1978).
The central contribution of these models has been to focus on the ‘spill-over’ effects that result from the failure of markets to clear.
If one market fails to clear, this will have repercussions in other markets and these in turn may further affect the disequilibrium in the initial market.
These spill-over effects require a ‘general equilibrium’ analysis; that is, one in which the interaction between all markets is considered,
As an illustration of such spill-over effects, imagine an economy with only two markets — a labour market and a goods market.
Households supply labour and demand goods; firms supply goods and demand labour.
Because wages and prices are rigid, both markets may fail to clear.
Initially we assume that there is excess supply in both markets.
Once again we note that the failure of each market to clear requires a quantity trading rule for each.
We shall assume that output is determined by the minimum of supply and demand, so that with excess supply in both markets, the quantities traded in each will be determined by demand.
In the labour market, employment is determined by the demand for labour by firms; in the goods market actual output traded is determined by the demand for goods by households.
Excess supply of labour means that households are rationed in the labour market: they cannot sell the quantity of labour services they wish to at current wages and prices.
This may mean that some workers are unemployed or that all workers are underemployed, or a combination of both.
Because households do not realize their desired labour supply, they will not be able to achieve their desired demand for goods.
This arises from the fact that unemployment or underemployment will reduce the household's income and constrain the demand for goods.
The effective demand for goods (to use a familiar Keynesian term) is below what households would optimally choose given current wages and prices (referred to as the notional demand).
The rationing of the household in the labour market spills over into the goods market by constraining the household's demand for goods.
Similarly, consider the effects of rationing in the goods market.
Here excess supply of goods means that output is determined by  demand and firms cannot sell the desired volume of output.
Firms are rationed in the goods market.
Because of this (and assuming for simplicity that firms do not carry inventories) they will demand only enough labour to produce the output they can sell, for any additional inputs of labour will either be idle or else will produce output which will remain unsold.
It is therefore only profitable for the firm to demand just enough labour to meet the demand for output.
The demand for labour is therefore constrained by the fact that the firm is rationed in the goods market.
In this way a ration in the goods market spills over into the labour market by constraining the demand for labour.
Since the constrained demand for goods (by households rationed in the labour market) will exacerbate the ration of firms in the goods market, and since the constrained demand for labour will further ration the household in the labour market, it is natural to ask whether the behaviour of both sets of agents can be mutually consistent.
To be mutually consistent the constrained demand for goods must ration firms in a manner that restricts their demand for labour to give rise to the initial constrained demand for goods.
The nature of such a ‘quantity-constrained equilibrium’ is discussed in the references cited above.
The coexistence of excess supplies of labour and goods is referred to as a ‘Keynesian’ quantity-constrained equilibrium.
Depending on the precise values assumed for the (fixed) levels of wages and prices, other non-market clearing regimes are:
Classical: excess supply of labour; excess demand for goods.
Repressed inflation: excess demand for both goods and labour.
Underconsumption: excess demand for labour; excess supply of goods.
The significance of these regimes for economic policy has been explored in a number of papers, notably in Muellbauer and Portes (1978) and Malinvaud (1977).
In these and other models, households save for future consumption (by accumulating money balances) and in some cases firms can accumulate inventories for future sales.
Because of this, expectations of the future have important effects on the present.
For example, if the household expects to be rationed in the goods market in the future, there is less reason to save out of current income and, consequently, the current demand for goods will rise.
If a firm expects to be rationed in the  future in the goods market, it is more likely to increase its current sales rather than produce for inventories.
There is, of course, no reason why expectations of future rations should not be rational (that is , based on current information, including the economic model of how these rations arise).
Indeed, Neary and Stiglitz (1983) have introduced the idea of ‘rational constraint expectations’ into a model characterized by rationing and constrained equilibrium.
The analysis of such models under rational expectations is too complicated to discuss here, but the main implications of the Neary and Stiglitz model are worth sketching.
When Keynesian quantity constrained equilibrium exists in the current period (that is, excess supply of both labour and goods) the multiplier effect of government spending (whether that spending is anticipated or otherwise) is greater under rational expectations than under ‘static’(non-rational) expectations.
Similarly, an increase in the supply of money will have real output effects whether it is anticipated or otherwise.
The allowance for spill-over effects between markets does not alter the policy implications discussed in simpler models earlier in this chapter, in other words that anticipated policies (both monetary and fiscal) can be used to stabilize output.
Moreover, the increase in the expenditure multiplier led Neary and Stiglitz to argue that the introduction of rational expectations into ‘quantity-constrained’ models ‘actually enhances the effectiveness of government policy’(p. 224).
5.3 MICRO-FOUNDATIONS FOR STICKY PRICES
The previous section has shown that the precise nature of price stickiness is of major importance to the results usually derived from rational expectations macroeconomic models.
For if prices are rigid in the McCallum sense, the main results of the flexible-price models carry through: in particular, systematic attempts to stabilize real output, employment and other real variables will fail; whereas if prices are sticky over long enough to permit policy adjustments by the government, the case for the type of stabilization policy advocated by Keynesian economists is restored even if expectations are rational.
Proponents of the view that Keynesian stabilization policies are futile have been quick to point out the key role that wage and price  rigidity play in justifying such policies, and the need for advocates of such policies to provide some theory of why prices should be rigid in the way they claim they are.
Imposing exogenously a particular form of price rigidity which happens to produce the result that Keynesian stabilization policies can work is hardly enough by itself to justify such policies.
After all, it seems likely that the form of wage and price rigidity in an economy will reflect the economic environment, one component of which is likely to be the behaviour of aggregate demand.
For example, in the two-period model described in the previous section it would seem likely that if aggregate demand became more volatile firms would become much more reluctant to agree to set prices two periods in advance, and so perhaps they would set prices only one period in advance: the nature of price rigidity would change in response to a change in the economic environment.
It is for this reason that Keynesian stabilization policies have been criticized for relying on the ‘unexplained postulate’ of wage rigidity and for assuming that the form of wage and price rigidity, the form of wage and price contracts, is exogenously given rather than determined by, amongst other things, the type of monetary and fiscal policies being carried out.
This is a good example of the ‘Lucas critique’ discussed in chapter 4.
This point has been forcefully expressed by two of the leading proponents of rational expectations, Lucas and Sargent:
So the key issue here is really the fundamental one involved in the dispute between Keynes and the classical economists: is it adequate to regard certain  superficial characteristics of existing wage contracts as given when analysing the consequences of alternative monetary and fiscal regimes?
Classical economic theory denies that those characteristics can be taken as given.
To understand the implications of long-term contracts for monetary policy, one needs a model of the way those contracts are likely to respond to alternative monetary policy regimes.
An extension of existing equilibrium models in this direction might well lead to interesting variations, but it seems to us unlikely that major modifications of the implications of these models for monetary and fiscal policy will follow from this.
(Lucas and Sargent, 1978, p. 65)
The need to find a sound theoretical basis for wage and price stickiness has inspired a large and growing literature on what has become known as ‘contract theory’.
It is not possible to review  comprehensively the research into the micro-foundations here, and the reader is directed to Rotemberg (1987) for an interesting survey.
However one recent series of contributions are worthy of mention.
A number of authors (Akerlof and Yellen, 1985; Mankiw, 1985a; Parkin, 1986) have argued that if firms have set optimum prices, a small change in the optimum may not persuade firms to change their price as the gain in profit is marginal.
This is because the profit function before the change must have been horizontal at the optimum, so a small change in the optimum price will make only a marginal difference to the firms' profits.
If there are small administrative costs of changing prices (so-called ‘menu costs’), it may not be worth the firm changing its price as the adjustment costs may dominate the small gain in profitability.
Yet the cited studies have shown that the macroeconomic effects of such rigidities can be quite substantial.
Thus it is argued that the gain in profits of changing prices may only be of second order, whereas the welfare losses from the resulting rigidities may be of first order.
Of course, there may be other costs of changing prices (other than purely administrative ones).
Okun (1981) and Rotemberg (1982) consider the cost of customer dissatisfaction with firms whose pricing appears erratic.
Whatever the nature of price adjustment costs, one important development in establishing the micro-foundations of Keynesian wage or price rigidity has emphasized that these costs need not be substantial to lead to rigidities which can have important macroeconomic consequences.
However, one problem that applies to a number of theories seeking to explain nominal wage rigidities has been highlighted by Barro (1977b) and can be illustrated here by reference to figure 5.1.
Suppose that a contract to sell at a given price for a specified period is, for whatever reason, advantageous to both buyers and sellers.
A contract is therefore concluded to sell at a price P for a set period (the exact length of this period is of no immediate concern).
If unpredictable changes in aggregate demand occur, disequilibrium results: for example, an unexpectedly high level of aggregate demand would cause excess demand to arise.
In such a circumstance a quantity rule has to be adopted in order to determine what actual output will be, and the one which we adopted was that actual output would equal the level of demand, thus obliging firms to produce and sell more than they initially considered optimal at the  price set.
If they are rational, firms will realize that such disturbances can occur, even though they cannot forecast their precise timing.
Furthermore, they will know that such disturbances will force them to produce a level of output which is not the optimal one in the sense that it is not what they would in advance choose to produce at a price of P.
Barro's question is as follows: Why should firms agree to a course of action which they know in certain circumstances will force them to do something which in advance or ex ante appears sub-optimal?
To put this a slightly different way: a contract which fixes prices but specifies that output will equal whatever is demanded must ex ante be sub-optimal for firms.
A similar question can be asked about consumers when the quantity rule is that output equals the minimum of demand and supply.
For this implies that if there is an unexpected rise in demand in period t consumers will not be able to buy the quantity of the good they at time period t -1, or ex ante, considered optimal at the set price.
Knowing that such disturbances can occur, why should consumers agree to a form of contract which, in such circumstances, forces them to acquire a quantity of goods at the agreed price which they consider sub-optimal?
Such a contract must ex ante be sub-optimal.
As Barro points out, the only quantity rule which does not carry with it the implication that at times buyers and sellers will, at the price set, trade a quantity of the good they consider in advance to be sub-optimal is a rule which sets output equal to the value it would take in the absence of any unanticipated disturbances; that is, y n .
For then if the price is set at P the quantity traded will equal the quantity that buyers and sellers at the end of period t — 1 thought optimal at that price.
Of course, if disturbances occur to aggregate demand, buyers or sellers who have agreed on a price P and a quantity to be traded y n will find themselves buying or selling more or less than they now think is optimal, but that is not the point.
At the time they agreed the contract, period t -1, it appeared optimal to trade y n if the price level was P.
And since that is what the contract binds both sides to do, it is at period t -1 an optimal contract.
The force of Barro's point should now be clear: in order to explain quantity movements when prices are sticky, Keynesian economists must provide some theoretical justification for the quantity rule they use.
A quantity trading rule which fixes price but  not output (or employment) appears to be sub-optimal.
If economic agents are assumed to be rational optimizers when forming expectations, why should they not also be rational optimizers when drawing up contracts?
As we have said, these questions are the subject of a large amount of current research which it is beyond the scope of this book to consider.
5.4 SUMMARY
In this chapter we have dealt with the major criticisms of the model developed in chapter 4.
In particular, we have shown the implications of applying rational expectations to a variety of alternative models, some of which maintain the idea of wage and price flexibility and some which do not.
We have established that rational expectations per se do not imply policy ineffectiveness, for when rational expectations are combined with alternative models of the macroeconomy systematic policy can influence the behaviour of output and allow the authorities to undertake stabilization policies.
The case for stabilization policy is further strengthened when one assumes that either wages or prices are sticky over time, although the microeconomic foundations for long-term contracts are very much in their development stage.
The counter-examples to the policy ineffectiveness proposition that we have considered in this chapter have led one notable proponent of rational expectations to write ‘the potential usefulness of activist policy rules in dampening fluctuations…may survive the rational expectations revolution’(McCallum, 1980, p. 738).
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Buiter (1980) summarizes and develops a number of criticisms of the rational expectations equilibrium macroeconomic model.
Marini (1985) demonstrates that stabilization through monetary policy is possible in Barro's (1976) model.
Rotemberg (1987) and Blanchard (1987) provide useful surveys of recent developments in the foundations for Keynesian macroeconomics and Gray (1976) analyses certain conditions under which ‘sticky’ wages might be optimal.
6 Rational Expectations and Macroeconomics: Two Influential Empirical Studies
In this chapter we shall examine two influential tests of rational expectations models in macroeconomics.
The contributions of Lucas (1973) and Barro (1977a) initiated a major applied research programme, the main aim of which was the empirical evaluation of the model presented and discussed in chapter 4.
Because of the historical importance of these papers we devote most of this chapter to them, and to the subsequent empirical research which has either corroborated or extended their results.
We leave the more recent research which has challenged their findings to the following chapter.
The Lucas paper, which we cover in section 6.1, concentrates on testing the prediction of the model developed in chapter 4 that the more unpredictable aggregate demand is, the less is the effect on real output of any given unpredictable movement in aggregate demand.
Barro focused on the other major prediction of that model: that only the unpredictable movement in aggregate demand affects real variables such as output and unemployment — his contribution is discussed in section 6.2.
Finally, in section 6.3 we consider some of the modifications and  extensions to these key contributions.
6.1 THE LUCAS TEST
The model developed in chapter 4 suggested that only the unpredictable component of aggregate demand would cause output to  deviate from its natural level, and the more unpredictable it was the less effect it would have on the deviation of real output from its natural rate.
Formally, we could write a simple version of that model (see, for example, equation (4.14) as  where y t is the aggregate real output, is the natural level of output, v t is the unpredictable component of aggregate demand, is the variance of v, is the variance of the relative demand shocks, and  is a function explained below, the value of which is positive.
All variables are in logarithms.
This equation states that in the absence of any aggregate demand shock (that is, if v t is zero), output will equal its natural level,,.
If the aggregate demand shock is positive, then real output will rise above its natural level; if it is negative it will fall below it.
The actual size of the rise or fall for any given value for  t will depend upon the variances of the aggregate and relative demand shocks.
The higher the variance of the aggregate demand shock, the more unpredictable the aggregate demand shock is, and therefore, as explained in chapter 4, the lower will be the effect of any given v t .
In other words, the greater the value of a2 the lower, ceteris paribus, the value of .
The model also predicts that the higher the value of  the greater, ceteris paribus, the value of .
The focus of the Lucas (1973) paper is on the first of these predicted relationships; that is, between the volatility of aggregate demand and its impact on real output.
He tests it using data from a number of different countries over the same time period, reasoning that if equation (6.1) were true, then those countries in which aggregate demand has been highly unpredictable should be those countries in which unpredictable aggregate demand has little effect on real output.
In fact, Lucas uses a slightly more complicated version of equation (6.1) in his study.
First he rewrites equation (6.1) as: where  is by definition the deviation of aggregate output in the ith country from its natural rate (that is,).
The other variables with i subscripts are as before but now refer to the ith country.
Then he allows for the effects of a ‘propagation mechanism’(see  section 5.1(a)) by adding the lagged value of  to equation (6.2) and attaching a positive coefficient  to it, giving:
The addition of  implies that any aggregate demand shock will have a drawn-out effect on real output: a positive value of  will, ceteris paribus, lead to a positive value for  (that is , output will be above its natural level); next period, even in the absence of a positive value for  will be positive because of the influence of the positive value of .
Provided that the value of  is less than one, the effect of the positive value of  will gradually become negligible.
If  were greater than one, the effect of a non-zero  would increase over time, so a value of  of less than one is a requirement for the model's stability.
Three final assumptions permit Lucas to carry out his test.
First, he assumes that  is a constant which is roughly the same for all countries.
Second, he assumes that the natural level of output grows at a rate which for any individual country is a constant over time but which may differ between countries.
This assumption allows Lucas to measure  as the deviation of actual real output, from the value predicted from a regression of  on a constant and time (where time might take the value of 1 in the first year of the data period, 2 in the second and so on).
Using this as his measure of , Lucas can carry out a separate regression of  on  and  for each of the countries for which he has data, once he has solved the problem of how to measure  for each country.
The method employed by Lucas to measure  appears now to be rather simplistic, as we shall see when we discuss later empirical studies.
He measures each country's aggregate demand at any time by its total nominal spending.
He then assumes that for each country the rate of growth of aggregate demand or nominal spending has followed a very simple process; that is, where  is the rate of growth of the ith country's nominal spending, is the mean value of  over the whole period, and  is the deviation of  from its mean.
Rationality of expectations implies that if equation (6.4) adequately describes the process determining  then for each country the anticipated rate of growth of aggregate demand will  be  and the unanticipated rate of growth will be  in any period t.
Thus Lucas measures the unanticipated rate of growth of aggregate demand in the ith country in any period t by  the deviation of the actual rate of growth of nominal spending from its mean value over the whole period.
And he measures the unpredictability of aggregate demand in the ith country by the variance of .
Of course, this procedure is only valid if equation (6.4) does adequately describe the process determining  in each country.
The extreme simplicity of the process suggests that this is unlikely, although Lucas (1973, p. 328 fn. 5) recognizes the problem and argues that the process he has assumed (that is, equation (6.4)) appears ‘roughly accurate for most countries’ in his study.
The simplicity of the process assumed for aggregate demand is something we shall return to later, since it has some bearing on the interpretation of Lucas's results.
If, for each country, is constant over time it follows that  will be a constant, although of course for different countries it will be a different constant.
Thus for each country one could use Lucas's measure of unanticipated aggregate demand to estimate the following OLS regression based on equation(6.3): where  is a coefficient, and  is a random error which is assumed to be serially uncorrelated with zero mean.
In fact, Lucas actually substitutes for  from equation (6.4) and estimates the following regression for each country:
Strictly, equations (6.5) and (6.6) are equivalent only if in estimating equation (6.6) the restriction is imposed that the coefficient estimated on  is equal to the negative of the constant term divided by the mean of .
It appears that Lucas did not in fact impose this restriction, but estimated equation (6.6) freely.
However, in what follows we shall assume that Lucas estimated the equivalent of equation (6.5).
Thus Lucas can be seen to be estimating a regression for each country in which that country's deviation of real output from its natural level is regressed on its own lagged value and Lucas's measure of the unpredictable and therefore unanticipated component of aggregate demand.
Lucas's study used data from 18 countries, and the regression  equation (6.5) was estimated for each of them using annual data over the period 1952–67.
If the rational expectations macroeconomic model summarized in equation (6.3) has any validity, one would expect, first of all, that the estimate of β t for each of the 18 countries would be positive and that the estimated value of  would be between zero and one.
In general, these predictions of the theory are confirmed by Lucas's results.
However, in a number of cases the variables on the right-hand side of equation (6.5) account for rather a small proportion of the variance of the left-hand side variable, suggesting that some important influences on  have been omitted from the estimating equation.
The second and crucial prediction of equation (6.3) is that those countries in which aggregate demand is volatile should be those countries in which β:1 is estimated to be low.
Countries with volatile aggregate demand are identified by Lucas as those countries for which the variance of unanticipated aggregate demand, v, is high.
To test this prediction rigorously Lucas should estimate equation (6.6) for his 18 countries jointly, imposing the restriction implied by his model that the β 1 coefficients are negatively related to the estimated variances of v. The Lucas model could then be tested along the lines suggested in chapter 3, by testing for the validity of this restriction.
In fact, Lucas adopts a much less rigorous approach.
He tabulates for each country the estimated variance of the unanticipated aggregate demand term, v, and that country's estimated value for β 1 .
If the prediction is correct then a negative relationship should be observed.
Lucas claims that such a relationship can be discerned in his data.
As an illustration of this negative relationship Lucas notes that for the US his estimate of the variance of aggregate demand is 0.00064, while for Argentina it is more than 20 times higher at 0.01555; the estimate of β 1 for the US is 0.910, whereas for Argentina it is much lower at 0.011.
One problem with the Lucas study, recognized by Lucas (1973, p.331), is that his 18 countries fall into two distinct groups.
The first group consists of 16 countries in which aggregate demand has been reasonably stable; the second consists of two countries Argentina and Paraguay — in which aggregate demand has been highly expansive and volatile.
The apparent negative relationship between Lucas's estimate of the aggregate demand volatility for any country and his estimate of β 1 for the country is heavily  dependent upon these two highly volatile countries.
To base conclusions on such a small sample is unsatisfactory.
However, a number of other authors (for example, Alberro, 1981; Kormendi and Meguire, 1984) have employed something like the Lucas approach using data from more countries, and have generally found much the same result as that reported in Lucas.
Despite the slightly unsatisfactory nature of the data set used by Lucas, and although the tests he applied were hardly rigorous, his paper was influential in that it was one of the first to show that certain of the predictions made by the rational expectations hypothesis were not entirely inconsistent with the data.
We shall consider in chapter 7 a more fundamental econometric problem with the Lucas study which casts doubt on the interpretation which Lucas puts on his results.
6.2 THE BARRO TEST
A second series of influential studies that gave support to the model presented in chapter 4 — this time to its prediction that only unanticipated changes in aggregate demand have real output effects — were those of Barro (1977a, 1978a; see also Barro and Rush, 1980).
The starting point of Barro's model is the assumption that the rate of growth of the quantity of money in an economy is the prime determinant of the rate of growth of aggregate demand in that economy.
The distinction drawn in chapter 4 between the predictable and unpredictable components of aggregate demand can be easily translated into a distinction between the predictable and unpredictable components of monetary growth.
In particular, if the quantity of money is the prime determinant of aggregate demand, it follows from the analysis in chapter 4 that the predictable component of the rate of growth of the quantity of money will have no effect on any real variable such as the level of output or the level of unemployment; only the unpredictable or random component of monetary growth will affect real variables.
In accordance with the theory of rational expectations, Barro identifies the predictable component of monetary growth as that part of the process determining monetary growth which could have been predicted on the basis of the information available at the time.
His initial task then is to identify this process.
In his original paper  Barro (1977a) used annual data for the US covering the period from 1941 to 1973 and, in contrast to Lucas (1973), who after all was considering a much larger number of countries, Barro investigated the process determining monetary growth in some detail.
In accordance with certain theoretical considerations and after some empirical experimentation, Barro obtained the following fairly complex equation as his best estimate of the process determining the annual rate of growth of the quantity of money over the period 1941–73: where  is the rate of growth of the quantity of money predicted by the process shown in equation (6.7) to occur in period t, and  is the actual rate of growth of the quantity of money in period t -i.
The rate of growth is defined logarithmically, that is  where M t is the annual average of the M1 definition of the US money stock; FEDV t is a measure of federal government expenditure relative to‘normal’, and UN t is a measure of unemployment, defined as  where U is the annual average unemployment rate.
So, according to Barro's estimate, the predictable component of money growth, depends upon the following:
1
a measure of the deviation of government expenditure from its normal level.
Barro's argument for the inclusion of this variable is that if government expenditure is equal to its normal level, it will tend to be financed by orthodox taxation, but if it is, say, abnormally high it is more likely to be financed by measures which increase the rate of monetary growth.
The exact method by which Barro measures normal government expenditure is not vital for our purposes: essentially, it is through a regression of actual expenditure on its own lagged values.
2
, a lagged measure of unemployment.
Barro argues that the presence of this variable reflects the counter-cyclical response of money to the level of economic activity.
When unemployment is high the US authorities have tended to respond by allowing monetary policy to accelerate.
3
Two lagged money growth terms to pick up any elements of serial dependence or lagged adjustment not captured by the other explanatory variables.
It should be emphasized that equation (6.7) is the result obtained from an ordinary least-squares (OLS) regression of actual monetary growth,, on the variables on the right hand-side.
It amounts to the ‘best’ statistical description of the process determining  which Barro could find for the period covered by his data.
Because of this Barro treats  as the best prediction that could be made by rational agents of the value of .
Thus  is identified by Barro as his estimate of the rationally anticipated component of , or .
In other words, Barro assumes that rational agents over the period were aware that the rate of growth of the quantity of money was being determined by the process described in equation (6.7), and were using their knowledge of that process and the coefficients involved in it to predict future monetary growth.
For this assumption to be consistent with rational expectations, equation (6.7) must exhibit three key characteristics: first, the variables on the right-hand side of equation (6.7) should include all those which exert an important impact on monetary growth.
In fact, the right-hand side variables in equation (6.7) account for about 90 per cent of the movements in  so this criterion seems likely to be satisfied.
Second, the component of DM which this equation does not account for should not exhibit any pattern for, if it did, then rational agents would exploit that pattern to improve their forecasts.
Barro presents some evidence that no such pattern exists: this evidence is from the Durbin-Watson statistic (see Johnston, 1984, pp. 314–17) which tests the null hypothesis that the error in predicting DM in any period t made by equation (6.7) is unrelated to the error made in the previous period.
From the Durbin-Watson statistic which Barro reports one cannot reject the null hypothesis (although, strictly speaking, the Durbin-Watson test is not applicable because of the presence of the lagged dependent variable).
The third key characteristic is that the actual value of all the variables which according to equation (6.7) determine  should be known at the end of period t -1; otherwise they cannot be used to predict .
In all cases except FEDV this criterion is satisfied since all other variables are dated t -1 or earlier, and we assume that such variables are in agents' information sets.
But FEDV is a currently dated variable and so, strictly, should not be included in equation (6.7).
Barro (1977a, fn.9) acknowledges this criticism but argues that the principal movements  in FEDV, which are dominated by changes in wartime activity, would be known to agents in advance.
The role of FEDV is explored critically by Pesaran (1982), whose study is considered in more detail in chapter 7.
Having obtained a measure of anticipated monetary growth, Barro computes the unanticipated component of monetary growth in each period as the difference between actual monetary growth in the period and the anticipated component of monetary growth in that period; that is,.
To put this another way, is the estimated residual from the OLS regression, the coefficients of which are shown in equation (6.7) and the dependent variable of which is actual monetary growth .
To test the prediction that the unpredictable component of monetary growth affects real variables, Barro first regresses the level of unemployment on the current and lagged values of his  variable and on two other variables which are seen as influencing the natural rate of unemployment.
(The presence of the lagged  is taken to reflect the presence of some ‘propagation mechanism’ such as those described in chapter 5.)
Thus Barro carries out an OLS regression of the following form: where  t is the equation error term; MIL = (military personnel) /(male population aged 15–44), for years in which selective military draft law was in effect, and MIL = 0 for the non-selective draftlaw years; and MINW is the minimum wage level.
The rationale for including MIL is that conscription works towards reducing the unemployment rate if individuals are more likely to be drafted into the services if they are unemployed.
The variable MINW measures the impact of minimum wage legislation on the unemployment rate.
The number of lagged  terms that enter into equation (6.8) are determined empirically by Barro; that is, he only retains lagged  terms the coefficients of which are significantly different from zero.
One would expect that if the unpredictable growth in the money stock were positive, then output would rise and unemployment fall.
Thus one would expect to observe negative coefficients on the current and lagged .
Notice that Barro assumes that FEDV t and  do not exert an independent influence on UN t .
This is an example of the ‘exclusion restrictions’ discussed in chapter 3.
The results of carrying out an OLS regression of equation (6.8) using annual US data from 1946 to 1973 were:
Estimated standard errors are in parentheses.
Notice that, as the theory suggest, the unpredictable monetary growth variables have significant negative effects on the level of unemployment.
The values of the student's ‘t’ test statistics, for a test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the  variables are zero, are 2.8 for  6.4 for  and 2.2 for  2.
These values are to be compared with 2.07, the critical value at the 5 per cent significance level under the ‘t’ distribution with 22 degrees of freedom.
So we can reject the hypothesis that each of the coefficients on the  variables are zero, and conclude that current  and up to two lags in  had a significant impact on the unemployment rate.
Thus the first part of the prediction which Barro set out to test appears to be confirmed by these results — unpredictable monetary growth does affect a real variable in the way suggested.
Notice also that the coefficients on the  variables imply that the lag pattern has a triangular shape with the strongest effect,-12.1, occurring after a one-year lag and then dying away.
Next, Barro tests the proposition that it is only the unpredictable part of money growth that influences the rate of unemployment.
He does this by including total money growth, in the unemployment equation as well as the unanticipated component,; that is, equation (6.8) becomes: where  t is the equation error term.
The null hypothesis that  can then be tested by using the F distribution as explained in chapter 3.
Barro obtains a value of 1.4 for his test statistic, which is less than the critical value under the F distribution with 3 and 19 degrees of freedom at the 5 per cent significance level.
So the null hypothesis that the γ coefficients are all zero cannot be rejected, and therefore neither the current nor the lagged DM's appear to have any influence on the rate of unemployment.
Notice that this test is equivalent to testing whether the anticipated component of monetary growth has an additional effect on unemployment over and above the effect of the .
To see this substitute  into equation (6.10) to give:
So including current and lagged total money growth in the output equation and testing the null hypothesis that the coefficients on these variables are all zero is exactly equivalent to including current and lagged predictable components of money growth in the output equation and testing for zero coefficients on these variables.
That is, constraining the γ coefficients to zero in equation (6.11) will produce exactly the same sum of square residuals as in equation (6.10) when the γ coefficients are constrained to zero.
Barro's statistical tests all seemed to support one of the main predictions made by the simple rational expectations model developed in chapter 4: that unpredictable monetary growth is important in the determination of the level of unemployment while predictable monetary growth is irrelevant.
In subsequent papers Barro (Barro, 1978a; Barro and Rush, 1980) extended the analysis in two directions.
First, he examined the influence of predictable and unpredictable monetary growth on real output rather than unemployment: he found evidence here too that only the unpredictable component of monetary growth affected real output, a positive monetary surprise leading to a rise in output above its natural level.
Second, he introduced a further equation — a price equation — and found that, as the rational expectations theory predicts, an anticipated rise in monetary  growth, of say  per cent, leads to an immediate  per cent rise in the price level, whereas a similar unpredictable rise in monetary growth leads initially to a less than per cent rise in the price level.
In general then, Barro's results appear to represent a small but significant body of evidence in support of the sort of rational expectations macro-economic model developed in chapter 4.
One criticism of Barro's approach to the estimation and testing of the rational expectations model is that he employs a two-stage estimation procedure and this is not statistically efficient.
That is, he first carries out an OLS regression of monetary growth on a number of other variables — the DM equation — and obtains the residuals from this equation; then, in a second stage, uses these residuals, the , in an OLS regression in which unemployment or output is the dependent variable.
Such a procedure is not fully efficient in that it does not use all the information contained in the model.
In particular, it fails to take account of its cross-equation restrictions.
It therefore bypasses one of the main methods of testing the rational expectations hypothesis which we explained in chapter 3, namely testing the restrictions it imposes.
An asymptotically efficient and more fruitful estimation procedure would involve the estimation of all coefficients jointly, imposing the cross-equation restrictions (‘asymptotically' means ‘as the sample size tends to infinity’).
To explain this point (which Barro (1977a) recognizes in a footnote, p.107 fn. 15) and also to demonstrate that Barro's results appear to hold true for countries other than the US, we shall outline a model similar to Barro's which Attfield, Demery and Duck (1981a)(henceforth ADD) applied to UK annual data for the period 1946–77.
Their model consists of the following equations: where DM is the rate of growth of the money stock, B is the real value of the government borrowing requirement and S is the real current account balance of payments surplus.
In the output equation y is the log of real GDP, t is a time trend and VP is a  measure of the variability of the inflation rate; and  t are equation errors.
The first equation in this model is an estimate of the process that monetary growth followed over the period considered.
The second is an output equation in which the variables t and VP determine the natural rate of output.
The rationale for the inclusion of B in the money equation is that governments may finance expenditures which they are reluctant to pay for through taxes by methods which expand the money stock.
Since a given nominal value for the borrowing requirement implies a progressively lower value for DM, the appropriate ‘fiscal’ influence on monetary growth is the real value of the borrowing requirement (B).
ADD argue that their method of dealing with the relationship between fiscal and monetary policy is simpler than that used by Barro (1977a), in which the equivalent fiscal variable is government expenditure relative to its normal level.
The use of B avoids the problem of estimating the normal level of government expenditure which, ADD argue, Barro handles inconsistently since he assumes that agents form their expectations about normal government expenditure using an adaptive expectations mechanism, while assuming that agents form their expectations rationally elsewhere in the system.
The justification for the inclusion of the lagged real current account balance of payments surplus,, is that it reflects the concern of successive UK governments with the external balance; a large surplus encourages (or at least allows) a more expansionary monetary policy, while a large deficit tends to bring about a contractionary one.
The structure of the output equation reflects the assumptions that the natural level of output is a function of two variables: time, t, and a measure of the variability of the inflation rate, VP.
The time trend accounts for the effects of a constant natural rate of growth of output while VP allows for the possibility that the efficiency of the economy, and hence the natural level of output, is reduced by a variable inflation rate.
ADD suggest that the reasons efficiency might be impaired in periods of variable inflation are that the price system fails to transmit as efficiently the information on relative prices needed to coordinate economic plans, that the optimum wage and price contract length shortens, making existing arrangements inappropriate, and that government interference in markets is likely to be increased.
From the money growth equation in (6.12) we have:
Substituting the expressions for  and  into the output equation in (6.12) gives the two-equation model:
From the model in equation (6.14) it is possible to explain the cross-equation restrictions.
Take, for example, the coefficient estimated on B t in the  equations: this is an estimate of .
But the coefficients estimated on  and  in the output equation are estimates, respectively, of , and  and so we can deduce from these four estimated coefficients estimates of  and .
Similarly, by taking the coefficient estimated on  in the  equation, and the coefficients estimated on  and  in the output equation, which are estimates of  and  we can deduce other estimates of  and .
The two sets of estimates of  and  should, in large samples, be approximately the same, if the restrictions are correct.
This restriction — that the two ways of obtaining estimates of  and  should give the same results — is an example of the cross-equation restrictions implied by the model in equation (6.14).
Barro's procedure ignores such restrictions entirely because he estimates the monetary growth and real output equations separately and does not impose the restrictions.
There is therefore no guarantee that the restrictions which are implied by his model will be satisfied.
As we have said, an asymptotically efficient procedure would estimate the coefficients in both equations jointly, imposing all the cross-equation restrictions.
ADD (1981a) employ such a procedure — full information maximum  likelihood — to estimate the model in equation (6.14) where the current monetary shock  times its coefficient β t is relegated to the error term in the output equation.
That is, if we let the whole error term in the output equation be  t then .
The variance-covariance matrix of equation errors is then: where  is the variance of  and  is the variance of  t and, to ensure that the structural parameters in the model are identified, it is assumed that the covariance between  and  t is zero.
ADD obtain maximum likelihood estimates by maximizing the criterion  with respect to the α's and β:i 's in the structure in equation (6.14), where n is the sample size.
Notice that an estimate of  t can be obtained by dividing the top right-hand element of the estimated  matrix, that is the estimate of the , by the top left-hand element of the covariance matrix.
ADD obtain the following estimates for their model: where asymptotic standard errors are given in parentheses and a  denotes an estimate of a variable or a coefficient.
In the money equation ADD did try a number of other variables such as the lagged inflation rate, nominal and real rates of interest and real income (as a deviation from trend) to obtain the most satisfactory explanation of the monetary growth process.
The variables in equation (6.16) proved to be the most suitable determinants of monetary growth.
In the output equation the unpredictable monetary growth variables do have a significant, positive effect on real output, although the impacts of  and  are less significant than Barro found for the US.
Notice also that the estimates for the UK do not display the strong triangular pattern found by Barro in the US.
ADD then tested the hypothesis that it is only unpredictable money growth that has an impact on real output by inserting actual money growth into the output equation in (6.14) for the periods t, t -1, t -2 and t -3, and comparing the likelihood from this model with the model in equation (6.16).
The resulting test statistic is 5.49, which has to be compared with 9.49, the critical value under the chi-square distribution at the 5 per cent significance level with 4 degrees of freedom.
So the null hypothesis that it is only unpredictable monetary growth which influences real output cannot be rejected.
The above tests are carried out by estimating the system as a whole and not, as in Barro (1977a), by estimating separately the money growth equation and the unemployment (or output) equation.
Since all the coefficients are estimated simultaneously, the estimated model (6.16), which has all the cross-equation restrictions imposed, can be compared with another model which has the same variables on the right-hand side of each equation but in which the cross-equation restrictions are relaxed; that is, the coefficients on each variable are freely estimated as  where  are equation errors.
Since in equation (6.16) we have relaxed the cross-equation restrictions implied by the rational expectations model (6.14), we can carry out a likelihood ratio test of the restrictions in equation (6.14) by comparing its likelihood with that of equation (6.17).
As explained in chapter 3, if the likelihood ratio test suggests that the cross-equation restrictions are not valid, it implies that the model which imposes them is invalid.
For their UK data ADD carried out such a test and obtained a test statistic of 17.93 which has to be compared with a critical chi-square value of 15.5 at the 5 per cent level and 20.1 at the 1 per cent level, with 8 degrees of freedom.
Given that they are working with a small sample and that the likelihood ratio test is a large sample test, ADD do not consider the evidence to be strong enough to reject the null hypothesis.
ADD (1981b) further extend this research by estimating a three-equation quarterly model of unanticipated monetary growth, output and the price level for the UK over the period 1963–78.
Apart from the use of quarterly data, the main difference in this study is that the current monetary shock is included in the output equation rather than being incorporated in the error term, in what — ADD demonstrate — is an asymptotically efficient estimation procedure.
That is, they show that the coefficients of the model are still identified in this case provided that it is assumed that the equation errors in the money growth equation and in the output equation are contemporaneously uncorrelated.
They reach broadly the same conclusion as in the paper using annual data: monetary growth affects real output only if it is unpredictable, and the cross-equation restrictions imposed by the model cannot be rejected.
Thus the ADD (1981a, b) results lend support to the findings of Barro for the US.
6.3 THE LEIDERMAN TEST
Soon after the publication of Barro's studies it was pointed out by Leiderman (1980) that Barro's model embodied two important but separate hypotheses — rational expectations and what is called structural neutrality — and that it was possible to test for rational expectations separately, and then, given rational expectations, test  for structural neutrality.
The structural neutrality hypothesis in the Barro model is simply the assumption that any growth in the quantity of money which is anticipated, whether or not those anticipations are formed rationally, will not affect the level of real output or unemployment.
To understand Leiderman's argument clearly, consider the following simplified version of the Barro model:
The structural neutrality hypothesis is embodied in this model because the coefficient on  in the unemployment equation has a coefficient which is equal but opposite in sign to the coefficient on .
Thus a rise in monetary growth which is anticipated will have no effect on the level of unemployment.
If it is now assumed that the coefficients on  and  in the unemployment equation are different, so that we are not assuming structural neutrality, we can rewrite the unemployment equation as:
A test for structural neutrality therefore reduces to the simple test of the null hypothesis .
If this equality restriction is not supported by the data, we can reject the neutrality postulate.
We can therefore test for rational expectations by substituting for  and  into equation (6.19) to give the system: where we have allowed the term  to accumulate in the equation error in the unemployment equation in (6.20).
(Notice that this means that the covariance between the equation errors in (6.20) is  which is unlikely to be zero.)
The equations in (6.20) embody the hypothesis of rational expectations but not the  assumption of structural neutrality.
Assume that we estimated the unrestricted version of equation (6.20); that is, where the  's are coefficients and  are equation errors.
In equation (6.21) there are six unrestricted coefficients.
In the system in equation (6.20), however, there are only five coefficients to be estimated, namely  and β 12 .
The rational expectations hypothesis thus places one restriction on the reduced form.
A test of the rational expectations hypothesis can therefore be constructed by computing the likelihood from the equations in (6.20) and the likelihood from (6.2]), and comparing the likelihood ratio test statistic with the chi-square distribution with, for this example, one degree of freedom.
If the rational expectations hypothesis is not rejected by this test we can test the structural neutrality hypothesis by comparing the likelihood from the system in equation (6.20) with the likelihood from the same system with the restriction imposed that β 11 equals β 12 .
Leiderman carried out this test using Barro's (1977a) data set (in which the real variable is unemployment).
He uses a full information maximum likelihood technique and concludes that ‘the restrictions implied by the constituent hypothesis of rational expectations and ‘structural neutrality’, as well as by the joint neutrality hypothesis, are not rejected by the sample information at the usual significance levels of five and one per cent' (Leiderman, 1980, p. 80).
6.4 THE LUCAS AND BARRO APPROACHES COMBINED
The Lucas (1973) paper tests one of the major predictions of the rational expectations model developed in chapter 4 and summarized in equation (6.1) by using cross-country data; the Barro studies test the other major prediction of that model using data from a single country.
A natural extension of the two approaches is to combine them and test both predictions at the same time.
This has been done in a number of papers and in this sections we outline the results of a study by Attfield and Duck (1983)(henceforth AD).
In simplified form, their model consists of the following three equations: where  is the rate of growth of the money stock in country , is a variable, the value of which is known at the end of the previous period and which influences monetary growth; α i and β i are coefficients for country i; and  are normally and independently distributed random errors, with zero means and variances  and  respectively; and  is a constant.
The first of these equations merely states that for any country the quantity of money grows in accordance with an identifiable but stochastic process.
This process may differ from country to country; that is why the coefficient α i is indexed on i.
The second equation embodies the structural neutrality and rational expectations hypothesis: for each country only the unpredictable component of monetary growth causes output to deviate from its natural rate.
These two equations then are essentially the Barro model applied to a number of different countries.
Equation (6.24) is a particular form of the relationship derived in chapter 4 and tested in Lucas (1973).
The derivation of the specific form need not concern us.
Its essential implication is that the coefficient linking the deviation of output from its natural rate to the unpredictable component of monetary growth depends negatively on the variance of unpredictable monetary growth.
The three equations taken together embody both of the major predictions outlined in the rational expectations macroeconomic model developed in chapter 4.
To test the two predictions, AD test the restrictions implied in equations (6.22)—(6.24).
To see what these are, first rewrite equations (6.22)—(6.24) as a two-equation model:
For any single country there are no restrictions imposed on equation (6.25) by equation (6.24).
To see this, imagine estimating the DM equation in equation (6.25) by OLS to obtain an estimate  of , and using the sum of squared residuals from this equation to construct an estimate Of  The estimate of α i could then be substituted into the output equation in (6.25) and, from the regression of  on , a unique estimate of  obtained by using the estimate of .
But if there are two countries used in the sample then, since  is assumed to be a constant across countries, that is it is not indexed on i, there will be a restriction on the model.
To see this, imagine repeating for a second country the process just described for the first.
Since  is a constant across countries you should obtain the same estimate of it in this second case.
Thus when estimating the model (6.25) using data from two countries, the restriction must be imposed that in each case the estimate of  must be the same.
As the number of countries in the sample increases, so does the complexity of the restrictions imposed by equation (6.25).
In fact, within the full AD model there are restrictions across equations within countries, between variances and coefficients within countries and between coefficients across all countries.
To test the restrictions on the model, AD use annual data for the period 1951–78 from 11 different countries (the US, the Netherlands, Canada, Denmark, Australia, the UK, the Philippines, Columbia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Argentina).
The particular countries were selected because an adequate explanation of monetary growth was possible on the basis of a simple and common process.
The process consisted of lagged government real expenditure and, for some countries, the lagged rate of monetary growth.
For the output equation AD assume that real output is a function of time, its own lagged value and current or one-period lagged unanticipated monetary growth (AD, 1983, p.448).
They estimate the model using maximum likelihood techniques and find that unanticipated monetary growth does generally have a positive effect on real output.
Of the 11 countries, 8 have estimates of β that are significantly positive.
In addition, a likelihood ratio test of the cross-equation restrictions does not reject the restrictions at the 1 per cent significance level for any of these countries.
These results support the prediction that the unpredictable component of monetary growth exerts a significant influence on real output.
AD then test the prediction that it is only the unpredictable component of DM that has an impact on real output in the way described in section 6.2.
They find that the null hypothesis that the  anticipated component of monetary growth exerts no influence on real output cannot be rejected for any country at the 1 per cent level.
FIGURE 6.1 The influence of monetary shocks and their volatility.
As a preliminary test of the prediction that the larger the variance of DMR the smaller the coefficient β, D present a figure which we reproduce in figure 6.1, which is a plot of the 11 estimates of the coefficient on unanticipated monetary growth in the output equations, the β i 's against the corresponding estimates of  the unpredictability of monetary growth as measured by the sum of squared residuals in the money growth equations.
From the points plotted in figure 6.1, the relationship between β and the variability of the unanticipated component of monetary growth is a downward-sloping one.
Such a figure gives the same sort of support to the prediction that the volatility of aggregate demand and its impact on real output are negatively related, as was found by Lucas (1973).
AD develop a much more formal likelihood ratio test of this relationship by estimating the model across all countries with the β i 's unrestricted and then with the β i 's restricted, according to the formula given in equation (6.24).
For details of the derivation of the test statistic, interested readers are referred to AD (1983, p. 446).
The result of the test was that the restrictions imposed by the rational expectations hypothesis on the β i coefficients could not be rejected.
The overall conclusion of the AD paper is that there is some support for the proposition that monetary growth affects real output only if it is unpredictable, and that the impact on output of unpredictable monetary growth declines the more unpredictable monetary growth becomes.
Kormendi and Meguire (1984) reach broadly the same conclusion using a similar model, but with a much larger sample of 47 countries.
6.5 SUMMARY
This chapter has explained and reported the results of two of the most influential empirical studies of the rational expectations hypothesis within a simple macroeconomic model.
It has also discussed further applications and some extensions of these models.
In general, the results that we have reported in this chapter have been favourable to the rational expectations hypothesis, suggesting at the very least that the usefulness of that hypothesis in one area of macroeconomics cannot be  dismissed lightly.
But these studies have had their critics, and it is to some of the key criticisms of them that we now turn in chapter 7.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Hanson (1980), Koskela and Viren (1980) and Lawrence (1983) are all attempts to apply something like the Lucas (1973) test to different data sets.
Wogin (1980) and Demery, Duck and Musgrave (1984) are applications of the Barro model to two other countries, Canada and West Germany respectively.
McCallum (1976) and Sargent (1976b) are other attempts to test for rational expectations within a simple macro-model of the economy.
Alogoskoufis and Pissarides (1983) and Demery, Duck and Musgrave (1983) concentrate on the price equation in Barro's model, in particular whether there is evidence in the UK that prices are ‘sticky’.
Tests of policy neutrality exploiting regime-switching for identification are a feature of Bean (1984) and Attfield and Duck(1986).