

5 Vibrational Spectroscopy
5.1 Introduction
Vibrational spectroscopy has been extensively used by inorganic chemists since about 1940, particularly with the development of infra-red (IR) and Raman spectrometers that are reliable and easy to use.
It is uniquely wide in its applicability: every molecular or covalently bonded sample has some form of vibrational spectrum, and it is easy to study gases, liquids, solids and solutions.
Spectra can even be obtained under extreme conditions of low or high temperature or pressure, and by various subtle means it is also possible to study short-lived species.
Above all, IR spectrometers are almost universally available, and so IR spectroscopy is one of the first techniques the inorganic chemist will call upon when studying a new sample.
Raman spectroscopy is also important, even though it is less widely used.
In this Chapter we show that the range of information which may be obtained from the use of the more common techniques is very wide; we also explain the ways in which less conventional sources of information about molecular vibrations may provide valuable data.
5.2 The physical basis; molecular vibrations
5.2.1 Vibrational motions and energies
It is possible to use vibrational spectroscopy as a tool for identifying and measuring concentrations of samples without needing to know anything about how or why the spectra arise.
However, much more information can be obtained if we have a reasonable level of understanding of this physical basis.
The basic picture we need is a purely mechanical one.
We regard a molecule as composed of massive particles (atoms) joined by connections which are much lighter (ideally mass-less)(Fig. 5.1).
We can identify the connections with the bonding electrons.
The motions of such a body can be  calculated classically using Newton's Laws of Motion, if we assume for the moment that the restoring forces in the connections are of the form  where χ is a displacement from equilibrium.
The internal motions are those that involve  no overall translation or rotation of the molecule.
They can be resolved into various oscillations about the equilibrium structure.
These are the characteristic or normal vibrations of the molecule, each with a characteristic vibration frequency  where k i is the force constant [see Eqn (5.1)]and µ i a reduced mass for the particular motion.
Classically, such motions can involve any amount of energy, but because of the atomic scale involved the energy is quantized.
The quanta of vibrational energy i are related to the classical vibration frequency by  where h is Planck's Constant.
Because of the Uncertainty Principle, it is not possible for a molecule to have zero vibrational energy; if it had, we could specify both the positions and the momenta of the atoms precisely.
All molecular vibrations therefore have some zero-point energy, and this can be shown to be equal to one half of a quantum, so that the total vibrational energy of a molecule with only one normal vibration is  where ν is the vibrational quantum number, a positive integer or zero.
5.2.2 Number of vibrational motions
A set of N atoms moving in 3-dimensional space has 3N degrees of freedom.
This is true both for independent atoms and for an N-atom molecule.
For all but linear molecules, external molecular motions — 3 translations and 3 rotations — account for 6 of these.
This leaves 3N — 6 vibrational motions (or modes of vibration).
A linear molecule has only two rotations, and so it has 3N — 5 vibrational modes.
Thus a   diatomic molecule (N = 2), which must of course be linear, has only one mode of vibration, the bond-stretching motion.
A bent triatomic molecule ABC has 3 × 3 — 6 = 3 modes (Fig. 5.2).
It is also useful to note that, in general, a molecule has one bond stretching mode per bond, although in systems with rings or cages the stretching motions are not always described so simply.
5.2.3 Non-ideal restoring forces; anharmonicity
So far we have assumed a simple (Hooke's Law) restoring force which is proportional to displacement [Eqn (5.1)]; this implies that the potential energy V has the form 
This represents a quadratic potential function.
It can be analyzed in two different ways: we can either use classical mechanics, or we can use the Schrödinger equation, which is the wave-mechanical equivalent.
In either case, we find that the motion is simple harmonic, with fixed frequency ω and equally-spaced energy levels as described by Eqn (5.4) and shown in Fig. 5.3(a).
However, Function (5.5) cannot possibly be a   true representation of the potential energy associated with a real displacement χ = r — r e of a bond between two atoms.
It is obvious that as r decreases below the equilibrium bond distance and the atoms ‘penetrate’ each other, the potential energy must increase dramatically so that some singular behavior (in the mathematical sense) must occur before r reaches zero.
On the other hand, as r increases, the potential energy does not increase without limit; it must approach asymptotically a finite value, the dissociation energy.
This is the energy required to separate the atoms or groups of atoms at either end of the bond by a great distance, so that there is no bonding between them.
A reasonable approximation to the expected behavior of a ‘real’ bond is given by the Morse function, where D e is the dissociation energy and a is a constant.
The Morse function yields vibrational energy levels given by Eqn (5.7), and these have the advantage that they are closely related to those for the simple harmonic case [Eqn (5.4)]
The energy levels for a Morse function are illustrated in Fig. 5.3(b).
It can be shown that any function capable of representing the variation of potential energy with displacement will lead to energy levels representable by a power series in  
The simple harmonic and Morse oscillators are thus particular cases of this general anharmonic oscillator for which the power series has been truncated after the first and second terms, respectively.
For the anharmonic oscillator, then, the vibrational energy levels associated with a particular vibration are not equally spaced.
The relative magnitudes of the coefficients of the power series vary with the sort of vibration.
For bond stretches involving heavy atoms, where hω e is of the order of a few hundred cm -1 , hχ e may be of the order of 1 cm -1 or less.
On the other hand, for bond stretches involving hydrogen atoms the anharmonic term is often larger in proportion, up to 100 cm -1 compared with hω e = 2000–3500 cm -1 .
For angle bending motions anharmonicities are often small, and may be negative, in which case the level separations increase as ν increases.
We shall meet other consequences of anharmonicity later.
Note that two forms of Eqn (5.7) will be found in other texts: one uses χ e (as here) and the other uses ω e χ e as the coefficient of .
5.3 Observing molecular vibrations
5.3.1.
Absorption in the infrared
We know that chemical bonds involve electrostatic attraction between positively charged atomic nuclei and negatively charged electrons.
Displacements of atoms during a molecular vibration therefore lead to distortions in the electric charge distribution of the molecule, which can be resolved into dipole, quadrupole, octopole, etc. terms in various directions.
Molecular vibrations therefore lead to oscillations of electric  charge, with frequencies governed by the normal vibration frequencies of the system.
An oscillating molecular dipole, for instance, can then interact directly with the oscillating electric vector of electromagnetic radiation of the same frequency, leading to resonant absorption of radiation.
The quantum energy of the radiation (hν) is equal to the quantum energy of the oscillator (hω) if ν=; ω, so that resonant absorption introduces exactly enough energy to raise the oscillator from a level ν to a level  [Fig. 5.4(a)].
Electric dipole interactions are thus responsible for absorption of radiation in the IR region of the spectrum.
In this range the frequencies are comparable with those of molecular vibrations, which are generally between 10 11 and 10 13 Hz, corresponding to 30–3000 cm -1 .
It is important to realize that not all molecular vibrations lead to oscillating dipoles.
We shall see in Section 5.7 how arguments based on symmetry may be helpful in deciding which vibrations will interact with IR radiation, and which will not.
Interactions with oscillating quadrupoles, etc. are also possible, but are so much weaker than dipole interactions that they can usually be ignored.
For magnetic species, such as free radicals, and some transition metal complexes, oscillating magnetic dipoles may in  principle interact with the magnetic vector of the radiation, but these interactions too are comparatively weak.
5.3.2 Raman scattering
IR spectra arise when radiation of energy corresponding to vibrational transitions in a molecule is absorbed.
But there is another way in which molecular vibrations can be excited by radiation, a way which does not involve direct or resonant absorption.
The radiation involved is normally of frequency much greater than that of any molecular vibration.
When radiation of frequency ν interacts with a molecular vibration of frequency ω, one quantum of the incident radiation may disappear, with creation of a quantum of frequency .
We may think of the initial photon as being absorbed, so that the molecule is excited to a ‘virtual’ state, whose lifetime is so short that there is effectively immediate re-emission of a photon whose energy may be different from hν by a quantum of vibrational energy.
The process, which is a very weak one, is illustrated in Fig. 5.4(b).
Conservation of energy requires a corresponding change in the vibrational energy of the molecule.
The resulting spectrum is called a Raman spectrum: it contains lines whose frequencies differ from that of the incident radiation by the frequencies of molecular vibrations.
The lines to low frequency of the incident radiation are called Stokes lines, and those at higher frequency are called anti-Stokes lines; the latter arise from vibrationally-excited states.
Scattered radiation of lower frequency is in general more important, because the proportion of molecules in excited vibrational states is governed by the Boltzmann distribution [Eqn (5.9)], and will be lower than that in the lowest state.
A conventional vibrational Raman spectrum therefore consists of a series of Stokes emissions separated in frequency from the exciting radiation by the various vibration frequencies of the sample.
The Raman scattering process is clearly not a resonant interaction, and it results in comparatively weak spectra.
The interaction comes about through the polarization of the electron cloud of the molecule by the oscillating electric vector of the incident quantum (Fig. 5.5).
The important molecular property connected with Raman spectra is therefore the polarizability, and a vibration will give rise to a Raman line if it leads to a change in the polarizability of the molecule.
We shall see in Section 5.7 that symmetry considerations allow us to decide which vibrational modes will lead to Raman scattering.
Information from electronic spectra
Electronic spectra often contain information about the vibration frequencies of both the lower and the upper electronic states of the species involved, as described in Chapter 6.
This is particularly true if an emission spectrum can be observed: absorption spectra arise mainly from the vibrational ground-state because of the Boltzmann distribution of population, unless the sample is already excited in some other way.
Much detailed information about the vibration frequencies of different electronic states of diatomic molecules and some simple polyatomic molecules has been obtained in this way.
For larger molecules it is not possible to disentangle the information about the electronic ground state from that relating to the excited state.
In recent years, however, the introduction of tunable lasers as excitation sources has allowed laser-induced fluorescence spectra to be obtained.
In these experiments, one specific vibronic (vibrational/electronic) level of the upper state is excited; fluorescence can then occur  to many different vibrational levels of the electronic ground state, as shown in Fig. 5.4(c).
Ground-state vibration frequencies are obtained as shifts from the exciting frequency or from the vibrational origin of the electronic band.
There is then no confusion between ground-state and excited-state information.
The selection rules depend on the symmetry properties of the electronic transition.
Much of the work reported so far with this technique involves organic samples, but the application to inorganic species should be a useful addition to other sources of information.
The method is applicable to gases and crystals, but vibrational relaxation in liquids tends to be too efficient to preserve the simplicity inherent in fluorescence from a single excited vibronic level.
The technique is discussed in some detail in Ref. [1], p. 395, and an example of a spectrum showing fluorescence from a crystalline sample is shown in Fig. 5.6.
5.3.4.
Inelastic scattering of neutrons and electrons
We have just seen that a non-resonant photon will normally leave an encounter with a molecule unchanged in energy, but it may very rarely lose energy to the molecule and emerge as a Raman-shifted photon of lower energy.
In the same way, we may think of the ideal encounter of a particle with a molecule as an elastic collision in which no energy is transferred.
However, rare inelastic collisions may also occur, resulting in the transfer of specific vibrational quanta of energy from the particles to the molecules.
We may, therefore, take a beam of neutrons or electrons, all having the same, known velocity, and pass it through or reflect it from a sample.
Analysis of the velocity distribution will reveal a ‘vibrational spectrum’ in the form of a spectrum of energy-losses by the particles.
Any particle could in principle be used; most results have been obtained with neutrons or electrons, each of which has various advantages and disadvantages for particular samples.
Neutrons interact comparatively weakly with matter, but Inelastic Neutron Scattering (INS) is capable of revealing both rotational and vibrational transitions in solid samples.
There are effectively no vibrational selection rules, so the technique is particularly useful for detecting vibrations that do not appear in either IR or Raman spectra.
The spectra of π-allyl complexes of nickel and palladium shown in Fig. 5.7 include some bands seen only in the IR spectra, some seen only in the Raman spectra, and some seen in neither.
More information about the technique and its applications can be found in Ref. [2].
Electrons interact much more strongly with matter.
Consequently, gases can be studied, but in most cases only electronic excitations are observed.
The technique has been extensively used to study vibrations associated with surfaces and thin film samples, usually in an electron microscope.
Vibrational excitation has only been reported for a few simple molecules in the gas phase, as shown in Fig. 5.8, and vibrational structure may also be seen on some bands arising from electronic transitions.
Applications of the technique, commonly known as Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS), to studies of solid surfaces are beyond the scope of this book.
The subject is discussed more fully in Refs [3]and [4].
5.4 Spectrometers
For many years the standard IR spectrometer has been the dispersive scanning spectrophotometer.
Non-dispersive interferometers, though available, were not widely used prior to the advent of modern computer technology.
In the past few years interferometers have displaced scanning spectrophotometers in many applications.
A third type of spectrometer, fundamentally simpler than the other two, uses a tunable  monochromatic source; instruments using IR-emitting diodes have been produced, but are not yet able to replace interferometers.
Dispersive instruments use prisms or gratings to separate radiation of different frequencies, by refraction or diffraction.
Photographic recording of IR radiation is extremely difficult, so scanning  spectrophotometers are used instead.
However, only one resolution element is detected at once, rather than all being recorded simultaneously as in a spectrograph; this makes the scanning spectrophotometer an inherently inefficient device.
Nevertheless, despite its mechanical complexity, its limited energy throughput and its inefficiency, it has dominated the market until comparatively recently.
These cheap, reliable and effective instruments have now been challenged by the alternative type, the interferometer.
In the interferometer no dispersing element is used, and no separation of different wavelengths is necessary.
All frequencies are measured simultaneously, by recording an interferogram, from which the spectrum is then obtained by Fourier transformation (see Section 1.5).
Modern interferometers covering the mid-IR region (4000–200 cm -1 ) include fast mini-computers required for the Fourier transformation, and are almost as easy to operate as scanning spectrophotometers.
The availability of the computer means that spectrum manipulation, storage and retrieval for replotting or comparison with standards are all easy, and this may be felt to justify the higher cost of interferometers.
However, the cost differential is rapidly diminishing, and as some of these benefits can be obtained simply by the addition of a micro-computer to a spectrophotometer, the choice between spectrophotometer and interferometer is becoming more and more a matter for the individual spectroscopist.
Each type of instrument has its particular advantages and disadvantages, and it seems likely that both types will continue to be available for the foreseeable future.
A basic Raman spectrometer consists of an intense source of exciting radiation, usually a laser, operating in the visible region on a single frequency, with a visible-light spectrophotometer to measure the Raman-shifted emission from the sample.
The sensitivity of the instrument may be increased by increasing the power of the laser or by decreasing the level of stray light in the monochromator; double- or even triple-grating monochromators are generally used to ensure that the Raman signals, often as weak as 10 -6 or less of the intensity of the exciting radiation, are not swamped by unshifted radiation by-passing the monochromator.
All radiation in the spectrum lies in the visible region, so glass optics can be used, and this offers an important advantage over the IR region, where glass is unusable, and mechanically weaker salt optics or front-silvered mirrors must be employed.
Recently it has been shown that Raman spectra may be obtained from a wide variety of samples using a combination of an interferometer capable of operating in the near-IR region and a near-IR laser.
The advantages include those associated with the interferometer (see above) and the associated computer, those associated with the high-power directed beam of the laser, which may also be operated in pulses rather than continuously, and also the virtual elimination of fluorescent background signals because of the long wavelength of the laser radiation.
Further information about scanning IR spectrophotometers, interferometers and Raman spectrometers may be found in Refs [5], p. 17;[6], p. 9; and [7], p. 132, respectively.
5.5 Sample handling
5.5.1 Infrared
One of the factors responsible for the wide use of IR spectroscopy is the ease with which various samples may be studied.
Glass and silica are opaque in the IR region below 4000 cm -1 , so that other materials must be used as windows for sample cells.
For most purposes the salts NaCl and KBr are adequate.
These can be used down to 600 and 350 cm -1 , respectively; for lower frequencies, CsI can be used down to 200 cm -1 but it is softer and much more expensive.
Spectra of these typical window materials are shown in Fig. 5.9.
All these materials are water-soluble, but this is only rarely a limitation, because intense IR absorption by H 2 O itself makes it very difficult to use IR spectroscopy to study aqueous systems.
Samples are most readily studied as liquids or solutions.
Thin films of liquid between two plane-faced salt windows are simplest to prepare, and a variety of designs of spaced-window cells, with fixed or variable sample thickness, are commercially available.
The effects of solvent absorption in a solution may be partially compensated by comparing the transmittance of matched cells, one containing solution and the other pure solvent, ideally in a double-beam spectrometer.
However, it is often necessary to use several solvents so that regions obscured by bands of one are free of interference in the spectrum of another.
Large solid samples are also easy to study, though the strength of the IR absorption may require the preparation of thin sheets of crystalline or amorphous materials.
Powders are slightly less easy to handle, and coarse, irregular solid samples give great problems because of scattering of IR radiation by solid particles of sizes comparable   with the wavelengths of the radiation (2–40 × 10 -6 m).
Both powders and coarser materials are usually finely ground, and then intimately mixed with a liquid whose refractive index is close to that of the solid.
The resulting mull, which should be optically clear, is usually examined as a thin film, pressed between two salt windows.
A heavy paraffin fraction (Nujol) is often used as mulling agent, and its few absorption bands can usually be readily distinguished from those of the sample (Fig. 5.10).
Ideally the regions where these interfering signals occur should be covered using a second     sample prepared with a mulling agent that has no absorptions in these regions, such as hexachlorobutadiene.
An alternative form of sample for solids is the pressed disk.
This may be of pure sample, but more often it is diluted with a salt, usually KBr.
The resulting disk needs no windows, and is also conveniently stored for future reference.
Scattering may be a problem unless the sample is very finely ground.
Another problem is that reactions such as halide exchange may occur during disk preparation, and it is sometimes necessary to evacuate the die during pressing to prevent oxidation of samples under the extreme pressure.
Gases require the most elaborate sampling arrangements.
For most purposes, glass tubing cells with flat salt windows sealed to flanged ends [Fig. 5.11(a)]are used.
Care must of course be taken with gases that may react with the glass, salt windows, or sealants.
For samples with very low vapor pressures, or for investigation of minor components of a gas stream, a greater path-length is helpful, and this may best be achieved using a folded-path cell with internal mirrors to direct the IR beam several times through the sample.
Various cells, such as that shown in Fig. 5.11(b), give paths of up to 20 m.
Sometimes samples need to be heated, cooled, compressed, treated with gases, irradiated and so on.
The apparatus required for these experiments usually includes salt windows, and is designed to fit the sample compartment of a commercial IR spectrometer.
One important experimental arrangement of this type, shown in Fig. 5.11(c), allows samples to be condensed at very low temperature (10–20 K) on a salt window.
This makes it possible to study samples isolated at high dilution in an inert matrix of a solid such as N 2 or Ar.
We shall see in Section 5.16.3 that such studies can be important even for stable substances, and can allow spectroscopic identification of species such as free radicals and other reactive fragments that are normally short-lived.
It is also possible to record vibrational spectra of solid samples under high and varying pressure.
Under these conditions many solids undergo phase changes, and the nature of the accompanying changes in structure can be studied.
Salt windows are generally too weak mechanically to be included in high-pressure apparatus, and the cell shown in Fig. 5.11 (d) has diamond windows.
Needless to say, small samples are usually used, and additional optics are needed to concentrate the beam of the IR spectrometer.
In such experiments the signal-to-noise ratio tends to be very low, and interferometers, which allow repeated scanning, are more useful than spectrophotometers.
5.5.2 Raman
As glass tubes are ideal for obtaining Raman spectra, sampling of liquids is much easier than for IR spectroscopy.
Moreover, one important advantage of Raman over IR spectroscopy is that water has very weak Raman scattering, and vibrational spectra of aqueous solutions are almost always studied most readily using Raman techniques.
The small size of the laser beam also makes it easy to investigate small solid samples, which generally require no container unless protection from air is needed.
For gases, however, the weakness of the Raman effect combined with low sample density makes spectra hard to obtain without special care.
It is almost essential to use a small cell with internal mirrors to give multiple traversal of the sample by the laser beam, and the highest attainable laser power should be employed.
Typical arrangements for recording Raman spectra of liquids, solids and gases are shown in Fig. 5.12.
Problems arise in recording Raman spectra of fluorescent samples, as the fluorescence is often much more intense than the Raman signal.
If this behavior is inherent in the sample, very little can be done about it except to change the exciting wavelength to one that reduces the effect.
But if it is due to a small proportion of an impurity it can usually be dealt with by careful purification or by exposing the sample to the laser beam for some time (a process called photo-bleaching).
A related problem is experienced with colored samples.
If an appreciable proportion of the laser radiation is absorbed by the sample, local heating will usually result in decomposition at the point of irradiation if the sample is a solid, though efficient convective mixing will often prevent  overheating in liquid samples.
One way of overcoming this is by spinning a large-area sample of the solid in the laser beam, so that any individual spot is irradiated for a short time only, and is able to cool before being brought back into the beam.
Effects of phase on spectra We shall see in Section 5.8.3 that changes in rotational quantum numbers accompany the vibrational transitions for gases.
At high resolution these result in fine structure; at lower resolution, various characteristic band envelopes may be observed.
We only find these in the spectra of gases; rotation is not quantized in condensed phases, and the characteristic rotational envelope of a gas-phase band is absent.
This has some advantages, as the rotational envelope results in a spreading of the intensity of a band over a  wide range, and may lead to overlapping of bands due to different vibrations.
A weak band close to a strong one may become difficult to detect in the gas phase, unless its own rotational envelope contains a prominent feature such as a Q-branch close to the band origin.
In condensed phases bands are often narrower, so that nearby vibrations are less likely to be obscured, while the peak heights are greater than in the gas phase.
This effect is at its most extreme in matrix-isolated samples, where very sharp pure vibrational peaks are usually observed.
Modes very close together may then be distinguished, and useful spectra are obtainable with very small samples.
Fig. 5.13 illustrates how the spectrum of a sample may depend on its phase.
In liquids and solutions there are several factors leading to broadening of the vibrational band, even in the absence of rotation envelopes.
In neat liquids and solutions there is little short-range order, and at any instant different molecules are under the influence of randomly-differing local environments.
The random differences in environment result in a range of different vibration frequencies, and so each vibration band is broadened.
This broadening can also arise from the time-variation of the local environment of a typical molecule, and it is possible to use measured bandwidths to probe the timescale of fluctuations of local environment.
Sometimes specific intermolecular complexes are formed, either between two sample molecules or between sample and solvent molecules.
For instance, hydrogen-bond formation in liquid water lowers the OH stretching frequencies by several hundred cm -1 , and it would be quite unrealistic to use the liquid water frequencies as characteristic of the isolated triatomic molecule.
In glassy solids the effects of random differences in local environment are even greater than for liquids; where fairly strong interactions occur, some bands may be very broad indeed.
Even in the same sample, however, other modes whose frequencies are insensitive to the local environment may well give quite narrow bands, and glasses (best formed by condensation from the gas phase onto a cold surface) should not be ignored as possible samples for the study of vibrational spectra.
In crystalline solids the effects of randomness of environment and of quantized rotation are absent, and very sharp vibration bands may be observed, especially in the Raman effect.
In the IR, problems arise because of the effects of surface reflection; these reach a maximum in the vicinity of an absorption band, and distort its apparent profile (the Christiansen effect).
The preparation of the samples, by fine grinding, must be undertaken very carefully, if high quality spectra are to be obtained.
The spectra of solid samples often contain more bands than expected on the basis of the molecular symmetry of single, isolated molecules.
These arise because the symmetry of the free molecule is reduced to that of the environment, which must be very low in the case of a random glassy solid, and may be low even in a crystalline sample.
This effect of site symmetry in a crystal is then compounded with the effects due to the presence of more than one molecule in the unit cell, which is the basic vibrating unit in a crystal.
If there are m molecules in the unit cell, each of the internal motions of the molecule will give rise to m components.
The activities of these components depend on their symmetries just as the activities of internal vibrations of the molecules are related to their symmetries (see Section 5.7).
The effects of low site symmetry are the same as those to be expected from distortion of the symmetrical molecule to a less-symmetrical form.
First, modes of the symmetrical form that are inactive in a particular spectrum (IR or Raman) may become active in the   lower symmetry of the site.
For example, the totally-symmetric stretching mode of the sulfate ion is IR inactive in an environment of high symmetry, as in solution; it becomes active in crystalline phases in sites of lower symmetry.
Secondly, degeneracy may be removed by reduced site symmetry, so that two (or three) distinct vibration bands occur rather than one.
For the sulfate ion, the triply-degenerate modes can show splitting into two or three components.
These features are illustrated in Fig. 5.14.
Site effects are well-defined in crystals, but are by no means confined to regular solids, and may be observed even in melts, as in molten mixtures of alkali sulfates, where the random distribution of M + ions around the sulfate anions may constitute a low-symmetry environment [8].
A further complication in the case of a crystalline solid is the possible appearance of lattice modes, which involve motions of whole molecules rather than of their constituent atoms.
A full factor group analysis of the motions of the entire cell is required to account for these, and we do not go into this process here.
Full details are given in Ref. [9].
The modes are usually of rather low frequency, and their effect can often be ignored except in the far IR region and at low frequencies in Raman spectra.
It is possible for such lattice modes to combine with higher-frequency modes giving weak additional features near strong fundamental bands, or near the expected positions of weak or missing fundamentals.
These can complicate the assignment of spectra of crystals, and care is needed in deciding on the numbers of active fundamentals in crystal spectra for this reason.
5.7 Vibrational spectra and symmetry
5.7.1 Fundamental vibrational selection rule
We have seen in Section 5.2 that vibrational energy is quantized, with the result that each vibrational mode has a characteristic frequency.
The possible energies associated with a vibration are , where ν, a quantum number, is a positive integer or zero.
For the simple forms of interaction of radiation or particles with molecular vibrations, the quantum numbers change only by ±1, and so the vibrational spectrum consists of a set of signals at frequencies given by 
These signals correspond precisely to the characteristic vibrations of the molecule.
If ν = 0 they are called fundamental bands.
As levels with ν > 0 are normally not significantly populated, these bands account for most of the intensity in an absorption spectrum.
The IR absorption spectrum and the Stokes Raman scattering spectrum both correspond to ν → ν + 1 transitions, so the fundamental vibrational selection rule is normally stated as .
We should remember that Δ ν=+1; is also permitted, but that this corresponds to the emission of radiation in the IR or to the anti-Stokes lines in the Raman spectrum, which will be weak, as the population of molecules with ν > 0 will be small.
The main exceptions to the  selection rule occur in electronic spectra (see Section 6.6), and in the resonance Raman effect (Section 5.17), where progressions due to transitions with Δν = 0, 1, 2, 3…may be observed.
5.7.2.
Symmetry selection rules
In vibrational spectroscopy we use electromagnetic radiation to investigate the transitions between molecular vibrational levels.
But there are some molecular vibrations which cannot interact with this radiation.
For instance, the stretching motion of a homonuclear diatomic molecule such as N 2 generates no oscillating dipole, and so direct interaction with the oscillating electric vector by the normally-dominant dipole mechanism is impossible.
This vibration is therefore inactive in the IR spectrum.
Similarly, some modes of some molecules may involve no change in polarizability, and so they are Raman-inactive.
It is useful to employ the symmetry properties of molecules and molecular vibrations in dealing with this matter, and we may state the selection rules for infra-red activity and for Raman activity of molecular vibrations in symmetry terms as follows:
1
a molecular vibration will give rise to a fundamental band in the IR spectrum if, and only if, the symmetry of the vibration is the same as that of one or more of the vectors x, y, and z [see Fig. 5.15(a)].
2
a molecular vibration will give rise to a fundamental band in the Raman spectrum if, and only if, the symmetry of the vibration is the same as that of at least one component of the polarizability tensor, a, of the molecule [see Fig. 5.15(b)].
We must therefore consider first how to determine the symmetry of a vibration, and secondly what the consequences of these symmetry selection rules may be.
If you are not familiar with the use of symmetry please read the Appendix before continuing.
5.7.3 Symmetry of vibrations
The symmetry of any property of a molecule may be determined by seeing how it behaves when operated on by the various symmetry elements that make up the overall symmetry point group of the molecule (see Appendix).
For simplicity, this behavior is best described in terms of the characters Xv ;(R) of the vibration (v) with respect to each of the symmetry elements (R).
The row of characters for a particular vibration, Γv, is called a representation, and it should be identical with one of the irreducible representations of the point group.
These express all the possible behaviors of attributes of molecules of the particular point group involved, and are collected in the character table.
The symmetry of the vibration can then be read from the character table, as a conventional symbol (see Appendix) for the symmetry species.
For example, consider the molecule H 2 O. This has symmetry elements E, C 2 (z), σ v (xz) and σ v (yz), making up the point group C 2v ,; whose character table is:
The four irreducible representations are given the labels a or b, depending on the sign of the character for C 2 (+ 1 or -1, respectively); a 1 is as always the totally symmetric symmetry species.
To determine the representation appropriate to a particular vibration (the antisymmetric stretch) we apply the symmetry operations to a diagram (Fig. 5.16) in which the motions of the atoms are represented by arrows.
The character is derived as the trace (sum of diagonal elements) of the transformation matrix that expresses the result of the operation on the motion represented by the arrows (see Appendix).
Here each symmetry operation will either leave the motion unchanged or reverse its direction, so the transformation matrices are simply + 1 or -1, respectively.
The identity operator (E) leaves the motion unchanged, so Xv (E) is + 1.
Equally, operation of the reflection σ v (yz) leaves all arrows unmoved, so Xv (σ yz ) is + 1.
Operation of the C 2 rotation axis shifts H a to where H b was, and vice versa, so the corresponding pair of arrows ends up reversed compared to the starting pair.
So now Xv (C 2 ) is -1.
Finally, we see that Xv (σ xz ) is -1, so    and we deduce that the vibration is of symmetry species b 2 .
The character table shows that the y axis also has b 2 symmetry, so this vibration will give a dipole change along y, and will be IR active (i.e. give rise to a fundamental band in the IR spectrum).
The character table also shows that the component α yz of the polarizability tensor has b 2 symmetry, so the vibration will also be active in the Raman spectrum.
For most point groups we can usually deduce the direction of any dipole change associated with a vibration without going into details of the representation.
Reference to the column of the character table showing the Cartesian axis directions then gives the symmetry species directly.
Thus for SiFH 3 , the stretching vibration of the SiF bond must give rise to a dipole change along the C 3 axis, conventionally the z axis (see Fig. 5.17).
The character table for C 3 ν; the point group concerned, shows that this vibration must therefore be totally symmetric, of a 1 symmetry species, and that it will also be Raman active.
We already know it to be IR active because there is a dipole change during the vibration.
With practice, the assignment of vibrations to symmetry species quickly becomes automatic, particularly for common point groups having only one or two symmetry elements.
Thus in a molecule with a single mirror plane (point group C s ) it is quite easy to decide whether or not a particular vibration is symmetric with respect to the plane.
It can thus be assigned to one (a') or other (a") of the two possible symmetry species.
The systematic treatment given in the example can be used in case of doubt.
We sometimes find that the representation generated is not the same as any of the irreducible representations of the character table, or that we are unable to define the character according to the procedure used above.
This usually indicates that the vibration we have chosen is not consistent with the symmetry of the molecule, and must be taken together with others to form symmetry-adapted vibrations.
For example, if we try to assign characters to the vibration of H 2 O in which bond O-H a stretches, we can see (Fig. 5.18) that X v is + 1 for elements E and σ yz ; but for C 2 and σ xz the arrow representing the motion is neither left unmoved nor simply reversed, but ends up where a similar arrow relating to a stretching motion of the O-H b bond would have been.
This indicates that we must consider the stretching motions of both bonds together.
We may proceed in two ways.
(1)
We must take as our basis the two vectors representing the two bond stretching motions, so that the transformation matrices showing the effects of the symmetry operations will be 2 × 2 matrices; only the trace of the matrix is needed to generate the   character Xv .
For the operations E and σ yz both vectors are unmoved, so the transformation matrix is  with a trace of + 2.
For the operations C 2 and σ xz each vector is shifted to where the other was originally, so the transformation matrix is  with a trace of 0.
The representation Γ v is then + 2 0 0 + 2, which is not one of the irreducible representations of the character table; it is a reducible representation.
It is, however, equal to the sum of the two irreducible representations Γ (a 1 ) and Γ (b 2 ), and we deduce that the two vibrations associated with OH bond stretching give rise to a 1 and b 2 group vibrations.
The character table then shows that both are IR and Raman active.
(2)
We may know from experience that whenever we have two equivalent bonds related by symmetry (a 2-fold axis C 2 , a mirror plane σ or an inversion center i), their motions combine to give symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibrations.
We can then decide what is the symmetry species of each combination.
Here, the symmetric combination (where both bonds stretch in phase) clearly must be a vibration mode of a 1 symmetry species.
The antisymmetric mode, where one bond lengthens as the other contracts, has been shown above (at the beginning of the present Section) to be of b 2 symmetry species.
Finally, consider an example of a molecule with a center of inversion, i.
Cyanogen  has two equivalent CN bonds, and we must treat their stretching motions together (see Fig. 5.19).
The symmetric stretching mode does not give rise to a dipole change, and hence is inactive in the IR.
The symmetry species here is called , as the molecule is linear.
The antisymmetric stretch gives rise to a dipole change along z, the molecular axis, and we deduce that this vibration is IR active, with symmetry species .
Here the sub-scripts g and u refer to the behavior with respect to the inversion center, g (from German gerade, even) meaning symmetric, and u (ungerade, uneven) meaning antisymmetric.
The Raman activities are the reverse of the IR activities, the symmetric mode being Raman active, the antisymmetric mode being inactive.
This is an instance of a general rule, the Rule of Mutual Exclusion.
For a molecule with an inversion center, i, only ungerade vibrations may be IR active, and only gerade vibrations may be Raman active.
Therefore no vibration may be active in both spectra.
In some point groups there are symmetry species which are associated with neither IR nor Raman activity.
A vibration of this type is the a 2 torsion (twisting) motion of    methylsilane (CH 3 SiH 3 ), which has C 3 ν, symmetry.
In this vibration the two MH 3 groups twist about their common axis in opposite directions [Fig. 5.20(a)].
Such a motion can be detected neither by IR nor by Raman spectroscopy.
In principle it can be detected by inelastic neutron scattering or by electron energy-loss spectroscopy [Section 5.3.4], for which there are effectively no symmetry selection rules.
We have seen that two equivalent bonds always have symmetric and antisymmetric stretching vibrations.
In the same way, there are three stretching modes associated with a group of three equivalent bonds (in an MH 3 group, say), while four bonds give rise to four modes, and so on.
For point groups including one rotation axis of order 3 or more, the z-axis is unique, being defined by convention to coincide with this rotation axis, but the x and y axes must be taken together, so that motions along x and y are equivalent, or degenerate.
The three equivalent M-H bonds of and MH 3 group in a molecule with a 3-fold axis through M then give rise to a symmetric combination of all three stretching motions (symmetry species a,) and a degenerate pair of antisymmetric combinations of stretching motions, with symmetry species e [see Fig. 5.20(b)].
In a  four-fold group, as in the square-pyramidal XeF 4 O molecule, the four equivalent XeF bond stretches combine to give a totally symmetric (a 1 ) component, a second non-degenerate component of b 2 symmetry and a doubly degenerate pair of components of symmetry species e (Fig. 5.21).
In the C 4 ν point group only a 1 and e vibrations are IR active, but a 1 , b 2 and e vibrations are all observed in the Raman spectrum.
5.7.4.
Symmetry of an entire set of normal vibrations
We can now tell how many vibrations a molecule has and decide their symmetry species, and so determine their IR and Raman activities.
For small molecules it is often possible to write down descriptions of various vibrations until the total of 3N — 6 is reached, decide the symmetry selection rules for each in turn, and so decide how many modes should appear in the IR and Raman spectra.
But for more complicated molecules we need to have a systematic way of working out how many of the molecular vibrations will be active.
The set of three translational degrees of freedom for each of a set of N atoms is modified when the atoms make up a molecule.
Thus the 3N — 6 internal motions (3N — 5 for a linear molecule) become distinct from the translations and rotations of the molecule as a whole, the six (or five) external motions.
However, the symmetry properties of the set of 3N degrees of freedom remain unchanged.
If we can generate the representation of this complete set of degrees of freedom for the isolated atoms, and then subtract the representation of the external motions, we would obtain the representation Γ vib of the whole set of molecular vibrations.
This is a reducible representation, which must then be reduced, or decomposed, to the sum of a set of irreducible representations.
This set will finally give us the numbers of vibrations of each symmetry species.
Using PF 5 (5.1) as an example, we shall proceed first to build up the reducible representation Γ y corresponding to the whole set of 3N degrees of freedom, then to reduce it, and only then remove the external motions to leave Γ vib .
(1)
We use as our basis the set of vectors representing all possible components of motion of individual atoms, making a total of 3N = 15 vectors.
Our transformation matrices are therefore 15 × 15 in size, and the advantage of only needing to consider the trace to derive the character X is apparent!
These 3N vectors are drawn on the atoms in 5.1.
(2)
If an atom moves when the symmetry operation is applied, the three vectors representing its motions contribute zero to the trace of the transformation matrix, and hence to the character.
(3)
For any atom that does not move when the operation is applied, there is a particular contribution to the character, and this is the same for every such atom for a particular type of symmetry operation.
These contributions, which do not depend on the point group or even the particular orientation of the symmetry element, are listed in Table 5.1.
They are called Xxyz the character of the general x, y, z basis vector for the particular operation.
For example, any C 2 axis will leave one component vector unchanged and reverse the other two, so the corresponding transformation matrix is of the form, with a trace of -1; any mirror plane will reverse one component and leave the other   two unchanged, so the trace is + 1.
The values of Xxyz for the various symmetry operations of the D 3h point group are:
(4)
We then calculate the character Xy (R) for each symmetry operation as n uXxyz (R), where n u is the number of atoms in the molecule left unmoved by the operation.
The overall reducible representation Γ y is then given by the row of characters Xy (R), one for each type of symmetry operation in the point group.
For PF 5 we have:
(5)
The collection of characters Γ y is a reducible representation, and is then reduced using the following equation.
This is done once for each symmetry species, to give the reduced form of the representation Γ y :
Here n i is the number of times the ith symmetry species appears in Γ y , h is the order of the point group (equal to the total number of symmetry operations, and given at the head of the character table), g r is the number of equivalent symmetry operations of type R, and Xi (R) is the character listed for operation R for this symmetry species in the character table.
The summation runs over all the classes of symmetry operations of the group.
We may illustrate the reduction for PF 5 , using the character table for D 3h given in Table 5.2, by showing the calculation required for the a 1 symmetry species:
Out of all possible motions of the six atoms, there are therefore two of a 1 ' symmetry.
In the same way we may find the numbers of motions of other symmetry species, and so obtain the reduced representation:
(6)
From the character table, the irreducible representations Γ t and Γ r corresponding to the translations and rotations are found; they are indicated by the symbols x, y, z, R x , R y and R z .
By removing these from the representation of all motions we are left  with Γ vib , the list of the numbers of vibrations of each symmetry species for the molecule.
For PF 5 we find Γ t is  is ; subtracting these from Γ y we obtain .
To check that we have the correct total number of vibrational degrees of freedom, we count one for each a (or b) species vibration, and two for each e (doubly degenerate) vibration.
This gives a total of 12 for PF 5 , which is equal to 3N — 6 for our six-atom molecule.
The character table shows us that only e' and a 2 "vibrations, corresponding to dipole changes in the x/y and z directions, respectively, can be IR active, so we expect five fundamental bands in the IR spectrum of PF 5 .
Only a 1 ', e' and e"vibrations will be Raman active, so we expect six fundamental bands in the Raman spectrum, only three of which (due to the three e' vibrations) should coincide in frequency with IR bands.
Notice that, in this degenerate point group, the 12 vibrational degrees of freedom result in only 8 distinct vibration frequencies, 4 of which correspond to doubly-degenerate modes, and that neither the IR nor the Raman spectrum contains bands due to all eight modes.
Vibrations of a 2 ' and a 1 "symmetry are inactive in both IR and Raman spectra.
PF 5 does not have any modes of these symmetry species, but other molecules with D 3h symmetry, such as Fe(CO) 5 , do have one or more of these totally inactive modes.
We can repeat the above analysis for any other suggested structure for PF 5 , such as the square pyramid of C 4 ν; symmetry.
The final result in this case is that such a molecule should have six IR bands, all with coincident Raman bands, plus three Raman bands with no IR counterparts.
We can therefore, at least in principle, distinguish the D 3h and C 4 nu ; structures by the numbers of bands in the spectra.
5.8 Assignment of bands to vibrations
5.8.1.
Introduction
For some purposes we do not need to know which modes of vibration are responsible for which IR or Raman bands, but sometimes we must go further, and assign the bands in the spectrum to particular modes.
Clearly this is much easier if we can associate bands in the spectrum with the various possible symmetry species.
In some cases overall selection rules leave little doubt.
For PF 5 only modes of e' symmetry are active in both IR and Raman spectra; any Raman bands coinciding in frequency with IR bands can confidently be assigned to these modes.
The only IR bands without Raman counterparts should be due to a 2 ' modes.
That leaves us with modes of a 1 ' and e"symmetry, which are forbidden in the IR but active in the Raman.
To distinguish between these symmetry species we need more information, and it is extremely helpful to measure polarization of Raman scattering from fluids and band contours of IR (or Raman) bands of gases.
5.8.2 Raman polarization
When radiation has been scattered, its polarization properties may be the same as those of the incident light, or they may have changed.
There are various possibilities, depending on the relation between the directions of incident and emitted radiation and the polarization properties of the incident light, but we will not go into details [which     can be found elsewhere (Ref. [7], p. 62)].
However, we can measure a depolarization ratio ρ for each band in the Raman spectrum of a fluid sample.
This is the ratio of the intensity recorded with a polarizing element (polaroid screen or half wave plate) set, first parallel, and then perpendicular to the plane of polarization of the incident radiation.
The maximum value ρ max is governed by the scattering geometry, and corresponds to a depolarized band, while any lower value corresponds to a polarized band.
The detailed theory is complicated, but the use of the depolarization ratio lies in a simple rule: totally symmetric vibrations give rise to polarized Raman bands; vibrations that are not totally symmetric give rise to depolarized bands.
Fig. 5.22 shows how this can be used to identify modes having similar frequencies.
For a given spectrometer and sample geometry, ρ max is more or less constant, and may be taken as known.
Thus if the value of ρ or a band is found to be less than ρ max may be assigned to a totally-symmetric mode.
The depolarization ratio is only required to be zero for totally symmetric modes of molecules of cubic or icosahedral point groups.
For totally symmetric modes of molecules of lower symmetry, ρ is greater than zero, and in some cases may be impossible to distinguish from ρ max .
The ratio also tends to be higher for totally symmetric modes that involve angle bending than for pure stretching modes.
We can now complete the assignment for PF 5 , by distinguishing between the a 1 ' and e"modes.
The two a 1 ' modes will be polarized.
The third Raman band without an IR counterpart must be of e"symmetry: it will be depolarized, as will be the bands due to the e' modes.
The final set of observations to be expected for the D 3h structure is shown in Table 5.3.
Fig. 5.23 illustrates the observed spectra.
The C 4 ν structure, with three modes of a 1 symmetry, should give three polarized Raman bands coinciding with three of the IR bands, and thus would be clearly distinguished from the D 3h structure.
For powders or microcrystalline samples, multiple external reflections among grains destroy polarization, so that we cannot obtain useful data.
Work with oriented single crystals can give detailed information; specialized texts (see Ref. [7], p. 63) should be consulted to enable the best use to be made of such experiments.
Polarized IR measurements are in principle useful for crystals and other oriented samples [10].
Dipole-induced absorption is due to a dipole change in a particular direction relative to the molecular orientation in the crystal, so that rotation of the sample leads to changes in relative band intensities if polarized incident radiation is used.
Fig. 5.24 shows how such measurements can be used in the assignment of bands to particular vibrational modes.
5.8.3.
Band contours in gases
In gases, the rotational energies of molecules are quantized; vibrational transitions may be accompanied by changes in rotational quantum numbers, and hence in rotational energy.
A gas-phase vibrational band is therefore usually complicated.
It does not just consist of a single  transition from  to  for each rotational level; it   includes lots of lines due to transitions with , where J is the general rotational quantum number.
The resulting set of lines forms a band envelope.
The various vibration bands for a given molecule have distinct band envelopes that depend on the symmetries of the vibrations concerned, because the rotational selection rules are different for different vibrational symmetries.
In some cases the individual lines making up the envelope may be resolved (see Chapter 4).
The five most important values encountered for ΔJ are -2,-1, 0, + 1 and + 2, and these give rise to characteristic branches in vibration bands which are labelled O, P, Q, R and S (see Table 5.4).
For the simplest possible case, where the rotation constants are the same in the lower and upper vibrational states, the corresponding patterns of rotation fine-structure lines are also given in the Table.
They are simply derived from the term  for the rotational energy.
Note that in this case all  lines coincide, and so Q branches are often line-like features close to the vibration transition energy ν vjb or ν.
For the other branches characteristic spacings of rotation lines  are predicted, for  (R and P branches) and  for  (S and O branches).
In general, S and O branches occur only in Raman spectra, whereas P, Q and R branches are found in both IR and Raman spectra (see Fig. 5.25).
The details of rotational line positions in vibration bands are exceedingly complex, and beyond the scope of this book.
The underlying rules, and some of the consequences, are set out in Refs [1]and [11].
There are, however, some simple rules that enable us to deduce the symmetry of a vibration from the band envelope of the corresponding IR or Raman band, even at rather limited resolution, where the 2B spacing of components of P and R branches, for instance, is not resolved.
A simple case is that of the linear molecule.
Here we can distinguish two distinct types of IR envelope, which correspond to vibrations causing dipole changes along the linear axis (parallel band) or perpendicular to the axis (perpendicular band).
For a parallel band, arising from an asymmetric stretching mode of Σ symmetry, the rotational selection rule is  only; there is therefore no Q-branch, for which ΔJ = 0.
On the other hand a perpendicular band, due to a doubly-degenerate bending mode of Π symmetry, has  or ± 1, so a Q-branch appears (see Fig. 5.26).
IR bands of linear molecules are therefore readily associated with Σ and Π symmetry species.
In the Raman spectrum, and + 2 transitions are allowed for both Σ and Π vibrations, but for Π vibrations only  is allowed as well.
It is thus more difficult to distinguish Σ and Π vibrations using the Raman bands, as we would have to detect the presence of P and R branches with spacings of 2B as well as the O and S branches with spacings of 4B.
The polarization measurement is likely to be more useful in this instance, and is the only method applicable if the individual lines in the O, P, Q, R and S branches cannot be resolved.
Non-linear symmetric tops which have a rotation (or rotation-reflection) axis of order three or more present a more complicated problem, as we must now consider two rotational quantum numbers.
J is still the overall quantum number, but the component of angular momentum along the top axis is also quantized, with quantum number K. There are still only two types of IR band, depending on whether the associated dipole change is parallel or perpendicular to the top axis.
For parallel bands, due to vibrations of some a symmetry species (a 2 ′ in PF 5 ; a 1 in SiFH 3 …), the rotational selection rules are , ± 1; ΔK = 0 except that when J = 0, ΔJ = 0 is forbidden.
The overall structure is superficially similar to that of a perpendicular band of a linear molecule, but with P, Q and R sub-branches for each value of K for which there is a significant population.
As the Q sub-branches superimpose, the result is usually a band with distinct P, Q and R branches.
For perpendicular bands, due to vibrations of e symmetry, such as e' in PF 5 , the rotational selection rules are , + 1;, and the P, Q and R sub-branches due to different initial K values are now separated because of the change in K. The usual result is a broad band with overlapping P and R sub-branches, and a regular series of Q sub-branches, one for each value of KΔK.
These Q branches are often distinct, but sometimes they merge into the rest of the band.
Thus again a distinction is in principle possible between bands due to vibrations of different symmetry species (Fig. 5.27).
The selection rules for Raman spectra are different, but parallel and perpendicular vibrations of symmetric tops may be distinguished by Raman band contours in the same way as described above for IR bands, although this may not be enough to allow us to assign symmetry species to all bands.
For asymmetric tops, which have three different moments of inertia, there is no symmetry element of order greater than two, and up to three different symmetry species of vibration may give rise to IR bands.
These correspond to dipole changes along the x, y and z Cartesian axes.
If these axes coincide with the three principal inertial axes A, B and C (see Chapter 4), either because of symmetry constraints, or just accidentally, we find that very simple band contours arise.
These may be labelled a-type, b-type or c-type if the dipole change is along the A, B or C axis.
The band contours illustrated in Fig. 5.28 may be taken as typical, though the details vary with the magnitudes of the three moments of inertia.
Thus c-type bands always have sharp distinct Q branches on an indistinct background with no apparent gap between P and R branches; b-type bands have a central dip with no distinct Q-branch (or sometimes a   Q-branch clearly divided into two, again leaving a distinct central gap); and a-type bands have more or less clear P, Q, and R branches.
For the point groups C 2 ν, D 2 , and D 2h , the symmetry means that x, y, and z axes coincide with the A, B, and C axes.
We then have to work out for each molecule which of the Cartesian axes corresponds with which inertial axis, as this depends on the details of the mass-distribution.
In molecules with point groups D 2 or D 2h the center of gravity is fixed at the intersection of the three relevant axes, and use the rule that .
For C 2v molecules only one of the inertial axes is defined by symmetry.
To define the other two the center of gravity must be located, and it may often be easier to use a combination of simple mechanical principles and information from the spectrum to deduce the exact correspondence between the axis sets.
As an example we may take gaseous SiCl 2 H 2 whose IR spectrum (Fig. 5.29) contains   bands with three distinct types of envelope, as expected for a molecule with C 2 ν symmetry.
There are 2 a-type bands, 4 b-type bands and 2 c-type bands, some of which overlap.
For a five-atom molecule there are nine modes, and their symmetry species can be determined as follows:
Only a 1 , b 1 , and b 2 , vibrations give IR bands; four of these should be of one type (a 1 ) and two each of the other types.
The C-axis must be perpendicular to the plane of the three heavy atoms and so we deduce that the c-type bands are due to b 1 vibrations.
As the spectrum includes four b-type bands we assign these to a 1 vibrations and the a-type bands to b 2 vibrations (Fig. 5.30).
Note that the a 2 vibration is observed in the Raman spectrum of the liquid which also confirms the assignment of the four b-type bands in the IR spectrum of the gas to a 1 vibrations as they coincide with partially polarized Raman bands.
For many molecules the Cartesian axes do not coincide uniquely with the principal inertial axes, and hybrid band contours arise.
For any planar molecule, the C-axis is automatically perpendicular to the plane, so that any IR-active out-of-plane motions give rise to c-type bands.
Many non-planar molecules such as ethyl germane (5.11) have their heavy atoms lying in a plane of symmetry, to which the C-axis is perpendicular, and their a"modes therefore also have c-type contours.
But if there is no molecular symmetry other than the plane, the x and y axes are not uniquely determined by the symmetry and in-plane vibrations and may give a/b-hybrid bands depending on the relative directions of the A and B axes and the dipole change.
These bands will, however, still be distinguishable from c-type bands, and the essential symmetry distinction can still be made.
Thus the spectrum of ethyl germane (Fig. 5.31) includes bands that seem to have a and b band shapes, and both types must be assigned to a' modes.
In other cases, other hybrid band shapes may arise.
If the molecule has no symmetry element except the identity operation, all vibrations are of the same symmetry species.
The dipole changes may take any orientation with respect to the inertial axes, and bands may have a-, b- or c-type contours or any hybrid.
Analogous distinctions between band envelopes may be made for Raman spectra of gaseous asymmetric tops, but they are not commonly used.
For molecules of C 2 ν, D or D 2h symmetry the four different symmetry species giving rise to Raman activity correspond to four distinct band envelopes, called A, B a , B b , and B c -types (Ref. [1], p. 244), while for other point groups various hybrids of these may arise.
Finally, for spherical tops, with three identical moments of inertia, only one symmetry species gives rise to IR activity, as x, y and z axes are triply degenerate.
In Raman spectra totally symmetric modes are uniquely identified in that they give rise only to Q-branches , whereas vibrations of any other symmetry give , ± 1 and ± 2 branches.
5.8.4 Intensities of allowed fundamentals
A fundamental band in an IR spectrum may only be observed if there is an interaction between the electric vector of the incident radiation and the oscillating dipole due to the corresponding vibration.
The intensity of the band therefore depends on the strength of that interaction, which is proportional to the square of the magnitude of the oscillating dipole .
Here Q represents the changing ‘coordinate’ involved in the vibration, analogous to  for a diatomic oscillator.
Symmetry selection rules correspond to symmetry requirements that for a forbidden band, must be zero, at least at the equilibrium configuration, where Q is zero.
For an allowed band, the value of  is not restricted, and it may accidentally be zero.
The magnitudes of dipole moment derivatives vary widely, and it is not safe to assume from the failure to observe a band that the corresponding mode is symmetry-forbidden.
Thus the lower-frequency stretching mode of HCN, mainly associated with CN stretching, gives rise to IR absorption so weak that it cannot effectively be observed by conventional means.
We shall see below that some particular bond-stretching or angle-bending motions have characteristically high intensities.
There is a wealth of empirical lore in this area, but the underlying physical reasons for the observed intensities are not well understood.
Attempts to calculate intensities have been made; Ref. [12]is a review of this area.
In a Raman spectrum, the intensity of a band depends on the squares of the derivatives of components of the polarizability tensor,.
In the absence of symmetry selection rules that require it to be zero, the value of the derivative is not restricted.
The Raman scattering due to different vibrations of a particular molecule is generally less variable than the intensity of the different IR bands, but the general level of intensity of Raman spectra varies from molecule to molecule much more than that of IR spectra.
For example, some simple organic solvents such as and  give very strong Raman spectra, whereas water gives only very weak scattering, but for each solvent the various allowed bands have similar intensities.
The absence of a band from a reasonably well-defined Raman spectrum is thus more likely to indicate a genuine symmetry selection rule than the absence of an IR band.
But mistakes have been made when trying to decide between alternative structures on the basis of the presence or absence of particular bands in IR and Raman spectra.
It is better to rely on the whole pattern of observed bands, including polarization and band contour data.
5.8.5 Mode numbering
We find it helpful to number modes so that we can refer to them simply in the form νsubn;.
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to find a fool-proof numbering system applicable to all molecules, but two simple rules are well-established.
1
The order adopted for modes of different symmetry species takes the more highly symmetric modes before those of lower symmetry.
2
Modes of a particular symmetry species are numbered consecutively from highest to lowest frequency; thus ν 1 is always the highest-frequency mode of the totally symmetric species.
The major source of discrepancy between different authors is rule 1, because the order of decreasing symmetry cannot be defined unambiguously.
The problem can be illustrated for the point group C 2 ν.
The b l and b 2 vibrations are equally symmetric, and an arbitrary choice has to be made, first as to which set is to be labeled b 1 , and secondly   as to whether to maintain the same order in mode numbering.
Table 5.5 shows the numbering of the nine vibrations of  as an illustration of the use of the two rules.
There is a more complicated example in the point group D 3h .
In this point group, symmetry species which are symmetric with respect to the horizontal plane, σh, are labeled'; those antisymmetric to the plane are labeled".
Some authors order the symmetry species a 1 ', a 2 ', e', a 1 ', a 2  ", e" , regarding the '/"distinction as most important.
Others treat the symmetry with respect to the 3-fold axis as more important, ordering the species as a 1 ', a 1  ", a 2 ', a 2 " , e', e".
This clearly results in a different numbering of all modes except those of symmetry species a 1 ' and e".
Neither approach is obviously more correct than the other.
We find a deviation from the two rules for triatomic molecules.
The bending mode is always labeled ν 2 , whatever the molecule.
For molecules AX 2 , whether linear like CO 2 or bent like H 2 S, the symmetric stretch is of higher symmetry than the antisymmetric stretch and so is labeled ν 1 , even though it is lower in frequency.
For molecules XAY, like OCS or CINO, the two stretching modes are of the same symmetry, and so are numbered in order of decreasing frequency.
5.8.6 Non-fundamental transitions
In real life, the business of deducing molecular symmetry from vibrational spectra may be complicated by transitions which do not correspond to the  vibrational selection rule.
Various types occur, and they may be categorized according to the changes in vibrational quantum numbers ν i , of the set of molecular vibrations (see   Table 5.6 and Fig. 5.32).
The list given is not exhaustive, but includes two important types of non-fundamental transitions.
Those with  are formally forbidden under the fundamental vibrational selection rule.
In general they give very weak bands in IR or Raman spectra unless special factors apply.
Their appearance is connected with anharmonicity, which leads to a breakdown of the selection rules derived assuming simple harmonic motion.
This is true of overtones, combinations and difference bands.
Hot bands, on the other hand, are formally allowed, because  is  for only one mode, and zero for all others.
Hot bands differ from fundamentals only in that the initial state of the transition is a vibrationally excited state, and not the vibrational ground state of the molecule.
They are in effect the fundamentals of molecules that are already vibrationally excited.
Such molecules are in general less abundant than ground state molecules, because of the Boltzmann distribution of thermal energy.
The ratio of the number of molecules in an excited state to those in the ground state, assuming dynamic thermal equilibrium at room temperature, is , where E ν is the excess energy in cm -1 .
When E ν is 1000 cm -1 , this ratio is 0·005, a proportion which is small enough to be ignored.
However, when ED is 200 cm -1 , the ratio is 0·34; therefore a sample of a compound with a vibration of frequency lower than about 300 cm -1 has a significant proportion of its molecules in vibrationally excited states.
In the presence of such low frequency vibrations, no band in the IR or Raman spectrum truly represents a single transition.
Each band is in fact made up of components due to transitions arising from the corresponding modes of the various vibrationally excited molecules.
One of the effects of anharmonicity is that these transitions do not all have exactly the same frequency, and so a band may have a very complex form.
However, it is sometimes possible to distinguish a progression of Q branches, such as is shown in Fig. 5.33.
The details of hot bands may be hard to analyze, but it is the formally forbidden transitions, due to overtones, combinations and differences, that cause most confusion.
In Raman spectra, these are usually much weaker than fundamentals.
All fundamentals for a given molecule are usually of comparable intensity, so it is unlikely that a forbidden band will be mistaken for a weak fundamental.
This is more of a possibility in IR spectra.
For example, in the IR spectrum of HCN there is a band in the region where the lower-frequency stretching mode would be expected.
Comparison with the Raman spectrum of the gas shows that the strong Raman band in this region is some 20 cm -1 lower in frequency than the observed IR band.
The two clearly do not correspond; the Raman band is assigned to the fundamental, and the IR band to the second overtone of ν 2 .
Once the fundamental  selection rule is breached, the IR and Raman activities of overtones and combinations are governed by the same symmetry selection rules that apply to fundamentals.
Before we can apply these, however, we must define the symmetry of a vibrational transition rather more precisely.
A transition involves two distinct vibrational states of the molecule, and we can define the symmetry species of each of these.
The symmetry of the transition is then defined as the direct product of the symmetries of the initial and final states involved, i and f 
The direct product representation Γ t is generated by multiplying together the corresponding characters of the representations Γ i and Γ f .
For fundamental, overtone or combination transitions, the initial state i is the vibrational ground state, which is always totally symmetric, with all characters equal to + 1.
Thus the symmetry of the transition is the same as that of the final state.
For overtones and combinations we  need to generate the representation Γ f as the direct product of the representations corresponding to each vibration excited in the state f.
For example, if an a 2 and a b 2 vibration of a C 2ν, molecule are both singly excited, we calculate the representation of the final state like this:
This corresponds to b 1 symmetry, and so the combination of an a 2 vibration and a b 2 vibration generates a b 1 transition.
Similarly, for double excitation of a b 1 vibration:
This corresponds to a 1 symmetry, and so the first overtone of a b 1 vibration is an a 1 transition.
Note that for all point groups without degeneracy all first overtones are totally symmetric.
In point groups with one or more axes of order three or more, the direct products obtained in this way may have to be reduced in order to discover the symmetry species of the components of the overtone or combination.
For instance, for a combination of two vibrations of e symmetry species in C 2ν:
This reduces to a 1 + a 2 + e.
For a combination all three components exist, though only a 1 and e components give rise to IR transitions from the ground state.
For an overtone, only a 1 and e components (the so-called symmetric product components) actually exist.
Details for other point groups are given in Refs [11]and [13].
Overtones and combinations are usually weak in IR and Raman spectra.
The symmetry selection rules operate as for fundamentals, in respect of activity and Raman polarization and IR band contours.
They can be valuable in making a complete vibrational assignment.
Vibrations that are not observed directly may still be involved in overtone or combination bands, from which the unknown frequencies may be deduced.
Overtones and combinations sometimes give rise to unusually strong bands in IR or Raman spectra by stealing intensity from a nearby fundamental of the same symmetry.
This phenomenon, known as Fermi resonance, occurs because the two vibrationally excited states mix.
Before mixing, one is the upper state of a fundamental and the other the upper state of an overtone or combination band.
After mixing, both states become partly fundamental and partly overtone or combination (Fig. 5.34).
As a result of the mixing, the intensity of the fundamental is shared between the two bands involved.
The energies of the upper states, and hence of the transitions, are also affected.
The mean frequency does not change, but the upper states move further apart, and so do the frequencies of the bands.
Fermi resonance thus introduces additional strong bands, which may be mistaken for fundamentals; it also affects the apparent frequencies of fundamentals involved.
For example, in the Raman spectrum of CO 2 we expect only one fundamental, due to the symmetric stretch, of symmetry species .
Instead, we observe two intense   Raman bands, one at 1285 and the other at 1388 cm -1 .
The  bending fundamental is at 667 cm -1 in the IR, and its overtone should appear near 1334 cm -1 , almost mid-way between the two observed Raman bands.
There is a  component of the overtone, and this component must have mixed with the  fundamental to produce two bands of similar intensity, each being more-or-less half fundamental and half overtone.
A similar case of Fermi resonance occurs in , where the first overtone of the C=S stretch at 1033 cm -1 interacts with the N=C stretch near 2070 cm -1 to give two IR bands of comparable intensity (Fig. 5.35).
Remember that Fermi resonance is only possible when a fundamental and a second-order band have the same symmetry and are close together in energy.
For purely harmonic vibrations, overtone or combination frequencies would be exact sums of the constituent fundamental frequencies.
In real oscillators the effect of anharmonicity is to change (usually to reduce) the frequency of an overtone or   combination [see Section 5.2.3].
The general formula for vibrational energy levels (to second order, for two vibrations) is 
The fundamental transition energies  are thus  and , and the overtone energies  are , which is not twice the fundamental energy.
The combination  occurs at , which is not equal to the sum of the fundamental energies.
The measurement of these five transition energies, however, allows us to calculate all five of the constants  in Eqn (5.13), and enables harmonic vibration frequencies ω e to be deduced from anharmonic transition energies.
Difference bands  behave exactly like the corresponding combination bands  as far as symmetry selection rules, band contours and polarization are concerned.
However, there is one very important distinction.
The energy levels involved in difference bands are the same as those involved in fundamental transitions.
Consequently the difference frequency should be precisely equal to the difference between the frequencies of the corresponding fundamentals.
For the same reason, difference bands cannot be intensified by Fermi resonance.
Hot bands, as mentioned earlier, show the effects of anharmonicity in the formation of sequences of bands; as they are already formally allowed transitions there is no enhancement in intensity due to Fermi resonance, though mixing of upper-state levels may affect the regularity of hot-band sequences.
5.9 Structural information from vibrational spectra
We have seen how the symmetry of a molecule determines the number of bands expected in IR and Raman spectra, so that we can use the numbers of bands observed to decide on the actual symmetry of a molecule, such as PF 5 .
We have also seen how Raman polarization data and gas-phase band contours may be used to make complete assignments of the observed bands to vibrations of particular symmetry species.
The task of assignment may be complicated by the absence of some expected bands with fortuitously low intensity, or by the presence of formally-forbidden overtone or combination bands, which may have appreciable intensity if the conditions for Fermi resonance are satisfied.
Now we must consider in more detail some of the ways we may use vibrational spectra to give structural information about inorganic substances.
There are a number of different levels at which the information content of a vibrational spectrum can be analyzed to allow identification of a sample to be made, or to allow conclusions to be drawn about its structure.
At one level, the spectrum as a whole may be treated as a fingerprint, which can be used simply to recognize the product of some reaction as a known compound.
This requires the existence of a file of standard spectra.
At the other extreme, the numbers of bands observed may be used to deduce the symmetry of the molecule responsible for the spectrum, and the force constants corresponding to all the internal vibrations can be deduced from the frequencies themselves using a normal co-ordinate analysis.
At intermediate levels, deductions may be drawn about the presence or absence of specific groups or assemblies    of atoms by looking for characteristic group frequencies and intensities.
The effects of isotope substitution on the observed spectrum may give valuable information about the numbers of atoms of a specific element present, and about any symmetry relationship between their positions.
We shall consider these methods of analysis of vibrational spectra in more detail in the following sections.
5.10 Fingerprints
5.10.1 Comparison with standard spectra
This is a traditional approach, and probably accounts for most vibrational spectra actually recorded.
Comparing two spectra, which involves taking into account band shapes and intensities as well as frequencies, is one of the tasks the human eye/brain seems to do rather well.
Strenuous efforts have been made to program such recognition abilities into microcomputers and several packages for manipulating and comparing spectra are available.
But it is still hard to beat the experienced eye, which can automatically focus its attention on the most significant features of a spectrum.
Unless the range of possibilities is very limited, or only simple questions are asked (‘Is this compound X?’ or ‘Is this sample of compound X pure?’), large numbers of standard spectra are needed for comparison.
Such standard spectra have been available as drawings for many years, and computer-compatible forms are now becoming available.
Most general collections are of spectra of organic samples, so that local collections covering special groups of compounds are of more immediate use to the inorganic chemist.
Some collections are commercially available [14].
5.10.2 Detection and identification of impurities
If our compound has already been characterized, any bands which are present in its vibrational spectrum but are not found in that of a pure sample may be assigned to impurities.
It is, of course, important to ensure that reference and sample spectra are recorded under the same conditions of phase, temperature, concentration and instrument resolution so that the comparison can be as detailed and reliable as possible.
Detection of impurities, then, is often quite easy.
If we are only monitoring a process of purification, it may not be necessary to identify impurities, but unless we do, we cannot be sure how sensitive the check on purity is.
An immediate complication is that an impurity is only a minor component of a mixture, and so some regions of its spectrum may be difficult to study.
In particular, if product and impurity are chemically similar, their spectra are likely to be very similar too, and most of the impurity bands may be masked by those due to the desired product.
Usually, we can find at least one band to use as a measure of the amount of impurity still present: if  is made from , the residual chloride can be detected by the only distinct band, that due to the Sn-Cl stretching mode.
In extreme cases, no such band can be identified, and purity must be determined by other methods.
It is important to remember that the absence of impurity bands in a spectrum does not mean that the sample studied was pure.
Band shapes can also be useful for identifying unknown impurities, particularly in the gas phase.
The width of a band gives some idea of the size of the molecule involved.
In extreme cases, resolution of rotational fine structure can identify a molecule such as HCl unequivocally.
5.10.3 Quantitative analysis of mixtures
Vibrational spectroscopy has been used successfully for quantitative analysis, but considerable care is needed to ensure accurate results.
This is particularly true with conventional IR spectrophotometers, which have limited photometric accuracy.
With modern ratio-recording double-beam spectrophotometers and FT interferometers this problem is much less severe, and ordinate repeatability of 0·01% transmission is now routinely available.
In the IR, the usual presentation of the spectrum in terms of transmittance T means that peak height is not linearly related to the intensity of absorption.
Some spectrometers can be operated so as to produce a spectrum of absorbance A, where peak height is a direct measure of intensity.
In terms of the light passing through the sample, I, compared with the initial light intensity I, whereas   
In the Raman, the intensity of a peak due to a given species is directly related to its concentration.
Another problem is that each IR or Raman band of each compound has its own characteristic intensity; concentrations of different compounds cannot be directly compared by a simple comparison of relative intensities of bands in a mixture.
However, the intensity of a particular band does vary linearly with concentration in a mixture unless some strong chemical interaction occurs between components, in which case mixtures of the same components in known concentrations must be used as standards.
Once this has been done it is possible to make single-frequency readings to give quantitative concentrations of constituents of a mixture.
With suitable sampling arrangements a standard spectrometer can be used to make a wide variety of different measurements.
Thus trace gases can be detected in air using a long-path gas cell and/or high pressure (Fig. 5.36), hydrogen atoms can be detected in polycrystalline silicon [15], inorganic fillers can be identified and measured in plastics (Fig. 5.37), and SiMe 3 end groups can be determined quantitatively in silicones (Ref. [16], p. 282), all with a standard IR instrument.
Species present in aqueous solutions can be studied, most conveniently by Raman spectroscopy, so that, for example , the equilibria involved in the aqueous carbonate/bicarbonate/CO 2 system can be understood [17].
Many other examples of studies of electrolytes in aqueous solution by Raman spectroscopy have been reviewed [18].
5.11 Group frequencies
So far we have considered each molecule and its spectrum in isolation.
Indeed, no relationship between the vibration frequencies of different molecules is logically necessary.
In practice, however, it is found that there are similarities between the frequencies of molecules containing similar groups of atoms, and this sort of information can be applied to the study of new compounds.
Such group-frequency correlations have been extensively developed for organic compounds, and similar correlations can  be drawn up for inorganic species [19].
These correlations arise because a normal mode, although formally involving the whole molecule, may actually involve significant motions of only a few atoms constituting a discrete group, and hence have a frequency primarily determined by the group and only slightly affected by the nature of the rest of the molecule.
In their simplest form, group frequency correlation tables allow the identification of bonded atom pairs, because bond stretching frequencies are the most characteristic.
The correlations can be extended to answer a wide variety of chemical questions.
We may be able to determine the number of atoms in a group, and so to distinguish MX 2 from MX 3 groups.
We can distinguish monodentate from bidentate sulfate, or terminal from bridging CO ligands, and we can use variations in the CO stretching frequencies in metal carbonyls to make deductions about the electronic natures of the other ligands.
The processes involved are described and illustrated below.
5.11.1.
Characteristic bond stretching frequencies
The vibration frequency associated with a particular bond depends primarily on the masses of the bonded atoms and the force constant of the bond, and to a lesser extent on the influence of the rest of the molecule.
We shall see below how these effects can be treated more formally, but we can deduce some general principles at this stage:
1
Characteristic stretching frequencies are lower for heavier atoms;
2
Characteristic stretching frequencies are lower for weaker bonds, where the restoring forces are smaller;
3
Stretching frequencies vary over a fairly narrow range in a set of related compounds.
The lightest atom, hydrogen, gives rise to some of the most characteristic group frequencies.
Virtually all bond stretches involving hydrogen bonded to one other atom occur in the range ∼ 4000 to 1700 cm -1 (H-F to H-Pb) and the position in this range correlates well with the mass of the other atom and the strength of the bond.
Thus in going down any Main Group of the Periodic Table (p-block elements), both the increase of atom mass and the decrease in bond strength lead to a lowering of the stretching frequency.
If we go from left to right along a row of p-block elements, the effect of increasing mass is outweighed by the increasing bond strength, and frequencies increase (see Table 5.7).
Among transition metal hydrides the mass of the metal atom has rather little effect; frequencies are in the range 2200–1700 cm -1 , the precise value depending on the metal and the other ligands involved.
More subtle correlations valid over limited classes of compounds may be found useful here.
The stretching frequencies of bonds not involving hydrogen are generally lower.
Except for multiple bonds with very high force constants or for single bonds between light first-row elements (e.g. C-F, B-O), all fall below 1000 cm -1 .
Group frequency correlations have been established for the most common and widely-studied elements, and an experienced worker soon learns to recognize diagnostic bands relevant to his own field of interest.
It must be remembered, however, that the ranges within which particular bond stretches appear may overlap, and circumstances sometimes arise in which a band may be considerably displaced from its expected position.
The most likely reason for this is vibrational coupling.
If there are groups with similar vibration frequencies close to each other in the molecule, and two or more of the vibrations are of the same symmetry, the group modes will mix; mixing displaces the normal modes to higher and lower frequencies.
In these circumstances the observed bands represent mixtures rather than particular group vibrations, and the analysis of the spectrum based on group frequencies no longer applies.
The coupling is generally greatest if the displacement vectors lie along the same axis, and the linking atom is relatively light.
This coupling between group modes of the same symmetry should not be confused with Fermi resonance between a fundamental and an overtone or combination of the same symmetry [see Section 5.8.6 above]; in the case of coupling between fundamental group modes there is no violation of the  vibrational selection rule.
An important group frequency is that due to the CO stretching motion of carbonyl ligands in transition metal complexes.
The average stretching frequency for a terminal carbonyl ligand in a complex correlates with the electron-richness of the metal.
Back-bonding from the d-orbitals of the metal into the π*; antibonding orbitals of the ligand weakens the CO bond and lowers the stretching frequency from its value in free CO.
Many examples can be found in the literature.
Here we shall note the unambiguous data for the series of complexes  (Table 5.8).
It is clear that electronegative chlorine substituents on the phosphine ligands decrease the electron density on the central Co atom, thereby decreasing the  back-bonding and raising the CO and NO bond stretching frequencies.
Note that solvent effects on CO stretching frequencies in metal complexes are often appreciable, and comparisons should always be made between samples of similar concentration in the same solvent.
5.11.2 Characteristic deformation (angle bending) frequencies
Angle bending modes may give rise to characteristic frequencies just as stretching modes do, but bending frequencies are much more variable.
For example, the angle  bending motions of germyl halides, GeH 3 X, consist of two deformation modes and one rocking mode, numbered ν 2 , ν 5 and ν 6 , respectively.
The observed frequencies are shown in Table 5.9, and observed IR spectra of some germyl halides are shown in Fig. 5.38.
It will be seen that ν 5 is at almost precisely the same frequency in each case, but that both ν 2 and ν 6 vary in frequency with the mass of the halogen.
The characteristic parallel band contour for ν 2 (a 1 ) and perpendicular contours for ν 5 and ν 6 (e) leave no    doubt about the correct assignments, and so we may say that the germyl rocking frequency characteristically lies between 550 and 650 cm -1 .
The correlation extends beyond this limited set of compounds.
All GeH 3 -compounds give a characteristic strong IR band near 850 cm -1 , attributable to a deformation mode of the germyl group; the exact frequency varies with the mass of the attached group.
5.11.3 Characteristic patterns of group frequencies
A clearly-defined group frequency like ν (CO), which gives bands in a region where few other fundamentals are likely to occur, can be very important in determining how many examples of the group occur in each molecule and the symmetry relationships between them.
We have already noted that there is one stretching mode for each bond in a molecule.
Thus in the absence of complications due to symmetry, we may in principle count the number of CO ligands in a complex simply by counting the CO stretching bands in the vibrational spectrum.
If there are symmetry operations relating equivalent groups, two other factors have to be considered.
First, symmetry selection rules govern the activity of the various stretching motions in IR and Raman spectra.
It may therefore be necessary to record both spectra to check for modes inactive in one but active in the other.
On the other hand, such rules give us additional information about the structure of the complex.
Secondly, if there is a rotation axis relating three or more CO ligands, the number of bands will be less than the number of ligands because some modes will be degenerate.
Thus a complex  has only two  bands (a 1 and e) in its vibrational spectrum, so long as the ligand L preserves the 3-fold symmetry of the  group.
In some examples, both factors are important.
In the carbonyl stretching region of the IR spectrum of tetrahedral  there is only one band, assigned to the triply degenerate t 2 mode.
The fourth stretch, of a 1 symmetry, is only Raman-active.
The symmetry species of a set of equivalent bond stretches may be worked out very simply.
The method is the same as was used to determine the OH stretching modes of H 2 O in Section 5.7.3.
We do not always have to work through the whole process though, because the patterns for two, three, four or more symmetry-related modes are reproducible from one molecule to another.
However, the labels for the symmetry species depend on the point group, and may be deduced from the appropriate character table.
In a cis-octahedral complex [](5.
III), the two CO groups trans to each other must logically be treated together, as must the other two, which are mutually cis.
We must not try to treat all four CO groups together, as the two pairs are not equivalent.
When the four CO ligands are treated as two sets of two, it is immediately clear that as each pair is related by the C 2 axis, there must be an a 1 and a b component from each pair.
Moreover, as the two pairs of bonds define two planes at right angles to each other, one of the two b components is b 1 and the other b 2 , in the overall C 2v symmetry of the complex.
We therefore expect two a 1 modes, one b 1 and one b 2 in the CO stretching region.
All four will be both IR and Raman active; the two a 1 modes are in principle distinguishable from the others by giving rise to polarized Raman bands in solution or in the gas phase.
In contrast, the four CO groups oftrans-[](5.
IV) are all symmetry-related, giving a 1 ', b 2 ' and e' stretching modes, only one of which one (e') is IR-active and all three are Raman active.
We can extend this kind of approach to make a complete analysis of the vibrations of quite complex molecules by making use of local symmetry to factorize the modes.
Let us considercis-[].
The overall point group is C 2v if we suppose that the PH 3 groups rotate freely.
The four (CO) stretches have just been described; the two (MP) stretches can be analyzed in the same way, and the deformations can be treated similarly.
The internal modes of the PH 3 groups present more of a problem.
They can be analyzed using local symmetry.
The local symmetry of M-PH 3 is C 3 ν and the PH 3 modes are like those of the CH 3 group in CH 3 X. There are a 1 and e PH stretches, a 1 and e PH 3 deformations, and e PH 3 rocks.
In CH 3 X, the a 1 modes give rise to dipole changes parallel to the C-X axis, and the e modes give rise to dipole changes perpendicular to that axis.
In the complex we can use a similar basis to classify the PH 3 modes as symmetric (giving dipole changes parallel to the M-P bond) and antisymmetric (giving dipole changes perpendicular to the bond).
We then combine the local modes of the two PH 3 groups within the framework of the overall molecular point group, which is C 2v .
Because there are two PH 3 groups, we have two ‘symmetric’ PH stretches, made up by combining the dipole changes along the M-P bonds.
If we represent the dipole changes by arrows, as in Fig. 5.39, it is clear that the two local modes can be combined in phase, giving a molecular mode of a 1 symmetry, or out of phase, giving a mode of b 2 symmetry.
The antisymmetric PH stretches are doubly degenerate in the local symmetry; in the overall point group of the molecule, this degeneracy is broken.
The associated dipole changes must be perpendicular to the M-P bonds, but the dipole arrows may lie either in the PMP plane or perpendicular to it (see Fig. 5.39), and the two sets are not equivalent.
If we take the in-plane modes first, the two dipole arrows can be taken in phase, giving us another a 1 mode, or out of phase, giving us another b 2 mode.
The   two modes have the same symmetries as the two derived from the internally symmetric PH 3 stretches, but they involve quite different types of motion.
Taking the out-of-plane dipole arrows together, we obtain b 1 and a 2 modes.
So we can classify the six PH stretches we expect as a 1 and b 2 derived from internally symmetric modes and usually labelled ν s S, and a 1 , a 2 , b, and b 2 derived from internally antisymmetric modes and usually labelled ν a .
Both a 1 (ν s ) and a 1 (v s ) should in principle give rise to polarized Raman lines, but the line from the ν 5 mode is likely to be more strongly polarized.
We can analyze the PH 3 deformation and rocking modes in exactly the same way.
There are six PH 3 deformation modes: a 1 and b 2 based on symmetric and a 1 , a 2 , b 1 and b 2 based on antisymmetric local motion.
The rocking modes are locally antisymmetric, and so they combine to give four modes of a 1 , a 2 , b 1 , and b 2 symmetry.
The remaining local modes are torsional.
They derive from molecular rotation of CH 3 X, and can be worked out by representing the local motion by arrows curved round the M-P bonds.
In C 2v these combine as a 2 and b 1 .
In this way we have been able to analyze and classify all the internal modes of the PH 3 groups.
5.11.4 Group frequencies and types of ligand binding
Many ligands have several different modes of binding to other atoms.
A classic example is carbonyl, which is known in a number of different environments, including terminal, bridging and triple-bridging (5.
V).
Bridging CO ligands normally have lower stretching frequencies than terminal ligands in complexes with the same metal and similar overall electron density.
The known range of frequencies in terminal sites is very wide (2130–1700 cm -1 ) but frequencies of bridging ligands lie between 1900 and 1780 cm -1 .
A CO band above 1900 cm -1 is therefore almost certainly due to a terminal CO; a band below this frequency may be due to a bridging ligand, but it could also be ascribed to a terminal ligand with some unusually severe reduction of the CO bond strength through  back-bonding.
Only if the complex also shows carbonyl bands well above 1900 cm -1 can one be confident that such electronic effects are absent, and safely assign low-frequency CO stretches to bridging ligands.
The IR spectrum of a solution of  for example, has CO stretching bands at 2060, 2030 and 2010 cm -1 only; shows bands at 2043, 2020, 1997 and 1840 cm -1 under the same conditions [19].
We will not assign these spectra in detail, but it is now generally accepted that the ruthenium complex has three  units held together only by metal-metal bonding, whereas the iron complex has bridging CO ligands, as well as many terminal ones.
Halogen atoms may also act as bridging ligands, sometimes forming simple dimers such as, and sometimes giving extended polymers such as [].
By studying a range of compounds of known structure, it is sometimes possible to define characteristic M-X stretching frequencies for terminal and bridging ligands, and to use the observed spectrum of a new compound to establish the presence or absence of bridging ligands.
Polyatomic ligands may have several potential donor sites, and we can sometimes identify various possible modes of attachment by their characteristic group frequencies.
The monothioacetate ligand, for instance, can attach to a metal:
1
through oxygen only, to one metal atom (5.
VIa);
2
through sulfur only, to two or to one metal atom (5.
VIb and c);
3
through both oxygen and sulfur to a single metal atom (5.
VId); or
4
through oxygen to one metal atom and through sulfur to another (5.
VIe).
Of these cases, only (2) leaves the ligand with an uncomplexed  group, which gives rise to a characteristic CO stretching band near 1600 cm -1 in the IR spectrum.
The  stretch is less characteristic, being weaker and in a more crowded region of the spectrum, but a band near 950 cm -1 may be taken as indicating case (1).
Cases (3) and (4), involving chelating and bridging ligands, lead to slightly reduced frequencies   for both bond stretches, down to about 1500 cm -1 for  and about 900 cm -1 for , and it is not usually possible to distinguish them in this way.
The perchlorate ion can occur as isolated, undistorted ions, or as distorted but essentially unattached ions, loosely attached through one or two oxygen atoms to one or two metal ions, or it may take part in hydrogen bonding to water molecules in hydrated salts.
The IR spectrum of the isolated undistorted ion shows only one band, ν 3 , in the  stretching region at 100 cm -1 ; the Raman spectrum shows ν 1 as well, near 900 cm -1 .
Distortion of the ion makes ν 1 IR active, and also lifts the triple degeneracy of ν 3 .
If the ion is attached through one oxygen, so that its symmetry is reduced from T d to C 3 ν, splits into two components (a 1 and e), while if the ion is attached to one or more metal atoms through two of its oxygens the degeneracy is entirely removed and three components of ν 3 (a 1 , b 1 and b 2 ) appear, as well as ν 1 .
Distortions due to the formation of hydrogen bonds are usually smaller than those due to co-ordination to metal ions.
For perchlorate, it appears that at least in aqueous solution a symmetrically-hydrated ion is formed, as only a single ν 3 bands is seen; for other oxyanions, however, distortions attributed to hydrogen-bond formation have been claimed on the basis of splittings of ν 3 bands.
5.12 Use of isotopes in interpreting vibrational spectra
As we have seen, vibration frequencies depend on the masses of moving atoms.
If we substitute an atom in a molecule by an isotope of different mass, we alter the frequencies of some modes — but only those in which the substituted atom moves significantly.
This can be a considerable help in assigning bands to particular vibrations, especially where several bands are close together in frequency.
If the substitution is only partial (involving only one, say, of a group of symmetry-related atoms) the resulting reduction of molecular symmetry may alter the selection rules.
This can allow us to draw conclusions about the number of atoms involved and the symmetry of the group.
A particularly important case involves deuterium substitution in hydrogen-containing species.
5.12.1 H/D substitution
The large relative mass increase here leads to large decreases in vibration frequencies, by a factor of up to 0·717 (1/√2).
Thus all M-H stretching frequencies decrease by several hundreds of cm -1 , and this can be used to confirm the group-frequency assignment of such modes, and also to remove M-H bands from regions where they may hide other bands.
This is particularly important for the region from 2400 to 1600 cm -, which covers stretching modes of many multiple bonds including those of CO ligands in metal carbonyls.
For example, there are four IR bands near 2000 cm -1 in the IR spectrum of [][20].
Only the lowest of these shifts appreciably on deuterium-substitution (see Table 5.10), and so this is assigned to the Co-H stretching mode.
The other three high-frequency bands must be due to CO stretches.
Deformation modes involving hydrogen also drop dramatically in frequency on isotopic substitution.
This can again serve both to confirm their assignment and to allow other modes in the same region to be distinguished.
However, mixing of modes of the same symmetry and similar frequency often occurs, so that deuterium substitution causes shifts of more bands than might have been expected.
In [], for instance, there is only one expected deformation that mainly involves motion of the H atom; it is doubly degenerate.
In the observed spectrum we find that several low frequency bands shift on deuterium substitution.
This shows that several normal vibrations contain contributions from this local or internal mode.
These bands are listed in Table 5.10.
We shall see in Section 5.14 how such frequency shifts may be used to provide precise information about the way in which the local modes contribute to the normal modes of vibration.
5.12.2 Heavy-atom isotope substitution
For atoms other than hydrogen, the relative changes in mass on isotopic substitution are small, and frequency shifts are less dramatic.
Indeed, except for first-row elements, band shifts are rarely more than one or two cm -1 , and particular precautions must be taken if they are to be observed at all.
We must eliminate any sources of broadening contributed by the instrument or sample, to ensure that narrow peaks rather than broad bands are present in the spectra.
Gaseous samples may give clear Q-branches, whose positions can be measured precisely, and solutions in non-interacting solvents usually give fairly narrow bands of well-defined shape which can also be useful.
Pure  liquids and solids often give broad or asymmetric bands and so it is very difficult to measure frequencies precisely.
For volatile samples it is sometimes helpful to use matrix-isolation techniques [Section 5.16.3], as the molecules trapped in an inert matrix are generally unable to rotate freely, and give simple sharp vibration bands of well-defined frequency.
Both naturally-occurring and artificial isotopic mixtures can give useful information.
Thus the normal 3:1 mixture of chlorine isotopes leads to a characteristic isotope pattern for a single M-Cl bond stretch, with a stronger higher-frequency band due to 35 Cl and a weaker, lower-frequency band due to 37 CI.
The relative shift  will be less than 0·5 (Δ m/m), which is readily resolvable if the bands are narrow [Fig. 5.40(a)].
A group MCl 2 gives a more complex pattern, as there are three possible isotopic species:(most abundant),(least abundant) and also .
The first two species contain equivalent M-Cl bonds, and so give bands due to symmetric and asymmetric stretches.
The bonds in  are not equivalent, and its bands usually lie between those of the other two species.
The relative abundances of the three species are 9 : 6 : 1 (, and we often observe two patterns, each of three bands of intensity-ratio 9:6:1 in decreasing frequency-order, as shown in Fig. 5.40(b).
It is often not possible to distinguish the weakest component, and only the relative intensities (9:6 = 3:2) serve to distinguish this case from that of a group containing only one chlorine, for which the intensity ratio is 3: 1.
Some elements, such as fluorine and phosphorus, have only one stable isotope, and isotopic substitution cannot be used conveniently to identify vibrations involving them.
In other cases, the naturally-occurring element consists mainly of one isotope, and enriched samples must be used.
Among the first-row elements,13 C,15 N and 18 O are relatively rare, but are obtainable in a variety of chemical forms at various levels of isotopic enrichment.
An example of the use of isotopically-enriched 15 N is illustrated in Fig. 5.41, in which a band just above 1000 cm -1 in the IR spectrum of  is seen to shift to lower frequency, confirming that it is due to an Os-N stretch.
In recent years, isotopically-enriched samples of various metals and other heavy elements have become available.
They have proved to be most useful in identifying bands due to metal-ligand vibrations in complexes, in the same way that samples containing isotopically-substituted ligands allow identification of ligand modes [21].
Fig. 5.42 shows IR spectra of , made with 58 Ni and 67 Ni: analysis of isotope shifts enables Ni-Br and Ni-P stretching modes to be identified.
Even the natural level of 13 C abundance (1%) may allow weak bands due to‘heavy’ molecules to be observed.
For example, transition metal carbonyls show weak IR absorptions to low frequency of the very intense 12 CO stretching bands.
These weak bands are attributed to mono-substituted 13 Co species.
It may be possible, by considering the possible sites for 13 C substitution and the symmetries of the resulting monosubstituted species, to draw definite conclusions about the structure of a complex.
In other cases it is possible to substitute progressively pure 13 Co for normal 12 CO in a complex.
The numbers of bands in the spectra of initial, intermediate and final samples will often give an indication of the numbers and relative positions of CO ligands.
The application of this method to  is described in more detail in Chapter 10.
Isotope studies have been very helpful in studying the reactions of molecular oxygen with metal atoms or halogen atoms.
These reactions are carried out in flowing low-pressure gas streams.
The products can be trapped in an inert matrix by freezing the mixture of reactants, products and an inert carrier-gas such as N 2 or Ar on a window held at 10–20 K. The reaction of metal atoms with O 2 can lead to the formation of a number of small molecules, and in general more than one of these will be formed in any particular experiment.
With halogen atoms X the initial products are usually XOO or XOOX, though the stable form of ClO 2 is known to be OClO.
The use of enriched isotopic mixtures of  and  allows such species to be identified as follows.
XOO has two stretching modes, one loosely described as , the other as .
The use of a 1:1 mixture of  and , with no , can only give two isotopic forms of XOO.
As O-X stretching frequencies are much lower than O-O frequencies, the two modes can easily be distinguished.
If the precursor O 2 is passed through an electrical discharge so that dissociation and recombination leads to the formation of  as well as the symmetrical species, the products of reaction with X will also include  and , which are different molecules; their  frequencies will probably be quite similar, but their  frequencies will differ considerably.
We therefore expect the two stretching regions of the spectrum to show the patterns illustrated in Fig. 5.43.
For XOOX, on the other hand, the species  is the only one that contains a mixture of isotopes, so that a sample made from scrambled dioxygen will give three  peaks rather than four, and six  peaks.
The alternative OXO compound has two oxygen atoms related by symmetry, and so there are only three distinct species.
It would give no  bands, but two  bands for each species.
The numbers of bands expected in the  and  regions for each species, for both unscrambled and scrambled O 2 precursors, are listed in Table 5.11.
Fig. 5.44 shows IR spectra for a product formed from fluorine atoms and dioxygen.
The pattern   of bands shows clearly that FOO has been formed in this case.
Under different conditions, FOOF may be formed and identified, and similarly reactions of chlorine and bromine have also been studied.
5.13 Complete empirical assignment of vibrational spectra
We have at last assembled all the information we need to allow the complete assignment of the vibrations of a moderately complicated molecule.
We have seen how the vibration frequencies may be observed and how each may be allocated to a particular symmetry species.
We have shown how group frequencies derived from experience with other molecules may be used to suggest assignments for particularly characteristic    bands, and how the use of isotopes may assist us in the deduction of molecular structure and of the types of atoms involved in each mode.
We have also seen how the expected vibrations of a model molecule may be organized into symmetry species, and how in simple cases this leads to very simple correlations between the vibration frequencies observed and the expected modes of the model.
We must now try to bring together all this information in the assignment of the spectrum of a more complex molecule, attempting at the same time to come to some definite conclusions about its structure.
We will consider  and , both of which have been studied using IR and Raman spectroscopy.
Each contains five atoms, giving nine normal vibrations.
Generation of the reducible representation and reduction assuming C 2 ν symmetry (5.
VIIa) leads us to expect 4a 1 + 1a 2 + 2 b , + 2 b2 vibrations.
All of these are Raman active and all except the a 2 mode are also IR active.
The list of observed bands (Table 5.12) shows that all the IR bands observed coincide with Raman bands (within 20 cm -1 , which is close enough considering that IR and Raman spectra are of different phases), and the number of Raman bands is indeed nine.
At this stage we cannot exclude the cis square planar alternative structure (5.
VIIb), which also has C 2 ν symmetry.
This would have 4a 1 + 1a 2 + 1b 1 + 3b 2 modes, all Raman active and all but one IR active.
It is possible to exclude the trans-form (5.
VIIc), which is centrosymmetric (point group D 2h ), and should have no IR/Raman coincidences.
This structure would give only three Raman-active modes , rather than the nine bands observed.
Returning to the expected tetrahedral form, we can assign the polarized Raman bands to three of the four expected a 1 modes.
The corresponding IR bands have b-type contours.
Without calculating moments of inertia about three Cartesian axes we    cannot be sure which band-type corresponds to which of the three IR-active symmetry species, but we now know that the B-axis is associated with a 1 vibrations, and is therefore the z axis.
The axis of greatest moment of inertia must be x, as it is perpendicular to the plane containing the three heavy atoms.
This is confirmed by the observation that one of the  stretching modes (near 2100 cm -1 in each case) gives rise to a c-type band.
We can therefore make the symmetry assignment of observed bands on the basis:
a 1 
IR active, b-type Raman polarized
a 2 
IR inactive Raman depolarized
b 1 
IR active, c type Raman depolarized
b 2 
IR active, a type Raman depolarized
There are, as expected, two c-type and two a-type IR bands, all coinciding with depolarized Raman bands, and one Raman band without a counterpart in the IR spectrum.
Three of the four a 1 modes have already been identified, and the remaining a 1 mode must be that at lowest frequency; the Raman band is not discernably polarized for , although it is for , and no IR band contours are available.
All the bands have now been assigned to symmetry species, and all we need to do to complete the assignment is to associate each band with a particular form of vibration, best expressed in terms of local motions such as Ge-H bond stretching.
The nine motions include four bond stretching modes, one for each bond, but these must be combined into symmetry-adapted group modes.
The two equivalent Ge-H bond stretches in the xz plane give symmetric and antisymmetric combinations of a 1 and b 1 symmetry respectively, while two equivalent Ge-X bond stretches in the yz plane give combinations of a 1 and b 2 symmetry.
The other five motions are all angle-bending   modes.
Removal of the 2a 1 + 1b 1 + 1b 2 stretches which have already been identified shows that they have symmetries 2a 1 + 1a 2 + 1b 1 + 1b 2 .
Both the  and the  groups have symmetric bending modes of a 1 symmetry.
In principle these could mix to some extent, but in practice they can be considered separately as their energies must be very different.
The other three modes, each of different symmetry, must involve motions of all four peripheral atoms.
As the hydrogen atoms are the lightest they must move most, and it is usual to describe all three as deformation modes of the  group (Fig. 5.45).
Group frequency considerations suggest that both  stretching modes should be near 2100 cm -1 , so the lower-frequency c-type band near 500 cm -1 must be a  deformation, as is the a 2 mode near 645 cm -1 .
The two bands near 760 cm -1 and 850 cm -1 are affected only slightly in frequency by the substitution of Br for Cl, suggesting that they too are essentially  deformation modes.
This leaves the two bands, near 400 cm -1 for the dichloride and near 300 cm -1 for the dibromide, as the GeX stretches, and the lowest frequency band in each case as the  deformation.
The final assignment is then as shown in Table 5.12.
5.14 Normal co-ordinate analysis
We have seen that it is sometimes possible to sort out the observed vibrational bands according to their symmetry, and that group frequency and similar empirical arguments may make it reasonable to associate bands with particular vibrational modes.
It is always necessary, however, to remember that the bands are not in fact associated with local, group modes, but with normal modes of the whole molecule.
Often particular normal modes are essentially identical to particular group modes, as we have seen for  and , but in other cases substantial mixing of local modes occurs.
This is always to be expected when modes of the same symmetry and similar frequency occur close together in a molecule.
In such circumstances we may not describe a band as being due to a single local mode, and the empirical methods we have used so far break down.
For example, we expect  to have two modes of b 2 symmetry, giving rise to two a-type bands in the IR spectrum of the gas.
Two such bands are observed, at 813 and 720 cm -1 , compared with 779 and 435 cm -1 in the spectrum of .
As fluorine is much lighter than chlorine, the antisymmetric  stretch is at a considerably higher frequency than the analogous mode of , and is therefore closer in frequency to the  rocking mode.
The consequence is that neither of the two bands observed for the difluoride should be assigned to either of the expected group modes, the GeF 2 antisymmetric stretch and the GeH 2 rock; both are due to whole-molecule modes; with contributions from both group modes.
The relative contributions can be determined by normal co-ordinate analysis.
Again, we may consider the two stretching motions of each of the linear triatomic species OCS, CO 2 and NCO -.
For OCS it is reasonable to argue that the higher frequency motion  corresponds to the CO stretch and the lower frequency  to the CS stretch, as the two terminal atoms have very different masses.
At the other extreme, for CO 2 , the terminal atoms are the same, and so we must have complete mixing to give two symmetry-adapted normal modes, whose harmonic frequencies are  and  (Ref. [11], p. 222).
In the NCO -ion the terminal atoms have similar masses and the force constants f(CO) and f(CN) are expected to be much the same.
We might therefore expect to find two local modes of rather similar frequency.
Instead we find two normal modes of very different frequencies, showing that again we have substantial mixing of the local modes, even though this is not required by symmetry.
Normal co-ordinate analysis aims to provide a quantitative analysis of such mixing of local or group modes, and so to improve our understanding of the vibrational motions of a molecule.
It also gives us a lot of other information, derived mathematically from the analysis.
The analysis is based on Newton's Laws of Motion applied to the motion of individual atoms.
Account is taken of their kinetic energies, which involve the masses of the atoms and their instantaneous velocities, and potential energies, which are derived from the instantaneous displacements of the atoms from their equilibrium positions in an assumed force field.
As the classical vibration frequency for a diatomic oscillator is equal to the quantized energy gap in units of h (Planck's constant), we can derive the normal vibration frequencies from a purely classical analysis.
For most purposes, a purely harmonic force field [see Section 5.2.1]is adequate.
This is lucky, as the mathematics required to manipulate the equations becomes much more complicated if non-quadratic terms are introduced.
Here we cannot go into the details of a normal co-ordinate analysis, as they are complicated even using harmonic force fields; the method is well described elsewhere [22, 23].
It is important to realize that a normal co-ordinate analysis is almost always an ‘under-determined’ problem mathematically.
There is not enough information available to allow a unique solution to be found, and the particular solution adopted will depend on the various assumptions made in the course of the analysis, as well as on the observed frequencies.
Considerable care is therefore needed in interpreting the results of a normal co-ordinate analysis.
There is also the problem of anharmonicity.
As we cannot use an anharmonic force field in the analysis, it may seem preferable to work with idealized harmonic frequencies  rather than the observed vibration frequencies, which include anharmonic contributions.
This requires the collection of much more experimental information so that the harmonic and anharmonic terms can be separated, and yet still does not take account of the anharmonic terms in the force field.
On the whole, it seems best to use the observed vibration frequencies in the analysis, recognizing that the results are of only limited validity.
The results of a normal co-ordinate analysis are of several kinds.
First, there are the calculated frequencies themselves; by adjusting the force field it should be possible to make these identical to the observed frequencies.
Secondly, there is the resulting force field, the various terms of which can be taken as force constants for the motions used initially to define the problem.
Such terms are often found to be more-or-less transferable from one problem to another, and so have some claim to significance beyond the level of the particular problem in which they were derived.
The third kind of result is derived from the force field and the mathematical solution of the equations of motion for each particular normal mode.
We can define the potential energy distribution in a normal mode, which shows how the various local modes mix in the vibration.
For example, in  we might find that the 813 cm -1 mode is 80%  rock, 20%  stretch, with the reverse proportions in the 720 cm -1 mode.
The mean square amplitudes of vibration for any atom or, more importantly, the mean square amplitudes of relative motion for any atom pair may also be calculated.
Such information is very useful in the analysis of electron diffraction patterns of gases (Chapter 8), and in other experiments where measurements must be conducted upon large collections of molecules in different instantaneous states.
Centrifugal distortion constants and Coriolis coupling constants can also be calculated, and the values compared with those obtained from analysis of rotational spectra or rotation fine-structure of vibration bands (see Chapter 4).
Details of the calculation of such physically observable quantities can be found in Ref. [22], p. 212.
Once again, we must remember that the results are not determined only by the experimental vibration frequencies, but by various assumptions made in the course of setting up and solving the problem.
It is possible, however, to use the observed values of these physically observable quantities to check the validity of some of these assumptions, and hence to derive a more reliable force field.
Additional information that can be used to narrow down the range of possible solutions in a normal co-ordinate analysis can be obtained using isotopically substituted samples.
As we have seen in Section 5.12, isotopic substitution can lead to changes in vibration frequencies.
The distribution of the isotope shifts among the various bands gives independent evidence about the force field, which is assumed to be invariant, while the mass-dependent kinetic energy terms alter.
Each isotopic substitution gives in principle one extra piece of information about the force field, and for several small molecules enough isotopic species have been studied to allow the force field to be specified fully.
Again, the influence of anharmonicity is not removed by these studies, and may even be worse if the anharmonicity is significantly different for the isotopic species, as it is with M-H and M-D stretches.
5.15 Changes of structure with phase
Some compounds have different structures in different phases.
, for instance, is molecular as a gas, but ionized as  and  in the crystal.
Such structural changes are of course accompanied by changes in vibrational spectra.
The IR spectrum of gaseous  is like that of the glass formed by rapid condensation, but completely different from that of the annealed and crystalline solid, whose spectra shows bands characteristic of  and .
Other structural changes, such as association or hydrogen bonding, are reflected in vibrational spectra, and can be followed by vibrational spectroscopy, as can processes of solvation.
Changes in conformation may also occur as samples are condensed or concentrated.
An extreme example is , whose IR and Raman spectra have been interpreted in terms of planar molecules of D 2h symmetry in the solid phase and a structure with a dihedral angle of 90° between the  end groups in the gaseous and liquid states.
One situation commonly encountered involves a molecule with two conformers, which are easily interconverted, with one marginally more stable than the other.
Changing the temperature alters the relative proportions of the conformers; the vibrational spectra therefore show bands whose relative intensities vary with temperature, as shown in Fig. 5.46.
5.16 Vibrational spectroscopy of unstable molecules
For stable samples we rarely need to obtain spectra in a hurry, and commercial spectrometers generally operate on timescales ranging from a few minutes to several hours.
The most modern interferometers can obtain spectra in shorter times, but even so they cannot deal with samples that decay in seconds, let alone milli-, micro- or nanoseconds.
Such samples require the use of special techniques which may be described loosely as flow, flash and freeze methods.
5.16.1 Flow
If an unstable species is generated in a static situation, such as in a bulb containing gases or a beaker containing a solution, its decay simply leads to a steadily-decreasing concentration at all points in the apparatus.
If, on the other hand, it is continuously generated in a flowing system — gas or liquid travelling at a uniform rate down a tube — its subsequent decay establishes steady-state concentrations at points down-stream from the region of generation.
At such points we can observe the spectrum of the unstable product together with that of any stable products, carrier materials and so on.
The flow method thus transforms the time-variation of concentration into a distance-variation and enables us to make an essentially static measurement (Fig. 5.47).
The distance scale of the decay of this steady-state concentration depends on the ratio of the flow rate to the rate of decay.
The problem with this method is that we must generate the species of interest continuously — often by mixing two gases or solutions — in a way that can be matched to the timescale of the measurement.
Thus even here we may want to reduce the total time required to record the spectrum.
In the past, much of the work with flowing gases used photographic recording of electronic emission or absorption spectra.
These give only limited vibrational information, and then only for small molecules.
More modern laser techniques allow much more subtle experiments to be applied to both small and    large unstable molecules in flow systems.
An example is shown in Fig. 5.48, which shows the Q-branch of ν 2 of FO 2 , prepared in a flow tube by reaction of fluorine atoms and dioxygen molecules.
The spectrum was recorded using a tunable IR diode laser.
5.16.2 Flash
Given the availability of very fast spectroscopic techniques, using either photographic recording or pulsed lasers, we can consider working with a non-flowing sample and  simply recording a spectrum at some interval after sudden generation of the species, but before its decay is complete.
This is the technique of flash photolysis, and again it can be applied to gaseous or to liquid samples.
Originally a high-intensity flash-lamp was used to generate the unstable species, while the spectrum was recorded using a second, weaker flash.
Modern flash photolysis experiments often use lasers because of their superior intensity, their monochromaticity and their directed beams.
Unfortunately a monochromatic beam is of only limited use for spectroscopy unless it is tunable.
Moreover, IR absorption spectra are difficult to record in this way, as photographic recording is effectively useless in the IR.
Interferometers can be used, though the decay of the sample following the generating flash means that quite elaborate multiple interferograms must be recorded under computer control.
These must then be combined to generate an interferogram in which each point corresponds to the same time-delay after the flash.
Each flash and interferogram only contribute one point to the composite interferogram, and thousands may be required.
It  is not a trivial experiment!
Over narrow spectral ranges, many flash-generation/laser-detection experiments may be devised and carried out, and the use of electric-field tuning (Stark effect), magnetic-field tuning (Zeeman effect) and double-resonance effects can lead to the identification and precise measurement of many vibration-rotation lines of short-lived species.
However, it is not at present a routine matter to extend such measurements over an appreciable portion even of one vibration-rotation band.
The production of the CH 3 · radical by flash photolysis of CH 3 I, for instance, has been monitored using a tunable IR laser set at a fixed frequency of 608.301 cm -1 , coinciding with the strong Q-branch of the ν 2 band.
The decay of the transient absorption was monitored over a few hundred microseconds, following a 30 ns photolysis flash [25].
5.16.3 Freeze
A third response to the problem of recording spectra of short-lived species is to increase their lifetimes, by cooling the sample in an inert environment.
We then have effectively unlimited opportunity to study the sample using conventional instruments.
A wide variety of methods has been developed for the preparation of such samples, which are described as matrix-isolated.
In many cases, where the inert environment is provided by a frozen gas (Ar or N 2 are often used), the temperature needed may be only a few degrees above absolute zero.
Such temperatures are best attained by the use of microrefrigerators using helium as the working fluid.
These micro-refrigerators are commercially available, and avoid the explosion hazard of liquid hydrogen and the expense of liquid helium.
In any case, high-vacuum equipment is needed to ensure adequate thermal insulation.
The technical details of matrix-isolation experiments and the results obtained by these methods are described in Refs [26]—[29].
Preparation of matrix-isolated samples generally follows one of two basic routes.
One involves generating a short-lived species in the gas phase, by photolysis, thermolysis, chemical reaction, discharge, etc.
The products are then co-condensed with a large excess (typically a thousand-fold) of the inert matrix material.
In the other method, the unstable material is generated in the cold matrix, by photolysis, or by chemical reaction of a stable precursor with a photolytically-generated atom.
Spectra of samples obtained using an extremely simple means of generation, evaporation from a solid, are shown in Fig. 5.49.
Here the vapors above heated Na 3 PO 4 have been co-condensed with argon.
The novel monomeric metaphosphate, NaPO 3 , was identified in the matrix by its IR spectra.
Both normal 16 O and enriched 16 O/ 18 O samples were used.
The structure of NaPO 3 is planar, like that of KNO 3 , and the sodium atom is coordinated to two of the oxygen atoms (5.
VIII).
Fig. 5.50 shows IR spectra of products formed when SiMe 3 N 3 is photolyzed in a matrix.
Loss of N 2 is presumed to lead to the formation of a nitrene, SiMe 3 N:, but this   is unstable, and rearranges to give the observed product.
The IR spectra are consistent with it being .
In particular, a band near 1670 cm -1 , which shifts to lower frequency when a 15 N-enriched sample is used, is assigned to the C = N stretching mode.
Recently the use of photolysis in matrices with plane polarized light and the subsequent recording of the polarized infrared spectra of the products has given important additional information about the structures of unstable intermediates.
Elegant and closely-analyzed work has shown that , formed by photolysis of , probably contains a semi-bridging carbonyl group; in the complicated photolysis of , it has been possible to deduce a great deal about the forms of the intermediate  and about the photochemical processes by which it is formed and reacts.
The reader is referred to the original papers for details (Refs [30, 31]).
A further example of the use of matrix isolation is discussed in Section 10.16, and many other examples will be found in Refs [26]—[29].
5.17 Resonance Raman spectroscopy
A Raman spectrum is normally excited using light of a frequency that is not absorbed by the sample.
The probability of absorption is very low, and excitation is to a virtual excited state whose lifetime is very short and whose energy is correspondingly poorly defined.
If we use light whose absorption probability is high, the effects of local heating by the laser beam are usually so great that the sample decomposes.
If we can avoid this local heating, possibly by spinning the sample rapidly under the laser spot so that different parts of the sample are heated in turn, we find that stronger Raman signals are observed as the exciting light is absorbed by the sample.
This effect is the resonance Raman effect [32, 33].
The energy levels involved are shown in Fig. 5.51, and the process is also discussed in Section 6.8.7.
The intensity of the effect is high, but in general only a few vibrational modes are involved, and often only one is detectable.
It is usual to find a progression indicating significant transition probabilities to many vibrational levels of the modes concerned.
The particular vibrations excited are often found to be closely associated with the electronic transition within whose band the exciting radiation falls, and this can sometimes be useful in assigning electronic transitions.
The use of a tunable laser may be helpful, as excitation profiles, which show the intensity of resonance-enhancement as a function of exciting frequency, may allow overlapping electronic bands to be distinguished from each other.
In terms of vibrational spectroscopy there are three major advantages over simple Raman spectroscopy.
1
The intensity is enhanced, enabling weakly scattering or very dilute samples to be used.
2
The spectrum is greatly simplified, as only a few vibrations are enhanced.
3
The observation of a progression enables the vibrational potential function to be specified over a wide range of the quantum number ν.
The resonance Raman effect is observable with a normal Raman spectrometer, and does not depend on any special properties of laser excitation.
The intensity enhancement relies on the electronic transition being allowed by symmetry, so the vibrations whose intensities are enhanced are almost always totally symmetric (Section 5.7).
The technique has enabled spectra to be obtained from the metallic cores of some important biological molecules such as hemoglobin and some enzymes, where the low   concentration of the metal and the low solubility of the substance itself make it difficult to study vibrational spectra in any other way.
The IR or normal Raman spectrum of such a large species is also, of course, very complex, and the resonance Raman spectrum is more readily interpreted because of its simplicity.
We shall illustrate the effect with two simpler examples.
The tetrahedral chromate ion,, has only one totally symmetric vibration, and it gives a very simple resonance Raman spectrum, with a clear progression up to the 9th overtone (Fig. 5.52).
The broadening of the higher bands   reflects progressively shorter lifetimes for the final highly-excited vibrational states.
Excitation in this case was with a laser line in the ultraviolet, well within the absorption band responsible for the yellow color.
The second example is , 5.
IX, which has a linear bridging oxygen and overall D 4h symmetry in the anion.
With this symmetry it has four totally symmetric vibrations, and all are seen in the resonance Raman spectrum (Fig. 5.53).
However, only the symmetric RuORu stretch (labelled ν 1 ,) produces progressions.
A few peaks due to the excitation of overtones of vibrations of lower symmetry (e.g. 2ν 9 ) can also be seen, but the main feature of the spectrum is a set of progressions in ν 1 , with or without excitation of one of the other a 1g modes.
This may be taken to imply that the electronic band, within whose absorption profile the excitation occurred, involves a transition between states having different Ru-O bond lengths, and probably involves excitation of electrons having some Ru -O bonding character.
We shall see in Chapter 6 how such arguments can sometimes help in the assignment of electronic transitions.
6 Electronic and Photoelectron Spectroscopy
6.1 Introduction
Our present understanding of quantum mechanics is largely based on the study of electronic spectra.
The spectra of atoms, for instance, with their series of lines, provided the pioneers of quantum mechanics with incontrovertible evidence of the quantum nature of matter at the atomic level.
The electronic structures of atoms can only be described in quantum terms, and are now well understood.
In the same way, the electronic spectra of molecules can give information about their electronic structures, and have helped to establish our present understanding of chemical bonding in molecules.
We shall see, however, that electronic spectra rarely give us direct information about molecular structures.
This is partly because molecular electronic spectra are very different from the line-spectra of atoms, consisting in most cases of broad bands, and partly because the spectra are usually very complicated, so that assignment is often impossible.
This complexity arises simply because a typical molecule has a lot of electrons in different energy levels, together with a large number of unoccupied levels, and excitation can occur from each of the occupied levels to many or all of the unoccupied levels.
There are also practical difficulties in obtaining electronic spectra outside a fairly narrow range of frequencies covering the visible and near-ultraviolet (UV) regions from 14 000 to 50 000 cm -1 (corresponding to wavelengths of 700 to 200 nm).
Very few molecules have electronic transitions below this range, in the IR region, but all molecules have most if not all of their electronic transitions in the far-UV region, above 50 000 cm -1 .
Note that the electron volt, which is often used as an energy unit, is equivalent to 8067 cm -1 .
For these and other reasons more useful information about molecular structures can be obtained by photoelectron spectroscopy, where the excited electron is ejected completely instead of remaining in a higher-energy level of the molecule.
The energy required to remove the electron depends only on the energy of the level it originally occupied relative to that of an unbound electron, so photoelectron spectra are in principle much simpler than electronic excitation spectra.
Much of this chapter will therefore be concerned with the two major types of photoelectron spectroscopy (PES), though we shall note how electronic excitation spectroscopy can be used to give structural information about some molecules.
The spectra of transition-metal complexes in the visible and near-UV regions have been studied in considerable detail, and may be most informative.
They can also be used to detect, identify and measure the concentrations of such compounds.
6.2 Excitation and ejection of electrons
The interaction of a photon and a molecule, like other physical processes, is subject to the laws of conservation of energy, of linear momentum and of angular momentum.
These restrict some of the conceivable processes whereby excitation could occur, while   allowing others to occur with very few restrictions.
These processes are illustrated in Fig. 6.1.
Thus excitation of an electron within the energy levels of a molecule requires the supply of energy from an incoming photon.
In some cases angular momentum (as orbital angular momentum of the excited electron) must also be supplied, but not linear momentum.
The incoming photon, on the other hand, has both energy and linear momentum, so that resonant absorption of the photon (involving transfer of the whole of the photon energy to the molecule) must also involve the transfer of the linear momentum of the photon.
This leads to an increase in the translational momentum of the molecule, which is not quantized.
Non-resonant absorption of a photon, in which both surplus energy and surplus linear momentum are carried away by a photon of lower energy, is a much less favorable process.
It leads to the Raman effect, which, as we have already seen in Chapter 5, is many orders of magnitude less efficient than direct resonant absorption.
In a photoionization process, on the other hand, any energy from the incoming photon over and above that needed to ionize the molecule is carried away as kinetic energy of the electron ejected from the molecule; conservation of linear momentum is generally accomplished by recoil of the ion formed.
This means that resonant photoionization offers no particular advantages and photoelectron spectroscopy is best done using a monochromatic light source with more than sufficient energy to ionize the electrons of interest.
This has the advantage that the surplus energy, appearing as kinetic energy of the electrons, can be measured by electrostatic analysis of the electron velocities.
6.3 Electron energy levels in atoms and molecules
In order to appreciate the various processes involved in electronic spectroscopy we need to have a reasonable picture of the levels, both occupied and unoccupied, available to electrons in molecules.
It is best to start with the levels in atoms, and some of the most successful quantitative descriptions of the behavior of electrons in molecules use an approach based on the Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO).
Each of the solutions found for the Schrödinger equation (quantum mechanical wave equation) for a one-electron atom can be regarded as relating to one of a set of orbitals, which is characterized by a unique combination of quantum numbers and is given a corresponding symbol, such as 1s, 2p, etc.
Each orbital has a distinct wave-function, which describes the distribution of an electron occupying the orbital, and an energy which such an electron must possess.
Each electron in an atom must have exactly the energy appropriate to one or other of the orbitals.
There are n 2 distinct solutions of the wave equation for each value of n, and the corresponding orbitals are said to constitute a shell.
Within each shell the orbitals are divided into sub-shells according to the value of the angular momentum quantum number l, which can take values from zero to (n -1); there are (21 + 1) orbitals in the sub-shell corresponding to a given value of l.
This leads to the familiar sets of s, p, d, f, etc. orbitals in each shell.
For a one-electron atom, all the orbitals of a given shell have the same energy relative to the energy of a free electron; this is proportional to n -2 , and to the nuclear charge, Z, as increasing the nuclear charge makes the electron more stable.
For an atom with many electrons, we can still use the one-electron atom wave-functions as approximate descriptions of the behavior of the electrons, though we should modify the functions to account for the mutual repulsion of the electrons.
In particular, this repulsion means that orbitals in different sub-shells no longer have the same energy.
Within any one shell the energies are always E s < E p < E d …, while the principal quantum number n still orders orbitals of the same value of l, so that E 1s < E 2s < E 3s …,
E 2p < E 3p < E 4p …etc.
It is possible however for orbitals of different principal quantum numbers to overlap in energy, so that E 3d > E 4s for example.
One of the most rigorous rules of quantum mechanics is the Pauli Exclusion Principle, an important consequence of which is that each orbital can hold no more than two electrons.
We can speak of an orbital as being full if it contains two electrons, half-filled if it has a single electron, or empty.
For a typical many-electron atom, such as Fe, we may divide the orbitals into three major categories.
At lowest energies we find the so-called core levels, corresponding to filled shells and sub-shells (1s 2 ),(2s 2 2p 6 ) and (3S 2 3p 6 ).
(The superscripts denote the total numbers of electrons in the sub-shell.)
There is then a set of valence levels, whose binding energies are generally quite low (5–25 eV).
Some of these are full, some half-filled and some empty.
For Fe the valence levels would include the 3d, 4s and 4p subshells, which could hold a total of 18 electrons if filled.
The nuclear charge of Fe is 26, and the core levels contain 18 electrons, so there are only 8 electrons in the valence levels.
Lastly there is a set of unoccupied (empty) levels (sometimes called Rydberg levels or virtual levels) consisting of the sub-shells 4d, 4f and all orbitals whose principal quantum number is 5 or more.
This last set is in principle infinite in number.
At electron energies even higher than the virtual levels we find a continuum of unbound states, corresponding to an ion and a free electron.
Excitation of electrons into this continuum corresponds to ionization.
For a ground state atom, the core levels are completely filled, the valence levels are partially filled, and the virtual levels and the ionization continuum are unoccupied.
Electronic excitations are then possible, from core or valence levels to valence, virtual or continuum levels, as shown in Fig. 6.2.
Core-level electrons may be excited into unoccupied or half-filled valence levels, or into virtual levels, or they may be ionized, by excitation into the continuum: only the last of these possibilities concerns us here.
The high binding energies of core levels in most atoms means that X-ray photons are required to ionize core electrons, giving rise to X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS or XPES).
Valence-shell electrons may also undergo transitions of three types, depending on their destination; in this case all are observable in practice.
Valence-valence excitations and valence-virtual excitations may be considered together, and give rise to valence-electron excitation spectra.
The excitation of valence electrons into the ionization continuum gives rise to valence-electron photoelectron spectra.
So far we have considered the transitions possible for individual atoms.
Exactly the same possibilities exist for molecules.
Not only that, but as far as the core levels are concerned the fact that atoms have combined to form molecules is almost irrelevant.
The characteristic core levels of the constituent atoms remain in the molecules, with only very slight shifts in energy (of the order of a few eV) due to the electrostatic charge on each atom.
Only the valence levels are greatly affected by molecule formation, as this is where the bonding actually occurs.
Thus intravalence excitation and valence-electron  ionization transitions contain information characteristic of molecules, whereas core-electron ionizations relate to the atoms making up the molecules.
All atoms other than hydrogen can be detected and identified using X-ray excited photoelectron spectroscopy, which is therefore sometimes called Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis (ESCA).
Moreover, the slight shifts in core levels, called chemical shifts, can be used to differentiate atoms of the same element in different environments, either within one molecule or in a mixed sample.
The technique is therefore very powerful in the examination of systems that are chemically inhomogeneous, or even varying with time.
The remainder of the present Chapter will deal with core-level photoelectron spectroscopy, valence-level photoelectron spectroscopy and electronic excitation spectroscopy in turn.
6.4 Core-level photoelectron spectroscopy
As we have seen, the removal of a core-electron requires an energy characteristic primarily of the atom concerned, so this technique offers us the ability to identify the constituent atoms of any sample.
6.4.1 Experimental method
To generate an XPS spectrum we need a source of X-rays, ideally monochromatic.
The usual X-ray source consists of a metal anode which is bombarded by a beam of high velocity electrons, and gives off the characteristic X-ray spectrum of the metal concerned.
This comprises a few intense lines and a much weaker continuous background.
A filter that transmits only the most energetic K line and absorbs less energetic X-rays then leaves an almost monochromatic X-ray beam, though the linewidth is of the order of 1–2 eV, and the ‘line’ may in fact consist of two or more components.
A crystal monochromator may be used to narrow the line and eliminate unwanted components, but the increase in complexity and the reduction in intensity that are inevitably involved mean that this is only done if very high resolution is required (see below).
The lines most often used are the K a lines of Mg (1254 eV) and Al (1487 eV).
The XPS spectrum consists of a record of the number of electrons ejected as a function of the energy carried by the electron, so the electrons must be detected after an analysis of their energies.
There are several different types of electron detector in use, most of which rely on the production of bursts of electrons when a single fast-moving electron strikes a surface.
In this way each electron arriving at the detector generates an electrical pulse which can be amplified and counted.
Energy analysis of electrons is equivalent to velocity analysis, and is generally done by the application of a controlled electrostatic field which deflects electrons with a particular velocity into the detector.
Further details of X-ray photoelectron spectrometers may be found in Refs [1]–[3].
The sample arrangements depend on the physical nature of the sample, of course.
By far the largest proportion of XPS studies are carried out using solid samples.
These present few problems with the requirement for a high vacuum (though volatile solids may need to be cooled), and they give the highest possible density of sample, and therefore signal strength, but it must be remembered that the atomic environment includes  neighboring molecules or ions.
Gases and liquids are harder to cope with, but useful spectra have been obtained for both.
6.4.2 Core-level photoionization process
The interaction of an X-ray photon with an atom, leading to ejection of a core electron, can be treated as a simple inelastic collision.
The energy transferred from the photon to the electron is more than enough to remove it from the atom.
The interaction is strong, as it involves the electric field of the radiation and the electric charge of the electron.
Moreover, it is not inhibited by the need to conserve both energy and momentum, because both are shared between the ejected electron and the resulting ion.
In the simplest possible photoionization event the whole of the photon energy is transferred to the electron, so we may write  where hν is the energy of the incident photon, BE is the binding energy of the ejected electron and KE is its kinetic energy.
Thus if we know hν and measure KE we can derive the electron binding energy very simply.
Core electrons are not normally involved in the bonding of the molecule, and so when they are ejected the resulting ions are usually formed in their vibrational ground states.
In any case, typical vibration frequencies of less than 0·5 eV (∼ 4000 cm -1 ) cannot normally be resolved, except under special circumstances when a monochromator is used to reduce the source linewidth from ∼ 1·2 to ∼ 0·2 eV.
In a few cases, such as that illustrated in Fig. 6.3, traces of vibrational structure have been observed, but this effect is rarely useful.
So for the rest of this section we can ignore processes in which the ion is excited, either immediately or during the ejection of the electron.
What we record in an X-ray photoelectron experiment is a spectrum of kinetic energies of ejected electrons, each corresponding to the binding energy of one core level in the sample.
For a sample containing only one type of atom these signals would   correspond to the expected s, p, d…sub-shells of the core shells.
For a sample with different atoms the result is simply a superposition of those expected for each of the constituent atoms.
Thus metallic cobalt gives signals due to removal of electrons with binding energies 926 eV (2s), 794 and 779 eV (2p), 101 eV (3s) and 60 eV (3p), while any cobalt oxide would also give signals due to the oxygen 1s core level with binding energy 540 eV, as shown in Fig. 6.4.
Any one of the Co signals is adequate to identify Co in a sample, as most energies can be uniquely associated with one sub-shell of one element.
Similarly, the signal at 540 eV uniquely identifies oxygen.
Chemical shifts are generally of a few eV or less, and overlap of lines due to different elements is unlikely, as each element contributes at most a few lines in the range 50–1200 eV, while the instrumental linewidth is of the order of 2 eV.
The 1s level binding energies of elements increase roughly as Z, the nuclear charge, and can of course only be used for elements lighter than that used in the X-ray source.
Nevertheless, every element except H and He has at least one line in the range 50–1200 eV which can be used for its identification.
Table 6.1 gives some convenient lines for a number of elements.
6.4.3 Spin complications
We noted above that the 2p levels of cobalt gave rise to two lines in the XPS spectrum, separated by some 15 eV, and other examples of this are shown in Table 6.1.
This is a consequence of electron spin.
We know that an atom with a single p electron has two states of slightly different energy depending on whether the spin angular momentum (quantum number s) is aligned parallel or anti-parallel to the orbital angular momentum (quantum number l).
Exactly the same sort of behavior is found for an atom with a single p-level vacancy.
In this case l is 1 and s is ½., and so the atom has two distinct states, as j, the vector sum of l and s, may be or ½.
Similarly for d levels there are two components, with j values and , and for f levels the j values for the two components are and .
The lines from s levels are of course single.
In molecules with unpaired valence electrons, spin-spin coupling between valence and core electrons leads to further small splittings.
Thus for the NO molecule a splitting of 1·5 eV occurs in the N 1s line near 415 eV, and for the O 2 molecule a splitting of 1·1 eV appears in the oxygen 1s line near 453 eV (Fig. 6.5).
Such splittings are too small to detect unless a monochromator is used.
6.4.4 Depth effects in solid samples
When the target atom in an XPS experiment is in a gas-phase molecule, the ejected photoelectron can escape freely, though even here it may lose some energy as it departs, exciting or even ionizing valence electrons in the process.
However, electrons ejected from solids are likely to be captured by the surrounding matter, unless the distance to the surface is very small.
Even for electrons originating in atoms near the surface various energy-loss processes reduce the main signal and generate a spectrum of bands to lower energies.
The analysis of such spectra can give information about the sample, but for our present purposes we are concerned only with the unperturbed signal, which must be derived from atoms near the surface.
How near depends on the electron energy.
If the binding energy is low the ejected electrons carry most of the photon energy and can escape from perhaps a depth of 100 Å, while low-energy electrons ejected from levels of binding energy of 1000 eV or more may only reach the surface from depths as small as 1 Å: this effectively includes only the surface layer of atoms.
We can therefore choose the depth to which we probe by using appropriate electron binding energies.
Such studies show that even freshly-prepared samples are often strikingly contaminated.
Thus metal surfaces which have been exposed to air, even at room temperature, are usually oxide-coated (Fig. 6.6), and the oxides present are not always those we might anticipate from a knowledge of the stability of bulk oxide samples.
Conversely, exposure of samples to the high vacuum within the XPS spectrometer may lead to surface alteration, especially loss of water from hydrated samples.
A very common surface contamination is due to a film of pump-oil acquired from the diffusion pumps, which gives a prominent carbon 1s signal.
Such unrepresentative surfaces can be stripped away by bombardment of the sample with electrons or ions, and this is often done as a routine precaution to ensure that the surface examined is typical of the bulk material.
It can, however, be useful to have some surface contamination, such as the pump oil, to provide a calibration point.
This enables the effects of sample-charging, which alters the velocity of the departing electron [see below, Section 6.4.5], to be allowed for.
As an alternative calibrant, some unreactive material may be sputtered onto the surface; gold is a favored material, giving 4f signals near 85 eV, as well as several others down to 4s near 760 eV.
As XPS is useful for the study of surfaces it can give a good deal of information about species adsorbed on catalysts.
Such work is important, but it is outside the scope of this book.
6.4.5 Chemical shifts
Once an atom has been identified, it is in principle possible to define its effective charge by observing the chemical shift between its core lines and those of a similar atom in a standard environment.
In practice the measurement is difficult, and many misleading shifts were reported before the possible pitfalls were appreciated.
The problems may be divided into three groups.
1
Instrumental factors, including the breadth of the exciting line and imperfections (aberrations) in the electron-velocity analyzer, which can be overcome in principle by improvements in the design, for example by inclusion of a monochromator.
2
Sample effects, including the problems of charging of solid samples, and the difficulty of defining a reference level from which the binding energy can be measured for an insulating solid.
These are best dealt with by use of an internal standard, such as the C(1s) line of hydrocarbon contaminants, or a line of some chemically-unreactive metal such as Au sputtered on to the sample.
Any reputable XPS study should report the standard used, and the energy adopted for the standard.
3
The final problem is that various energy-loss processes may accompany or follow the photoionization event, reducing the energy of the ejected electron.
There is no cure for this, but fortunately it is usually found that such processes do not occur in some fraction of photoionization events, so that the observed spectrum contains at least some intensity in an unshifted line, accompanied by various ‘satellites’ corresponding to the energy loss processes.
Once we have adequate instrumentation and have adopted an internal standard, what do we find?
Quite simply, the core energy levels for atoms of a particular element depend on its environment.
We can, therefore, distinguish between different compounds, or between chemically distinct atoms in a single compound.
However, the peaks due to atoms in different sites frequently coincide by chance, as the shift range (up to about 10 eV) is not very large compared with the ultimate linewidth (∼ 0·2 eV).
Positively charged atoms attract the core electrons more strongly than neutral or negative ones, so metal atoms in oxides, salts and so on have higher binding energies than similar atoms in pure metal samples (Fig. 6.6).
Even for carbon compounds distinct signals are observed, depending on the numbers of electronegative atoms attached to the C atom concerned (Fig. 6.7).
Such chemical shifts can clearly give useful information about the oxidation state of an element in a sample, though the small shift range makes it hard to define non-overlapping regions characteristic of each oxidation state.
For example, the molybdenum 3d binding energies observed [4]for , and , in which the formal oxidation states of the metal are 0, 2 and 4, are 230·9, 232·7 and 235·3 eV, respectively.
Thus a high oxidation state is associated with a high binding energy, as expected.
However, the binding energy for the Mo v complex  is only 235·5 eV, and oxidation states IV and V cannot be distinguished reliably.
This could be taken to show significant back-donation from O to Mo, which would reduce the effective charge on Mo.
Such arguments are appealing, but must not be carried too far without careful theoretical analysis.
6.4.6 Comparison of chemical shifts with theory
There are three fundamentally different approaches to the calculation of core-level binding energies.
In one, we calculate the orbital energies of the electrons in the original molecule, and equate the orbital energy with the binding energy — an assumption  known, loosely, as Koopmans' Theorem.
The absolute binding energies are of course very large, and even if we do a very expensive calculation we should not expect our calculated orbital energies to match them exactly.
But we may hope that the small differences in binding energies that correspond to the chemical shifts between different samples will be correctly reproduced.
This is only a hope, and this way of calculating chemical shifts is probably the least satisfactory.
A second approach is to use some theoretical model to calculate effective atomic charges.
The chemical shifts are then related to the differences in charge in different samples.
Here we are dealing much more directly with the small differences between samples, and considerable success has been claimed for groups of closely-related molecules.
An example, using a very simple model of the bonding in nickel(II) complexes in which the charge is calculated simply from the electronegativity difference between the central atom (Ni) and the attached ligand atom, is illustrated in Fig. 6.8.
Here we see how the observed chemical shifts in binding energy correlate very well with the calculated charge on Ni.
This approach, which relates chemical shifts to a single effective charge parameter, requires that all core levels on a given atom shift together, so that the 2s-2p gap, for instance, remains constant.
This seems to be effectively true in practice, and the success of a charge-based calculation is a reflection of how well the actual differences in charge are reproduced [2].
The third approach attempts to avoid the approximation of Koopmans' Theorem by deriving binding energies as the differences in total energies between the molecule and the highly excited positive ions formed by removing core electrons.
The problems of calculating the total energies of such ions are by no means trivial, and important advances in techniques of calculation have been made in the process of developing  satisfactory methods.
It is particularly important to allow for the electronic relaxation of the ion — adjustments of all other electrons — though the timescale is too short to allow vibrational relaxation.
This approach is only worth attempting if full ab initio methods are used, as semi-empirical methods such as CNDO, INDO and MNDO are incapable of dealing with ions in states which have incompletely filled core orbitals.
Ideally we should include configuration interaction (CI), but this is rarely possible except for small molecules.
The second approach has on the whole been most successful, as it is possible to use ‘cheap’ methods such as CNDO to calculate effective atomic-charges.
Inclusion of corrections for relaxation effects improves the accuracy of its predictions.
This leads to the relaxation potential model, which can be used to rationalize observed chemical shifts, to predict the chemical shifts of new systems and, it is hoped, to increase our understanding of chemical bonding.
6.5 Symmetry and molecular orbitals
Core levels can be regarded as essentially atomic in character, and a core electron can be clearly identified in terms of the particular atom and the type of atomic orbital with which it is associated.
In contrast, valence electrons of molecules are best discussed in terms of molecular orbitals.
A particular molecular orbital may seem to be associated primarily with one bond, or with a single atom, but in principle it must be associated with the whole molecule.
The use of symmetry to classify molecular orbitals is almost essential for a detailed understanding of electronic spectroscopy.
We can only describe this briefly here; further background material can be found in the Appendix, and full details can be found in Refs [5]—[9].
Assigning a particular molecular orbital to its symmetry species is like assigning a vibration to its symmetry species (Section 5.7): we need to consider the effects of the various symmetry operations on the sign and orientation of the wavefunction.
One problem is that we do not necessarily know what a particular wavefunction looks like, and it is here that the LCAO approach to the construction of molecular orbitals is very useful.
We begin by classifying the valence-shell atomic orbitals (AOs) of the constituent atoms, in the symmetry of the molecule, as the set of molecular orbitals (MOs) has the same distribution of symmetry species as the set of contributing atomic orbitals.
Then we can attempt to construct molecular orbitals, bearing in mind that an orbital of any particular symmetry species arises from combinations only of atomic orbitals of that same symmetry species.
The Appendix on symmetry includes details of the assignment of atomic orbitals to symmetry species.
A simple example will illustrate these points.
Consider the H 2 O molecule, with symmetry C 2 ν (Fig. 6.9).
The oxygen atom has four valence-shell AOs (2s, 2px, 2py, 2pz) and each hydrogen atom has one AO (1s).
There are thus a total of six constituent AOs, and we shall find six MOs formed from them.
The symmetry species of the oxygen AOs may be deduced by considering the effect of each of the four symmetry operations E, C 2 , σ xz , σ yz on the respective wavefunctions.
The results are: 2s, a 1 ; 2p x , b 1 ; 2p y , b 2 ; and 2p z , a 1 .
The two hydrogen-atom 1s AOs must be taken together, and generate a symmetric and an anti-symmetric combination of symmetry species a 1 and b 2 , respectively.
The six atomic orbitals combine to give six molecular orbitals, and these must belong to the same set of symmetry species, and we can write the reduced representation:
Clearly the MO of b 1 symmetry can have no contribution from any AO except O 2p x , and can be properly considered as a localized oxygen lone-pair orbital.
As there is no possible overlap with H-atom orbitals, the MO has the same energy as the oxygen AO except for a small charge effect.
The two MOs of b 2 symmetry are formed by overlap of the O 2p y and H (1s -1s) orbitals, each of b 2 symmetry.
The overlap of two orbitals on different centers generates a bonding MO of lower energy and an anti-bonding MO of higher energy.
In principle all three MOs of a 1 symmetry have contributions from all three constituent a 1 orbitals, and we cannot easily deduce the final pattern of energies and bonding characters.
In this case, the O 2s AO has a much lower energy than either the O 2p z AO   or the symmetric combination of H 1s AOs, and is more closely held to the oxygen core than the O 2p z AO.
It is therefore reasonable to suggest that one of the MOs of a 1 symmetry is largely O 2s in character, while the O 2p z and H (1s + 1s) orbitals combine to generate bonding and anti-bonding MOs.
The final pattern of energy levels is shown in Fig. 6.10.
The result is that we have six MOs, two bonding, of symmetry species a 1 and b 2 , two non-bonding, of symmetry species a 1 and b 1 , and two anti-bonding, of symmetry species a 1 and b 2 .
The eight electrons in the valence shell occupy the bonding and non-bonding levels, leaving the anti-bonding levels unoccupied.
Of course, this is a very simple case, and it is often necessary to consider many more AOs and MOs.
OF 2 , for instance, has six more AOs (four valence-shell orbitals on each fluorine, rather than one for each hydrogen in H 2 O) and hence six more MOs.
In fact these can legitimately be regarded as fluorine ‘lone pair’ orbitals quite distinct from the bonding, non-bonding and anti-bonding MOs which are analogous to those found for H 2 O. Similarly, presents us with yet another increase in complexity, but the additional orbitals can be regarded, at least to a first approximation, as ‘CF 3 group’orbitals associated with CF bonding or with F atom lone pairs, again superimposed on a basic set of ‘skeletal’MOs analogous to those found for H 2 O.
The energies of the MOs cannot, of course, be derived purely from symmetry arguments.
They may be calculated by various empirical, semi-empirical or non-empirical methods [10]—[12].
6.6 Valence-electron photoelectron spectroscopy
6.6.1 Instrumental
Valence electrons, with binding energies below about 40 eV, may be photoionized with X-rays in the same way as core electrons.
However, there are distinct advantages in  using lower-energy photons for the excitation.
The most commonly-used light source is a discharge lamp, generally with a collimating capillary which allows a pencil of light to escape into the sample region without permitting sample to flow back into the discharge.
Various gases may be used, but almost all spectra are recorded using He discharge lamps.
At a comparatively low energy density excited neutral He atoms give rise to quite strong emission of He(I) lines, of which by far the strongest is He(Ia) at 58·4 nm (21·22 eV), corresponding to the electronic transition .
At lower gas pressures and higher energy density ionization of He in the discharge becomes more important, and He(II) emission lines, due to transitions of He + ions, become progressively stronger.
Again, the line at lowest energy is most important.
It is called He(IIa), and corresponds to the transition .
Its energy (40·8 eV) is considerably higher than that of the He(Ia) line.
The great advantage of using lower-energy photons rather than X-rays is the greater resolution attainable.
This can be attributed to the narrower intrinsic width of the source emission line, which is less than 0·01 eV, and to the lower energy of the ejected electrons.
The resolving power of an electrostatic analyzer is related to the electron energy, so that ΔE/E is effectively constant.
If we can construct an analyzer with ΔE/E = 0·001, this contributes > 1 eV for the electrons ejected with > 1000 eV kinetic energy using X-ray radiation, but only 0·01 eV for 10 eV electrons produced using 21 eV [He(I)]excitation.
In practice a resolution of 0·02 eV (20 meV) is attainable with a relatively simple design using UV sources, and this is adequate to show vibrational features (characteristically ∼ 0·1 eV).
UV-excited photoelectron (UPS) spectrometers use electrostatic velocity analyzers, often of a cylindrical design, which are cheap and simple to construct.
Details of experimental arrangements are described in Refs [13]–[15].
6.6.2 Vibrational structure of PE bands
Only valence shell MOs that are occupied by at least one electron can be studied by photoelectron spectroscopy (PES), but for these we can deduce the binding energy and also in some cases the bonding or anti-bonding character of the orbital.
The binding energy of the electron in an orbital (BE) is found from the kinetic energy of the ejected electron (KE) and the photon energy as before:
Here  is a new term equal to the difference in vibrational energy between the ion and the original molecule, measured in each case from the ground vibrational level.
As most of the molecules will be in or near the ground state before ionization, is rarely negative, but may be positive or zero, depending on whether the ion is vibrationally excited or not.
There is no simple selection rule for Δν in this case, and in some cases extensive vibrational progressions are found.
These can help us in making assignments and can tell us about the vibrations of molecular ions.
To understand what causes vibrational fine structure, it is simplest to start with a diatomic molecule.
Photoionization is like electronic excitation; the main difference is that the upper state is an ion.
We can therefore draw potential functions for the ground-state molecule, and for the molecular ion produced by loss of an electron, on the same diagram.
For the ground-state molecule, the spread of internuclear distances  is represented by the ground-state wavefunction, with a maximum probability near the center.
By the Franck-Condon Principle, ionization occurs so fast that the internuclear distance does not have time to change; the ion is produced with the internuclear distance that was appropriate for the molecule, in what is called a ‘vertical’ transition.
To understand the consequences of this constraint, we must look at the potential function of the ion.
We will assume for the time being that this has a well-defined minimum.
If we remove an electron from an anti-bonding orbital, the ion will be more tightly bound than the molecule was.
The minimum in the potential function will therefore be at a shorter internuclear distance, and the vibration frequency will be higher than for the molecule.
We can see from Fig. 6.11 that excitation is to vibrational levels of the ion whose wavefunctions give high probabilities for the inter-atomic distance found in the neutral molecule, and so overlap the ground-state wavefunction.
There will be a series of levels satisfying this criterion, and so we observe a progression, in the frequency of the ion.
Since we have removed an anti-bonding electron the vibrational frequency of the ion is greater than that of the molecule.
If we remove an electron from a bonding orbital, the bond in the ion is weaker than that in the molecule.
The minimum in the potential function is at a greater internuclear distance, and the vibration frequency is lower.
Once again, ionization from the     ground-state of the molecule leads to the formation of ions in a series of vibrational states, and the UPS band shows a progression with  (see Fig. 6.12).
If we remove an electron from a non-bonding level, the potential functions of ion and molecule should have minima at very similar internuclear distances.
If the forms of the two potential functions are similar too, we may well find that the ground-state level for the ion lies almost exactly over that for the molecule in the energy diagram (Fig. 6.13).
Ionization from the ground-state of the molecule then produces ions, most of which are in their vibrational ground-state, and we see a single sharp line with no progression (corresponding to the 0 → 0 transition).
In practice few UPS bands are quite so starkly simple; we usually see the vestiges of a progression.
But it is generally easy to recognize a peak due to ionization from an essentially non-bonding level.
As the bonding or antibonding character increases, the progression lengthens, and the intensity maximum moves from the (0 → 0) peak.
The progression associated with ionization of a strongly bonding level may show a maximum (the vertical ionization   energy) well down the band, and we may not detect the (0 → 0) level (the adiabatic ionization energy).
We can therefore find out a lot about the character of the orbital from which ionization occurs by studying the form of the UPS band.
The UPS spectrum of HCl [Fig. 6.14(a)], for instance, shows two bands below 21·22 eV.
The one at lower energy is a sharp doublet with essentially no progression, just one pair of weak satellites.
The other shows a long progression with a frequency of 1610 cm -1 , a reduced .
The doublet is assigned to ionization from the n-non-bonding orbitals of Cl, split by spin-orbit coupling [see Section 6.6.4 below]; the progression is due to ionization from the H-Cl bonding level.
The spectra of O 2 and N 2 in this region are also informative.
The spectrum of O 2 [Fig. 6.15(a)]shows four bands.
The one at lowest energy shows a progression in an increased O-O stretching frequency, showing that ionization has occurred from an anti-bonding orbital.
The remaining bands are complicated because  may be produced in quartet or doublet states, but all show clear progressions with reduced O-O stretching frequencies.
The energy-level scheme is given in Fig. 6.16(a).
The second band, with its very long progression of vibrational peaks, is assigned to both the quartet and doublet states formed by removal of an electron from the π u level, while the third and fourth bands are assigned respectively to the quartet and doublet   states formed by removal of an electron from the  level; both levels are expected to be strongly bonding, as suggested by the lower vibration frequencies of the ions.
The spectrum of N 2 [Fig. 6.1 5(b)]looks very different.
Of course, there is no band corresponding to the lowest energy band of O 2 , because the π g level of N 2 is empty; but in marked contrast to the spectrum of O 2 , the first and third bands show sharp and dominant (0→0) peaks and clearly correspond to ionization from non-bonding levels.
Moreover, the second band shows a progression with a reduced NN stretching frequency, and is assigned to ionization from the π u bonding level.
The first and third bands represent ionization from  and  levels.
In O 2 these are respectively bonding and anti-bonding, and  is below .
In N 2 , is raised in energy and becomes less bonding through mixing with  of the same symmetry, which is filled and lies below it: is lowered in energy and becomes less anti-bonding by mixing with the empty  which lies above it [see Fig. 6.16(b)].
Mixing is greater for nitrogen than for oxygen because the gap between 2s and 2p is smaller.
The σ-character of the highest-filled level in N 2 is confirmed by the ‘end-on’ coordination found in most complexes of N 2 with transition metals.
With polyatomic molecules there are many different vibrational modes, and so analysis of what might happen on ionization becomes conceptually much harder.
In practice, many bands show no resolved structure.
The band maximum then gives us the vertical ionization energy, and the band origin gives the adiabatic ionization energy.
In the UPS spectra of some quite complex molecules we may see resolved progressions.
When we do, we conclude that the vibrational coordinate associated with the progression is very much affected by the orbital from which the electron was   removed.
For example, in the spectra of many acetylenes, the bands due to ionization from the π-bonding levels show progressions with reduced CC stretching frequencies.
In the spectrum of ammonia (Fig. 6.17), the band due to ionization from the lone pair orbital shows a long progression in a reduced  symmetric deformation frequency.
This reminds us that the angle in  is largely determined by the lone pair, and the ground state of  is essentially planar.
If the potential function of the ion shows no minimum, but a continuous decrease in energy with increasing internuclear distance, there are no discrete vibrational levels; can take a continuous range of values, giving a broad band.
A similar situation will arise if the ion-state formed, although itself vibrationally bound, is ‘predissociated’ by overlapping a dissociating state at similar energy and distance.
In other cases the ion state is only weakly bound, so that only a few discrete levels exist, and the band shows a few lines followed by a broad continuous portion.
There are thus different reasons for observing bands without structure, but when we are able to observe vibrational structure, it can be most helpful.
6.6.3 Spin-orbit coupling
If an electron is removed from a p-orbital of a rare gas atom the interaction of the electron spin angular momentum (quantum number s) with the orbital angular momentum (quantum number l) generates two possible states for the ion, depending on whether the angular momenta add or subtract.
The overall quantum number j can be or ½ and the difference in energy between these states is related to the spin-orbit coupling constant for the atom.
Similar effects operate for d orbitals, but not for s orbitals, which have no orbital angular momentum.
In exactly the same way, an atom such as a halogen atom in a covalent molecule can show spin-orbit coupling.
The magnitude of the coupling constant increases with nuclear charge: values for the hydrogen halide ions in their ground states are HF 0·03 eV, HCl 0·08 eV, HBr 0·33 eV, HI 0·66 eV (Fig. 6.14).
We find a simple splitting into two  states only for molecules in which there is a single halogen atom, lying on an axis of at least 3-fold symmetry.
In molecules with more than one halogen atom more complicated patterns appear.
In linear molecules, only Π states give a spin-orbit splitting, and this can aid in the assignment; similarly in non-linear molecules only E states (where the electron has been removed from a molecular orbital of e symmetry) show the effect.
The magnitude of the splitting in a given band gives an indication of the contribution of the halogen p-orbitals to the corresponding molecular orbital.
Thus for BrF the first band shows a splitting of about 0·32 eV and is clearly due to a level largely localized on Br; in IBr (Fig. 6.18) the first two bands show splittings of 0·58 and 0·36 eV and are assigned to lone-pairs mainly localized on I and Br, respectively.
As a level becomes more delocalized the magnitude of spin-orbit coupling falls, as in the series RI where the constant has values of 0·66 (R = H), 0·63 (R = CH 3 ) and 0·56 eV (R = CMe 3 ).
The decrease presumably arises because the level of the lone pair on the halogen atom mixes with other levels of e symmetry in the alkyl halides.
For R = SiH 3 the value is 0·55 eV, showing a greater delocalization effect for the silyl compound than for the methyl.
We cannot be sure that this is a sign of (p →d) π bonding in the Si compound; the delocalization could involve the SiH bonding or anti-bonding levels of e symmetry.
Similar effects can be seen for other heavy atoms, such as Se, Hg and Xe, though usually only in linear molecules.
6.6.4 Jahn-Teller distortions
Removal of an electron from a degenerate level leaves an ion in a degenerate electronic state.
The Jahn-Teller effect concerns the spontaneous removal of this degeneracy by a distortion of the ion.
Thus the first band of CH 4 arises from removal of an electron from one of the three t 2 orbitals, forming  in the triply-degenerate 2 T 2 state; this distorts spontaneously.
With the degeneracy removed, there are three maxima in the spectrum, and so the band appears to be broad.
Distortion of doubly-degenerate states gives two maxima, but often these are not resolved, and we may only observe a broadening of the band.
Jahn-Teller distortions may occur in molecules which also show spin-orbit coupling, giving more complex patterns.
An analogous effect in linear molecules is called the Renner-Teller effect.
6.6.5 Structural information from valence shell PES: making assignments
The photoelectron spectrum of a molecule is closely related to the set of occupied valence orbitals.
For simple molecules, some PE bands may show discrete structure due to vibrational excitation of the ion; this may be interpreted in terms both of the bonding/non-bonding/anti-bonding character of the electron removed and of the vibration frequencies of the ion.
All this information is related to molecular structure, but it is rarely possible to come to definite conclusions about the constitution, shape, size or conformation of a sample purely from its PE spectrum.
Of course, at the simplest possible level the PE spectrum may be used as a fingerprint, allowing us to identify a pure sample or a constituent of a mixture by comparison with known spectra.
This process is particularly effective where small molecules are involved, for the band-shapes and vibrational structure are often characteristic.
For more complex molecules in whose spectra vibrational detail is not resolved, assignments are difficult to make.
Bands often overlap, and the only methods available to help making assignments are relating the intensities of bands, comparing spectra of related molecules, possibly observing spin-orbit coupling, or making comparisons with theory.
Band intensities are often used in making assignments, but they have to be interpreted with care.
Though there should be some correlation between the degeneracy of a fully occupied level and the intensity of the band derived from ionization from that level, many factors (including band overlap) obscure or destroy the validity of this generalization.
With the spectra of transition metal complexes, a comparison of spectra obtained with He(I) and with He(II) radiation is often used to help in making assignments.
Ionization from orbitals with d character is normally supposed to be stronger in spectra excited with He(II) than with He(I) radiation.
Recently it has become possible to record band intensity profiles with a range of excitation energies between 20 eV and 100 eV using synchrotron radiation; these profiles show that the relationship between ionization energy and band intensity is not a simple one.
The spectra of  show a very pronounced intensification of the bands due to ionization from the predominantly metal-d orbitals of t 2g symmetry at photon energies that appear to correspond to absorptions in the high energy electronic spectra [16].
Studies of this kind show much promise in helping to understand the PE spectra of moderately complex inorganic and organometallic compounds, but at present the empirical assignment of these spectra is fraught with uncertainty.
The most fruitful studies have been based on calculated energy levels.
As with core levels, there are various approaches to the computation of valence level binding energies.
Here, however, the appeal of empirical and semi-empirical methods is stronger, as they are able to handle valence levels explicitly, without the need to include core levels.
The size of a semi-empirical calculation is thus much less than that of an ab initio calculation for the same molecule, even if only first row elements are concerned.
However, the results of the comparison of valence level PES with these simpler calculations have not been encouraging.
Not only do the semi-empirical methods (CNDO, INDO, MNDO, etc.) fail to reproduce the absolute values of binding energies, but they also often predict the wrong orders of levels.
They can hardly, therefore, be taken as satisfactory aids to assignment.
There are at least two problems involved, apart from the particular failings of the assumptions built into each method.
These arise from the different effects of electron correlation in the molecule and the ion (which of course have different numbers of  electrons), and the effects of spontaneous relaxation of the electrons remaining in the ion as the ejected electron leaves.
Both effects are more important for valence levels than for core levels, because the separations between levels are much smaller.
These problems can only be resolved by more elaborate and sophisticated calculations.
Allowing for electron correlation requires use of configuration interaction (CI) methods, which enlarge the scale of the computation enormously, while the relaxation effect is best dealt with by calculating the difference between overall energies for molecule and for ion (ΔSCF, ΔINDO, etc.).
Calculations for transition metal species present particularly difficult problems.
It is hard to calculate the energies of ions with several unpaired electrons, and the effects of electron correlation and of relaxation are particularly significant in transition metal compounds.
6.7 Valence excitation spectroscopy
6.7.1 Experimental methods
Most of what is commonly called electronic spectroscopy is concerned with transfer of electrons between valence shell molecular orbitals.
For atoms and diatomic molecules, emission spectroscopy using discharge excitation is very useful, but for larger molecules most work has been done using absorption techniques.
More recently, the use of lasers to excite specific upper state levels has allowed emission spectra to be studied.
This technique is known as laser-induced fluorescence spectroscopy.
Emission electronic spectroscopy is the simplest possible form of spectroscopy.
The sample is a low pressure gas excited thermally, electrically or by a microwave or radio-frequency discharge, and acts as the light source.
We then only need a dispersing element and a detector to complete the experiment.
Unfortunately, only diatomic molecules are easy to study in this way, as larger molecules almost invariably fragment on excitation, but a vast amount of information has been obtained for atoms and diatomic molecules.
Most work has been done in the visible and near-UV regions (wavelengths 700–200 nm; frequencies 14 000–50 000 cm -1 ) where photographic recording is easy, and glass or quartz optics are ideal.
Both prism and grating spectrographs are simple to construct and operate, and many decades of experience has resulted in the development of reliable instruments.
Recording spectrophotometers are more elaborate, but are also available commercially.
Modern Fourier transform interferometers, designed to operate mainly in the IR, can also be used up to 16 000 cm -1 or so, covering part of the visible region, and instruments designed to cover the entire visible region should be available soon.
These instruments combine constant resolution and high precision of frequency measurement with great photometric accuracy.
For absorption spectroscopy we need a light source as well as the sample, dispersing element and detector.
Suitable continuum emission is obtained from a filament lamp in the visible region and from a high-pressure H 2 (or better, D 2 ) lamp in the near-UV region.
Detection is usually electrical, with a photomultiplier.
Prism and grating spectrophotometers are commercially available, and absorption spectra of solids, liquids, solutions and gases are all readily obtained.
For the laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) experiment we need to have a tunable laser source, most commonly a dye laser, pumped by a high-power UV laser.
This may well be pulsed rather than continuous in its output, which allows us to use a gated detector, discriminating between prompt fluorescent emission and delayed phosphorescence.
In the simplest experiment the total emission is monitored as a function of excitation frequency, giving an excitation spectrum.
This is closely related to an absorption spectrum, but not identical to it, because the ‘spectrum’ recorded relates only to those molecules that fluoresce rather than losing energy in other ways.
Fig. 6.19 shows the absorption and emission processes.
A more elaborate LIF experiment uses a simple monochromator to disperse the emission, so that each separate transition is detected separately.
We now have a ‘two-dimensional’ spectrum, as we can record the spectrum of the emission (in one dimension) for a range of excitation frequencies.
As explained in Section 5.3.3, this can result in a very simple spectrum, due to emission from a single vibrational level of the electronically-excited state to various vibrational levels of the electronic ground state, as shown in Fig. 6.19.
This gives us information about some of the vibrations of the ground state (see, for example, Fig. 5.6).
Scanning the excitation frequency reveals different upper-state vibrational levels, giving information about the vibrations of the upper state, and about the electronic nature of this state.
To obtain the greatest possible simplification of the spectrum, the sample must be cooled (as a gas by expansion  through a supersonic nozzle in a high-pressure carrier gas such as He or Ar, or as a solid or matrix-isolated sample) so that the initial excitation populates only a single level at a time.
As well as emitting and absorbing light, samples of solids also reflect light, and it is possible to obtain reflectance spectra in various ways.
A specular reflectance spectrum is obtained from a polished flat surface, whereas a diffuse reflectance spectrum is obtained from a rough surface or a loose powder sample.
Both of these techniques give information about the solid surface rather than the bulk.
The resulting spectrum is similar to a conventional transmission spectrum, as radiation that is absorbed is not reflected.
An example is shown in Fig. 6.20.
6.7.2 The information in an electronic spectrum
Transitions between two levels with long life-times are the most informative.
Such an electronic transition has various possible changes in vibrational and rotational quantum numbers associated with it, so that the spectrum, however it is obtained, consists of a number of vibration bands, each with rotational fine structure, together forming an electronic system of bands.
The selection rules governing the changes in vibrational and rotational quantum numbers depend on the nature of the electronic transition, and they can be ascertained by analyzing the pattern and structures of the bands.
The fullest analysis can only be achieved if rotational structure is resolved.
In this case rotation constants in upper and lower states can be calculated, as well as vibration frequencies, and a detailed picture of the structure of both states can be obtained.
Rotational structure is, however, rarely resolved except for molecules with only two or three atoms.
This is due partly to the very high resolution required to resolve rotational detail for larger molecules, and partly because excitation often leads to states which are unstable.
These result in short lifetimes for the upper states, and hence  a loss of definition of the energy levels.
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle tells us that .
If Δt is 10 -10 s, the uncertainty ΔE in the energy level is ∼10 -24 J per molecule, or 0·6 J mol -1 , some 0·05 cm -1 .
This is quite enough to remove any resolvable rotational structure with the possible exception of sharp Q branches.
Lines may also be broadened through the Doppler effect, and this broadening increases with the transition energy.
Large molecules give spectra with a high density of lines, and line broadening can cause these to merge, so that rotational details are not discernable, even without dissociation or predissociation.
Both the Doppler broadening and the density of lines in the spectrum can be dramatically reduced by nozzle-beam expansion, where a jet of gas, either pure sample or sample mixed with an inert gas diluent, is allowed to expand through a nozzle into an evacuated chamber at supersonic velocity.
Most of the random (thermal) motion of the gas is thus converted into forward velocity, and the translational temperature (which governs the velocity measured perpendicular to the flow direction, and hence the Doppler broadening) can drop to within a degree or so of absolute zero.
At the same time energy is lost from rotational degrees of freedom, by collisions during the expansion, and samples often end up almost entirely in the lowest few rotational levels, so that only a few transitions are observed in the spectrum.
For upper states that are directly-dissociated (i.e. with repulsive potentials) lifetimes may be as short as 10 -14 s, giving energy uncertainties of hundreds of cm -1 .
Under these circumstances there is no vibrational structure, and the electronic transition gives an unresolved band.
For solids and liquids, electronic absorption bands are usually broad and essentially featureless.
This may be due to the overlapping of many vibration sub-bands, including hot bands corresponding to species in which low-frequency vibrations are excited.
In such cases cooling the sample may lead to a simplification of the spectrum (Fig. 6.21).
Another factor is that the lifetime of the excited state is short because of a high probability of re-emission (fluorescence), which broadens the levels.
6.7.3 Selection rules
The selection rules that govern the intensities of valence electronic transitions are derived from the quantum mechanical equations that are used to formalize and understand the processes involved.
They depend on many factors, and it is not possible to give a full account of them here; you will find details in Refs [17]and [18].
It is important, however, that you understand some aspects of the rules if you are to make sense of the electronic spectra of inorganic species.
The rules can be divided into those concerned with electron spin and those related to orbital properties.
The spin selection rules are very simple in principle:
1
only one electron is involved in any transition;
2
there must be no net change of spin — i.e. Δ S = 0.
The first rule governs some processes that might not involve an overall change of spin, but it is conveniently considered with the spin rule.
It is a very stringent rule; it is very rarely necessary to consider transitions involving more than one electron in interpreting the electronic spectra of inorganic species.
The second rule is also stringent.
Transitions that involve a change in overall spin are usually very weak indeed for species involving light elements.
For instance, all the transitions in the visible spectrum of , a high spin d 5 complex, are spin forbidden, and the bands are extremely weak , hence the pale color of manganese(II) salts.
For complexes of heavy transition elements, however, spin-orbit coupling may lead to a relaxation of this rule, which only holds as long as the total spin quantum number S has physical meaning, and so spin-forbidden bands may be found to have reasonable intensity.
The orbital selection rule may be stated in different ways.
It applies most strictly to species with a center of inversion.
For them it may be stated in the following terms:
3a
Transitions that are allowed must involve an overall change in orbital angular momentum of one unit — i.e. ΔL = ± 1.
Transitions within the same sub-level, i.e. d-d or p-p transitions, are forbidden.
3b
Transitions from g to g and from u to u states are forbidden; only transitions from u to g or from g to u states are allowed.
This rule is known as the Laporte selection rule.
It too can be relaxed by various mechanisms.
It is less stringent than the spin selection rule, partly because the mechanisms for getting round it are more effective.
Consider, for instance, a regularly octahedral complex like .
The electronic bands in the visible spectrum are derived from d-d transitions.
These are Laporte-forbidden: ΔL = 0.
Moreover, this rule cannot be mitigated by mixing the d orbitals with p orbitals, because in a regular octahedron the d orbitals are g and the p orbitals are u.
In tetrahedral  there is no center of inversion; this means that mixing between d and p orbitals is possible, and the bands in the visible spectrum are much stronger than for  (Fig. 6.22).
However, even in a regularly octahedral complex there are ways of weakening the effectiveness of the Laporte selection rule.
A g-g transition may be forbidden if considered as a purely electronic process, but it may become   allowed if it is coupled to a vibrational process of u symmetry — if, for instance, a u vibrational mode is excited in the upper state.
This sort of process is described as vibronic.
There are also other mechanisms for intensifying bands due to formally forbidden transitions, which we do not discuss here.
And charge transfer transitions, which involve transfer of an electron from metal to ligand or ligand to metal (Section 6.8.5), are fully allowed, and bands may be very intense indeed, as for example in .
Thus there is a very wide range of intensities observed for electronic bands; the weakest are those that are both spin and orbitally forbidden, the strongest both spin and orbitally allowed.
Some typical intensities are given in Fig. 6.23.
Another feature of electronic transitions is that the  selection rule for pure vibrational transitions no longer applies.
An electronic band can therefore show a progression of peaks due to Δν = 0, 1, 2, 3…bands for one or more vibrations (see   Fig. 6.24).
This gives us a much more detailed picture of the potential well than the single Δν = 1 pure vibrational transition.
Analysis of progressions leading to dissociation (at which point the progression breaks off to be replaced by continuous absorption) can give us accurate values of dissociation energies for simple molecules.
In absorption the progression relates to the vibration levels of the upper state.
In emission or laser-induced fluorescence experiments the vibrational potential and dissociation limit(s) of the ground-state can be investigated.
Thus selective excitation to the ν'=; 0 level of an electronically-excited state may be followed by emission accompanying transitions to the ν"= 0, 1, 2, 3, 4…levels of the ground state.
Even if we are not sure of the nature of the upper state involved, the energy differences in the progression give clear-cut information about the ground state.
By changing the excitation frequency we can probe the upper-state vibrational levels, but it is often difficult to identify the ν'=; 0 level, which may have low probability of excitation or emission.
6.7.4 Calculation of valence excitation energies
In most cases, at least one of the states involved in valence excitation transitions has two unpaired electrons, and it is notoriously difficult to handle such states adequately.
It is not surprising, then, that there are many unsatisfactory ways of calculating valence electron excitation energies, but none that give convincing results except over a very narrow group of compounds.
For inorganic systems, especially those involving transition metals, there are special techniques which are used to predict (d-d) transition energies, for example, but even those with adjustable parameters cannot always give unambiguous interpretations of the observed spectra.
An old but superb treatment of this area is to be found in Ref. [19].
6.8 Electronic energy levels and transitions in transition metal complexes
The wide range of colours of transition metal complexes is among their most striking properties.
This is one sign of the richness of the electronic spectra of compounds containing transition metal centers.
These electronic spectra are full of information about the electronic structures of the species responsible for them; such spectra have been most extensively studied and analyzed, and there is no room in this book for a detailed account of their interpretation.
Moreover, much of the work has been concerned with the analysis of the spectra and the interpretation of the parameters obtained in terms of theory; though this is an essential part of understanding of the  chemistry of transition metals, it is less directly related to determining the structures of their compounds.
We therefore give an indication of what causes bands in the electronic spectra of transition metal compounds, of how these bands can be analyzed, and of what sort of structural information can be obtained from them.
If you want to go through the details of assignment and analysis, there are many excellent treatments that will help you, varying in depth from the brief but extremely clear account in Ref. [20]to long and complicated books on the subject, for example, Ref. [21].
6.8.1 Metal, ligand and metal-ligand bonding levels
Electronic transitions in transition metal compounds, as in all other species, take place between occupied and empty orbitals.
The orbitals in these compounds can be considered to lie predominantly on the metal (or metals in a polynuclear species) or on the ligands, or to be involved in metal-ligand interactions and so be shared between metal and ligand.
In the simplest electrostatic picture of a complex such as, for instance , the lone pairs of the oxygen atoms in the water molecules are regarded as in pure ligand orbitals and the eight d electrons of the nickel are held in pure d orbitals.
Thus such a complex can be described as a d 8 complex.
If the bonding between nickel and the water ligands is regarded as having some covalent character, then the lone pairs of the water molecules are in bonding levels, and two of the metal d orbitals take on some anti-bonding character.
For a fairly simple mononuclear species this classification can be represented schematically as in Fig. 6.25.
Remember, though, that even such simple ligands as  may have non-bonding valence-shell orbitals.
In terms of this sort of classification, electronic transitions may be of five types:
(a)
ligand-based transitions  
(b)
metal-based transitions
(c)
metal-to-ligand transitions
(d)
ligand-to-metal transitions
(e)
intervalence transitions.
These transitions will be considered in turn.
6.8.2 Ligand-ligand transitions
Some ligands have low-lying empty orbitals, usually weakly antibonding in character, and thus possess characteristic electronic absorption spectra of their own.
This is normally the case for organic ligands containing π-systems, such as pyridine and more complicated aromatic amines.
As the metal-ligand bonding is likely to involve the very orbitals that are the lower levels in such transitions, the transition energies are greatly affected by the metal center, generally shifting to higher energy compared with those in the free ligand.
More subtle effects occur when we compare one complex with another, so ligand-ligand transition energies will vary with the nature and charge of the central metal atom.
6.8.3 Metal-metal transitions (d-d bands)
Transitions between orbitals that are largely or completely localized on a metal center are usually described as d-d (or, for elements with partly filled f sub-shells, f-f) transitions.
The bands associated with them are rarely very strong, and are sometimes very weak because of the electronic selection rules, but they have been studied extensively, and offer very detailed information about the electronic structures of transition metal derivatives.
But it can be a complicated matter to extract useful information from the observed spectra.
For a metal complex with d electrons, the analysis usually starts with the free ion.
Knowing the number of d electrons, it is possible to work out the number of free ion terms by analyzing the microstates; this process is described in Ref. [20].
Once this has been done the terms must be put in order of energy.
Hund's Rules will usually give the ground term correctly, but they are less reliable for the higher energy states.
The energies of the terms depend on inter-electronic interactions.
These can be described by a series of complicated integrals, but the integrals have been expressed in terms of just three parameters, A, B and C, called Racah Parameters.
Only B and C come into the differences in energy between terms, so the process of ordering the terms can be made a lot simpler using Racah parameters.
Once the terms for the free ion have been worked out and put in order of energy, it is necessary to see how the environment of the ligands will affect them.
The effect depends on the symmetry of the coordination environment.
For a metal in an octahedral array of six identical ligands, the d orbitals split into a lower set of three with symmetry t 2g and an upper set of two with symmetry e g .
Environments of lower symmetry lead to different splitting patterns (see Fig. 6.26).
The effects of environments of different symmetry upon the terms for different ions can be worked out using group theory.
For example, for the very simple case of an ion with a single d electron, such as Ti 3 +, the free ion term is 2 D. In an octahedral field this splits into a lower state 2 T 2g and an upper state 2 E g , just as the d orbitals split into t2 g and e g sets.
The energy difference between the two terms is Δ, and so on this simple basis the electronic spectrum should consist of a single band whose energy gives Δ directly.
The energy of the system can conveniently be represented by a diagram in which energy is   plotted against Δ (Fig. 6.27).
The energies of the 2 T 2g and 2 E g states depend only on Δ, and the transition energy can be obtained easily from the diagram.
For species with more than one d electron, things are much more complicated.
To start with, there are more energy levels: for a d 3 system, for instance, the ground free ion term is usually 4 F, but this splits in an octahedral field into three levels —4 A 2g ,4 T 2g and 4 T 1g , just as the f orbitals split into a 2u , t 2u and t 1u sets in an octahedral field.
The number of states into which a term splits in a particular field is determined by group theory, but that is only the start of the problem; determining the relative energies is difficult.
As with the free ion, the inter-electronic effects depend on a number of complicated integrals; these can be expressed in terms of Racah parameters, but B and C do not have the same values as they have for the free ion.
There are two limiting cases to consider: the weak field case and the strong field case.
In the weak field case the field of the ligands is weak compared with the inter-electron interactions, so that the quantum numbers L and S remain valid.
In the strong field case the inter-electronic effects are treated as a perturbation.
The results of very detailed calculations can be represented as plots of the variation of energy, E, with Δ.
In these diagrams, known as Tanabe-Sugano diagrams, E/B is plotted against Δ/B;(see Example 6.2).
The units make the forms of the diagrams effectively independent of B, and since C is assumed to be about 4B they can be used to include variations in C. Tanabe-Sugano diagrams can be used to assign spectra empirically; they lead to the identification of allowed transitions, and very often the fit of the observed transition energies gives values of Δ/B; that are unambiguous.
Similar plots, but with fixed B and C, are called Orgel diagrams.
The Orgel diagram for a d 3 system is given in Fig. 6.28.
The lowest energy state for the free atom or ion is usually 4 F with another quartet state,4 P, to higher energy.
In an octahedral environment the 4 P state remains single, having symmetry 4 T 1g , but the 4 F state gives rise to three levels, whose energies diverge as the ligand field strength increases.
All the levels involved are still g (symmetric with respect to the inversion center, since we are dealing with strictly octahedral complexes), so all transitions are formally orbitally forbidden (ΔL = 0).
There are only three possible spin-allowed (ΔS = 0) excitations, from the lowest level,4 A 2g , to the three higher quartet states.
In many Orgel and Tanabe-Sugano diagrams the lines are curved, because of interactions between states of the same symmetry.
Analysis of d-d spectra of transition metal complexes can give information about three parameters of structural importance: the symmetry of the species; the magnitude of Δ; and the magnitude of the Racah parameter B. Identifying the symmetry and coordination number of a complex is obviously important in determining its structure.
The number of methods available for studying complicated species in solution is limited, and electronic spectroscopy is useful in this context.
The electronic spectrum of nickel cytochrome c, for example, is interpreted as showing that the nickel atom is six-coordinated, rather than four coordinated.
A similar analysis of the electronic spectrum of , based on the frequency patterns from model compounds, indicated that the copper atom was five-coordinated.
In oxy-hemocyanin, too, the electronic spectrum, taken with the g-values from the ESR spectrum, shows that the copper(II) ions were in slightly distorted tetrahedral environments, and so the ready electron transfer to give tetrahedral Cu I could be understood.
The determination of Δ can also provide useful structural information, by showing what the ligand atoms are; in cases such as ligands may be bound to metals through either nitrogen or sulfur.
Finally, the determination of B has led to the formulation of the nephelauxetic series of ligands, in which the position of a ligand is related to its power to expand the d orbitals of the metal.
6.8.4 Jahn-Teller distortion
It is found experimentally, and can be shown theoretically, that any complex with a degenerate (e or t) set of orbitals which is occupied unsymmetrically (i.e. neither entirely filled nor half-filled) distorts its ligand environment spontaneously in such a  way as to remove the degeneracy [see Section 6.6.5].
As an example, an octahedral d 7 ion with a filled t 2g (lower) set of d orbitals and a single electron in the doubly-degenerate e g upper set would distort in such a way that the e g levels split, such as by an elongation along the z-axis, giving a tetragonal ligand arrangement as in Fig. 6.26(c).
The single electron then occupies the lower orbital, d z 2 , and the overall energy of the system is reduced.
This clearly allows a new transition, in which the odd electron moves from the d z 2 to the empty  level, and should also increase the number of bands associated with excitation of an electron from the t 2g to the e g set of levels (both sets are now split, so several extra bands will appear).
Again, the effects of Jahn-Teller distortion must be taken into account in analyzing d-d band patterns.
Upper states can also be perturbed by Jahn-Teller distortions.
In , for instance, though the lower 2 T 2g state is not perturbed the upper 2 E g state is split, leading in principle to the splitting of the d-d band into two, though in practice only one broad band with a shoulder is usually observed.
6.8.5 Metal-ligand and ligand-metal (charge-transfer) bands
A transition that involves the transfer of an electron from metal to ligand or vice versa is called a charge-transfer transition.
One involving transfer of an electron from the metal, in the lower energy state, to a ligand, in the upper state, is known as an oxidative charge-transfer transition, because the metal is oxidized in the process.
Similarly, one involving transfer from ligand to metal is called a reductive charge-transfer transition.
These transitions are particularly important for second- and third-row transition metal complexes, and the associated bands are often extremely intense, so that they can dominate a whole spectrum and obscure the relatively weak d-d bands.
Some possible   charge-transfer transitions are shown in Fig. 6.29.
A well-known example of a reductive charge-transfer band is in the spectrum of the permanganate ion,.
Here we may formally write the ground-state as , in which case the spin and orbitally allowed transition involves transferring an electron from one  ligand to the metal, giving  as the upper state.
Oxidative charge-transfer processes are observed in the spectra of complexes of low oxidation state metals with organic amines, such as.
Here the lower state is  and the excited state is .
6.8.6 Intervalence transitions
There is a large and growing number of compounds containing two or more transition metal atoms in different oxidation states.
They have a range of interesting properties.
For example, the striking color of Prussian Blue is an indication that electronic spectra may have unusual features.
Intervalence compounds have been classified according to the ease of electron transfer between the distinct sites.
In Class I compounds, electron transfer between the centers is slow, and the sites behave as if they were effectively independent.
In Class II species the centers perturb each other but the sites remain distinct, while in Class III species the sites are indistinguishable and electron delocalization is effectively complete.
There are other sub-classes, but these three represent the major divisions.
There are some fascinating Class II chain species, such as, where en is ethylenediamine, in which electronic transitions involve whole chains of metal sites.
Binuclear species containing metal ions linked by ligands capable of acting as frameworks for electron transfer have been widely studied, and it has been shown that there should be an intervalence charge transfer (IVCT) transition at an energy which is simply related to the energetic barrier for thermal electron transfer.
These IVCT bands appear in the near infrared.
Species of Class III, such as, which can be regarded as a  dimer, show sharp IVCT bands that are not affected by solvent, whereas Class II species such as give broad IVCT bands whose energy is sensitive to solvent.
More details are given in Refs [22]and [23].
6.9 Assigning bands of transition metal complexes
The discussion above has indicated the most important observations that help in assigning the electronic spectra of transition metal complexes.
The first criteria are the number, positions and intensities of bands; these may be compared with calculated parameters or semi-empirical predictions, and with the spectra of related species for which assignments are firmly established.
In some cases, vibrational progressions may be observed, and careful analysis of the nature of the vibrations involved can give us an idea of both the symmetry and any changes in structure associated with the transition, just as it can for a band in a valence photoelectron spectrum (Section 6.6.2).
The effect of cooling the sample may be informative.
In general, it is found that an allowed transition does not change significantly in intensity as the temperature is lowered, though the apparent energy may shift as the contribution from hot bands arising from vibrationally excited states is reduced.
A forbidden band that appears by virtue of vibronic coupling will become weaker as the temperature falls, because the   effect of the coupling is greater for more highly-excited vibrational states, which are less populated at lower temperatures.
For an oriented sample, such as a single crystal, study of the polarization of the absorption can show how the symmetry of the transition is related to that of the structure.
Such information is not obtainable for samples in solution, but for optically active species the use of circularly polarized light can give a circular dichroism spectrum (see Section 6.10).
One technique which can be of some help in deciding on the nature of an electronic transition is resonance Raman spectroscopy (see Section 5.17).
As we have seen, excitation of a Raman spectrum within the absorption profile of an electronic transition can lead to selective excitation of a progression in one or more molecular vibrations.
If the nature of such a vibration can be established it may throw some light on the nature of the electronic band.
Thus, if the electronic transition is accompanied by a significant change in the metal-ligand bonding it is likely that the most symmetrical metal-ligand stretching mode will be enhanced in intensity by the resonance Raman effect, as is observed for the  and  ions (see Fig. 5. 52).
This observation indicates that the absorption band within which the excitation occurred is of the metal-to-ligand or the ligand-to-metal charge-transfer type.
On the other hand, excitation within a band concerned mainly with the ligand might result in enhancement of the intensity of internal ligand vibrations of the resonance Raman spectrum (Fig. 6.30).
Excitation within a d-d band may lead to very little resonance Raman enhancement, and indeed for some species with inversion centers it has been found that the Raman bands are weaker than in the normal Raman spectrum when excited by light in the absorption profile of a d-d band.
6.10 Circular dichroism
6.10.1 Optical rotatory dispersion and circular dichroism
A molecule or ion with no improper rotation axis is chiral, and will show optical activity.
A chiral species rotates the plane of polarization of plane polarized light that is passed through it; the direction of rotation depends on which enantiomer is present, for the rotation is equal and opposite for the two enantiomers.
Rotation of the plane of polarization of plane polarized light is therefore a useful way of studying the enantiomers of chiral species.
A spectrum in which the magnitude of rotation for a particular enantiomer is plotted against the wavelength of the light is called an Optical Rotatory Dispersion (ORD) spectrum.
A chiral species is also circularly dichroic — that is, the absorption coefficients for right- and left-circularly polarized light are different.
A plot of the difference between the molar absorption coefficients for right-and left-circularly polarized light against wavelength is called a circular dichroism (CD) spectrum.
The sign of the differential absorption depends on which enantiomer is present, so the CD spectrum can provide information about the configuration of an enantiomer.
The rotation depends on the scalar product of the electric dipole and magnetic dipole transition moments.
Transitions that are both electronically and magnetically allowed can be seen in a CD spectrum, as in a normal electronic spectrum.
In addition, however, transitions that are electronically forbidden but magnetic dipole allowed may be well defined in CD spectra.
Thus CD spectra can help to reveal details of electronic spectra and to determine assignments.
More details can be found in Refs [21]and [24].
6.10.2 Magnetic circular dichroism
The components of an electronically degenerate state will be split in a magnetic field by the Zeeman effect, if the ground and/or excited states possess non-zero angular momentum m j ; there is differential absorption of right- and left-circularly polarized light by the components of different m j .
A plot of the differential absorption for right- and left-circularly polarized light for a sample in a magnetic field is called a magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) spectrum.
The species studied does not have to be chiral: the differential absorption comes from the effect of the magnetic field on degeneracy.
Therefore the MCD spectrum gives information about the generacy of the ground and/or excited state of the species studied.
If the excited state is degenerate but the ground state is not, the MCD spectrum will have the form known as an A term, with components with positive and negative differential absorption; the shape does not depend on temperature.
If the ground state is degenerate but the excited state is not, the Boltzmann distribution will determine the intensities of the right- and left-circularly polarized absorptions from the Zeeman levels of the ground state.
The resulting spectrum, described as a C term, will be all positive or all negative, and will be temperature-dependent.
If there is a field-induced mixing of the various states, a B term may be observed.
This looks like a C term but does not depend on temperature [21].
MCD spectra provide information about the degeneracy of states and help with the assignment of electronic spectra.
For instance, the electronic spectrum of  [25]contains a single peak at 37 900 cm -1 .
The MCD spectrum contains a strong peak centered near 39 000 cm -1 with a negative B term, and a strong second peak near 43 000 cm -1 with a positive B term.
These observations show that the first absorption band of  at 37 900 cm -1 consists of two electronic transitions.
6.11 Detection of complexes and measurement of concentrations
Finally we return to the extreme importance of visible and UV absorption bands of transition metal complexes in detection and measurement of concentrations.
The breadth of such bands means that those of different species often overlap, but it is  generally possible to select a wavelength at which one compound may be monitored during the course of a reaction, for instance.
The ease of measurement and relative cheapness of small visible/UV spectrometers makes their use very popular.
High ordinate accuracy is obtainable because of the stability of source and detector, and concentrations can be inferred directly from the intensity of absorption if the Beer-Lambert Law is obeyed.
This states that the absorbance, A (or the optical density, E) is directly proportional to the product of pathlength and concentration.
The molar extinction coefficient has units of  if c is in  and I is in cm, so that A is a pure number.
A is related to the intensity of light I that is transmitted compared with the initial intensity I by 
The various types of absorption we have described above generally have fairly characteristic extinction coefficients.
For this reason it is usual to report an electronic absorption spectrum as a list of peak positions and extinction coefficients, or as a list of the extinction coefficients at various wavelengths.
Another measure of intensity is the oscillator strength, f, given by 
These experimental measures of intensity can be related to the wavefunctions for the upper and lower states using an integral known as the transition moment, Dif, which is of the form  where ψi and ψf are the wavefunctions for the initial and the final states and M is the dipole moment operator, which can be obtained from symmetry tables.
The transition moment is related to the oscillator strength by the expression  where s f is the degeneracy number of the upper state, m is the mass of the electron and ν is the transition frequency.
A study of the changes in absorption spectrum of a system in the course of a reaction can give information about the mechanism, as well as about the nature of the product(s), the rate of the reaction and how the rate changes with concentration, with temperature and with the presence of other potential reagents.
A useful feature of such dynamic spectra is the isosbestic point, which is a point where the total absorbance does not change with time, although the absorbances at points on either side do change as the concentrations of reagents and products evolve.
The isosbestic point is in fact the point where the molar extinction coefficients of reagent and product are equal.
A simple isosbestic point only arises if two species whose concentrations are changing as the reaction proceeds absorb significantly in the region of the spectrum concerned.
If other absorbing products or intermediates occur there will be no isosbestic point.
If the absorption spectra of reagents and products happen not to cross there can be no isosbestic point, but the same effect can be seen in the first-derivative spectra.
The example shown in Fig. 6.31 is remarkable, as it apparently shows the transformation of an Au 11 cluster into an Au 13 cluster without any intermediate or by-product.
This is of course not possible, and we should rather conclude that any intermediate, formed by the initial attack of Cl -on , must have no significant absorption in the spectral range studied, or that its concentration is never so great that it contributes significantly to the spectrum.
Another example is shown in Fig. 6.32.
Here several isosbestic points are seen, showing that the absorption spectra of reagent and product (at equal concentrations) cross at several points.
Only two species are involved in this example, which involves progressive electrochemical oxidation of an Ru 11 complex to the Ru 111 analog.
6.12 Spectra of compounds of elements with partly-filled f subshells (lanthanides and actinides)
The 4f electrons in the lanthanides and their compounds and the 5f electrons in the actinides and their compounds are well screened from external effects by the filled shells of higher principal quantum number.
This has several important consequences, the first being that the f-f bands of such species are characteristic of the element concerned, and hardly affected by even the immediate ligands.
Of course, species with different numbers of f electrons will have different states and hence different transitions, but all compounds of a particular ion will be expected to have very similar spectra.
The lanthanide elements in particular are almost always found in the form of complexes of  ions, and each element has its own characteristic color.
The actinides are more variable in their oxidation states, and this gives them more varied colors, but again the spectra of compounds derived from a given oxidation state are likely to be very similar.
The second consequence of this insulation of the f electrons from external influences is that the f-f bands are sharp, much narrower than typical d-d bands.
They are also characteristically weak, the effects of deviations from perfect inversion symmetry (which is often found for complexes of lanthanide elements) being insufficient to relax the g → u selection rule.
All f levels are of u symmetry in a centrosymmetric environment, so f-f transitions are forbidden.
The colors of lanthanide compounds are therefore pale; the actinides have rather stronger colors, because of the effects of spin-orbit coupling, which is greater for heavier atoms.
Charge transfer transitions are less important for the f-block elements than for d-block elements, mainly because they are less likely to form complexes with ligands having suitable donor orbitals.
Much less work has been published on spectra of these species than on those of d-block metal complexes.