

RATBIRD
…
To warn and warn: that one night, never more
To light and warm us, down will sink the lurid sun
Beneath the sea, and none
Shall see us more upon this passionate shore.
THE DISINTEGRATION of the old world?
Easy.
I'll manage it.
Everything will end not with a bang but a whisper — a whisper of last words.
Words.
So it began.
So it will end.
When I grow up.
Here I lie on this crimson equatorial shore, far from where the great electronic city dissolves itself under its own photochemical smogs.
Here I lie, about to tell you the legend of the Other Side.
Also about to go on a journey of self-discovery which must bring me back to my beginnings.
As sure as I have tusks, this is ontology on the hoof.
So to begin with what's overhead.
The sun disputes its rights to rule in the sky above.
Every day it loses the struggle, every morning it begins the dispute over again.
Brave, never-disheartened sun!
I lie under the great sea almond tree which sprouts from the sand, looking up into its branches where light and shade dispute their rival territories.
This is called beauty.
Light and shade cohabit like life and death, the one more vivid for the dread presence of the other.
In my hand I clutch —
…
But the great grave ocean comes climbing up the beach.
There's another eternal dispute.
The ocean changes its colours as it sweeps towards where I lie.
Horizon purple, mid-sea blue, shore-sea green, lastly golden.
Undeterred by however many failures, the waves again attempt to wet my feet.
Brave remorseless sea!
(What should a legend contain?
Should it be of happiness or of  sorrow?
Or should it permit them to be in — that word again — dispute?)
— What I clutch in my hand is a fruit of the sea almond.
It's not large, it's of a suitable nut shape, it's covered with a fine but coarse fibre like pubic hair.
In fact, the nut resembles a girl's pudendum.
Else why clutch it?
Is that not where all stories lie, in the dumb dell of the pudendum?
The generative power of the story lies with the organ of generation — and veneration.
Let me assure you, for it's all part of the legend, at the miracle of my birth I came forth when summoned by my father.
He tapped.
I emerged.
A star burned on my forehead.
I'm unique.
You believe you are unique?
But no, I am unique.
In their careless journeys across the worlds, the gods create myriads of everything, of almond trees, of waves, of days, of people.
But there's only one Dishayloo, with no navel and a star on his forehead.
So my journey and tale are about to commence.
Knowing as much, my friends, who sit or stand with me under the tree, stare out to sea in silence.
They think about destiny, oysters or sex.
I have on my t-shirt saying ‘Perestroika Hots Fax’.
A distant land.
That's what's needed.
I've met old men who never went to sea.
They speak like spiders and don't know it.
They have lost something and don't know what they have lost.
Like all young men I must make a journey.
The dispute between light and shade must be carried elsewhere, waves must be surmounted, pudenda must open with smiles of welcome, fate must be challenged.
Before the world disappears.
We all must change our lives.
So I rise and go along the blazing beach to the jetty, to see Old Man Monsoon.
They call him Monsoon.
His real name has been forgotten in these parts, funny old garbled Christian that he is.
He can predict the exact hour the rains will come.
And many more things.
Once Monsoon was called Krishna.
Once he visited the Other Side, as I will relate.
He saw me coming and stood up in his boat.
He's a good story-teller.
He says, What is the human race (looking obliquely at my tusks as he speaks) but a fantastic tale?
Told, he might add, with a welter of cliché and a weight of subordinate clauses, while we await a punchline.
The friends accompany me to the jetty.
At first in a bunch, then stringing out, some hastening, some loitering, though the distance is short.
So with life.
Monsoon and I shake hands.
He wears nothing but a pair of shorts.
He is burnt almost black.
His withered skin mummifies him, though those old Golconda eyes are golden-black still.
People say of Monsoon that he has a fortune buried in a burnt-out refrigerator on one of the many little islands standing knee-deep in the sea.
I don't believe that.
Well, I do, but only in the way you can believe and not believe simultaneously.
Like Rolex watches from a different time zone.
He shows yellow teeth between grey lips and says in a voice from which all colour has faded, ‘Isn't there enough trouble in the world without youngsters like you joining in?’
Grey lips, yellow teeth, yet a colourless voice…
Well, let us not linger over these human paradoxes.
I make up something by way of reply.
‘I've lost my shadow, Monsoon, and must find it if I have to go to the end of the Earth.
Perhaps you can foretell when the end of the Earth will be?’
He points to the puddle of dark at my feet, giggling, raising an eyebrow to my friends for support.
‘That's not my shadow,’ I tell him.
‘I borrowed this one off a pal who wants it back by nightfall.
He has to wear it at his mother's wedding.’
When I have climbed into the boat, Monsoon starts the engine with one tug of the starter rope.
It's like hauling at a dog's lead.
The hound wakes, growls, shakes itself, and with a show of haste begins to pull us towards the four corners of the great morning.
The craft creaks and murmurs to itself, in dispute with the waters beneath its hull.
And the sweet playful sound of the waves against old board.
The ocean, some idiot said, is God's smile.
Monsoon picks up my thought and distorts it.
‘You smile like a  little god, Dishayloo, with that star on your brow.
Why always so happy?’
I gaze back at my friends ashore.
They shrink as they wave.
Everything grows smaller.
Hasten, hasten, Dishayloo, before the globe itself shrinks to nothing!
‘The smile's so as not to infect others with sorrow.
It's therapy — a big hospitable hospital.
Antidote to the misery virus.
Did you ever hear tell of the great white philosopher Bertrand Russell?’
The Golconda eyes are on the horizon to which our boat is hounding us, but Monsoon's never at a loss for an answer.
‘Yes, yes, of course.
He was a friend of mine.
He and I used to sail together to the Spice Islands to trade in vitamin pills and conch shells.
I made a loss but Bertra Muscle became a rupee millionaire.
These days, he lives in Singapore in a palace of unimaginable concrete and grandeur.’
Now the friends form no more than a frieze, spread thin along the shore, like bread on a lake of butter.
Soon, soon, the dazzle has erased them.
My memory does the same.
Sorry, one and all, but the legend has begun.
Talk's still needed, of course, so I say, ‘This was a different man, pappy.
The guy I mean said…’
But those words too were forgotten.
‘…
Why should I recall what he said?
Are we no better than snails, to carry round with us a whole house of past circumstance?’
My hands were trailing in the water.
Prose was not my main concern.
Monsoon picked up on that.
‘Pah.
‘House of past circumstance…’
What are you, a poet or something?
Something or nothing?
The Lord Jesus had a better idea.
He knew nothing dies.
Even when he snuffed it on Mount Cavalry, he knew he would live again.’
‘Easy trick if you're the son of God.’
The Golconda gold eyes flared at me.
‘He was a bloke in a million.
Go anywhere, do anything.’
‘'Have mission, will travel.’'
All the time the dear water like progress under the prow.
‘Born in India, I believe, sailed in Noah's boat because there was  no room at the Indus.’
His face had taken on the expression of imbecile beatitude the religious sometimes adopt.
‘Jesus was poor, like me.
He couldn't pay Noah one cent for the trip.
Noah was a hard man.
He gave him a broom and told him to go and sweep the animal turds of the deck.’
‘What happened?’
‘Jesus swept.’
Cloud castles stood separately on the horizon, bulbous, like idols awaiting worship.
Something above moving over a smooth sea prompted Monsoon to chatter.
I scarcely listened as he continued his thumbnail portrait of Jesus.
‘He wasn't exactly a winner but he was honest and decent in every way.
Or so the scriptures tell us.
And a good hand with a parable.’
The little boat was in the lap of the ocean.
The shoreline behind was indistinct; it could have been anything — like a parable.
Ahead, two small humps of islands lay stunned with light.
I began to feel the charge of distance, its persuasive power.
Perhaps the islands were like humpbacked whales.
But the world's old.
Everything has already been compared with everything else.
The old man said, ‘You'll soon have left us.
We'll be no more in your mind, and will die a little because of it.
So I'll tell you a story — a parable, perhaps — suitable for your life journey.’
And he began the tale of the ratbird.
Monsoon spoke in more than one voice.
I abridge the tale here, there being only so many hours in a day.
Also I've removed his further references to Jesus, diluting it.
Same tale, different teller, only coconut milk added.
There was this white man — well, two white men if you include Herbert — this white man Monsoon knew as a boy, before he was Monsoon.
This white man — well, he and Herbert — arrived at this port in Borneo where Boy Monsoon lived in a thatched hut with Balbindor.
Like many whites, Frederic Sigmoid was crazed by the mere  notion of jungle.
He believed jungles were somewhere you went for revelation.
In his vain way, he placed the same faith in jungles that earlier whites had put in cathedrals or steam ships.
But Frederic Sigmoid — Doctor Sigmoid — was rich.
He could afford to be crazy.
Back in Europe, Sigmoid had cured people by his own process, following the teaching of a mystic called Ouspensky and adding a series of physical pressures called reflexology.
Now here he was in Simanggang with his mosquito nets, journals, chronometers, compasses, barometer, medicine cabinet, guns and one offspring, out to cure himself or discover a New Way of Thought, whichever would cause most trouble in a world already tormented by too much belief.
Seek and ye shall find.
Find and ye shall probably regret.
With Sigmoid was his pale son, Herbert.
Monsoon and his adoptive father, Balbindor, were hired to escort the two Sigmoids into the interior of Borneo.
Into the largely unexplored Hose Range, and an area called the Bukit Tengah, where lived a number of rare and uncollected species, including the ratbird, happy until this juncture in their uncollected state.
Animal and insect: all congratulated themselves on failing to make some Cambridge encyclopaedia.
Balbindor was a coastal Malay of the Iban tribe.
However, he had been into the interior once before, in the service of two Dutch explorers who, in the manner of all Dutch explorers, had died strange deaths: though not before they had communicated to civilization a mysterious message, ‘Wallace and Darwin did not know it, but there are alternatives.’
Balbindor, four foot six high, brought the word hot-foot back to the coast.
Sigmoid was keener on alternatives than his son Herbert.
Confidence men always have an eye for extra exits.
Thirteen days into rainforest, led by Balbindor and sonlet, and the doctor remained more determined than his offspring.
The night before they reached the tributary of the Baleh river they sought, Balbindor overheard a significant exchange between father and son.
Herbert complained of heat and hardship, declaring that what he longed for most in the world was a marble bathroom with warm scented water and soft towels.
To which his father rejoined that Herbert was a gross materialist.
Going further, Sigmoid retreated  into one of his annoying fits of purity, declaring, ‘To achieve godliness, my boy, you must give up all possessions…’
Herbert replied bitterly, ‘I'm your one possession you'll never give up.’
Had this been a scene in a movie, it would have been followed by pistol shots and, no doubt, the entry of a deadly snake into the Sigmoid tent.
However, the story is now Balbindor's.
He shall tell it in his own excruciating words.
And Balbindor, never having seen any movie, with the solitary exception of The Sound of Music (to which he gave three stars), lacked a sense of drama.
Father and son, he reported, kissed each other as usual and went to sleep in their separate bivouacs.
If my story, then I tell.
Not some other guy.
Many error in all story belong other guy.
I Iban man, real name no Balbindor.
I no see Sound Music ever.
Only see trailer one time, maybe two.
Julie Andrews good lady, I marry.
My kid I take on no call Monsoon.
Monsoon late name.
Kid, he come from India.
I take on.
I no call Monsoon, I call Krishna.
My son they die logging camp all same place three time.
Too much drink.
I very sad, adopt Krishna.
He my son, good boy.
Special golden eye.
I like, OK.
This Doctor Sigmoid and he son Herbert very trouble on journey.
We go on Baleh river, boat swim good.
All time, Herbert he complain.
White men no sweat pure, too many clothe.
No take off clothe.
Then boat swim up tributary Puteh, no swim good.
Water he go way under boat.
Mud he come, stop boat.
We hide boat, go on feet in jungle.
Very much complain Herbert and father he both.
They no understand jungle.
They no eat insect.
Insect eat them.
Jungle many tree, many many tree.
Some tree good, some tree bad, some tree never mind.
I tell number tree.
Tamarind tree, he fruit bitter, quench throat thirst.
Help every day.
Sigmoid no like, fear poison.
I no speak him.
All same jungle olive, good tree.
We drink pitcher plant, all same like monkey.
Monkey they good guide.
Krishna and me we do like monkey.
I understand jungle.
Wake early, when first light in jungle.
Deer trail  fresh, maybe catch deer along blowpipe.
Monkey wake early, eat, sing, along branches.
Sigmoids no like wake early.
Day cool.
I like wake early, make Sigmoids rise up.
Go quiet.
Creep along, maybe catch kill snake for pot.
Many ant in Hose Range, big, little, many colour.
All go different way.
I speak ant, ant speak me.
Go this way, go that.
Every leaf he fall, he mean a something.
I understand.
I plenty savvy in jungle.
One week, two week., three week, we walk in jungle, sometime up, sometime down.
For Sigmoids, very hard to go.
Both smell bad.
Too much breath.
No control.
Dutch men control of breath good.
Herbert he very scare.
No like jungle, all same long time.
No good man, swear me.
I understand.
Herbert he no think I understand.
Three week, get very near area Bukit Tengah.
Now all path go up, need more care.
Many cliff, many rock.
One fall, maybe finish.
Waterfall, he pour bad water.
I know smell bad water nose belong me.
Krishna and two bearer and I, we no drink bad water.
Come from Other Side.
I tell Sigmoids no drink water come Other Side.
They no care, no understand, they drink bad waterfall water plenty.
Take on bad spirit.
Understand.
I shout much, Krishna he cry all same long time.
Herbert he shout me, try hit little Krishna.
I tell Herbert, ‘You drink water belong Other Side.
Now you got bad spirit.
You no get back Europe.
You finish man.’
Herbert no savvy.
He plenty sick.
I see him bad spirit.
It suck him soul.
Now I plenty scare.
Every day more slow.
Other Side he come near.
Bearer man they two, they no like go more far.
I hear what they speak together.
I savvy what Orang Asli speak, I tell Dr Sigmoid.
He swear.
No please me.
Both Sigmoids have fever.
Black in face, very strange.
Smell bad more.
Big storm come over from Other Side, maybe hope drive us away.
Thunder he flatten ears, lightning he blind eyes, rain he lash flesh, wind he freeze skin.
We hide away under raintree, very fear.
Night it come, big wizard, I no understand.
Too black.
In night bearer they go, I no hear.
Two bearer they run off.
Steal supply.
I very sad I no hear.
In morning dawnlight I say to doctor sorry.
Bearer they scare, go back wife.
Doctor he swear again.
I say, no good swear.
Who hear  swear with good nature?
Best leave alone, keep silent.
He no like.
Make bad face.
Day after storm, we come Other Side.
I see how monkey they no go Other Side.
Different monkey on Other Side, speak different language.
Different tree, grow other different leaf.
Fruit they different, no wise eat.
Insect different.
Also one more bad thing.
I see men belong Other Side in jungle.
They move like ghost but I see.
Krishna he see, he point.
Plenty eye in jungle belong Other Side.
No like.
Other Side men they much difference.
How they think different, no good.
I see, I understand, Krishna he understand.
I no make Sigmoids understand.
‘Geology,’ I explain Sigmoids.
I speak they language good.
‘He change.
Different earth begin now since many many old time.
All thing different, different time.
Different inside time.
Womb bring forth different thing.
Bad go there, no go.
Only look one day.’
‘Balls,’ he say.
I sick with him doctor.
I make speak, ‘I keep my ball belong me.
You go, and Herbert.
I no go one more pace.
Krishna, he no go one more pace.’
Herbert he bring out gun.
I very fear.
I know him mad with bad spirit.
I say him, ‘Two piece Dutch man they come here.
Pretty soon they finish.
Why you no sense?
Come back home along me, Krishna.’
He get more mad.
I was really disgusted with this idiot native Balbindor or whatever his name was.
Here we were.
At great expense to ourselves, Father and I had finally arrived on the very threshold of Bukit Tengah, the Middle Mountain, and this difficult little man and his black kid were refusing to proceed.
It just was not rational.
But you don't expect rationality from such people.
These natives are riddled with superstition.
Also, I blamed him for the way the bearers had deserted us.
We had quite an argument.
I was trembling violently from head to foot.
Most unpleasant.
I want to say this, too, about the whole incident.
Balbindor treated  Father and me all along as complete fools.
We could grasp that he was trying to tell us we had arrived at some sort of geological shift, much like the Wallace Discontinuity east of Bali, where two tectonic plates meet and flora and fauna are different on the two opposed sides.
We knew that better than he did, having researched the matter in books before the expedition, but saw no reason to be superstitious about it.
We had also observed that there were those on the other side of the divide who were watching us.
Father and I were going to go in there whether or not Balbindor and his son accompanied us.
We saw the necessity to make an immediate impression on the new tribe, since we would be dealing with them soon enough.
That was why I shot Balbindor on the spot.
It was mainly to make a good impression on the new tribe.
Little Krishna ran off into the jungle.
Perhaps the little idiot thought I was going to shoot him as well.
I suppose I might have done.
I was pretty steamed up.
‘Put your revolver away, you fool,’ Father said.
That was all the thanks I got from him.
When has he ever been grateful?
We had no idea what to do with Balbindor's corpse.
Eventually we dragged it to the waterfall and flung it in.
We slept by the waterfall that night and next morning at our leisure crossed the divide into the Other Side (the silly name had stuck).
For two days we travelled through dense alien jungle.
We were aware that there were men among the thickets following us, but it was the monkeys who caused us most trouble.
They were no bigger than leaf monkeys, but had black caps and a line of black fur about the eyes, giving them an oddly human look.
Father trapped one with the old Malayan gourd trick, and discovered it to have only four toes on each foot and four fingers on each hand.
We came at last to a clearing brought about by a massive outcrop of rock.
Here we rested, both of us being overcome by fevers.
We could see the barbaric scenery about us, the tumbled mass of vegetation, with every tree weighted down by chains of epiphytes and climbers.
Above them loomed densely clad peaks of mountains, often as not shrouded by swift-moving cloud.
These clouds took on startling devilish shapes, progressing towards us.
It may have been the fever which caused this uncomfortable illusion.
Days must have passed in illness.
I cannot say how strange it was, how peculiarly dead I felt, when I awoke to find myself at a distance from my father.
Dreadful sensations of isolation overcame me.
Moreover, I was walking about.
My feet seemed not to touch the ground.
I discovered that I could not get near my father.
Whenever I seemed to advance towards him, my steps deviated in some way.
It was as if I suffered from an optical illusion so strong that it consumed my other senses.
I could do no more than prowl about him.
Father was sitting cross-legged by the remains of a fire on which he had roasted the leg of a small deer.
Its remains lay by him.
He was talking to a small wizened man with long hair and a curved bone through his cheeks which made him appear tusked.
The face of this man was painted white.
For some reason, I felt terrified of him, yet what chiefly seemed to scare me was a minor eccentricity of garb: the man wore nothing but an elaborate scarf or band or belt of fabric about his middle.
No attempt had been made to cover his genitals, which were painted white like his face.
Prowling in a circular fashion seemed all I was capable of, so I continuously circled the spot.
Although I called to my father, he took no notice, appearing totally absorbed in his conversation with the white-faced man.
I now noted that the latter had on each hand only three fingers and a thumb, and only four toes on each foot, in the manner of the monkeys we had come across in another existence.
I was filled with such great uneasiness and hatred that I chattered and jibbered and made myself horrible.
Again and again I attempted to advance towards my father.
Only now did I realize that I loved this man to whose power I had been subject all my life.
Yet he would not — or perhaps could not — take the slightest notice of me.
I set up a great screaming to attract his attention.
Still he would not hear.
Father, Father, I called to you all my life!
Perhaps you never ever  heard, so wrapped up were you in your own dreams and ambitions.
Now for this last time, I beg you to attend to your poor Herbert.
I know you have your own story.
Allow me mine, for pity's sake!
It would be true to say without exaggeration that throughout my mature life, in my quest to transform humanity, I had been in search of Mr White Face, as I thought of him.
(He refused to tell his name.
That would have given me power over him.)
I have a firm belief in transcendental power, unlike poor Herbert.
White Face materialized out of thin air when I was drinking at a pool.
There on my hands and knees, by gosh!
I looked up — he was standing nearby, large as life.
Naked except for the band round his belly; yet something about him marked him immediately as a singular character.
(A flair for judging character is one of my more useful talents.)
A remarkable feature of White Face's physiognomy was a pair of small tusks (six inches long) piercing the cheeks.
My knowledge of anatomy suggested they were rooted in the maxilla.
They gave my new acquaintance a somewhat belligerent aspect, you may be sure!
Already he has told me much.
We have spent two whole days from sun-up till sun-down in rapt conversation.
His thought processes are entirely different from mine.
Yet we have much in common.
He is the wise man of his people as I, in Europe, am of mine.
Grubby little man he may be — he shits in my presence without embarrassment — yet in his thought I perceive he is fastidious.
I can probably adapt some of his ideas.
Much that he says about divisions in the human psyche is reflected in pale form in the Hindu sacred books of the Upanishads (which is hardly surprising, since White Face claims that all the world's knowledge of itself emanated from the ‘Other Side’ during the ice age before last, when Other Siders went out like missionaries over the globe, reaching as far as Hindustan).
What I do find difficult to swallow — we argued long about this — is some strange belief of his that the world is immaterial and that humanity (if I have it correctly) is no more than a kind of metaphysical construct projected by nature and relying on words  rather than flesh for its continued existence.
Perhaps I've misunderstood the old boy.
I'm still slightly feverish.
Or he's mad as a hatter.
Only knowledge is precious, he says.
And knowledge is perpetually being lost.
The world from which I come is in crisis.
It is losing its instinctual knowledge.
Instinctual knowledge is leaking away under the impact of continual urbanization.
That I believe.
It is not in conflict with my own doctrines.
He thinks our world will shortly die.
Then the Other Side will recolonize the world with new plants and animals — and understanding.
(His kind of understanding, of course.)
He wants to convince me to become his disciple, to go forth and encourage the world-death to come swiftly.
By the third day of our discussion, I begin more and more to comprehend how desirable it is that the civilization to which I belong should be utterly destroyed.
Yet still I hesitate.
We drink some of his potent boka and rest from intellectual debate.
I ask, How are things so different here?
For answer, he shows me a ratbird.
Some distance from the rock on which we sat in conference conferring about the future of the world, if that doesn't sound too pompous — an angsana stood, a large tropical tree, its branches full of birds to which I paid no attention.
Birds have never been one of my major interests, I need hardly say.
Mr White Face began a kind of twittering whistle, a finger planted in each corner of his lips.
Almost immediately, the birds in the angsana responded by flying out in a flock, showing what I took to be anxiety by sinking to the ground and then rapidly rising again.
Each time they sank down, they clustered closely, finally expelling one of their number, who fluttered to the ground and began — as if under compulsion — to walk, or rather scuttle, towards us; whereupon the other birds fled into the shelter of their tree.
As the bird came nearer, White Face changed his tune.
The bird crawled between us and lay down at our feet in an unbirdlike manner.
I saw that its anatomy was unbirdlike.
Its two pink legs ended in four toes, all pointing forward with only a suggestion of balancing  heel.
Wings and body were covered in grey fur.
And the face was that of a rodent.
In some ways it resembled a flying fox, common throughout Malaysia; in some ways it resembled a rat, but its easy flight and way of walking proclaimed it a bird.
And now that I looked again at Mr White Face, I saw that beneath his paint his face had some of the configurations of a rat, with sharp little jaws and pointed nose, not at all like the inhabitants of Sarawak, a blunt-faced company, with which I was acquainted.
Obeying his instruction, I proffered my hand, open palm upwards, towards the animal.
The ratbird climbed on and began to preen its fur unconcernedly.
Nobody will blame me if I say that in the circumstances I became very uneasy.
It seemed to me that in Mr White Face I had stumbled upon an evolutionary path paralleling — rivalling — our accepted one; that this path sprang from a small ground mammal (possibly tusked) very different from the arboreal tarsier-like creature from which Homo sapiens has developed.
I was face to face with…
Homo rodens…
Over millions of years, its physical and mental processes had continued in its own course, parallel to but alien from ours.
Indeed, perhaps inimical to ours, in view of the hostility of such long standing between man and rat.
Rising to my feet, I flicked the ratbird into the air.
Instead of flying off, it settled at my feet.
I found I was unable to walk about.
My legs would not move.
Some magic had trapped me.
At this unhappy moment, I recalled that mysterious sentence, ‘Wallace and Darwin did not know it, but there are alternatives.’
The alternative had been revealed to me; with magnificent hardihood, I had ventured into the Other Side; was I to suffer the fate of the two Dutch explorers?
Mr White Face continued to sit cross-legged, gazing up at me, his tusked countenance quite inscrutable.
I saw the world through glass.
It was unmoving.
I felt extremely provoked.
Perhaps the argumentative Balbindor had been correct in saying I should not have drunk from the waterfall springing from the Other Side.
It had left me in White Face's power.
And I was uncomfortably aware of the spirit of Herbert.
After the  foolish lad had died of his fevers — unable to pull through illness like me with my superior physique — his spirit had been powerless to escape.
It circled me now, yowling and screaming in a noxious way.
I tried to ignore it.
But how to escape my predicament?
I stared down at the white face of the ratman.
Then, from my days as a chemist, I remembered a formula for bleach.
Perhaps the magic of science would overcome this detestable witchcraft (or whatever it was that held me in thrall).
As loudly as I could, I recited the formula by which bleach is produced when chlorine reacts with sodium hydroxide solution: ‘’.
Even as I chanted, I felt power return to my muscles.
The great tousled world about me began to stir with life again.
I was free.
Thanks to bleach and a Western education — and of course an excellent memory.
I kicked at the ratbird, which fluttered off.
‘I don't care for your kind of hospitality,’ I told White Face.
‘Well, you have passed my test,’ he said.
‘You are no weakling and your words are strong.
To each of us there are two compartments which form our inner workings.
One part is blind, one part sees.
Most of our ordinary lives are governed by the part that sees, which is capable of performing ordinary tasks.
That part is like a living thing which emerges from an egg.
But there is the other part, which is blind and never emerges from the egg.
It knows only what is unknown.
It acts in time of trouble.
You understand?’
‘You perhaps speak in parable form of two divisions of the brain.
If so, then I believe I understand you.’
(I did not think it politic to express my reservations.)
He gave a short dry laugh, exposing sharp teeth.
‘Oh, we like to believe we understand!
Suppose we have never understood one single thing of the world about us and inside us?
Suppose we have lived in utter darkness and only believed that darkness was light?’
‘All things may be supposed.
So what then?’
He said, ‘Then on the day that light dawns, it will be to you as if a sudden incomprehensible darkness descends.’
After this horrifying statement he made a beckoning gesture and began running.
Since he made swiftly towards the forest, I had not much option but to follow.
But his words had chilled me.
Suppose indeed that we were hedged in by limitations of comprehension we could not comprehend?
The ratbird had already shaken many of my convictions regarding life on earth and how it had evolved.
Mr White Face's mode of progression through the forest was at odds with my previous guide, Balbindor, and his method of procedure; but then, the trees, the very trees we passed through, were different.
Their bark, if bark it was, possessed a highly reflective surface, so that to move forward was to be accompanied by a multitudinous army of distortions of oneself.
(In this hallucinatory company, it was impossible not to feel ill at ease.
Jumpy, in a word.)
I did not understand how it was possible to find one's way in such a jungle.
White Face was presumably trusting to his second compartment, ‘the part that never hatched’, to see him along his course.
In which case, the blind thing was unexpectedly reliable.
After two days of arduous travel, we came to a dark-flowing river.
On the far side of it stood a village of longhouses, much like the ones we had left back on the coast, except that these were entered by round doors instead of the normal rectangular ones.
Uncomfortable as I was in White Face's company, there was comfort in the sense of arrival.
I was possessed of a lively curiosity to investigate this kampong of the Other Side — that lively curiosity which has carried me so successfully through life.
One factor still contributed to my unease.
The ghost of my son pursued me yet, his translucent image being reflected from the trunk of every tree, so that it sometimes appeared ahead of me as well as on every side.
Herbert waved and screamed in the dreariest manner imaginable (uncanny, yet nevertheless lightly reminiscent of his behaviour throughout his life).
‘We shall cross the river,’ White Face announced, putting two skinny fingers into the corners of his mouth and whistling to announce our presence.
‘Will Herbert cross with us?’
I asked, I trust without revealing my nervousness.
He dismissed the very idea.
‘Ghosts cannot cross moving water.
Only if they are ghosts of men with wooden legs.’
After White Face had signalled to some men on the opposite bank, a narrow dugout canoe was paddled across to collect us.
By the time we landed at a rickety jetty, a number of inhabitants had gathered, standing cautiously back to observe us with their heads thrust forward as if they were short-sighted.
All of them had tusks.
Some tusks were large and curled, or adorned with leaves.
I could not fail to see that all, men, women and children, wore nothing in the tropical heat but a band — in the case of the women this was quite ornate — around their middles, leaving everything else uncovered.
The breasts of the women were small, and no more developed than those of the men.
(The women also had tusks, so that I wondered if they were used for offence or defence.
Presumably the missionary position in coitus would have its dangers.
One might be stabbed in medias res.)
They were in general a strange lot, with sharp beaky faces quite unlike the Malays to whom I was accustomed.
In their movements was something restless.
A kind of rictus was common.
I saw that here was opportunity for anthropological study which, when reported abroad, could but add to my fame.
I wanted to look in a mouth to see where those tusks were anchored.
White Face addressed some of the men in a fast-flowing and high-pitched language.
They made respectful way for him as he led me through the village to a longhouse standing apart from the others.
‘This is my home and you are welcome,’ he said.
‘Here you may rest and recover from your fever.
The spirit of your son will not harm you.’
To my dismay, I found that the bleach formula had left my mind and would not be recalled.
Did this mean I was still under his spell?
So it was with reluctance that I climbed the ramp leading into the longhouse with its two great tusks over the circular entrance.
Inside, I was barely able to stand upright at the highest point, for I was head and shoulders taller than my sinister host; and it did not  escape my notice that the roof at its highest point was infested with cobwebs, in the corners of which sat large square spiders.
Also, when he gestured to me to sit down on the mats which covered the floor, I could not but observe two fairly fresh (tuskless) skulls above the door by which we had entered.
Catching my glance, Mr White Face asked, ‘Do you speak Dutch?’
‘Do they — now?’
I asked, with sarcasm.
But he had a response.
‘On the night of the full moon they do speak.
I cannot silence them.
You shall hear them by and by, and become familiar with the eloquence of death.’
We then engaged in philosophical discourse, while a servant woman, cringing as she served us, brought a dark drink like tea in earthenware bowls which fitted neatly between Mr White Face's tusks.
After two hours of conversation, during which he questioned me closely concerning Ouspensky, he apologized that his wife (he used a different word) was not present.
It appeared that she was about to deliver a son.
I congratulated him.
‘I have twelve sons already,’ he said.
‘Though this one is special, as you may see.
A miraculous son who will further our most powerful ambitions, a wizard of words.
So it is written…
Now let us discuss how the end, closure and abridgement of your world may be brought about, since we are in agreement that such an objective is desirable.’
Although I was less ready than before to agree that such an objective was desirable, I nevertheless found myself entering into his plans.
(The dark drink had its effect.)
The plans were — to me at least— elaborate and confusing.
But the horrifying gist of his argument was that Homo sapiens might be extinguished by pantun.
I understood that pantun was a form of Malayan poetry, and could not grasp how this might annihilate anything; but, as he continued, I began to see — or I thought in that dazed state I saw that he believed all human perceptions to be governed by words and, indeed, distorted and ultimately betrayed by words.
Betrayed was the word he used.
This, he said, was the weakness of Homo sapiens: words had weakened the contract with nature that  guaranteed mankind's existence.
(All our spiritual ills were evidence of this deteriorating state of affairs.)
There were ways by which all Homo sapiens could be reduced abridged — into a story, a kind of poem.
Those who live by the word die by the word.
So he said.
We could end as a line of pantun.
I cannot reduce this plan of his into clear words.
It was not delivered to me in clear words, but in some sort of squeaky Other Side music with which he aided my understanding.
All I can say is that there in that creepy hut, I came to believe it was perfectly easy to turn the whole story of the world I knew into a world of story.
As we were getting into the how of it — and drinking more of that dark liquid — the servant hurried in with an apology and squeaked something.
White Face rose.
‘Come with me,’ he said.
‘My wife (he used the different word) is about to bring forth the thirteenth son.’
‘Will she mind my presence?’
‘Not at all.
Indeed, your presence is essential.
Without your presence, you can have no absence, isn't that so?’
(Whatever that meant.
If that is truly what he said.)
In we went, into curtained-off quarters at the far end of the longhouse.
All misty with scented things burning and jangling instruments being played by two long-tusked men.
His wife lay on the floor on a mat, attended by the servant girl.
Her stomach did not appear extended.
She was entirely naked, no embroidered band round her middle.
For the first time, I saw — with what sense of shock I cannot explain — that she had no navel.
Nor was this some kind of unique aberration.
The servant girl — perhaps in honour of the occasion — was also nude and without the customary middle band.
She also had no navel.
I was struck as by an obscenity, and unprepared for what followed.
(Tusks I could take; lack of navel implied a different universe of being.)
‘Now the birth begins,’ said Mr White Face, as his wife lifted one leg, ‘and you will find all will go according to plan.
The story of your species will become a kind of Möbius strip, but at least you will have had a role in it, Dr Sigmoid.’
He had never used my name previously.
I knew myself in his  power; as never before I felt myself powerless, a thin be-navelled creature without understanding.
I had believed these strange people of the Other Side to be distant descendants of a kind of rodent ancestor.
But that was a scientific illusion built on evolutionary terminology.
The truth was different, more difficult, less palatable.
As the woman lifted her leg, an egg emerged from her womb.
An egg not of shell like a bird's: leathery rather, like a turtle's.
An egg!
A veritable egg, ostrich-sized.
A terrible rushing noise beset me.
The longhouse flew away.
I was surrounded by bright sunlight, yet in total darkness, as foretold.
Even worse — far worse — I was not I. The terror of wonderment, real understanding, had changed all.
Only the egg remained.
With a sense of destiny, I leaned forward and tapped upon it with an invisible finger.
It split.
At the miracle of my birth, I came forth when my father summoned me.
A star was set upon my forehead.
I am unique.
The gods that make their careless journeys across the world, playing with science or magic as they will, create thousands of everything, of sea almonds, of waves, of days — of words.
Yet there is only one Dishayloo.
No navel, and a star in the middle of his forehead.
Born to shine in a world of story.
FOAM
‘There's nothing for it when you reach the Point of No Return — except to come back.’
E. James Carvell
MANY Central and Eastern European churches had been dismantled.
The deconstruction of Chartres Cathedral was proceeding smartly, unhindered by Operation Total Tartary.
On the previous day, a guide had taken me round Budapest Anthropological Museum.
I had wanted to see the danse macabre preserved there, once part of the stonework of the cathedral at Nogykanizsa.
Although the panel was in poor condition, it showed clearly the dead driving the living to the grave.
The dead were represented by skeletons, frisky and grinning.
The line of the living began with prelates in grand clothes, the Pope leading.
Merchants came next, men and women, then a prostitute; a beggar brought up the rear, these allegorical figures representing the inescapable gradations of decay.
As I was making notes, measuring, and sketching in my black notebook, the guide was shuffling about behind me, impatient to leave.
I had special permission to be in the gallery.
Jangling her keys more like a jailer than an attendant, she went to gaze out of a narrow window at what could be seen of the prosperous modern city, returning to peer over my shoulder and sniff.
‘A disgusting object,’ she remarked, gesticulating with an open hand towards the frieze, which stood severed and out of context on a display bench in front of me.
‘'What is beauty, saith my sufferings then?’'
I quoted abstractedly.
To me the danse macabre was a work of art, skilfully executed; nothing more than that.
I admired the way in which the leading  Death gestured gallantly towards an open grave, his head bizarrely decked with flags.
‘The unknown artist, I felt sure, had been to Lubeck, where similar postures were depicted.
‘The helpful guidebook, in Hungarian and German, told me that this sportive Death was saying, ‘In this doleful jeste of Life, I shew the state of Manne, and how he is called at uncertayne tymes by Me to forget all that he hath and lose All.’
For a while, silence prevailed, except for the footsteps of the guide, walking to the end of the gallery and walking back, sighing in her progress, jingling her keys.
We were alone in the gallery.
I was sketching the Death playing on a stickado or wooden psalter and goading along a high-bosomed duchess, when the guide again shuffled close.
‘Much here is owed to Holbein engraving,’ said the guide, to show off her knowledge.
She was a small bent woman whose nose was disfigured by a permanent cold.
She regarded the work with a contempt perhaps habitual to her.
‘Theme of danse macabre is much popular in Middle Ages.
In Nogykanizsa, half population is wipe out by plague only one years after building the cathedral.
Now we know much better, praise be.’
I was fed up with her misery and her disapproval.
I wanted only to study the frieze.
It would buttress a line of thought I was pursuing.
‘In what way do we know better?’
It is unwise ever to argue with a guide.
She gave me a long discourse regarding the horrors of the Middle Ages, concluding by saying, ‘Then was much misery in Budapest.
Now everyone many money.
Now we finish with Christianity and Communism, world much better place.
People more enlightenment, eh?’
‘You believe that?’
I asked her.
‘You really think people are more enlightened?
On what grounds, may I ask?
What about the war?’
She shot me a demonic look, emphasized by a smile of outrageous malice.
‘We kill off all Russians.
‘Then world better place.
Forget all about bad thing.’
The grand steam baths under the Gellert Hotel were full of naked bodies, male and female.
Many of the bathers had not merely the  posture but the bulk of wallowing hippopotami.
Fortunately the steam clothed us in a little decency.
Tiring of the crowd, I climbed from the reeking water.
It was time I got to work.
Churches long sealed with all their histories in them were to be opened to me this day.
By a better guide.
Everyone was taking it easy.
Headlines in the English-language paper that morning: STAVROPOI.
AIRPORT BATTLE: First Use Tactical Nukes: Crimea Blazes.
The war had escalated.
Everyone agreed you had to bring in the nukes eventually.
Hungary was neutral.
It supplied Swedish-made arms to all sides, impartially.
The Soviet War marked the recovery of Hungary as a Central European power.
It was a godsend.
Little I cared.
I was researching churches and, in my early forties, too old for conscription.
Wrapped in a white towelling robe I was making my way back towards my room when I encountered a tall bearded man clad only in a towel.
He was heading towards the baths I had just left.
We looked at each other.
I recognized those haggard lineaments, those eroded temples.
They belonged to a distant acquaintance, one Montagu Clements.
He recognized me immediately.
As we shook hands I felt some embarrassment; he had been sacked from his post in the English Literature and Language Department of the University of East Anglia the previous year.
I had not heard of him since.
‘What are you doing in Budapest?’
I asked.
‘Private matter, old chum.’
I remembered the dated way he had of addressing people — though he had been sacked for more serious matters.
‘I'm here consulting a clever chap called Mircea Antonescu.
Something rather strange has happened to me.
Do you mind if I tell you?
Perhaps you'd like to buy us a drink…’
We went up to my room, from the windows of which was a fine view of the Danube with Pest on the other side.
I slipped into my jogging gear and handed him a sweater to wear.
‘Fits me to a T. I suppose I couldn't keep it, could I?’
I did not like to say no.
As I poured two generous Smirnoffs on the rocks from the mini-bar, he started on his problems.
Music, when soft voices die, Vibrates in the memory…’
So says the poet  Shelley.
But supposing there's no memory in which the soft voices can vibrate…’
He paused to raise his glass and take a deep slug of the vodka.
‘I'm forty-one, old chum.
So I believe.
Last month, I found myself in an unknown place.
No idea how I got there.
Turned out I was here — in Budapest.
Budapest!
Never been here before in my natural.
No idea how I arrived here from London.’
‘You're staying here?’
I remembered that Clements was a scrounger.
Perhaps he was going to touch me for the air fare home.
I gave him a hard look.
Knowing something about his past, I was determined not to be caught easily.
‘I'm attending the Antonescu Clinic.
Mircea Antonescu — very clever chap, as I say.
At the cutting edge of psycho-technology.
Romanian, of course.
I'm not staying in the Gellert.
Too expensive for someone like me.
I rent a cheaper place in Pest.
Bit of a flophouse actually.’
He laughed.
‘You see, this is it, the crunch, the bottom line, as they say — I've lost ten years of my memory.
Just lost them.
Wiped.
The last ten years, gone.’
He shone a look of absolute innocence on me.
At which I uttered some condolences.
‘The last thing I remember, I was thirty.
Ten, almost eleven years, have passed and I have no notion as to what I was doing in all that time.’
All this he related in an old accustomed calm way.
Perhaps he concealed his pain.
‘How terrible for you,’ I said.
‘FOAM.
That's what they call it.
Free of All Memory.
A kind of liberty in a way, I suppose.
Nothing a chap can't get used to.’
It was fascinating.
Other people's sorrows on the whole weigh lightly on our shoulders: a merciful provision.
‘What does it feel like?’
I always remember Clements's answer.
‘An ocean, old chum.
A wide wide ocean with a small island here and there.
No continent.
The continent has gone.’
I had seen him now and again during those ten years, before his sacking.
I suggested that perhaps I could help him fill in gaps in his memory.
He appeared moderately grateful.
He said there was no one else he knew in Budapest.
When I asked him if he had been involved in an accident, he shook his head.
‘They don't know.
I don't know.
A car crash?
No bones broken, old boy.
Lucky to be alive, you might say.
I have no memory of anything that happened to me in the last ten years.’
Unthinkingly, I asked, ‘Isn't your wife here with you?’
Whereupon Clements struck his narrow forehead.
‘Oh God, don't say I was married!’
He drank the vodka, he kept the sweater.
The next day, as suggested, I went round with him to the Antonescu Clinic he had mentioned.
The idea was that an expert would question me in order to construct a few more of those small islands in the middle of Clements's ocean of forgetfulness.
The clinic was situated in a little nameless square off Fo Street, wedged in next to the Ministry of Light Industry.
Behind its neoclassical façade was a desperate little huddle of rooms partitioned into offices and not at all smart.
In one windowless room I was introduced to a Dr Maté Jozsef.
Speaking in jerky English round a thin cigar, Maté informed me we could get to work immediately.
It would be best procedure if I began to answer a series of questions in a room from which Clements was excluded.
‘You understand, Dr Burnell.
Using proprietary method here.
Dealing with brain injury cases.
Exclusive…
Special to us.
Produces the good result.
Satisfied customers…’
His thick furry voice almost precluded the use of finite verbs.
Knowing little about medical practice, I consented to do as he demanded.
Maté showed me up two flights of stairs to a windowless room where a uniformed nurse awaited us.
I was unfamiliar with the equipment in the room, although I knew an operating table and anaesthetic apparatus when I saw them.
It was at that point I began to grow nervous.
Nostovision equipment was also in the room; I recognized the neat plastic skull cap.
Coughing, Mate stubbed his cigar out before starting to fiddle with the equipment.
The nurse attempted to help.
I stood with my back to the partition wall, watching.
‘Wartime…
Many difficulties…
Many problems…
For  Hungarians is many trouble…’
He was muttering as he elbowed the nurse away from a malfunctioning VDU.
‘Because of great inflation rate…
High taxes…
Too many gipsy in town.
All time…
The Germans of course…
The Poles…
How we get all work done in the time?…
Too much busy…’
‘If you're very busy, I could come another day,’ I suggested.
He squinted at me and lit another cigar.
‘I am expert in all science, so many people take advantage of me.
Even when I am small boy, I must carrying to school my small brother.
Three kilometre to the gymnasium…
Now is shortage of material, I must do all.
This damned war…
Many upheaval…
Spies and traitor…
Everywhere same…
Today toilet blockage and how to get repair?
You cannot be nervous?’
‘I have an appointment, Dr Maté.
If later would be more convenient…’
‘Is no problem.
Don't worry…
I treat many English.
Get this nurse to move, I explain all.’
Maté sought to reassure me.
They had developed a method of inserting memories into the brains of amnesiacs, but first those memories had to be recorded with full sensory data on to microchip, and then projected by laser into the brain.
That at least was the gist of what I gathered from a long complex explanation.
While I listened, the nurse gave me an injection in the biceps of my left arm.
They would need, Maté said, to append electrodes to my cranium in order to obtain full sensory data matching my answers to his questions.
‘I don't really know Montagu Clements well,’ I protested.
But of course I could not simply refuse to co-operate, could not walk out, could not leave poor Clements without doing my best for him.
Indeed, my eyelids felt heavy.
It was luxury to stretch out, to groan, to relax…and to fall into the deepest slumber of my life…
The cathedral in which we walked was almost lightless.
My extended senses told me that it was vast.
I asked Dr Maté what we were doing there.
His answer was incoherent.
I did not press him.
He seemed to be smoking a cigar; a little red glow formed occasionally as he inhaled, but I could smell no smoke.
In order to keep my spirits up — I admit I was apprehensive — I talked to him as we progressed step by step.
‘I suppose you read Kafka, you understand the complexities with which he found himself faced at every turn.
As a psychologist, you must understand that there are people like Kafka for whom existence is an entanglement, a permanent state of war, while for others — why, at the other extreme they sail through life, seemingly unopposed.
These differences are accounted for by minute biochemical changes in the brain.
Neither state is more or less truthful than the other.
For some truth lies in mystery, for others in clarity.
Prayer is a great clarifier — or was.
My belief is that old Christian churches served as clarifying machines.
They helped you to think straight in ‘this doleful jeste of life’.’
I went on in this fashion for some while.
Dr Maté laughed quite heartily, his voice echoing in the darkness.
‘You're such good company,’ he said.
‘Is there anything I can do for you in return?’
‘More oxygen,’ I said.
‘It's so hot in here.
As a church architect, I have visited, I believe, all the cathedrals in Europe — Chartres, Burgos, Canterbury, Cologne, Saragossa, Milano, Ely, Zagreb, Gozo, Rheims —’ I continued to name them for some while as we tramped down the nave.
‘But this is the first time I have ever entered a hot and stuffy cathedral.’
‘There are new ways.
Neural pathways.
Technology is not solely about ways of conducting war.
It brings blessings.
Not least the new abilities by which we may see human existence anew — relativistically, that is, each person imprisoned in his own umwelt, his own conceptual universe.’
He let out a roar of laughter.
‘Your friend Kafka — I'd have lobotomized him, speaking personally — he said that it was not only Budapest but the whole world that was tragic.
He said, ‘All protective walls are smashed by the iron fist of technology.’
Complaining, of course— the fucker always complained.
But it's the electronic fist of technology which is smashing the walls between human and human.
I exclude the Muslims, of course.
Down they go, like the Berlin Wall, if you remember that far back.
In the future, we shall all be able to share common memories, understandings.
All will be common  property.
Private thought will be a thing of the past.
It's simply a matter of micro-technology.’
I started laughing.
I had not realized what good company Hungarians could be.
‘In that connection, I might mention that Jesus Christ was evidently pretty au fait with micro-technology.
All that resurrection of the body stuff.
Depends on advanced technology, much of it developed during that lucky little war against Saddam Hussein in the Gulf.
Strictly Frankenstein stuff.
Robbing body bags.
Dead one day, up and running — back into the conflict — the next.’
Maté was genuinely puzzled.
We halted under a memorial statue to Frederick the Great.
He had heard of Frankenstein.
It was the other great Christian myth which puzzled him.
This was the first time I had ever encountered anyone walking into a cathedral who had never heard of Jesus Christ.
Explaining about Jesus proved more difficult than I expected.
The heat and darkness confused me.
I knew Jesus was related to John the Baptist and the Virgin Mary, but could not quite remember how.
Was Christ his surname or his Christian name?
My father had been a Christian.
All the same, it was difficult to recall the legend exactly.
I was better on ‘Frankenstein'.
But I ended by clarifying Jesus's role in the scheme of things by quoting, as far as I could remember, from a hymn, ‘He came down on earth from Heaven, he died to save us all.’
Although I couldn't actually see Maté's sneer, I felt it in the darkness.
‘Where was this Jesus when Belsen and Auschwitz and Dresden and Hiroshima happened?
Having a smoke out the back?’
Somehow, I felt it was rather sacrilegious to mention Jesus's name aloud where we were.
The cathedral was constructed in the form of a T, the horizontal limb being much longer than the vertical, stretching away into the endless dark.
Oh, the weight of masonry, felt somehow as pressing on the vertebrae.
And, like fossil vertebrae, great columns reared up on every side, engineered to support vast weight, as if this whole edifice was situated many miles under the earth's crust, the mass of which must somehow be borne.
So I say.
So I understand it.
Yet those stone vertebrae — in defiance of the dull facts of physics — writhed like the chordata, climbing lizard-tailed into the deeper darknesses of the vaulting.
It was the cathedral to end all cathedrals.
Maté and I now stood at the junction of the cathedral's great T. The vertical limb of this overpowering architectural masterpiece sloped downwards.
We stopped to stare down that slope, more sensed than seen.
Kafka could have felt no more trepidation at that time than I, though I covered my nervousness by giggling at Maté's latest joke.
He claimed he had not heard of the Virgin Mary either.
I stood at the top of the slope.
With me was another church architect, Sir Kingsley Amis.
‘The font is somewhere over there,’ he said, gesturing into the darkness.
‘But I'd better warn you it's not drinking water.
Even if it was, you wouldn't want to drink it, would you?’
He gave a throaty laugh.
Both he and I were greatly diminished by Dr Maté, who now made a proclamation, reading from a box.
‘We're here now, on the spot you see indicated on your map, adjacent to the pons asinorum.
Presently a devil will appear and remove one of you.
I am not permitted to say where he will remove you to.
We have to keep destinations secret in wartime, but I am authorized to say that it will be somewhere fairly unpleasant.
As you know, the war between humanity and the rest is still on.
But Geneva rules will apply, except in so far as fire and brimstone will be permitted on a strictly controlled basis.
All torture will be attended by an authorized member of the International Red Cross.’
‘How long do we have to wait?
Is there the chance of a drink before we go?’
Sir Kingsley Amis asked.
‘Devil should be here shortly.
ETA 2001,’ Mate said.
‘Shortly’ was just another of the euphemisms such as surface in wartime.
It indicated an eternity, just as bombs are described as deterrents.
‘This'll spoil his day’ means ‘We'll kill him’, and ‘God’means ‘A ton of bricks is about to fall on you’.
Myself, I prefer euphemisms.
Phew, I was so tired.
Time in the building was lethargic, with every minute stretching, stretching out in companionship with the  night towards infinity.
Reality wore thin, bringing in illusion.
At one point I almost imagined I was sitting typing while a dreadful senseless war was waged in the Gulf.
But the gulf of time I was in was much greater.
Forget reality; it's one of the universe's dead ends…
Interest is hard to sustain, but my feeling was as much of interest as terror.
Only those who enjoy life feel terror.
I admired all the melancholy grandeur round me, the reptilian sense of claustrophobia.
It compared favourably with the slum in which I lived.
At the bottom of the slope before us, a stage became illuminated.
You must imagine this as an entirely gradual process, not easily represented in words.
A. Pause.
Stage.
Pause.
Became.
Pause.
Ill.
Pause.
You.
Min.
Pause.
Ay.
Pause.
Ted.
Trumpets.
It was illuminated predominantly in bars of intersecting blue and crimson.
Funebrial music began to play, brass and bass predominating.
The music, so akin to the lighting, was familiar to me, yet only just above audibility, as the lighting hovered just above the visible end of the spectrum.
These low levels of activity were in keeping with the enormous silences of the cathedral structure.
They were shattered by the sudden incursion of a resounding bass voice which broke into song.
That timbre, that mixture of threat and exultation!
Unmistakable even to a layman.
‘The devil!’
Kingsley Amis and I exclaimed together.
‘And in good voice,’ said Dr Maté.
‘So this is where I have to leave you.’
I was stunned by his indifference.
‘What about that sewing machine?’
I asked.
But he was not to be deflected.
Even while speaking, he was shrinking, either in real terms or because he was being sucked into the distance; darkness made it hard to differentiate.
However, I had little time to waste on Maté.
Attention turned naturally to the devil.
Though he had yet to appear on the dim-lit stage, I knew he was going to come for Kingsley Amis.
‘I'd better make myself scarce too,’ I said.
‘Don't want to get in your way.’
‘Hang on,’ he said.
‘You never know.
He might be after you.
Depends on whether or not he's a literary critic.’
When the devil arrived on stage, he was out of scale, far too large ridiculously far too large, I might say, meaning no disrespect.
It was hard to discern anything of him in the confused dark.
He was black and gleaming, his outline as smooth as a dolphin's even down to the hint of rubber.
He stepped forward and advanced slowly up the ramp, still singing in that voice which shook the rafters.
This struck me as being, all told, unlikely.
It was that very feeling that all was unlikely, that anything likely was over and done with like last year's cricket match, which was most frightening.
I trembled.
Trembling didn't help one bit.
I turned to Kingsley Amis.
He was no longer there.
I was alone.
The devil was coming for me.
In terror, I peered along the great wide lateral arms of the cathedral.
‘Anyone there?’
I called.
‘Help!
Help!
Taxi!’
To the left was only stygian darkness, too syrupy tor me to think of penetrating, the black from which ignorance is made.
As I looked towards the right, however, along the other widespread arm of the building, something materialized there like a stain: light towards the dead dull end of the electromagnetic spectrum.
All this I took in feverishly, for the devil, still singing, was approaching me still.
Perhaps I should apologize for my tears.
As a rationalist, I had but to snap my rational fingers, it might be argued, and the devil would fade away in a puff of smoke.
To which I might say that, rationalist or not, I had spent too many years in my capacity as church architect investigating the fossils of a dead faith not to have imbibed something of the old superstitions.
But — this was more germane — I had a belief in the Jungian notion of various traits and twists of the human personality becoming dramatized as persons or personages.
This enormous devil could well be an embodiment of the dark side of my character; in which case, I was all the less likely to escape him.
Nor did I.
As I took a pace or two to my right, starting to run towards that  taint dull promise of escape, a vision distantly revealed itself.
Fading into being came a magnificent palladian façade, lit in a colour like blood, with doric columns and blind doorways.
Nothing human was to be seen there — no man to whom I might call.
If the burrow to my left represented the squalors of the subconscious, here to my right was the chill of the super-ego.
I ran for it.
But was hardly into my stride when the singing devil reached me.
I screamed.
He snatched me up…
…and bit off my head.
To any of you with decent sensibilities, I must apologize for these horrific images.
You may claim they were subjective, private to me, and should remain private, on the grounds that the world has nightmares enough.
Perhaps.
But what happened to me was that my head was bitten off almost literally.
My memory was wiped.
It's a curious thing suddenly to find oneself walking.
Imagine yourself in a cinema.
The movie begins.
Its opening shot is of some character walking, walking across a featureless landscape.
Photography: grainy.
The shot immediately holds your interest, perhaps because our ancestors right back to the Ice Age were great walkers.
Now imagine that you're not sitting watching in your comfortable stalls seat: you are that character.
Only you're not in a movie.
You're for real, or what we call real, according to our limited sensory equipment.
Your life has just begun and you're walking across what turns out to be Salisbury Plain.
It's cold, there's a hint of rain in the breeze.
The place looks ugly.
But walking is no trouble.
It's everything else that's trouble.
Like how you got where you are.
Like what happened.
Like what your name is.
Like who you are.
Even like — where are you going?
Night is closing in.
That much you understand.
What do you do?
You go on walking.
Over to your right in the distance, half-hidden by a fold of land, is a broken circle of stone monoliths.
You kind of recognize it, although no name comes to you.
It's the ruin of a Stone Age cathedral, taken  out in the war with the Neanderthals, cobalt against the overpraised English countryside.
You continue as dark continues to fall.
Your legs keep working, your pace is unvarying.
You become slightly afraid of this remorseless body, asking yourself, Is it mine?
Dusk gathers about you like a coat when you climb a fence and reach a road.
There is almost no traffic on the road.
You try to thumb a lift from the cars as they approach from either direction, sweeping you with their headlights.
Past they go, never pausing.
Bastards.
The fourteenth car stops.
A woman is driving.
A man sits beside her.
They ask where you want to go, and you say Anywhere.
They laugh and say that is where they are going.
You climb in.
You huddle on the back seat, unable to answer any of their well-meant questions.
They think you are a loony, and drop you in the nearest village.
You are inclined to agree with their judgement.
You wander hopelessly along the road, then, frightened, back into the village.
The village is called Bishops Linctus.
By now its streets are deserted.
Lights glow inside the pub, the Gun Dog, but, with no money in your pocket, you are afraid to enter.
There are countries where you might enter and be looked after in a hospitable way; you do not feel that could happen in England.
A young man in gum boots saunters along the road with a shotgun under his arm.
He stares at you hard as he passes.
He returns and addresses you.
He is guarded but friendly.
He seems not to believe you have lost your memory.
Nevertheless, he takes you along to his house, which is one of a line of council houses on the edge of the village, just before the plain recommences its reign.
His old mother greets you.
She is surprised, saying that Larry never speaks to anyone.
He tells her to shut up.
You stand there, back to the kitchen wall, while she fries up Larry's favourite meal, which is sausages and mashed fish fingers.
You and Larry sit and eat at the table.
It is good.
He has a room he calls His Room.
It is locked.
The old woman interrupts to say it is full of guns.
He says to shut up.
He tells you he is a farm labourer or sometimes a brickie.
At present he is out of work.
He lets you doss on the floor of his bedroom.
The place is full of gun  magazines, and there is a Kalashnikov in Larry's bed.
He sleeps with it.
You express your gratitude.
‘I like helping people,’ Larry replies.
He puts out the light.
You lie there on the floor.
Despite all your worries, you feel pleasure and comfort in those words of his, ‘I like helping people.’
And so you sleep.
Only you're not in this movie.
This is my movie.
I'm for real — or what I call real, according to my limited sensory equipment.
Morning.
When I woke, Larry was already up and about.
I could hear his mother shouting at him.
For a few seconds, I was living with this present situation.
Then the edge of the abyss reappeared.
I could remember nothing further back than the time I was walking over that miserable plain.
When I got up, the old woman gave me a cup of thin instant coffee.
I stood with her against the sink.
She had a canary in a cage.
‘It's Kevin.
We call it Kevin.
I think it's a girl.
One of the family, aren't you?
Keeps me company.
Say hello to Kevin.
I wash it every Saturday, under the hot tap.
It likes that.
Don't you, Kevin?
You like a nice wash under the hot tap.
It's one of the family.
Sing for your mummy then.
Who's a good Kevin?’
I was watching through the window, as Larry loaded boxes of ammunition into the back of an old battered Land Rover.
His mother caught my glance.
‘He's going into Swindon to try and get a job.
You stay here with me.
He's a dangerous driver, is Larry.
We'll go down and see Dr Roberts.
She's a sympathetic woman — trained in London, she was — and she'll help you.’
Larry was looking preoccupied.
His movements were slow, his gaze abstracted, as if he were composing a poem in his head.
Without glancing back at the house, he climbed into the cab of the Land Rover.
Nothing happened.
I went to the window to watch, obscurely thinking something was wrong.
The back of his head could be seen.
Motionless.
Not trying to start the vehicle.
Just sitting there in the driver's seat.
The council houses followed the curve of the road, which wound  up a slight incline.
Beyond the houses was open agricultural land, the plain.
The village lay in the opposite direction.
From the last house, three hundred yards distant, a woman emerged, wearing an old blue raincoat and pushing a baby's push-chair.
She had a scarf tied over her head and was evidently going into the village to shop.
Larry moved as she drew nearer.
The window of the vehicle wound down.
A rifle muzzle protruded from it.
A shot sounded.
The woman in the blue raincoat fell to her knees, still clinging with one hand to the push-chair.
As three more shots rang out, the push-chair blew apart.
The woman's face was covered with shreds of baby as she fell on the road.
Larry's mother had seen at least part of this.
She was drying a plate on a tea towel.
She dropped the plate, ran from the kitchen, and opened the front door.
‘No, no, Larry!
Stop it, you fool.
Whatever do you think you're doing?’
Larry had descended from the Land Rover after firing the four shots.
He moved slowly, with a sleep-walker's lethargy.
With that same lethargy, he snugged the butt of the rifle into his shoulder and fired at his mother.
She was blown from the porch back into the passage.
He fired two more shots into the house.
I ran to the bedroom and heaved myself under the bed, fighting blindly with the magazines.
I was sure he was after me.
There the police discovered me, four hours later, lying in a pool of my own urine.
So it was that eventually I found myself in a hospital in Swindon close to other victims of Larry Foot.
After shooting the woman from the council house and her baby, and his mother, Larry had walked into Bishops Linctus and shot dead the first three people he met, wounding several others.
BISHOPS BLOODBATH screamed the tabloid headlines.
The quiet little affair roused much more excitement than the Soviet War (in which British troops were involved) then reaching one of its many climaxes outside Tblisi.
Why had Larry done it?
The explanation given was that he had always been keen on guns.
Presumably the same explanation would cover the Soviet War.
Armed police from Bishops Magnum and Salisbury shot Larry  down behind the Shell garage.
He had liked to help people, poor Larry.
At least he gave a little pleasure to the bloodthirsty readers of the Sun.
This incident got me swiftly — in an ambulance — into the realm of professional medical scrutiny.
Within a few days, I again had an identity.
I was Roy Edward Burnell, a university lecturer and specialist in church architecture.
I had written a learned book, Architrave and Archetype, a thesis linking human aspiration with human-designed structures, cathedrals in particular.
The chief medico in charge of my case, a Dr Rosemary Kepepwe, entered my hospital room smiling, bringing with her a copy of my book.
‘We're getting somewhere, Roy,’ she said.
‘We'll contact your wife next.’
I smote my forehead.
‘My God, don't say I'm married.’
She laughed.
‘I'm afraid so.
At least you were married.
We'll soon have her tracked down — and other people in your past.
What is the last thing you remember before the white-out?’
Even to me, her attitude seemed amateurish.
When I said something of the sort, Dr Kepepwe explained that most of the original staff of the hospital were serving with British troops in Operation Total Tartary, in Murmansk, Usbekistan, the front in the Caucasus, and the new revolutionary area opening up round Lake Baikal.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union had created a tremendous demand for medication.
‘My husband was a brain surgeon,’ Kepepwe said.
‘The best husband a woman could have.
David won the Isle of Wight Sea-Fishing Trophy two years in succession.
Everyone respected him.
We have three children, one of them at Eton and one now working as a waiter in a Little Chef off the M25 at the South Mimms Service Area.
But David volunteered to serve with Total Tartary.
I had picked up a bit of surgery from him, of course, so here I am.
‘You were quite lucky to get here.
Salisbury Plain is all mined these days.’
‘Lucky me,’ I said.
But it appeared I did not know how lucky.
I had marvelled that it was such a quiet hospital, and ascribed this to  efficiency.
Not so, Dr Kepepwe explained.
I was the only patient in there.
All the other wards were empty.
Civilian patients had been turned out three days earlier, as the hospital prepared to receive wounded from the Eastern theatre of war.
‘Anyhow, I'd better take your details,’ Dr Kepepwe said, reluctantly.
‘Then I'll bring you a cup of tea.
What did you say was the last thing you remembered?’
I told her.
I had gone to South America to view some of the ecclesiastical architecture there.
I arrived in Buenos Aires and checked into my hotel.
I remembered going up in a gilt elevator.
And then — white-out.
The fear of standing on the edge of a great abyss overtook me.
Dr Kepepwe saw the expression on my face.
‘Don't worry — you're not alone, Roy.
How does it feel?’
‘An ocean.
A wide ocean with a small island here and there.
No continent.
The continent has gone.’
As I spoke the words, some strange thing struggled in my mind.
A name almost came back to me, then died.
So I waited.
Waited to be restored.
To pass the time I had access to the hospital library on VDU, together with TV and video.
Also the new media craze, the NV, or nostovision.
Laser projectors could beam whole programmes into the mind, where the programmes became like your own lived memories, though they faded in a few days.
In view of my deficiencies, I avoided the NV and stuck to the library; but little I read remained in my mind.
What sins, what meannesses, what grave errors I had committed in the previous ten years had been forgiven me.
I waited in calm without apprehension.
Dr Kepepwe assured me active steps were being taken to trace those who had been intimate with me during the ten blank years: my parents, my academic colleagues.
The confusions of war, the tight security covering the country, made communication difficult.
When she left in the evening, I wandered through the great empty building.
In the dark of the long antiseptic corridors, green LEDs glowed, accompanied often by hums or growls.
It was like being in the entrails of a glacier.
On the desk in Rosemary Kepepwe's office stood a photograph of her husband David, very black, smiling genially with a large fish on a scale by his side.
I wondered about their lives; but there was nothing on which to speculate.
She was little more to me than an embodiment of kindness.
Only my slippered footsteps on the stairs, the tiles.
I was a ghost among the ghosts of multitudinous lives whose cvs, like mine, had been lost.
Who had lived, died, survived?
A phrase came back uncomfortably from the white-out, ‘the sorry jeste of Life’.
But, I told myself as I took a service elevator up to the roof, I should not think in the past tense.
Any day now and the hospital would he filled again with the living — the military living, harpooned by their wounds, poised on the brink of a final white-out.
They would survive or not, to accumulate more memories, happy or sad as the case might be.
On the roof, the installations of air-conditioning plants painted black by a city's grime lived and breathed.
I stood on the parapet, looking out over the town of Swindon, willing myself to feel less disembodied.
The stars shone overhead, remote but always with promise of something better than the brief rush of biological existence.
As I drank them in, a roar of engines sounded.
Three B-52 Stratofortresses flew overhead, from the west towards the eastern stars.
I went downstairs again, to my ward, my nest in the glacier.
I must wait.
Waiting did not require too much fortitude.
One day soon, Dr Kepepwe would do the trick — with luck before the war-damaged moved in to supplant me in her attentions.
The days would pass.
Help would come.
Indeed, the days did pass.
And then Stephanie arrived.
Stephanie was a vision of delight, tall, fine-boned, aesthetic of countenance, walking easy and free inside a fawn linen suit.
Hair tawny, neat, almost shoulder-length.
I admired the way she strolled into the ward, doing quite determinedly something not to her taste.
With a cautious smile on her face.
And this lady had been my wife.
I could have forgotten that?
I could have forgotten all the times we had  enjoyed together, where we'd been, what we'd done?
So it seemed.
My head had been bitten off.
Like most gusts of pleasure, this one brought its pain.
She sat facing me: calm, sympathetic, but at a distance I had no way of negotiating, as I listened dismayed to what she revealed of those islands, that lost continent.
Stephanie and I had married eight years ago, only four weeks after meeting in Los Angeles for the first time.
We were divorced five years later.
Here indeed, I thought, must lie some of those sins, meannesses and grave errors.
She broke this news to me gently, casting her clear gaze towards the window in preference to seeing my hurt.
The hospital authorities had tracked her down in California, where she was enjoying success as a fabric designer and living with a famous composer of film music.
‘You don't owe me anything,’ she said.
And, after a pause, ‘I don't owe you anything.’
‘It's good of you to come and see me.
The war and everything, and that jumbo blown out of the skies over the Atlantic…’
A small laugh.
‘I was interested, of course.
You're a bit of medical history.’
‘We had no children?’
She shook her head.
‘That whole business was the reason for our falling out.’
‘Shit,’ I said.
A long silence fell between us.
I could have crossed the Sahara in it.
‘Did I ever — I mean, since we split up — did I ever — did we communicate at all?’
‘It was final,’ she said.
‘I didn't want to know.
I like my new life in the States.
What you did was up to you, wasn't it?
But you did send me postcards.
Generally of draughty old churches here and there — of the kind you used to drag me into when we were together.’
‘You can't beat a good old draughty old church,’ I said, smiling.
She did not return the smile.
Perhaps the woman lacked humour.
‘I brought a couple of your cards along in my purse,’ she said.
I noted the Americanism as she dipped into her handbag.
She pulled out one card and handed it over, extending it between two outstretched fingers — as if amnesia was catching.
‘Huh, just one card.
I tore the others up, I'm afraid.’
That, I thought, was a little unnecessary pain she had no reason to inflict.
The card, crudely coloured, showed a picture of a church labelled as St Stephen's Basilica, although I saw immediately that architecturally it was not a basilica.
I turned it over, glanced at the Hungarian stamp, and read the few words I had scribbled to Stephanie, only three weeks earlier.
‘Budapest.
Brief visit here.
Making notes for lectures as usual.
Need some florid Hungarian architecture.
Trust you're well.
Have met strange old friend — just going round to Antonescu's Clinic with him.
Love, Roy.’
I flung my arms round Stephanie and kissed her.
I went back to the Gellert.
There, not entirely surprisingly, was Montagu Clements, still wearing my sweater.
He raised his hands in mock-surrender.
‘Pax.
No offence meant, honest, old chum.
Since I lost my job I've worked as a decoy for Antonescu, luring on innocent foreigners who come here to take advantage of low Hungarian prices.
Economic necessity and all that.’
‘You had your hand in the till — now you've had it in my mind.
Stealing a memory is like murder, you miserable slob.’
‘Yes, and no doubt it will be legislated against when nostovision becomes less than a seven-day wonder.
Till then, Antonescu earns a modest dollar from his bootleg memory bullets.
They're short of hard currency, the Hungarians.
Let me buy you a drink.’
I almost threw myself on him.
‘You've poisoned my life, you bastard, you'd probably poison my drink.’
He was very cool.
‘Let's not fall out.
You have a contempt for me.
Think how I might feel about you.
I've had to edit ten years of your memories, a lot of which weren't edifying.
You should be happy to be rid of them.’
‘I see, Clements — The FOAM Theory of History…
Never learn anything.
Just bloody forget.
Haven't you ever heard that saying about those who forget history being doomed to repeat it?
Why do you think the world's in such a fucking mess?’
He remained unmoved.
‘I have no idea, old boy.
Nor, I suspect, do you, for all your academic posturing.
Without wishing to hurt your feelings, your last ten years were full of crap.
But there — everyone's last ten years were full of crap…’
We were standing in the baroque foyer of the hotel, which had been built in the great European hotel age during the peaceful years preceding the first World War.
I gestured through the doors, through the glass of which traffic could be seen crossing the Szabadsag Bridge.
Beyond lay the dense Magyar thoroughfares, the grandiose piles of masonry, where fat profiteers sweated over their calculators.
‘I was already on my way to the police, Clements, old boy.
Don't pretend we're friends.
You had me dumped on Salisbury Plain, don't forget.’
Clements turned on one of his innocent smiles.
‘Just think, it could have been the Gobi…
I interceded on your behalf.
Be British, old chap — let's compromise.
Let's do a deal.’
‘What deal?’
He said, ‘We could discuss business better in the bar.
You want your memory back, eh?
Don't go to the police and I'll bring you your memory this afternoon.
Agree?
Say three-thirty, after I've taken my customary nap.
OK?’
So I agreed on it.
I agreed, thinking I would go to the police later.
Clements turned up at 3.55.
We sat at the upstairs bar with two tall glasses of iced white Eger wine, for which I paid.
He produced in the palm of his right hand two slender plastic spools, which I recognized as nostovision bullets, ready to be inserted into the head-laser.
‘I had some trouble getting these, old chap.
How about fifty dollars each?’
‘Maybe you really have lost your memory or you'd know I wouldn't fall for that.
Hand them over.
Why two bullets?’
He took a reflective sip of his wine.
‘Antonescu's at the cutting edge of psycho-technology.
We have to know our customers.
They're mainly in America and the Arab World.
It's a specialized market.
We boiled your memory banks down into two categories — the rest we  threw away, sorry to say.
There's your speciality, church architecture and all that.
That spool has a limited but steady sale to academics — a tribute to all the knowledge you had packed away.
I suppose you'll be glad to get that back.
Surely it's worth fifty dollars to you?’
‘Come on, Clements, what's the other bullet?’
‘A hundred dollars, old chum?
It's all your life and activities with a woman called Stephanie.
Very erotic stuff, believe me.
Very popular in Saudi Arabia.’
I threw my wine in his face and grabbed the two bullets.
I leave it to you to decide which bullet I played first.
The Soviet War continues.
Heavy fighting in the Caucasus despite bad weather conditions.
Radio reports said that Alliance forces used chemical and bacteriological weapons in the Kutaisi area.
Questioned, American General ‘Gus’ Stalinbrass said, ‘What the heck else do we do?
These assholes don't give up easy.’
Last night, four Georgian soldiers crossed the Tblisi lines, found their way through a minefield, and gave themselves up to a British journalist, Dicky Bowden.
One of the soldiers was a boy of fourteen.
Bowden said, ‘Starved and disaffected troops like these are all that stand between our advance and the Caspian Sea.’
He was confident that the war would be over in a week or two.
Say a month.
Maximum two months.
A year.
SUMMERTIME WAS NEARLY OVER
I AM RESOLVED to leave some brief account of my days while I am still able.
It does not escape me that a fair hand has already written some account of my early days; but that account broke off too soon, for I returned from the realms of ice, to which solitudes my soul — if I may be presumed to have one — was attracted.
In due time, I returned to the country about the city of Geneva.
Although I had hoped for justice and understanding when my story was known, that was not to be.
Persecution remained my lot.
I had to escape to the nearby wilderness of mountain and ice, to live out my days among chamois and eagle, which were being hunted as avidly as I.
Before leaving the city for ever, I came across a philosopher, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, even more noted than the family of my accursed Master.
At the beginning of one of his books I discovered these words, which to me in my lowly condition were more than words: ‘I am made unlike anyone I have ever met; I will even venture to say that I am like no one in the whole world.’
Here was a sentiment I might have uttered myself.
To find such understanding in a book gave me strength.
Ever since coming upon Rousseau's writings so long ago, I have tried to live with my dear wife above the glaciers in the condition he would have approved, that of the Noble Savage — in defiance of those citified creatures who multiply in the valleys far below.
The placidity of a late August day lingers over the Swiss Alps.
The sound of automobiles wending their way along the road far below does not reach me; I hear only a distant occasional cowbell and the cheerful nearer transactions of insects.
I am at peace.
The helicopters  appeared after noon, when the clouds cleared from the brow of the Jungfrau.
They had been active all week, unsettling me with their noise.
There were two of them, blue, belonging to the Swiss police.
Soon they disappeared behind a nearby slope — and I crawled from under the bush where I had hidden.
Once all was peace here.
We did not know of tourists and helicopters.
Now the numbers of the People are increasing.
If it isn't helicopters, it's cars on the way to the Silberner Hirsch below, or machines roaring in distant valleys.
Elsbeth and I will have to move to a more remote place, if I can find one.
Elsbeth says she does not wish to move again.
Our cave on the upper slopes of the Aletschhorn suits her well, but ours is a fugitive life, as I explain to her.
In summer, the People drive off the highway up the track leading to the Silberner Hirsch, with its fine view of the mountains to the north.
Occasionally, one or two of them will leave their cars and climb higher, almost as far as the winter shelters.
Perhaps they will pick the wild flowers growing in the lush grasses, cornflower, poppy, clover, eglantine and the frail vetch.
They rarely reach the cave on its precipitous slope.
I never molest the People.
Elsbeth and I stay hidden.
I protect her in my arms.
In winter, she and I are completely alone with the elements.
My temperament is compatible with the wind and the snow and the storms born from the cold wombs of northern lakes.
The People's machines do not threaten us then.
We survive somehow.
I have learned not to be afraid of fire.
I sit over its red eye in the cave and listen to the musics of the atmosphere.
I am kin with the slopes hereabouts.
They are steep and treacherous with outcropping rock.
No People come to ski on them.
In the autumn, before the first snows fall, when fog rolls up from the valley, the hotel closes down, the People all depart.
Only a boy lives at the hotel to act as watchman with his goats and chickens.
That's far below our eyrie — I go down there to scavenge.
Oh, I have seen that boy's face full of fear as he stares through a window at me passing in a swirl of snow.
Our winter world is without human inhabitants.
I can't explain it.
I cannot explain to Elsbeth where the People go.
Do they sleep all winter, like the waterfall?
This is the trouble: that I understand nothing.
Long though I have lived, I never understand better as years pass.
I never understand why the teeth of winter bite so cruelly down into the bone, how daylight sickens from the east, why Elsbeth is so chill as I lie with her, why the nights are so long, without word or gleam.
I am troubled by my lack of understanding.
Nothing remains, nothing remains.
Best not to think of another winter.
It is summer now, time of happiness.
But summertime is nearly over.
All this livelong day I lay on my favourite rock in the sun.
The flies visited and crawled on me.
Also many other small things that may have life and thought — butterflies, snails in curled shell, spiders, maggots.
I lay staring at the People below, coming to and going from the Silberner Hirsch.
They climb from their machines.
They walk about and photograph the valley and the hill peaks.
They enter the restaurant.
In time, they come from it again.
Then they drive away.
Their cars are beads on the thread of highway.
They have homes, often far distant.
Their homes are full of all manner of possessions.
They are capable of many kinds of activity.
I hear their planes roar overhead, leaving a trail of snow across the sky.
People are always busy, like the flies and ants.
This also they can do: procreate.
I have mated many times with Elsbeth.
She brings forth no child.
Here is another thing I cannot understand.
Why does Elsbeth not bring forth a child?
Is the fault in her or in me, because I am strangely made, because, as Rousseau said, ‘I am made unlike anyone I ever met’?
The grass grows high before my sight.
I peer through its little ambush at the scene below.
Even the grass makes more grass, and all the small things that live in the grass reproduce their kind, until summer is over.
Everything conceives more things, except Elsbeth and I.
Elsbeth remained as usual in our cave beside the waterfall.
When the good season is spent and cold bites to the bone, the waterfall dies like most other living things.
Its music ceases.
It becomes rigid and  mute.
What is this grief that visits the Earth so regularly?
How to explain it?
Only in the spring does the waterfall recover, and then it roars with delight at regaining life, just as I did.
Then Elsbeth and I are happy again.
My head becomes cloudy as I lie on my rock peering through the grass at the scene down below.
After night has fallen, I will climb down the slopes to walk about unseen round the hotel and retrieve what the People have discarded.
I find there something to eat, and many other things, discarded papers and books, this and that.
The night is my friend.
I am darkness itself.
Why it has to be thus I know not.
Yet I have taught myself not to feel discontent.
Once I was malicious because I was miserable, hut no more.
Now I have my lovely mate, I have schooled myself to be neither malicious nor miserable, and not to hate People.
In the discarded newspapers I read that there are People far more evil than ever I was.
They take pleasure in killing the innocent.
This murder they do not only with their bare hands but with extreme weapons, the nature of which I am unable to comprehend.
Thousands die in their wars every year.
Sometimes I read the name of my Maker in the newspapers.
Even after all this time, they still speak ill of him; why it does not therefore make me, his victim, welcome among People I do not know.
This is something else eluding my understanding.
Lying in my cloudy state, I fall asleep without knowing it.
The flies buzz and the sun is hot on my spine.
To dream can be very cruel.
I try to tear these visions from myself.
In my dreams, memories of dead People rise up.
One claims that I have his thighs and legs, another that I have his torso.
One wretch wishes his head returned, another even claims his internal organs.
These desperate People parade in my sleep.
I am a living cemetery, a hospital of flesh for those who lack flesh.
What can I do?
Within me I feel dreadful ghosts and crimes locked within my bones, knotted into my very entrails.
I cannot pass water without a forgotten claimant reaching for what is his.
Do People suffer in this way?
Being a mere composite from charnel  houses, I fear that I alone undergo this sorrow behind the eyebrows.
Residual scenes from dreadful other memories play like lice inside veins I hardly dare look on as mine.
I feel myself a theatre of other lives and deaths.
Why then do People shun me?
Have I not more humanity than they trapped inside me?
While I suffered from these dreams on my slab of rock, something woke me.
I heard the sound of voices carried on the thin air.
Two People, females, were climbing upwards.
They had left behind the Silberner Hirsch and were moving towards the place where I lay.
I observed them with the silent attention a tiger must give its approaching prey.
And yet not that exactly, for there was fear in my heart.
The People always awaken fear in me.
The elder of these two women was gathering wild flowers, exclaiming as she did so.
It was innocent enough, yet still I felt the fear.
The elder female sank down on a tree stump to rest, fanning herself with her hand.
The other one came on, picking her way cautiously.
I saw the brown hair on the crown of her head, gleaming in the sun with a beauty I cannot describe.
She would have passed me by a few feet, perhaps not noticing me.
Yet because I could not bear to lie where I was and chance being seen, I jumped up with a great bound and confronted her.
The female gave a gasp of fear, looking up at me with her mouth open, revealing tongue and white teeth.
‘Help!’ she called once, until I had my hand over the lower part of her face.
The look she gave me changed from fear to disgust.
Oh, I've seen that look on the faces of People before.
It always awakens my fury.
The faces of People are unlike mine, plastic, mobile, given to expressing emotion.
With one blow I could wipe that expression and the flesh that paints it right from their skulls.
As I lifted her, her toes dangled in their white trainers.
I thrust my face into hers, that female face dewed with the heat of afternoon.
As I considered whether to smash her and throw her down on the mountainside, I caught her scent.
It hit me as forcibly as a blow to the stomach.
That scent…
So different from the scent of Elsbeth…
It caused  a kind of confusion in my brain, making me pause.
One of those old elusive memories from the back of my brain returned to baffle me — a memory of something that had never happened to me.
I have said I understand little; at that moment I understood nothing, and that terrible lack ran through me like an electric shock.
I put her down.
‘You monster…’ the female said, staggering.
Beneath us, the descents were toothed with jagged rock.
Rather than fall, she clung to my arm — a gesture so trusting in its way as to melt the remains of my anger.
I could remember only how vulnerable People were, the females in particular.
At that instant, I would have fought a wild beast in order to preserve her unharmed.
As though sensing some abatement of my ferocity, she said in a natural tone, ‘I did not mean to startle you.’
When I could not think how to answer this, unaccustomed as I was to conversing with People, she went on, ‘Do you speak English?
I am just a tourist here on vacation.’
Still I could not answer, my senses reeling from her scent and from the look of her.
It was as if a little wild doe had come to me, all quivering with a half-mistrust.
She was young.
Her face was round and open, without scars from medical science.
Her grey eyes were set in a brown skin smooth like the shell of a hen's egg.
The hair I had watched from above had become disturbed when I lifted her, so that it shaded the line of her left cheek.
She wore a t-shirt with the name of an American university printed on it, and denim shorts cut ragged round her plump thighs.
Beneath the shirt I saw the outline of her breasts.
That outline held so entrancing a meaning that I was further disarmed.
My difficulty in breathing was such that I clutched my throat.
She looked at me with what I took to be concern.
‘Say, you OK?
My friend's a doctor.
Maybe I'll call her to come on up.’
‘Don't call,’ I said.
I sat down in the long grass, puzzled to understand my weakness.
In some elusive way, here before me was the representative of something, some enormous sphere of sensations and transcendent values such as I had only read about, something  my Maker had withheld from me which I desperately needed.
That I could put no name to it made it all the more tantalizing, like a song when only the tune remains and the words are lost by time.
‘My friend can help,’ said this astonishing young person.
She turned as if to call but I growled at her again, ‘Don't call,’ in so urgent a voice that she desisted.
When she looked up the mountainside, as if searching for help there, I realized that she still had fear of me, little knowing the true state of affairs, and felt herself like an animal in a trap.
‘But you're ill,’ she said.
‘Or else in trouble with the law.’
Her remark released my ability to speak to her.
‘My trouble is with the law of humanity, which rules against me.
Law is invented to protect the rulers, not the ruled; the strong, not the weak.
No court on Earth is concerned with justice, only with law.
The weak can anticipate persecution, not justice.’
‘But you are not weak,’ she said.
Her grey eyes when she looked at me made me tremble.
When the moon is high, I roam the mountainsides much of the night.
That dear silver dish in the sky is like an eye, guarding me.
But in the grey eyes of this female I read only a kind of concealed hostility.
‘Justice is only a name.
Persecution and weakness are real enough.
Those who for whatsoever reason have no roof over their heads are no better than deer to be hunted down.’
My words appeared to make no impression on her.
‘In my country, there is Welfare to look after the homeless.’
‘You know nothing.’
She did not dispute that, merely standing before me, head bowed, yet sneaking side glances at me and round about.
‘Where do you live?’ she asked, in a minute.
I jerked my head in the direction of the mountain above us.
‘Alone?’
‘With my wife.
Are you…a wife?’
She dismissed the question with a toss of her head.
I listened to the flies buzzing about me and the murmur of the bees in the clover as they tumbled at our feet.
These small sounds were the building bricks of the silence that enfolded us.
She stuck out a small brown hand.
‘I'm not afraid any more.
I'm sorry I startled you.
Why don't you take me to visit with your wife?
What's her name?’
At that, I was silent with mistrust a long time.
Her scent reached me as I took the hand gently into mine and looked down at her.
Finally, I spoke the sacred name.
‘Elsbeth.’
She too paused before responding.
‘Mine's Vicky.’
She did not ask my name, nor did I offer it.
There we stood on the perilous slope.
This encounter had used much of my courage.
I had caught her, yet still I feared her.
While I contemplated her, she continued to look about with uneasy glances like a trapped animal, and I saw her breasts move with her breathing.
Now those honest grey eyes, which I associated with the moon, were furtive and unkind.
‘Well then,’ she said, with an uneasy laugh, ‘what's keeping us?
Let's go.’
Perhaps my Maker did not intend that my brain should function perfectly.
This little thing whose hand I held could easily be crushed.
There was no reason for me to fear it.
Yet fear it I did, so greatly did the idea come to me that if I took her up to the cave to meet Elsbeth, she would somehow have trapped me instead of I her.
Yet this notion was conquered by a stronger urge I could not deny.
If I led this tender scented female to the cave, she would then be far away from her friend and entirely within my power.
We would be private to do that supreme thing, whether she wished for it or not.
Elsbeth would understand if I overpowered her and had my way with her.
Why should I not?
Why else was this morsel, this Vicky, sent to me?
Even at the cost of revealing the whereabouts of the cave to one of the People I must take this specimen there — I must, so great was my urge, thundering in me like the breakers of an ocean.
When I was finished with her, I would make sure she did not give our hiding place away.
Elsbeth would approve of that.
Then our secret life could continue as before, with only the small wild things knowing of our existence.
So thereupon I echoed her words.
‘Let's go.’
The way was steep.
She was puny.
I kept good hold of her, part-dragging her after me.
The afternoon sun blazed on us and her scent rose to me, together with her sobs.
The bushes became smaller, more scanty.
I had come this way a hundred times, always varying my route so as to avoid making more of a track than a rabbit might do.
We came to the Cleft, a shallow indentation, a fold in the flesh of the mountain.
Here the infant waterfall played its tune, gushing with pure water which, several hundred feet down the valley, would become a tributary of the Lotschental river.
Behind the fall, hidden by a dark-leaved shrub, was the entrance to the cave.
Here we had to pause.
She claimed she must get her breath back.
She bent double and stayed that way, and her brown hair hung down, and her little fingertips touched the ground.
Great white clouds rolled above us, tumbling over the mountain summit as if eager to find quieter air.
Of a sudden, one of the police helicopters shot overhead, startling me with its enormous clatter, as if the thing were a flying tree, streaking out of sight behind the crisp crest of the Jungfrau.
I had no time to hide before it was over and gone.
I grabbed the girl and pulled.
‘Into the cave with you.’
She struggled.
‘What if Elsbeth doesn't want to see me?
Shouldn't you warn her first?
Why don't you call her out here?’
Not answering, I dragged her towards the cave.
She seized at a bush but I beat her hand away.
‘I don't want to see Elsbeth,’ she screamed.
‘Help!
Help!’
Silencing her with a hand enveloping her face, I half-lifted her and so we entered the cave, the girl struggling furiously.
Elsbeth lay there in the shade, watching everything, saying nothing.
I let the girl loose and pushed her towards my wife.
The girl went motionless, staring forward, one hand to her lips.
There was no sound but the high buzz of flies.
I waited for her to try to scream again, readying myself to leap upon her and bear her down.
But when she spoke, it was softly, with her gaze on Elsbeth, not me.
‘She's been dead a very long time, hasn't she?’
Some People can cry.
I have no facility for tears.
Yet as soon as this activity began in Vicky, a storm of weeping — as I judged the sensation — accumulated in my breast like a storm over the Alps.
In Elsbeth's eyes no movement showed.
The maggots had done their work in those sockets and moved to other pastures.
As I raised my hands above my head and let out a howl, two male People rushed into the cave.
They yelled as they came.
The weeping girl, Vicky, threw herself out of danger into the recesses of the cave, where I stored the fruits of the autumn.
The men flung a net over me.
Wildly though I struggled, using all my strength, the net was unbreakable.
The male People drew it tight, as fishermen must have done when they hauled in a catch in olden times.
They shackled my legs so that I could not run.
Then they felled me, so that I lay by Elsbeth and was as helpless as she.
Those People treated me as if I were no better than an animal.
I was dragged out of the cave, through the waterfall, to lie on my back gazing up at the fast-moving clouds in the blue sky; and I thought to myself, Those clouds are free, just as I was until now.
More male People arrived.
I found out how they came there soon enough.
One of their helicopters was standing on a level ledge of mountainside above my refuge.
The female, Vicky, came to me and bent down so that I could look again into her grey eyes.
‘I regret this,’ she said.
‘I had to act as decoy.
We knew you were somewhere upon the Aletschhorn, but not exactly where.
We've been combing this mountainside all week.’
My faculty of speech was deserting me along with my other powers.
I managed to say, ‘So you are just an accomplice of these other cruel beasts.’
‘I am working with the local police, yes.
Don't blame me…’
One of the male police nudged her.
‘Out of the way, miss.
He's still dangerous.
Stand back there.’
And she moved away.
I was lifted up and lashed to a stretcher.
Her face disappeared from my sight.
Still encased in the net, I was dropped on the ground as if I were an old plank.
They shouted a great deal, and waved their arms.
Only then did I realize they were going to transport me up the  mountain.
Five male People were there, one of them controlling the other four.
They looked down on me.
Again those expressions of disgust: I might have been a leopard trapped by big-game hunters, when mercy did not enter into their thoughts.
The male person who ordered the others around had a mouth full of small grey teeth.
Staring down, he said, ‘We're not letting you escape this time, you freak of nature.
We have a list of murders stretching back over the last two centuries for which you are responsible.’
Though I read no sympathy in his face or mouth, I found a few words to offer.
‘Sir, I had never an intent to offend.
It was my Maker who offended against me, acting so unfatherly against one who never asked to be born in any unnatural way.
As for these murders, as you name them, the first one only, that of the child, was done in malice, when I had no knowledge of those states of being which you, not I, can enjoy — to wit, life and death.
The rest of my offences were committed in self-defence, when I found the hands of all People were against me.
Let me free, I pray.
Let me live upon this blessed mountain, in the state of nature and innocence described by Rousseau.’
His mouth thinned and elongated like an earthworm.
‘You shit,’ he said, turning away.
Another male appeared over the ragged skyline.
‘Chopper's ready,’ he called.
They swung into action.
I was lifted up.
It took four of them to carry me.
I could not see the female but, as I was raised to their shoulders, I caught a glimpse of my happy home, that cave where Elsbeth and I had been so content.
Then it was gone, and they laboured up the slope with me, trussed and helpless.
As we approached the helicopter, a shower burst over us, one of those unheralded showers which sweep the Alps.
I tasted the blessed rain on my lips, drinking it even while the People complained.
I thought, this is the last time I taste of the benisons of nature.
I am being taken to the realms of the People, who hate nature as much as they hate me, who am unnatural.
A chill sharpened the flavour of the water.
It carried the taint of  autumn, that melancholy transition time before winter.
Summertime was nearly over, and my wife would lie alone and lonely in our cave, waiting for my return, looking with her sightless eyes for her lover, uttering never a word of complaint.
BETTER MORPHOSIS
LOOK, I'll put it to you this way, in the hope you'll understand.
Literature's OK, but what really grabs me is scuttling, right?
Like, I mean, scuttling — here and there, anywhere I feel like.
Which is to say that directions are better than sentences.
Any direction better than any sentence.
Scuttle scuttle bliss.
Bliss.
Me and all my friends had been having this really great scuttle.
OK?
A megascuttle, all round this apartment building in Prague.
A moment's inattention and what happens?
— Jesus, I wake up and find myself transformed.
Like lying in a BED, transformed into — Look, I have to tell you.
Into this huge pale human thing.
Well — shit, into Franz Kafka.
KAFKA.
(That's his name.
They have NAMES.)
Where's everyone gone?
Nowhere.
I don't know.
I don't know, I never had a single thought before.
Suddenly I'm Franz Kafka, lying there in that bed and thinking fit to bust.
THINKING.
Yuk…
All I'm thinking is just awful.
I mean, I'm a fan of oily rags and maybe mildew.
A bit of damp in a bad corner and I'm happy.
Anything.
Grease, know what I mean?
But not for fuck's sake thinking.
Honest, I didn't even know thinking had been invented.
But there I was, and thinking — I may as well say it, thinking bad thoughts about my father.
How he was so oppressive, how he was so strong and hairy and his voice was so loud and when he washed of a morning he made splashes in the wash-basin and blew his nose into the water, both nostrils at once into the soapy water and…
Well, look, Christ, never mind thinking, like the whole concept of FATHER was alien.
Come on, down there in the basement, we just spawned, remember.
We just were.
One moment, nothing.
Eggs.
Next moment, up and running.
Dozens of us, scuttling.
You know?
Scuttling, having real fun, mobile as all get-out.
Little legs going like the clappers.
So I felt down the bed.
TWO LEGS.
Jesus.
What a nightmare!
Just TWO LEGS.
Where had all the others gone?
Pity's sake, what the hell was I supposed to do with two legs?
You think you can get a good scuttle going with two legs?
Forget it!
Two legs.
I can't get over it.
Between the legs some hair of a sort and this stupid flabby thing.
I feel it with my mandibles —
Mandibles!— Yow, what have the bastards done to me?
I have lost my shagging mandibles.
No mandibles.
Just these feeble hand things, all pale and pulpy and —
— and I pull at it and it — sort of gets stiff —
— come on, I must be off my tiny thorax —
— it gives out with some mess that I might normally eat but now it sort of blows away and there's a whole muddle of emotion in my…
MIND I cannot cope with.
Look, reproduction should not require such an upheaval.
But almost immediately Kafka — me, dammit — begins thinking again, and I get out of bed.
No kidding.
I. Get.
Out.
Of.
BED.
The horror of it!
Those two awful long white legs, not neat at all, covered with a layer of flesh…
I move them and instead of having a good scuttle across the floor, I stand up on these legs in quite the wrong attitude.
And I walk, balancing on these two stilts, high above the floor.
Frightened?
Sonny, I was scared out of my wits.
Scared shitless, and that's the truth.
There's a chest across the room, of the sort I used to scuttle under.
Instead, I pick up the clock on it and I see it is half-past six.
You follow me?
I'm reading a clock and I'm thinking it's time to be going to work.
Me, who never read a clock or went to work in my life.
Look, I've spent days in basements and places like that, but for fun.
FUN.
Work?
I'd never heard of work till that moment, and there I was thinking of myself dressed in trousers and sitting at a desk with a ledger.
Sitting.
Christ, I ask myself in a panic, how the shagging hell  do you SIT?
But somehow at the same time I am washing myself — I'm trying to get the filth off myself.
It's incredible.
I thought soap was something you ate, yet here I am, calling myself Franz and rubbing this stuff round my neck.
Not at all liking filth.
Only yesterday, it used to be a way of life.
And there's Father — OK, don't say it, I'm only telling you there's FATHER, banging on the door with a fist and calling, ‘Franz, Franz, what's the matter with you?’
You think that's odd?
Then dig this: I ANSWER.
Yes, I make this noise kind of thing in my throat and I say, ‘I'm just ready.’
That's what I say.
I have never spoken one word before fine, many a scuttle here and there, but never a WORD.
And there I stand, bold as brass, if shaking a bit, saying, ‘I'm just ready.’
Maybe I'm growing stronger.
And the nightmare goes on.
I can't repeat it.
You'd think I was round the twist if I told you.
I mean, like sitting at a breakfast table with a FAMILY.
Not thousands, just four of them, each with two of these legs I've been telling you about.
You think I looked funny?
Up yours.
I shiver to think of that breakfast.
Those people…
Not a one of them realized I was not human.
They looked at me and they pretend I'm someone called Franz Kafka.
Maybe they really thought I was Franz Kafka.
People who can't scuttle just can't be trusted.
Standing, I sample a bowl of oatmeal.
So after this meal, when I find I'm stuffing foul non-rancid things down my throat — without bad effects — I try a quick scuttle round the room.
Can I get up the wall?
Can I scuttle across the ceiling?
What, with two legs?
Forget it.
I fall flat on my bonce and break a chair.
The other three people all run around screaming — quite fast, admittedly, but you would hardly call it scuttling.
Scuttling needs technique.
I don't have to tell you.
My idea is to get out of the house.
So I put on a coat.
Don't laugh.
I'm telling you, I put on a coat.
In this nightmare, everyone puts on coats when they go out.
Maybe I'll see the funny side of it one day.
On the way to work, we bump into Milena.
That's a female of the species.
‘Hello, Franz,’ she says.
‘Thanks for your letter.
How are you?’
This is meant to be the sexy bit, but don't get excited, chums.
Franz — me — I — he goes over all shy.
Can't even look at her properly.
Stutters.
In his mind thinks of simply incredible things he would do to her, involving getting her on a couch and going into unrealistic positions without clothes, plus jerky movements.
Of course, EGGS are at the bottom of it all.
That at least I can understand.
But does he get on with the egg-laying?
Do they spawn?
Not a bit of it.
They just stand there in the street.
I say, ‘I'm not too good this morning.
The question of my health is a difficult one, which I shall have to answer at length in a letter, if you can find the patience to read it.
I wouldn't hold it against you if you didn't read it.
Whatever you think I look like does not necessarily represent the truth.’
This is bizarre.
She replies, ‘I liked the flowers.
They now stand in my room.
They bring the daylight into my room.
Perhaps you will come to see them, visit my room.’
And I say, ‘No, you are not listening.’
And he's thinking of her ovipositor.
I can hear his stomach rumbling, and long to escape among the cobbles underfoot, where lovely horse droppings lie.
I could scuttle scuttle scuttle like fury among them.
‘I keep imagining this morning that I have — please believe me, Milena, because when we're married you will have to put up with a lot of this, but I keep imagining that I have lots of little crisp sepia legs.’
‘What colour?’ she asks, startled.
‘Sepia.
A sort of light, faded brown, perhaps with a touch of mahogany.
Anyhow, I keep thinking I'm a common household pest.
Horse shit!’
‘What?’
Milena backs away in disgust.
But this word is mine.
I have managed to squeeze out that one phrase, ‘horse shit’.
Much better than conversation.
Kafka and Milena take fright and run off in different directions.
Looks like egg-laying has taken a beating.
Somehow I get to my workplace.
All sorts of men there — I'm terrified, of course— in big boots.
I keep thinking I'm going to get stamped on, even when the clots are calling me Franz.
I sit down at this desk with a ledger.
It isn't as difficult as I'd thought, because I have found how to…
Look, I'm not explaining all this for fun…
I have found how to bend in the middle.
Down I sit, and what do I do?
I shouldn't be doing this.
I know I shouldn't be doing this, but still I do it.
(Yes, right, figure that one out…)
I start writing The fucking Trial.
In a notebook.
In longhand.
Like there was no tomorrow.
Scared of being caught.
Don't tell me it doesn't make sense.
There's that thing, my HAND, utterly repulsive, and it is moving, making tiny scrawls on the paper.
Scrawls I might enjoy, on their own, but unfortunately they are not just mere scuttles — oh, no, it seems I'm in some kind of a scuttle-free universe — these scuttles spell something.
Spell.
SPELL.
Don't ask me to explain, just take it that's what they do, see?
‘K. was informed by telephone that next Sunday a short inquiry into his case would take place.’
That's what Kafka — that's what I wrote.
It didn't make sense to me.
I'm no fool, but that sentence wouldn't make sense to any insect.
Telephone?
Sunday?
Yet he — I — seemed pleased enough, and kept dribbling these words across the page.
What is all this?
I asked him.
Who the hell are you?
No answer, naturally.
But he did then stop this scrawling, which was a relief.
He rested his head in his hands.
He closed his eyes.
That is, sorry, I mean I rested my head in my hands.
I closed my eyes.
Bad feelings came over me.
An inspector approached, walking heavily between the clerks' desks.
When he got to Kafka's desk, he spoke.
‘Get on with your work.’
I looked up.
At last I found my voice.
‘Please help me,’ I chirped.
‘I'm an innocent cockroach.
Sir.’
Kafka — I — was taken before the supervisor.
I repeated my sentence.
By now, I could say it more loudly.
My two pale flabby little paws were waving, as if in protest.
Eventually, a doctor was called.
DOCTOR.
It seems these humans are often — unwell — a kind of failure even to non-scuttle.
He examined me, and was not surprised to find I had only two legs, though of course I squealed about it.
So here I am in this damp cell now.
A considerable relief, let me tell you.
There are cockroaches here, thank God.
They scuttle over the floor.
Scuttle scuttle scuttle.
Great.
Sense at last.
I lie on the floor so that they can scuttle over me.
‘Don't.
Please,’ says Kafka.
Me.
‘Sod off,’ I say.
Scuttle scuttle scuttle.
Happiness.
THREE DEGREES OVER
ON THE flight back to England, Alice Maynard found herself restless, and in a curious state of mind generally.
She avoided conversation with the other passengers, who, she saw immediately, were in commerce and not the sort of people she usually mixed with.
She tried to withdraw into herself.
Really, she had been so outgoing in the States.
So Alice refused all offers of alcohol from the solicitous hostess in First Class, rejected the proffered magazines, donned her eyepads, and lay back as far as possible in what the airline liked to call her armchair.
Gradually, the drone of the Boeing's engines faded into the background of her thought.
Yet she remained tense, trying to vanquish that unease which always attended her on transatlantic flights, despite a helpful air-sickness pill.
Perhaps it was not so much the fear of the air — or of the weary hours to be passed before they reached London Heathrow — as the fear of the ocean.
On European flights, she felt no such unease; she had made such excursions recently on behalf of her college fund-raising activities.
But that great stretch of ocean beneath the plane, directly below her seat, that great stretch of amorphous water, grey, insatiable, impossible to comprehend, represented a threat.
Her life, and her husband's, bless him, were so secure, so free of the ghastly crises which afflicted other Oxford people in their mid-forties — so, in a word, if indeed there was such a word, so un-oceanic.
Really, the Atlantic was like the subconscious.
Drop into it and you were lost.
The very notion of falling into that mass of water, as into unforeseen circumstances, and being swallowed — becoming an unconsidered mote and being swallowed — was enough to set the pulses racing.
Of course, one told oneself that that was nonsense — some clever people would call it a manifestation of…well, rather personal fears.
One thought of other things.
A well-disciplined mind could do that with confidence.
For instance, one thought of that nearly completed critical edition of Emily Dickinson's poems, to be published by an American university press.
It would be a pleasure to return to one's desk in Septuagint College and resume one's ordinary work.
As freezing persons recollect the snow
First chill — then stupor — then the letting go
A disconcerting person, Emily Dickinson, but her shrinking from the sexual side of life was something with which one could entirely sympathize.
She roused, removed her eyepads, and looked about the cabin.
Everything was as normal.
All armchairs were filled, mainly with men, most of them sipping champagne, as if a flight were something to be celebrated, like a wedding.
Alice had thought that a white-haired man was sitting in the chair next to her.
She saw she was mistaken.
A heavily-built young woman was leaning forward, right elbow on the armrest, writing left-handedly on a notepad balanced on her lap.
Her shoulder-length hair obscured her face, though Alice moved position to try and see more than a slab of cheek.
The woman wore a dark heavy dress with three-quarter-length sleeves.
This was the source of Alice's unease.
No, what an absurd thought!
True, there seemed something vaguely unpleasant about the woman, but that was nobody else's business.
Alice did not have to talk to her neighbour.
She lay back, more determined than ever to sleep.
It was silly to worry.
She was not the worrying kind, any more than Harold was.
The fund-raising tour of the States had tired her, which was natural enough.
Now she could rest until they reached Heathrow and English soil.
Heathrow!
Suddenly the word sounded so English.
Alice had enjoyed lecturing about the need of the University, and  Septuagint in particular, for funding.
The American audiences had been most receptive, and generous as Americans always were.
She had spoken eloquently — and not without quoting American authors — of the opportunities facing Britain in 1988, of Mrs Margaret Thatcher's remarkable drive to revive the economy, and at the same time of the considerable drawing in of horns to which the University had been forced.
She spoke of Oxford, that ancient seat of learning, to which universities all over the world still looked for example.
And she asked for their support over a difficult period.
In fact, she was asking for no more than American colleges everywhere asked of their alumni, and many Americans had benefited from the Oxford system.
It had been calculated that there were some six and a half thousand living American Oxonians, many of them leading distinguished careers as a result of their education.
Nor did she refrain from alluding, in the closing passages of her speech, to Mrs Thatcher's wish for a moral revival in England.
She approved of that, as evidently did the majority of her audiences, fired by the example of their own President (soon, alas, to step down).
The mere notion had a sense of mission achieved, and Harold would be proud of her.
That success would certainly constitute no impediment to his own career in the University.
Dear Harold.
She thought of the woman at a mid-Western university she had visited: Frances someone, wife of a lecturer in English Literature.
Frances was a New Yorker, totally lost in Nebraska.
‘Oh, yes,’ she had said, in answer to a remark of Alice's, ‘we sure are quiet here.’
A quick look round to see if anyone on the faculty might be listening and then, traitorously, raising her glass almost to her lips, ‘In fact, I sometimes wonder if we aren't all dead.’
Alice smiled at the recollection.
How different Oxford was from Nebraska…
Oxford, the very centre of intellectual life.
Her thoughts drifted, but she was not asleep.
Again the drone of the plane seemed to echo a deeper unease, which again came to the surface of her mind.
She opened her eyes.
It seemed as if the woman in the adjacent chair had shuffled herself closer.
Her dark-clad arm now overlapped the armrest, a loop of sleeve hanging down on Alice's side.
An old-fashioned analogue  watch and a chunky bracelet on the right wrist might be observed through half-closed lids.
The thick dark hair — really, it gave no appearance of having been washed recently — obscured the plane of the cheek.
The woman was still writing, writing, with savage intensity.
The nails on the hand clutching the pen were bitten down to the quick — always a sign of savagery.
Alice glanced at her own hands, small, neat, the nails immaculately well maintained, and covered with a transparent varnish to protect them from the world.
Drone drone drone went the engine noise, almost as if it were the sound of the pen against the paper.
Somehow, this woman — this squaw — seemed immense and, because immense, threatening.
Alice herself was of middle height petite was the word her mother had used — with small, delicate, but sharp features.
Her body likewise, really.
Not really built for childbearing — and, after all, a modern feminist, a career-woman, had no place in her life for the bother of children.
Harold had seemed not to mind.
Thank God, they had both made rational choices in marrying each other(she had kept her maiden name because, well, other considerations apart, Maynard was to be preferred to Badcock)…
Neither of them had ever carried the sensual side to excess.
Dear Harold.
Somehow, Harold Badcock was Harold Badcock in the way that Oxford was Oxford, an exemplar of rationality and decorum.
Supposing the aircraft went down into that awful grey ocean…
Then, she was sure, Harold would be the last thing she would think of as she drowned.
Harold, and Emily Dickinson.
Certainly not the woman in the next seat…
Who was still writing…
She knew it, even without removing the eyepads and opening her eyes.
Even as she sank, she would know the woman was still leaning forward, great uncouth lump, writing.
Writing what?
Writing out her soul?
Writing out menus, more like?
She was a big clumsy woman in middle age, her figure gone, a greedy eater, probably greedy about everything, greedy in the way clouds were greedy when they obscured the sun, just when she was sitting out in their neat  little garden in Chadlington Road.
That was where she liked to mark papers, under the laburnum tree Harold had planted when they had moved in, many years ago.
Leaning forward to study the papers more clearly, she realized that she could get a better view of the pad on which the squaw was composing.
The woman, writing in that cramped way, left hand curled about the pen, used a bold sloping script.
It unravelled itself across the page.
Now it was forming a name.
Alice read the name.
Harold Badcock.
She uttered a grunt of dismay and surprise.
The squaw turned head and shoulder and looked at her.
Great dark eyes stared up from under broad brow and untidy hairline.
Generous lips drew back in a smile to reveal small, pearl-like teeth.
Little beads of moisture dotted the upper lip.
‘Did you say something?’
The enquiry was couched in a low voice, almost a murmur, although it contained a hint of a rasp on the ‘s’ sounds.
‘My husband…’
Alice said.
She did not know how to complete the sentence, an unusual slip for a lady with an Oxford degree in English.
She gestured towards the squaw's pad.
‘Is your husband a writer, too?’ asked the squaw.
‘I am a writer of sex novels.’
She gave her name.
Alice missed it, as she groped to orient herself.
Those large eyes were disconcerting and somehow overheated.
A dangerous woman, no doubt of it.
‘How do you do.
My name's Alice Maynard.
I'm from Oxford.’
There were always polite formulae to which one could adhere.
But the mention of Oxford in no way deterred the squaw, as intended.
She leaned closer to Alice, so that Alice could smell a warm perfume, reminiscent of a flower, the name of which could not be called to mind.
‘Oh, you're from Oxford.
Then you can help me.
I'm heading for Oxford, and this is my first time away from the States.
I'm real excited, as you can imagine, and greatly looking forward to the adventure.’
This was said with a direct simplicity which normally would have  had its appeal for Alice.
The woman was younger than she had supposed, although it was difficult to judge her age at all precisely.
‘And whereabouts are you from?’
Alice asked, rather sharply.
‘Oh, you won't have heard of it.
A place in Nebraska.
Just a hick town, I guess.
Right off the map.’
There were formalities in these exchanges.
‘I was in Nebraska recently.
Lecturing.’
The squaw extended her hand.
‘I'm sure we are going to be friends, Alice.’
Reluctantly, Alice accepted the hand.
It was noticeably warm, as if it had been hiding somewhere snug.
‘You can show me all the delights of Oxford,’ said the squaw.
And so Felicity Paiva arrived in Oxford, England.
Alice was not entirely sure how.
The Victorian house in Chadlington Road seemed curiously dim dim and cold behind its formal stone exterior, although the month was June.
In this context, Felicity (Alice was still trying to banish the word ‘squaw’ from her mind) Felicity gave off an impression of light and warmth, as if she had never presented herself as dark.
She strode with a determined step into the hall, and in no time was going from room to room, throwing open doors, exclaiming with interest and delight.
‘Such a heavenly home!
So British!
And you've kept it in period, which is such a smart move!’
Alice was vexed by this remark, since she and Harold had updated the house in many ways, only five years earlier.
While tearing out the old central heating and installing new, they had daringly put in new patio windows looking on to the rear garden (where they had done away with mouldy flowerbeds full of Michaelmas daisies and had built a tiled area complete with ornamental pool and a lion's head which dripped water into the pool), as well as redecorating most of the house in a lighter, more ‘eighties’, way.
They had also knocked down the wall of the old breakfast room to extend the kitchen, and put in a super scarlet Aga such as the Vice-Chancellor's wife possessed.
This was not what Alice called ‘keeping it in period’.
Besides, they had David Gentleman prints on the hall walls, framed in aluminium frames.
Felicity cooed over her bedroom, though in a rather disappointed way, and inspected the bathroom without comment.
It was true that the shower curtain should have been renewed.
She strode over to her single window and looked towards the Cherwell, over the garden.
‘Nice yard you have.
Well, well, I wonder what's going to happen to me in a place like this…’
‘I expect you'll do much as our other American tourists do,’ said Alice.
‘I anticipate that my husband will be home in about an hour.’
Her intention was to speak to Harold and prepare him before he got sight of the girl.
She was sure he would be serious, although, Harold-like, he would attempt not to show it.
Harold was as well-mannered, she considered, as anyone in the University, including the stiff old Prebendary Porkadder, who lived in the next-door house with his housekeeper.
And Harold could not abide young women though of course he was too polite to manifest dislike, even of trendy young women.
She sat down at her dressing table, feeling a curious lethargy overcome her.
Her shoulders sank, her head sank.
Perhaps she even went into a doze, which was very unlike her usual alert self.
When Alice roused herself, it was with the realization that her husband was already in the house.
She heard his voice downstairs, talking in the rather affected boom he put on for strangers.
Drone drone drone.
It seemed a longer walk than usual from the bedroom, along the passage, down the stairs and into the living room.
The house really was surprisingly dark.
And chilly.
And quite unfriendly.
Harold Badcock, Tyndale Lecturer in Medieval European History, shot his wife a look of hate as she entered the living room.
He stood by the empty grate, resting an elbow on the mantelpiece, so as almost to prod the Meissen shepherds and shepherdesses.
Upon his wife's entry, he drew back slightly from Felicity Paiva and straightened.
She had changed into a golden dress of a loose-flowing kind, and had brushed her hair back to reveal a high, broad brow.
She was smiling at Harold.
One hand, with its bitten nails, rested on the mantelpiece, also close to the innocent shepherdesses.
Harold Badcock conquered his glance of hatred immediately, and came forward with his arms out to greet his wife.
She went to him.
He clutched her elbows.
Harold was slightly fleshy at this time of his life, in his mid-forties.
They lived well in Magdalen, no doubt of it.
He was balding fast, with a monk's tonsure.
That, and his pointed nose and small moustache, gave him a rather naughty, pixie-like look, quite at variance with what Alice considered his real character.
Harold was a tie-wearer, against the fashion, but he had already removed it, and his grey jacket, which surprised her.
The room was full of a tension Alice had not known before, not even during their sometimes rather stiff North Oxford dinner parties.
‘So, we've got a visitor, Alice.
How jolly!’
This remark was so out of keeping that Alice became alarmed.
‘I hope you don't mind, Harold dear.’
‘Mind?
Of course I don't mind.
Felicity may find us a bit stuffy in our ways.’
This was surely one in the eye for Alice, but Harold, without pause, turned to address the golden visitor.
‘But are you all right, my dear, after your long journey?
Not running a temperature, are you?
I thought your hand felt rather hot.’
‘Three degrees over,’ she said, as if quoting, languid of voice as she stared across the hearthrug at him, one hand up to her bosom, as if protectively.
Or as if saying, the hussy, Look at my ample — too ample — bosom, Alice thought.
Really, she could not think what had come over Harold.
He was eyeing the young woman as if she were a — well, a confectionery shop.
‘What's that?’ she asked in best classroom style.
‘What does ‘Three degrees over’ mean?’
‘'Three degrees over.’
That's my permanent body temperature.
There's a medical term for it.
I'm always three degrees above normal blood temperature.
Have been ever since puberty.’
It was amazing, thought Alice.
Almost as if key words had been uttered — body, blood, puberty — Harold was drawn across the  hearthrug to Felicity's side.
He put a hand on her forehead, an unusual and disturbing expression on his face.
‘By George,’ he said.
‘You're not ill?
Don't want to go to bed?’
‘I'm not sick, no.
Just kind of feverish compared to other folks.
One of my boyfriends said that it's as if I was from another planet.
Venus, most like.’
She was grinning at Harold in what could only be construed as a saucy way.
He kept his hand on her brow, smiling in a little-boy manner.
‘I expect you have a lot of boyfriends.’
‘You don't get the effect in full force on my forehead, Harry.
Try a hand a little lower-in my armpit, for instance.’
‘Really!
Why should Harold want to place a hand in your armpit?’
There was no response to Alice's question.
Harold was more preoccupied with medical matters.
The girl lifted her arm, he slid his hand in.
Immediately his face lit up, as if he had found a treasure.
‘Mm.
Quite a fever…
Amazing.
And of course it's like that all over, one gathers?’
Felicity laughed.
‘What do you reckon?
Want to check it out?’
Although not loud, her laugh seemed to reverberate in the room, destroying its solemnity.
For a moment its two square bay windows, which stared across the road to the rear of the Dragon School, seemed to lighten as if with sunlight, and the carriage clock on the mantelpiece chimed five as if in sympathy.
‘I expect you have a lot of papers to mark, Harold,’ Alice said.
‘Could we have some tea, do you think, Alice?’ he asked her, in a remote tone.
He looked at her impersonally, solemn-faced, as if they had never met before.
Fifteen years of determined feminism dropped away.
She turned to do as she was told.
As she did so, she saw her husband remove his hand from Felicity's armpit and place his fingers daintily to his nose.
She slammed the door behind her, then instantly regretted that she had left them shut in alone together.
She had no memory of making the tea.
All she knew was that she was back at the closed door with a tray, wondering what Harold and  Felicity might be doing on the other side.
The cups rattled in response to her uncontrollable trembling.
She knocked.
Harold and Felicity were sitting together on the sofa, heads close.
They straightened as Alice entered, laughing in a conspiratorial manner.
‘We're out of ginger-nut biscuits,’ she said severely.
Barely looking at his wife, Harold said, ‘I thought I'd drive Felicity down to see the College after we've had a cup of tea.’
‘Harold, Felicity may not want to see Magdalen, she's probably tired after her journey.
I expect you're tired — you generally have a sherry and a nap when you come home at this time, and, besides, there are those papers to correct and I hoped you'd help me unpack.
I want to have you about the house because I brought you a little souvenir from New York, only it may take a while to get it out of my suitcase.
Don't you think it looks like rain?
I should save the trip until the weekend, when we can all go, besides, she'll be bored with all your old historical studies, she'll want to be with other people of her own age, other Americans, perhaps — I mean, there are plenty of them about the place, goodness knows, and that shirt should really go in the wash straight away.’
‘Let's have our tea, dear,’ he said, with a show of patience.
‘Why is there no chocolate cake?
Felicity writes sex novels, you know?
Skirts was her last title — just that, Skirts, one word, very cute.
Arouses the interest at once.
Not published over here yet.’
‘I should imagine not,’ said Alice.
‘And the traffic will be so congested at this time of afternoon, you'll hardly get down the High at all, and it's clouding over, and Felicity should acclimatize herself before she goes out, particularly since Magdalen is so cold at this time of —’
‘I'll be just fine, Ally,’ and
‘My study's always warm,’ they said simultaneously.
When they had left the house, Alice went back upstairs to her bedroom.
She undressed.
Naked, she walked into the bathroom and there surveyed herself in a way she had not done for some years.
She put her hands under her breasts and lifted them slightly.
True, they  were not particularly large, but they were keeping their shape well.
She had not ruined them by child-bearing.
She ran the bath, loading it with bubble-bath, and sank down into the water.
Again she felt overwhelmed with fatigue, but sly, lecherous images slunk into her mind, like a guilty dog sneaking in after a roll in something bad.
She was simultaneously pleased, revolted and delighted.
The thought of Harold's penis, erect and engorged, slipping between the hairy lips of Felicity's vagina was something that no counter-thoughts of the corridors of Septuagint could dispel.
She moaned and clutched her sudsy breasts.
Perhaps she drifted off in the bath.
In a vivid dream, someone offered her a plate of peacock breast.
She refused, as she usually did.
She woke and dressed, spraying on perfume in a manner quite unlike her usual self.
A good burst between the thighs.
It was after ten o'clock, and almost completely dark, when Harold and Felicity returned to the house.
He was holding her arm, looking peculiarly young and unprofessorial.
Alice had the impression, as she rose from her chair, that again Felicity was dark and hag-like, her eyes glittering from a wigwam of jet-black hair.
It was difficult to make out the essential nature of the girl: it seemed to change with the time of day, the season.
‘Did you care for the look of Oxford?’ she asked, striving for a conversational tone.
Felicity merely shrugged and looked up at Harold, as if expecting him to answer for her.
Then she gazed at Alice through languorous and drooping eyelids.
It was dim in the living room, and Alice could find nothing else to say.
She seemed to stand staring at the two of them, and they at her, for a long time, while outside, where night was making of the road a strange country, the vegetation grew black and monstrous.
‘I think we'd better go to bed,’ Harold said, shuffling impatiently.
Alice's heart stopped.
He clarified his statement by adding, ‘Felicity's tired and wants to unpack.’
Watching the girl slink from the room without so much as a goodnight, Alice took hold of her husband's hand.
She could almost  hear him sub-vocalizing the dreadful phrase — how vulgar it was ‘three degrees over’.
As soon as Felicity had left, she let go of him and they stood side by side, as if waiting for someone to photograph and frame them, listening to the slow ascent of Felicity up the stairs.
She was heard to pause before going into the bathroom, the latch of which gave its distinctive click.
Harold raised a finger, to indicate that they should listen.
They heard nothing until the sound of the toilet flushing.
He smiled and licked his lips.
‘Let's go to bed, my dear,’ Alice said.
‘I want you to make love to me tonight.’
‘It's been a long time…’ he said, letting his voice die away.
‘I expect we shall remember how to do it.
Come on.’
‘You look very tired, Alice.’
‘Come along, Harold.’
‘Haven't you got a headache?’
Up in the bedroom, she switched on her bedside light, leaving off the other lights.
Rapidly, she undressed, to prance before him, coquettishly covering and uncovering breasts and quim with outspread hands.
‘Disgusting,’ he said.
‘A Septuagint fellow…’
But when he also stepped out of his clothes, she saw he had an erection.
She flung herself upon him, going down on her knees to kiss the ramrod.
A long time since she had done that.
It felt marvellous, both hard and upholstered.
Perhaps it had grown fatter since she had last stroked it.
She wondered about the other men who had been on the plane, and what theirs felt like.
What fun to have them all lined up for inspection…
Once in the bed, they fell on each other, doing it sideways, Harold bending over to get her nipples teased between his teeth, while he placed a middle finger over her anus in the way he knew she enjoyed.
She groaned and cried, feeling, oh, so much readier than usual.
That it was all undignified, that it was really rather unpleasant, that it was somehow dehumanizing for Harold — these considerations went by the board as he finally rolled on top of her, grunting fiercely in a tone no one at Magdalen would have recognized.
She called her  affirmatives and gasped, clutching him tight as she had not done in years.
‘Oh, that was so lovely,’ she whispered, gazing into his eyes.
He was smiling too.
‘OK, dear, fine, great, now, if you don't mind, I want to pop into Felicity's room and just say goodnight to her.
Won't be long.
You get some sleep.
You must be exhausted.’
Alice sat upright, heedless of her swinging breasts, still wet with his saliva.
‘Harold, how dare you?
I forbid you to go.’
‘No, dear, it's OK,’ he said, reassuringly, although he never used the word ‘OK’.
‘I promise I won't be more than an hour.
Only she is feeling desperately homesick.
She misses Nebraska.
I'm sure you understand.
Poor girl, so far from home, and, you realize, her sexual quarters are also three degrees over, and what man could resist the thought of that?
Can you imagine how deliciously hot they'll be?
It would be preposterous — and cruel besides — not to go in and comfort her a little.
She is our guest, after all.’
‘Harold, please, what are you saying?
After all these years — that's adultery…
What would Prebendary Porkadder think?’
‘Now, Alice, dear, don't get worked up, it's just a little hospitality.
We don't want Americans to think we aren't hospitable, and besides, she's bound to be lying there thinking of sex, poor little thing, and it'll be all wet and hairy, and so deliciously —’
As he was talking, he was sliding out of bed, still trying to face his wife, but finally leaping up with a glad cry and rushing for the door, clad only in his pyjama top, his penis smacking against his thighs as he ran, as she noted.
‘Bugger,’ she said.
Seven years ago, she had allowed a man from Christ Church to do it to her on a sofa during a Commem ball, and really she had not liked it.
His breath had smelt of beer and his shirt of mothballs.
And he had asked her afterwards if Oxford had moved.
Since then, nothing but virtue.
Now this.
Bloody Felicity.
What was the creature?
A harpy?
One of the harpies…
Harpies with herpes.
‘I hope you get bloody herpes,’ she shouted — rather an old-fashioned shout in Oxford in 1988, when the younger dons were  talking about nothing but the case of AIDS in Merton.
Of course, it was hushed up, like everything else in the University.
‘Did I really say ‘bugger’?’ she asked herself, in an awed whisper.
Slipping into her silk bathrobe, she crept to the door and listened.
She could hear nothing.
Not a sound.
Perhaps that foul seductress had developed a way of doing it absolutely noiselessly, and without movement.
She had once been told by a graduate in oriental studies — Studmeyer?
Studebaker?
Shuckskin?— some foreign name — rather handsome, actually — that such things were possible as far as Japanese women were concerned.
Apparently it involved developing the muscles of the pelvic floor.
Foreigners were really very odd…
‘I'll damned well buy a book and learn the art.
It's not too late…’
She sighed.
‘And practise on someone other than Harold,’ she added.
Of course, Felicity was not oriental.
Not even a squaw with Indian blood.
She had announced that her father was Albanian.
Who knew what strange rites went on in the savage mountains beyond Tirana, what musical instruments they played, where mad King Zog had ruled.
Noises.
Definitely.
Felicity's door opening.
Oh, God, her heart failed her.
They were going to rush into her bedroom, to annex the double bed, in order to thrash about.
What was she supposed to do?
Bring them tea while they copulated?
No doubt they would find new and disgusting ways in which to do it.
Rushing over to the open suitcase standing on a side table, she snatched from it the long paper-cutter she had brought back for Harold from New York.
She would stab him to death if he dared bring that hideous hag in here, even if it involved blood spurting over the recently redecorated ceiling.
…
But the footsteps went past her door.
They were neither hurried nor stealthy — the sort of footsteps old acquaintances might leave behind.
With great caution, she opened the door and moved breathlessly into the corridor.
It was dark and airless.
She put out her hands so that her fingertips brushed the wall on either side, almost as if she  were floating.
The water was thick and murky, full of currents that ran rudely against her face.
Alarmed, she thought she saw a black man lurking just behind her.
Not that she had the slightest prejudice against blacks.
In fact, one of her students who was black showed a remarkable sympathy with Emily Dickinson, and had written a good essay on the short poem beginning, ‘Drowning is not so pitiful/As the attempt to rise’.
It was not a black man, just a dolphin.
Floating down into the depths, she heard the kitchen door into the back garden close the very moment she switched on the hall light.
At that, the door opened, and her husband looked back at her, his moustache bristling.
‘Don't come out, dear, you'll catch your death of cold.
Go back to bed.
We're just going to have a fuck in the flowerbed.’
‘Mind the bloody peonies,’ she shouted, but too late.
The water went sluicing out of the house into the garden.
She heard the prebendary's cat from next door weeping in feline fright.
Trembling with rage, Alice rushed to the refrigerator and flung open its blind white door.
As she might have expected, it was almost empty, except for an air hostess sitting on the toilet, smoking.
There was not even any ice in the ice compartment-the ideal antidote to this whole obnoxious ‘three degrees over’ pretence of Felicity's.
Felicity!
What an absurd name for that primitive slut!
There were decent Felicitys at the University, along with the Penelopes and Rosalinds — all acceptable high-protein English names.
Why there was even a Felicity at the other end of Chadlington: Felicity Chugg, who lived with her widowed sister, Deborah Hensprawn, and her two cocker spaniels.
Felicitys were not supposed to be irresistible to men.
That was left to the Valeries, Tinas and Marilyns of this world.
Either she could hear jungle drums or the beating of her own heart.
Drone drone drone.
Why, there was a positive orgy going on out there, in her respectable garden!
The Medes from over the way were joining in, perhaps, or the dreadful Throckmorton brothers from Number Thirteen.
Surely not…
She ran upstairs again, heedless of the dolphin thrashing wetly on the upper landing.
Damned creatures — Harold had been leaving the  landing window open again.
Climbing over Felicity's tousled bed, she shone a torch out and down on the garden.
The sight was confusing.
Evidently the garden had been badly neglected during her ten days' absence.
It looked as if Old Hubbard had been drinking again and had not shown up on Tuesday.
The laburnum had gone.
Where the lawn had been grew a large clump you could hardly call it a copse — of coconut palms.
She could scarcely believe her eyes.
But she could believe her ears.
Sexually coarse — no other term for it — sexually coarse laughter sounded from the region of the raspberry canes, on the other side of the goldfish pool.
The balmy Oxford night air was alive with lechery.
She ran downstairs again, clutching her wicked New York paper-cutter.
My God, she would have vengeance for this!
She had never killed before: in her heart, she foresaw what she had missed.
Intense though Emily Dickinson was, Emily had never experienced the spume and spray of arterial blood.
Many though the pleasures of Septuagint were, they did not include crime passionel.
Or only very rarely, and then Alice Maynard had not been remotely involved.
On her feet were no shoes.
On her slender body was only the bathrobe, which fluttered out behind her as she ran into the steaming night.
She could smell the lust, tainting the air like distant barns burning.
Night birds screamed, rejoicing.
Pushing her way through the hordes of little black boys with bones through their noses, she looked up at the sky.
A full moon hung above the distant mountains.
Over New Marston way, the volcano flared briefly, its great tit black against the last bars of sunset.
Something roared down in the swamp.
Prickles formed over her flesh at the sound.
Well, we know where we are, don't we, Alice?
This is Papua New Guinea, and the remote end of it at that.
A tell-tale phrase came back to her as she ran over the dew-wet marsh grass: The White Girl's Grave.
My God, but there would be blood-letting this night.
It hardly surprised her that the goldfish pool had spread so much.
She had been away too long.
The natives had run amok without her firm guiding hand.
Something lumbered and crashed out on the sandbank.
The hippos, she thought, with a sure hunter's instinct, the  hippos always mate at the full moon, to whelp during the monsoon, as they had since Tertiary times.
Harold and the girl were dancing ahead or, rather, pursuing each other at a ritual pace round and round a flat white sacrificial stone.
They paused when Alice came up to them, their bodies painted with symbolic whirls and animals.
‘What do you do here, white woman?’
Harold asked, raising his great fists threateningly.
‘Dis de sacred mating place of de tribe.
Meat dagger belong me he quench flaming tip along passage she belong she-minx.
You go vamoose from here plenty chop-chop, tuck up in him blanket, take sleeping pill.’
But the girl cried in a clear voice, ‘No, Mighty One, let de old lady stay.
She come to do worship, ain't it, She-Who-Carries-Torch?’
She had a bougainvillaea blossom in her tousled mane.
Alice set the torch down on the sacrificial slab.
She was not going to be fooled by their silly voices and accents.
As she began to tick them off, a manservant rushed up with a magnum of champagne.
When she waved him away, he poured the foaming liquid reverently over the stone.
‘You two don't deceive me,’ she said.
‘Harold, come inside at once before you disturb the Prebendary.
You're simply making a spectacle of yourself.
This is not a College Gaudy.’
The hell-cat rushed up to her, pointing to Harold.
‘He sing.
He dance.
He know secret how place de stick in de hole of flesh.
He Mighty One.’
‘Nonsense, he's my husband Harold, and don't you forget it.’
Felicity was wearing nothing but the great swirl of hair and the flower in it.
Her breasts wobbled as if with a slow rhythm of their own.
Her hips vibrated with energy.
Down in the forest of her sex hair, something glinted in the moonlight like a jewel.
She came closer.
Harold pointed to her and chanted, ‘She sing.
She dance.
She shake it like you don't know how.
She screw like rattlesnake all the same one-piece.’
They chanted together, leaping up and down, ‘We sing.
We dance.
We shake it.’
An infant's skull tied by a thong rattled round his loins.
It did not conceal his monstrous organ, the end of which had temporarily found lodgement in the eye socket of the defunct toddler.
He and Felicity moved nearer.
He snatched the knife from Alice's hand.
‘He armed.
He know no fear,’ Felicity chanted.
‘He sweat like pig.’
Alice was powerless.
Yet she had lost her terror.
Tearing off her single garment, she stood naked before them, proud little breasts pointing upwards as if to offer the cherries of her nipples to the Papua moon.
‘Take me, take me,’ she said, her voice low and thrilling, ‘penetrate me — only, for God's sake, don't wake the neighbours.’
Felicity flung herself down on the sacrificial stone, opening wide her legs, arching her back, so that her pudendum rose in the air like some nocturnal flower.
Her labia opened in a welcoming smile.
Her orifice steamed.
Moet & Chandon was poured over it.
‘Worship, Alice, do de female stuff, dear!
You come makeum pact along us,’ she called.
Impelled by an instinct greater than herself, Alice slunk forward, walking between the bent legs, looking that magical organ in the eye, caught by its immodest yet complex configurations.
She could hear her own animal noises.
A scent came to her nostrils, like the mingled smell of laburnum honey and lobster thermidor.
Her tongue came out, waving with a life of its own.
She bent forward to the glistening flower, amid the cries of the others.
The jungle drums were beating again.
Her lips met those luxurious other lips.
Orgasmic shudders seized her body.
‘Three degrees over!’ she cried.
Now she knew what the heat meant.
The heat birth of the universe.
The terrible tandoori oven of the womb, the essential kindling of sex, the force that woke the dormant dog of philoprogenitive penis.
‘Three degrees over!’
Now the lust was in her head, burning in her body.
Everyone was shouting and singing and chanting.
‘He sing.
He dance.
He take us both.’
And he did.
The infant skull went flying.
They writhed upon him, writhed under him.
The great lip-smacking moon flailed their flanks with silver as they tumbled in ecstasy.
For a while they were more than human.
Inexhaustible, like creatures of legend, Indian sculpture, pornography.
Once more, Zog gloried and drank deep in his distant palace, while the head-hunters ran on the fevered margins of the lagoon, a frieze from prehistory.
‘He come.
He go.
He come again.’
She knew she was more than human — a goddess, born for the eternal burn of love.
There had been many nights like this, and she had been furiously ridden before, as now, by this tireless Mighty One, face fixed in the inhuman lineaments of lust.
Something in her drank in his savage juices, as the mango trees suck up rain, and, in her turn, she spurted liquid from every pore and orifice.
Even from her ears, golden treacle flowed, which the others lapped like nectar.
‘He suck.
He blow.
He know.
He got de rhythm.’
And indeed he had.
Now they were all three degrees over.
There seemed to be many of them.
No longer was it necessary or possible to tell which limb was which, which body.
Oh, oh, that there should be nights like this — and her mother need never know.
‘He shout.
He shag.
He got de rhythm.’
They all had the rhythm.
She heard her mouth calling strings of obscenities, sweet to be heard, lullabies, jocularly jurassic love songs, meaningless aphrodisiacal noises.
And there was another voice, a new voice.
And the new voice was saying, ‘Mrs Badcock, what do you think you are doing?’
Only one person was brave enough, fool enough, to address her as ‘Mrs Badcock’, a name she hated; that was their obstreperous old neighbour, Prebendary Denzil Porkadder.
He had climbed on a garden seat to peer over the wall at their activities.
Although she could see he wore pyjamas, he had on his head as usual his old straw hat with its black band.
‘Are you fornicating with those persons, Mrs Badcock?
They're not Oxford people, are they?’
Alice was immediately embarrassed, and shrank back into her  usual self.
It felt extraordinarily like the process of detumescence she had witnessed in her husband on many an occasion.
‘They are members of the University, Prebendary,’ she muttered, covering her nudity.
Although not exactly a religious person, she was pained to think that a senior member of the Church of England should get (albeit by moonlight) a good glimpse of her sexual organs in their present somewhat engorged state.
Abashed, she tried to shrink behind the sacrificial stone, and hid her eyes.
‘Get inside, the lot of you, or I'll call the police,’ shouted the prebendary, foaming at the mouth.
‘The gardens of North Oxford are designed for peaceful horticulture, not these heathen goings-on.
Besides, it's gone midnight.’
But Harold and Felicity were less easily cowed than Alice.
Harold gave a murderous cry of rage and jumped up on the stone, aiming the knife straight at the holy old blatherer.
It flashed in the moonlight.
Alice saw that murder was going to be done, and shrieked uselessly.
To kill off the prebendary, a reverend old man whose one hundredth birthday was going to be celebrated on the next Sunday, the second Sunday after Trinity, at St Andrew's Church and just about everywhere else in Oxford…
Well, it would be the end of her career and of Harold's.
They would be imprisoned, and, when released, would probably have to live out their stained lives in Cowley, or Kidlington.
Old acquaintances would cut them dead when they chanced to meet in the Covered Market.
She lifted a hand to stop her husband, to grasp the knife.
But she fell back, reading in both Harold's eyes and Felicity's an unstoppable blood lust.
It was a life they needed now, a life they were going to have.
‘He hate.
He conquer.
He know.’
The prebendary was still ranting on, unconscious of danger, as he quoted scripture and mentioned the Prime Minister, whose determination to get rid of sex and violence, and anything else amusing on TV, he commended.
Harold was flexing his muscles for the perfect balance, teeth bared, knife poised over his head.
And the savage woman shouting, chanting, naked and outrageous, goading him on.
‘He throw.
He kill.
He throw.’
Alice covered her eyes and groaned.
All round was a hubbub.
People were pressing against her.
And still the squaw was shaking her and repeating the chant.
‘He throw.
He throw.’
A LIFE OF MATTER AND DEATH
A Novel in One Chapter
I
VERY WELL.
Here I sit looking out over the sea, on this little rag of an island, Uskair.
I may as well tell the story, though a new generation, growing up since the Odonata arrived on Earth, will find it incredible.
Do you wonder why I have hesitated until now?
Because it isn't really my story.
It's my brother's.
Yes, my brother Alec.
The Man Who Changed the World, damn him.
Last year, before I decided to settle here for keeps, my business took me to one of the great northern cities, chief among those of the prosperous world.
From the air, it seemed a place of beauty, from ground level often horrifying.
From the city's government and economic centre, the destinies of billions of people round the globe were decided, yet the population was still not under control.
The problem of the living remained, though the problem of the dead had been solved.
To the man who had solved that problem, a statue stood in one of the main squares.
On the plinth were the simple words:
ALEC GREYLORN 1975–2026 He Brought a Cleansing Force To Human Affairs 
My brother's figure stood in bronze, and on his shoulder was an Odonata.
Many cities have erected similar memorials.
All his fortune went to institutions; only the island came to me, the younger brother he spurned as a liar.
All cities have changed their appearance in the last decade.
Even villages and hamlets have changed.
Odonatist towers stand everywhere, glass towers resembling translucent vases.
They say that such towers stand in Alice Springs, in Cove, Oregon, in Timbuktu and Petra and downtown Samarkand.
The vase towers bring beauty to the ugliest place, and have altered human perceptions of what is sublime.
Sometimes as the light of the sun catches them, you see the Odonata fluttering down into them to receive the gifts that mourners leave there.
It is not only the landscape that has changed.
So have religions.
It is laughable now to imagine a single one of the world's multitudinous dead being burnt by fire or buried in earth.
Much has changed for the better, thanks to Alec's discovery.
All the same, there's no glass tower on Uskair.
The Odonata themselves are pretty splendid, I admit.
Another generation will grow accustomed to their beauty, and no longer marvel at them.
I take a shot at the odd one that flies over Uskair strictly illegal, I know.
In general, their iridescence, their startling speed, remain a joy.
It is easy to see why a new religion has grown about them.
Besides, people will worship anything.
But the Odonata are not spirits.
They scarcely resemble the order of dragonflies after which they were named.
Some have been sighted more than thirty feet in length, cruising almost a kilometre above sea level.
Wing-spans are recorded of up to forty feet.
They are intelligent, although it is an intelligence unlike humanity's.
There's no aggression.
Odonata have never attacked a living human being.
They avoid planes and helicopters.
What they do is basic: they fly, feed, breed sparingly and look beautiful.
They do good.
They inspire musicians.
They make me sick.
And it was Alec who let them loose.
Alec took after my father.
He was a man of action.
And a boy of action.
He was two years older than I, taller, more handsome, better at sport.
On his fifth birthday, he climbed a tall tree until he reached twig level, where he sat contentedly as the wind rocked him to and fro.
On the ground far below, Father applauded while Mother cried for him to come down.
I stood and licked my ice-cream.
Later, I asked Alec if he liked being perched so high.
‘Oh, no,’ he said.
It was an irritating answer.
I believed him to mean that he climbed trees not for enjoyment but because he felt danger was his natural environment.
Perhaps he did it to hear Mother scream.
While I was always told I talked too much, Alec was quiet.
That was because he was athletic.
We used to go sailing on the estuary when we were boys.
Father taught us everything.
He taught us how to ride out a storm.
That was when my sister drowned.
Father wanted her to be buried at sea; Mother did not.
They quarrelled terribly over that.
I'll never forget how they quarrelled.
Alec liked sailing more than I. I got seasick.
Fortunately, we spent more time mountaineering than sailing.
Father was a mountaineer; he made his fortune from the ski resorts on a mountain Grandfather had bought cheaply in Colorado.
So we were forever heading for the rocky interior of continents, to regions of crags and barrenness.
Father was at his most hearty in places where there was an echo.
Alec liked solitudes too.
Father was a big square man, very freckled and covered with sparse sandy hair.
He perspired a lot, he enthused a lot.
He liked to sing hymns as he worked his way up cliff faces.
He was a schoolboy at heart — as I realized later in life.
He used to tell us that on our expeditions we were ‘confronting the Unknown’.
The phrase gave him satisfaction; he used it a lot.
Mother — another sandy person, with pretty green eyes — would nod to herself when she heard the phrase, as if in recognition, and smile a little secret smile.
Personally, there were things other than the Unknown I would  have preferred to confront.
But there's no doubt this activity stood Alec in good stead when he finally came across the truly Unknown.
When we were not at school, we were under canvas, often as not, and far from the crack-crazed cities of Europe.
In the 1980s and 1990s, there were still remote places, and if there were remote places we found them.
Although I was no linguist at school, I could still say a few useful words in Spanish, Nepali, Urdu, Carib, Slovak and Bahasa Malay.
We often slept under the stars.
I knew the word for star in about twenty languages.
So it was that, just before my fourteenth birthday, I found myself with my parents and brother at the foot of an unprepossessing mountain called locally El Jocoso, the Jocund.
I had tried many lies and devices to avoid this mountain, including a realistic limp and stories of leg cancer.
To no avail.
Even my bloodcurdling tale of the Curse of El Jocoso had not prevailed.
There I was, there the mountain was.
We were camped amid the little-visited Calaste chain in southern Bolivia.
The mountains are no great height, but the ascents are steep, the country wild, and the snakes prolific — all plus factors as far as my father was concerned.
Another irritating item was that the place was swarming with tortoises, clashing against each other in their anxiety to mate.
One can only question the wisdom of a god who gave shelled creatures a sex life.
We had experienced great difficulty in procuring bearers and mules, since a small war was raging in valleys and hills.
Several rival revolutionary armies were challenging the central government and each other.
Father dismissed all this as typical South American ferment, and believed that all would be well as long as we sang a hymn before breakfast.
The fact that we had ventured into disputed territory meant nothing to my father.
Guerrillas warned us that the CIA were about to spray the area with a new defoliant and anthrax contaminants.
How often have I heard Father, after listening impatiently to similar warnings, exclaim, ‘Oh, don't be an idiot — let's get on with it, man!’ and stride ahead, swinging a machete.
Men thus instructed often found it easier to get on with it than to try and explain the danger all over again.
So it was that — ill-equipped, ignoring all warnings, and unable to pick up the BBC World Service on our radio — we confronted El Jocoso without guides and in a thunderstorm.
Even my mother, normally so placid with her three great boys, was in a bad mood.
There had been shelling in Casa Tampica and she had left her hair dye in the Holton Hotel.
‘Onward, Christian soldiers!’ boomed my father, as he hammered in his first piton.
It was on 8 August that Father suffered his fall.
The three of us were scaling an almost vertical face.
I was bored.
I had just discovered boredom, and it was magic to me.
To my left hand was a small ledge and on it, rather surprisingly, a tortoise appeared.
Pitching my voice to a tone of mild puzzlement, I called, ‘What's a rattlesnake doing up here?’
My father looked round, startled.
He slipped on the naked rock.
The fifi hook attached to his étrier slipped.
He reached too violently to grasp it, a tape snapped on the étrier, and he was gone.
He slid fifty feet down a chimney, and became wedged there.
When we called, he replied, although he soon must have lost consciousness.
Alec and I had been climbing on his right-hand side.
We had to pick our way down and scale a different shoulder of cliff before we were able to lower ourselves to where Father lay.
By then it was late afternoon.
Shadows began to fill the valleys below us.
The sun swung round towards the west and the Pacific Ocean.
Once we heard the sound of firing, but the crackle of guns came up to us tinny and diminished.
In the mountains, humanity becomes an abstraction.
Night approaches fast in those altitudes.
Alec and I realized that we would only endanger our lives by trying to extract Father from where he lay and make a night climb with him.
We slept on a narrow ledge, clinging to each other.
Once in the uneasy hours of dark, I heard my father singing to himself.
‘From Greenland's icy mountains…’
He sounded drunk.
It was after noon on the following day before we got a rope round Father and managed to haul him slowly out of the chimney.
He was badly injured.
‘Just a scratch,’ he said, before passing out again.
His left leg was broken, together with several bones in both feet.
The flesh had been scraped from his stomach, chest and face.
His right hand was smashed and that shoulder dislocated.
There was massive bruising, and he had lost a lot of blood in the night.
‘That was all rather spectacular,’ he said, as we sat him up and got him to sip some rum.
We had a six-mile descent, down El Jocoso to the little camp by a stream where Mother waited with the mules.
Alec and I lowered and carried Father by turns.
We were well aware of him stifling cries of pain, but there was nothing for it but to proceed.
Darkness overtook us again.
We camped uncomfortably, one on either side of Father, to keep him warm.
Although we had little to eat, the water held out, and we bathed Father's wounds, which were beginning to look nasty.
The flies were a problem.
The three of us reached the camp by the stream on the following afternoon.
Mother wept to see Father's state, and proposed that we set out for Chiguana, the nearest town where we might expect to find a hospital, immediately.
Unfortunately, as chance would have it, a few villagers had passed the camp on the previous day; finding they were friendly, my mother traded one of our two mules for a gallon of hair dye.
We had only one mule left, an unfriendly beast called Estrelita.
On to the back of Estrelita Father was loaded, and we started off, leaving much of our kit behind.
Alec and I were exhausted.
Happily, the way was mainly downhill to Chiguana, not far from the frontier with Argentina.
The night was filled with my father's delirium.
He called persistently for his old schoolmaster to beat him.
We decided in the morning that Alec should press on ahead and try to find a doctor in town, while I came on with Mother and the recalcitrant mule.
What a journey that was!
Father appeared to be sinking, day by day.
In order to avoid a stretch of forest, in which Mother thought she had heard firing, we crossed an expanse of igneous rock, red, potholed and uneven.
The potholes, rarely bigger than Estrelita's  hoof, were filled with little brackish puddles in which minute things swam — mosquito larvae.
In one of these potholes, Estrelita's front right hoof became trapped.
She bucked and reared in fury in her efforts to get free.
We had to calm her and untie my father, laying him down tenderly while we tried to extricate the mule.
‘I'll light a fire under her,’ I suggested.
But we were afraid she might then escape.
Mother poured hair dye round the hoof; even that did not act sufficiently as a lubricant to set the poor beast free.
Eventually, after dosing Father with more rum, Mother and I sank down exhausted to sleep, leaving the animal to kick and struggle throughout the night.
When I woke, the mule was still stuck.
My first thought was for Father.
I went to him.
In his delirium, he had drunk several potholes dry, and was dead.
The heat on the rock flow became intense only an hour or two after sunrise.
Mother and I decided that in the interests of hygiene we could not take Father's body into Chiguana, but must bury him where he lay.
I set to work with the pick.
The rock splintered and flew, alarming the wretched mule, whose leg was now badly inflamed.
After two hours' work, I had managed only to hack out a shallow hole hardly large enough to bury a tortoise.
Father had been burden enough when alive; dead, he was nothing but a nuisance.
While I was still labouring away, my mother screamed in a rich contralto.
I looked up.
She was staring at a party of five men, heavily armed, who had appeared from behind a rock pile and now stood, several metres away, pointing machine guns at us.
‘Are you any good with a pick?’
I called.
Evidently they had no English.
They wore camouflage uniform and, from the looks of them, had been living long in the jungle.
Perhaps that accounted for their nervousness.
They would not venture into the open where we stood, but shouted their demands at us.
‘What can they want?’
Mother asked me.
When I had no answer, she addressed them directly, stressing each word for their convenience.
‘Who are you?
Can't you go away?
We have a dead person here.
He died of the plague.’
Gun barrels waved at us, but the men stood their ground.
One of them, a handsome man scarcely more than an adolescent, shouted something in a high voice.
It sounded vaguely political, chiefly because it went on for some while.
‘I think he said they are the Chiguana Revolutionary Liberation Army,’ I told Mother.
‘We'd better be civil.
Offer them your hair dye.’
The man was shouting and gesticulating.
Now his meaning was clear.
They wanted Estrelita.
I understood something of his heavily accented Spanish.
He said, ‘Bring the moke over here and we will not shoot you.’
Picking up a stick, I whacked Estrelita on her rump.
She kicked out but still could not move.
The more I whacked, the more she kicked, the more the members of the Revolutionary Liberation Army shouted and raged.
They clearly believed I was trying to trick them.
The leader let off a few rounds which went bellowing over our heads.
My mother lost patience.
‘Come and get the bloody animal yourself, if you want it,’ she yelled.
The revolutionaries charged.
Possibly they were accepting my mother's offer; more likely they, like her, lost patience.
Mother turned and ran.
I threw myself flat beside the corpse.
The mule uttered its insane bray and broke free of its prison at last.
Forgetting us, the revolutionaries ran in pursuit, firing sporadic shots as they went.
They disappeared over the rocks, often falling.
‘We'd better get on to Chiguana,’ Mother said, coming up to me, panting.
‘What do we do with Dad?
We can't leave him here.’
She looked up at the sky, where vultures were gathering.
‘Can't we?’ she said.
Alec met us in the cobbled streets of Chiguana with an English-speaking doctor.
I practically collapsed in his arms.
The doctor was efficient and kind.
His surgery was well equipped.
In his care I remained, delirious.
I had contracted dysentery, of a type known locally as ‘cordillera killer’.
The doctor's house was on the main square of Chiguana, with three steps up to his door: ‘to deter the crippled and the halt’, he told me, genially.
I lay for several days in a small wooden room, convinced for some reason that I was on an ocean-going ship.
My father made irregular appearances, singing hymns lustily as he climbed a mizzen-mast like a mountain.
Filth and ugly matter poured from my body.
A little square woman — to be identified when sanity returned as the doctor's wife came to change my bedding and cleanse me regularly.
I sat up weakly one morning, and the ship's cabin had transmuted itself into a little square room in an isolated town in South America.
Where had the illusion of the ship come from?
Where had it gone?
The doctor's name was Santos.
He was of medium height and middle age, rather a square man, to match his wife, with square capable fingers at the end of square brown hands.
His face was open and honest and smiled readily, the generous mouth turning upwards into a handlebar moustache.
‘You're back on land again, my lad.
You've been raving about galleons and sea creatures.’
‘I did believe I was at sea, sir.’
‘You gave me orders from the poop deck.
The only poop was in your bed.’
‘I'm sorry for that.’
He smiled.
‘I'm used to humanity's mess.
It's my stock-in-trade.’
Dr Santos told me that my mother would pay his bill.
She and Alec were staying with a ‘grand friend’ of the doctor's, a Senor Porua, who lived nearby.
I was strong enough next morning to go and look out of the front window.
A market was in progress.
A stall selling apricots, peaches and melons stood outside the doctor's house.
There were earthenware pots for sale, and men rode through the crowd on  horseback.
The scene was more reminiscent of the nineteenth century than the twenty-first.
When I remarked on this to the doctor's wife, she explained that the town was under virtual siege, cut off from the central government.
The airport had been seized by one revolutionary force and the communication centre by an opposing one.
Both forces shelled the town periodically.
Chiguana had virtually no contact with the outside world.
My small room adjoined the doctor's surgery.
I could hear him bullying his patients in a good-natured way.
‘Of course you're ill.
Look at the way you live.
Your house is a pigsty.
Cease to neglect your wife and she may not neglect your home.
You eat too much.
You smoke too much.
You drink too much.
You go to the whores of the Calle Minotauro.
You have guinea pigs in your bed.’
That night I dreamed I was on a ship again, and Alec was captain.
But when I awoke I was sane.
I washed myself and walked out the back of the house.
The ground was steep, and soon gave way to the cemetery.
Among the graves were small tombs like English beach-huts which, in the Catholic way, sheltered the remains of whole families, their likenesses memorialized in framed photos on the carved stones.
Remember my age and make allowance for it.
I was just an English schoolboy.
I remarked on what to me was exotic to the doctor over a hasty breakfast of coffee, bread and cheese.
‘What's odd?’ he asked, smoothing his moustache with a linen napkin.
‘A surgery, like a chapel, should be near the cemetery.
I cure no one.
For all my medicaments, the peasants all wind up there, under slabs, sooner or later.’
‘Does not that make you melancholy, sir?’
‘For all these people's piety and prayers, they finish up out there, in decay.
Worms get them all in the end.
Do you think that makes the priests a wit less jolly?’
I saw he liked simply to converse.
I was astonished.
I had never met such a characteristic before.
That was part of my inexperience.
After the surgery closed, he loved to drink wine and talk.
To my  ears, much of the talk was about death, a subject which made me nervous.
I said something to that effect, in a churlish tone — manners are something else we have not learnt at that age.
‘I've nothing against death,’ said the doctor, ignoring my tone and answering in good humour.
‘If we didn't all turn into disgusting lumps of decaying meat, men would be even more arrogant than they are.
Civilization is the art of concealing the corpse in us.
The Church conspires towards the same end.
There's too much pomp in funerals.
We need a better way of disposing of bodies — something less ostentatious.’
This remark, which struck me as silly and offensive at the time, was to be recalled later.
Reminded of my defunct parent, I said, ‘Father believed in the Resurrection.’
The doctor laughed.
‘My grand friend Porua has visited Italy more than once.
He enjoys all this renaissance art, full of noble statesmen, florid gestures and people being resurrected.
Yet what are people under their fine robes?
Just matter — matter in decay.’
I noticed he himself dressed well.
‘Sir, my position in the world is precarious enough.
I don't wish to know what it is to be mortal, thanks.
I intend to live for ever.
’ Despite the boast, I spoke rather miserably.
‘What you want is a woman, young feller-me-lad.
I'll get you one when you're fully recovered.
You have a sound prick on you, as I've observed.
I'll find it a billet in a few days.’
At the mention of its name, the member referred to leaped up in hope.
I was recovering.
Next evening, I was drinking his wine.
Perhaps it made me too outspoken.
Night had fallen over Chiguana and, as the doctor's wife had predicted, the Lower Bolivian Liberation Force had driven through the town, firing randomly and inspiring fear in all.
‘Well, it's not so bad,’ said Santos.
‘Only one old woman killed, and she with a frightful goitre and her husband long ago disappeared in the hills.
We've known worse.
There's a treat on Saturday.
I'm going to take you to the Bioskop to see a great old film from ancient days.
Charlie Chaplin, in Modern Times.’
‘That's ages old,’ I said, contemptuously.
‘Sentimental rubbish.’
He jumped up, spilling his wine.
‘What, you dare say that, you impudent young frog?
You dare call Modern Times rubbish?’
I was alarmed, but stood my ground.
‘I just don't like Chaplin.’
‘Then what an unfeeling little brute you are to be sure.
The comedy, the poverty, the pathos, the loneliness, the hope — all beautifully in balance…
If you don't enjoy that then you have no feeling for your fellow men.’
‘He's not half as funny as Buster Keaton.’
‘You dare say that in my house!
Chaplin grasped the whole complexity of the human heart, its goodness, its beastliness — and you dare call that rubbish!
Jesus!’
He grasped my collar.
I struck out feebly in self-defence and hit him across the chest, which increased his rage.
Next moment, I found myself frog-marched out to his front door.
He kicked it open and flung me down the three steps into the street.
It was my fourteenth birthday.
Alec and my mother had taken shelter under the wing of Santos's ‘grand friend’, Porua de Madariaga.
Porua's house was large, rambling and decaying.
At the time, I took this decay merely as a sign of the times; I was comfortable with decay.
I liked my room, reached by an open staircase, at one end of the mansion.
It looked out over a garden so long overgrown it was returning to jungle.
Porua's vineyards, long the source of the fortune of the de Madariaga family, were in the hands of one or other of the revolutionary parties.
While my mother attempted to sort out our family finances — no easy matter with the capital, La Paz, virtually divorced from all communication — I took on a job of work for Porua.
In his great house, almost bereft of servants and filled with damps, glooms and moulds, Porua lived like a soldier under siege.
He was a tall man, heavy in build, his hollow voice making him sound empty, like an old wooden drum.
Yet his great blue jowls appeared sufficient fortification against the world; while so immense was his dignity that it was some while before I realized he spent his nights in the arms of my recently widowed mother.
She, poor woman, had at last found a grown-up man, and showed her pleasure by fawning on Porua.
Callowly, I was disgusted by all this; I avoided my mother and threw myself into the job of telling lies for La Clava.
Porua had three cars.
They mouldered outside the casa, a-thirst for the gasoline which no longer arrived in Chiguana.
He rode to work every morning on a fine stallion.
I followed on foot to the offices of his newspaper.
With most other lines of communication knocked out by the civil war, Porua's La Clava played an important role in informing that isolated community.
Not only had the various guerrilla movements cut all land means of communication; the staff of the paper, including the reporters, had left to join one side or another in the hills.
Some would say this made him the ideal publisher of a newspaper.
So I respected him, and was glad to work long hours in his stuffy little offices, learning better Spanish and the workings of a paper; learning also something about Porua, whom I studied with almost servile interest.
This was my first real relationship with a grown man beyond the charmed circle of father, uncles, cousins, in which Alec and I had previously moved.
The coldness of his character shocked me.
While Porua would spare a fly buzzing against his window pane, he was never better than harshly civil to anyone he considered his inferior.
He was unsparing of anybody who worked for him.
Only to his great black horse, which he rode about the town, did he show affection.
I failed to see how tolerant he was of me, with my callow questioning of everything: I flinched under the coldness of his eye, yet did not perceive his isolation.
We sometimes worked almost till midnight, with a sub-editor, to get out the next edition of the paper.
I could hear gunfire in the hills on occasions when I walked home.
In response to some implied criticism I made of his treatment of the sub-editor, Porua regarded me in a sneering silence and then said, ‘Why should I have regard for my fellows?
Consider the stories we print in our columns.
Are they not bulletins on the nastiness of mankind?
Murders, theft, rape, calumnies, graft — our daily bread.
Not one grown man, aristocrat or peasant, is worthy of respect when you really know him.
Women are little better, only weaker in carrying out their ill intentions.
Dogs shit in the street, children in their trousers.
Only the horse has nobility.’
I was secretly thrilled by such misanthropy, arguing that such views were in conflict with his profession of Christianity, for Porua was a regular churchgoer.
He gave a short laugh, as hollow as his voice.
‘You've much to learn.
Christ was a fool to die for men.
That's my opinion.
What improvement did he make in the world?
The sight of him hanging on the Cross — are we really supposed to worship that, defeat and death?
Christ's preachings have merely made us more aware of the darkness surrounding us.
I have a scorn of him.’
He made a curt gesture.
‘My visits to the church are to set an example to the brute population of Chiguana.
They need a fear of heavenly retribution to keep them in order.
Sometimes I also enjoy the music and the wailing.
I am not entirely averse to the compositions of Monteverdi.’
He left the room abruptly, with the air of a man who has revealed too much of himself.
I returned to the clutch of reports on my desk.
My father's nature had been sunny.
To Father, every man had been ‘a good chap’.
The darkest villain was ‘a rather jolly fellow’ in Father's book.
I remembered a banker friend of my parents who was on trial for having raped his twelve-year-old niece; Father had tut-tutted and said, ‘I suppose he could not help himself.’
This lack of judgement, of the judgemental impulse, was revealed in Chiguana as weakness.
It was a part of becoming adult that I grew aware of the great invisible universe of personality which controls us as surely as do physical laws.
This dawning knowledge made me aware of my isolation.
I needed the woman Santos had promised me to share experience with.
My state was an unhappy one compared with the other members of my family: my mother had become attached to the grim Porua, and Alec had formed a liaison with Nuria.
Nuria was the daughter of the de Madariaga family.
She had an older brother, but he was studying architecture in Italy.
Their mother  had died when they were little more than infants and, I gathered, it was from that moment that Porua's misanthropy had set in.
Nuria's was a solemn beauty.
She was not lively as are many girls of eighteen.
She was studious, read much, and liked to talk about the cosmos.
Her face was pale, her eyes grey, and therefore quite startling, her mouth prettily shaped, indenting at the corners in a permanent half-smile.
Oh, I often studied that face covertly!
She wore her dark hair in plaits about her head.
She had a penchant for long grey velvet dresses which marked her, in my youthful estimation, as foreign and sophisticated.
‘I mean to go to Italy one day, as my brother has done,’ she told me, when I discovered her on a stone bench in the garden, reading a book.
‘That is why I read Dante now.
Do you read Dante?’
‘No.
Never.
At least, I don't think so.’
‘I am teaching your brother.’
Alec had never before shown any interest in Dante — or in women.
He and I, together with that great boy, my father, had spent our lives in a world of eternal boyhood, being good chaps and climbing or sailing.
Now Father had gone, and here was Nuria, with a strong physical presence, as challenging in her way as her father.
The poisonous philosophies of both Santos and Porua were banished by the sight of the latter's daughter in her grey dress, red book in hand.
My relations with my mother were also marked by coolness.
She resented my dislike of her relationship with Porua.
Once, when I told her a lie about what I was doing, in order to evade hostile questioning, she said, severely, ‘You're growing too like your father.’
I thought about that for an hour before deciding to ignore her, as Father always did.
As I rarely watched TV or read newspapers, my knowledge was scanty.
There had been a story about secret arms deals with a Middle Eastern country involving the suicide of a French diplomat, but I recalled no names or figures.
‘Make them up,’ Porua said.
‘We have to enlighten our readers.
They are so insensitive to matters of veracity that accuracy is no virtue.’
So I made up my stories.
There was the fictitious crisis involving tourists dying of food poisoning in Portugal, and another concerning a foreign minister who vanished without trace in Budapest, and there was the Chilean dope smuggler arrested in Miami who was found to have sixteen wives.
These reports had at least a grounding in real events, or my memory of them.
But I soon had to rely more and more on my imagination.
So the news became more and more sensational.
Porua made no complaint.
Nor did our readers.
One day we carried a headline SECRET OF IMMORTALITY DISCOVERED.
It was the story of a German scientist working on seaweed in South Korea who had found how to elude death.
A small queue formed in the dusty street outside our office doors to ask for the scientist's address.
Then Porua gave his short laugh and said, ‘Why should those pigs wish to live a day longer?’
One evening after night had fallen, I returned alone to the Porua mansion.
Lightning flickered noiselessly in the western sky.
I had been drinking in a bar with the sub-editor, who had become a friend.
The town lay dead, exhausted after the day's heat.
Some eternal quality in the atmosphere seized me and I stood silent, listening to dogs barking distantly in the hills.
A figure moved on a balcony above my head.
It emerged from Nuria's room.
The man came down the steps and began to cross the courtyard.
I saw it was Alec, walking slowly as if in a daze, his right hand held up to his nose and mouth, his eyes downcast.
He saw me, apparently without surprise, and spoke tonelessly.
‘This night I am in heaven.’
There was no pause in his stride.
He did not look directly at me.
He simply walked on towards his own quarters.
How my heart sank at his words.
I understood their meaning and was full of jealousy.
Next day, La Clava carried the bloodthirsty story of how the king of one of the United Arab Emirates had murdered his brother for love of a gorgeous American woman named Maria Nuria Nussberg.
As far as I can tell, Alec never went with a woman again, or had dealings with women.
It was as if that one experience had  been so charged with meaning it had forever changed something in his being.
It was a blow to Alec — I too had my regrets — when Mother got papers and money through from La Paz.
Suddenly we were preparing to return to the real world; Mother, advised by Porua, was bargaining for mules in the market.
I was reluctant to leave, being in the midst of fabricating a sensational case in which a Soviet spy ring had been discovered in Israel and an old ex-Nazi had admitted that he had helped liaise in secret South African military strikes against the colony on Mars.
A pretty grey-eyed woman was being held, pending enquiries.
When bidding farewell to Porua, I tried to extract from him some word of praise for my activities on behalf of his paper.
‘You are no better than our readers,’ he said, fixing me with a look it took me years to forget.
‘You found an opportunity to lie and seized on it avidly.
You took pride in your lies.
Do you consider that warrants praise?’
We made our way past the strongholds of the revolutionary armies to Antofagasta on the coast.
At the sight of the Pacific Ocean, Alec was overwhelmed.
Tears burst from his eyes when we were leaving South American soil and stepping aboard the cargo ship that would deliver us in Panama.
The tears fell like raindrops on the deck, and he would not speak.
Within a year, Alec, with his share of Father's money, had bought himself this small island of Uskair, off Barra in the Outer Hebrides.
Perhaps he had already formed a notion of sailing alone round the world.
I lost touch with him.
When I had finished with university, I qualified as an ecologist.
In no time, I was established in the small world of the university as lecturer.
Someone once said to me, ‘Nature creates women, but society has to make its own men.’
I still think of Porua de Madariaga as a real man.
Alec became a real man.
Somehow my father and I remained in  boyhood, not developing, turning into big hairy ageing boys.
So we were popular, and courted popularity, because we happened to be the sort of person society preferred, neotenic, forever in the larval stage.
I married a big hairy freckled jolly girl called Ruth.
We have three children, all girls.
Ruth is Chairperson of the local Consumers' Association.
Just the other month, I met my mother in Kensington High Street.
I was going to walk by, but she grasped my sleeve.
‘Why do you hate me?’ she asked.
‘You and Alec?’
She does not get on well with Ruth.
She was looking much older.
Alec never married.
Instead, he sailed alone round the world.
He was twenty-five when he began the voyage.
In his thirty-two-foot ketch, Nuria, he set out from the small harbour under the shoulder of his Hebridean island.
He was gone from sight of man for eight months.
He slipped away one dawn.
Five islanders, the total population of Uskair, not counting his dogs, waved him on his way.
It was Father's ‘confronting the Unknown’ again.
Although we took little heed of his departure, Ruth and I watched Alec being interviewed on TV when he returned.
‘I was fortunate in my choice of boat, and my equipment gave me little trouble.
All the electronic tackle performed without hitch.
You just need to want to sail on for ever…
No, not for the notoriety, for the experience, for one's own sake.
I reckoned that I needed to chance everything on a — well, it's a bit like roulette, when you feel an inexplicable urge to stake everything on one number…
Yes, of course I was scared occasionally.
It doesn't matter.
Some of those waves at the bottom of the world — I mean you can tell by the look of them they have come from the beginnings of time and will roll right over you and go on rolling for ever.
Afterwards…
I suppose I have told myself I must be a lunatic.
But after all, other men have done it.
Captain Slocum did it at the end of the nineteenth century.’
He looked modest when he said all this.
It was the irritating Alec I remembered as a boy, perched twig-high in a tree.
‘The best thing about it?
You escape the twenty-first century.
The Southern Ocean is absolutely apart from man — I mean in time  as well as space.
The seas are high and grand and you're in the rushing air all day, surrounded by stars at night, and the whole universe might be yours.
You share it with dolphins and whales and albatrosses and the lonely satellite orbiting overhead.
Oh, when you're down there, everything is worth it, everything…
‘Sure, yes, it's good to come home.
One of the most moving things of the whole voyage was when I saw Uskair loom out of the mist.
In all the previous months, I had rarely seen land, never wanted to.
But there was my island, Uskair.
And as I changed tack, the harbour came into view round the headland, with the hill rising behind it, where pines grow in a sheltered spot, and then I could make out the white walls of my house through the binoculars.
I was sure my dogs would be waiting for me.
That was a great moment.
‘No, I shall never do it again.
Not twice.
That would be tempting providence…’
With his manly modesty, my brother became something of a hero.
He came to my university, lectured, and met Ruth and the girls.
He seemed uncomfortable with us.
Later, after Mother died, we heard he was looking for a sponsor and planning another solitary voyage.
It was on that second voyage he encountered the Odonata.
Alec's autobiographical book, Far from Land, was published before he sailed.
In view of what was to come, one passage is particularly striking:
In the Southern Ocean, in that great reverberating blue-green world I shared with nature, I became intensely aware of the way in which men and women have trapped themselves within cities.
Cities re-create in concrete the restrictions humanity has imposed on its spirit.
The land had been left behind.
The world chokes with people, living and dead.
On Mars, the colonists are repeating the errors of Earth.
We pollute our globe on an increasingly massive scale because something has died in us.
Our civilization has become a cage in which we choose to imprison ourselves.
In that great clean ceaseless world towards the Antarctic, all this became clear to me.
I saw then that we shall  die, wish ourselves into extinction, unless we find a new course.
I would have been content then to die myself, rather than take my body back eventually to encumber the continents with yet another corpse.
In Nuria II, Alec sailed back to that distinct world of high oceans.
He was again his own master.
I suppose few of us have imagination enough to project ourselves into his place.
I am convinced that a special kind of solitary mind is required to endure such a voyage.
He was on latitude fifty-six, somewhere to the south of Heard Island, when he sighted wreckage on the water ahead.
Something like a fin protruded from the water.
Alec took it at first for a whale.
Nearer, he thought it might be the tailplane of an aircraft, possibly Australian.
A figure clung to it.
The wreckage was sinking gradually.
The Nuria II made slow headway.
The figure waved.
Alec waved back.
Evidently the wreckage was becoming unstable.
The figure suddenly jumped into the water.
As it did so, Alec saw that it appeared deformed.
He said later that the body was curiously broad, rather like a turtle's.
There the resemblance to a turtle ended, for, after one or two splashes, the figure disappeared below the waves.
When Alec reached the spot, the wreckage lay waterlogged below the surface, sinking slowly deeper.
He saw lettering on it he could not make out, although he had the presence of mind to record the scene on a video.
Of the figure there was no sign.
Drifting nearby, however, was a sort of transparent inflatable dinghy, low in the water, resembling a cocoon.
Alec pulled it in with a boathook, and got it on deck with some difficulty.
Peering through the transparent cover, he saw what appeared to be bundles of bandages.
He believed it was a kind of first-aid package from a life-raft which had failed to inflate.
After tying it to the mizzen-mast, he did not investigate further.
This indifference on Alec's part has been the subject of comment.
My belief is that my brother wanted no intrusion from the outer world.
It disturbed his peace of mind.
His wish was to be alone in the deserts of ocean, as others crave the solitude of deserts of sand.
He had taught himself to sleep in brief snatches.
He thought he heard noises in the night but did not bother to look.
At dawn, he found that the transparent covering had split and thirty white insects had emerged on deck, each the size of a rabbit.
His impulse was to kick the creatures into the sea.
Their very oddity deterred him from doing so.
To discover a new species would be a wonderful thing.
He continued with his tour of inspection, in which every knot, cleat and screw came in for daily scrutiny.
With the sun shining on them, the insects became more active, and climbed the mainmast.
My brother observed them, and captured them on video.
Their bodies are carried on ten multi-segmented legs.
Their heads have a horizontal split which gives the appearance of a visor.
Within the split, vari-coloured eyes can be seen.
The creatures might pass for terrestrial were it not for the thick twisted cable-like sensors which connect head and tail and run on either side of the body, lending a machine-like appearance.
Clustered at the top of the mast, the insects became immobile.
Alec lost interest.
The wind was freshening and he took in the mizzen-sail.
When he next looked, great winged things were circling his boat.
The backs of the insects were splitting, and new forms emerging from the husks — the adult forms we know as Odonata.
The larval stages remained clinging to the mast, to blow away in the next gale.
The adults are beautiful and metallic.
Shimmering moire tints in fugitive pink, blue and green suffuse their wings, while their bodies appear clad in abalone and mother of pearl.
Their wingspan exceeds that of an albatross.
Although they metamorphose like terrestrial insects, they have a lung-bladder which sucks in air or extracts oxygen from liquid.
Along their flanks are arrays of proprioceptors which in part act like external arteries.
These Odonata may never have been on Earth before, but they circled the Nuria II in an assured way and then set off northwards towards Australia with leisurely beats of their wings.
Glistening wing colours could still be seen after the insects themselves had faded into the blue.
Alec monitored a variety of radio signals, but rarely responded  himself.
However, he did consider this event important enough to send a report to an Australian station on Lord Howe Island.
Nothing more was seen of the Odonata for a couple of years.
In that time, they adapted to the new environment, established themselves, and bred.
In saying this, I subscribe to the generally held view that the creatures are of extra-terrestrial origin.
The notion that they were mutated terrestrial insects does not bear inspection.
We may never be certain, but it seems most likely that the Odonata were part of a cargo in a trans-stellar vessel which crashed on Earth by accident.
If it had not been for my brother, the Odonata would have drowned, just as the turtle-shaped biped drowned.
After two years, Odonata sightings in Australia began to mount, to be met by incredulity from the rest of the world.
Next, sightings were reported in the Philippines and Singapore and Malaysia.
The first living specimen was caught in a suburb of Sydney, where it was perched under a hedge, devouring the carcass of a dead dog.
At this early stage in the Odonata's existence on Earth, such incidents led people to believe that Odonata killed dogs, other animals, and even humans.
Scare stories abounded.
In consequence, the creatures were exterminated whenever possible.
Still they spread.
In the following year, they were sighted in India, spreading rapidly north.
They were sighted in China, where those who attempted to eat them reported them to be tasteless or unpleasant.
Within eighteen months, the Odonata appeared in Africa, southern Europe and in South America.
At this time, serious attempts were made to eradicate ‘the new plague’, as a phrase of the period went.
The attempts failed, and soon the whole world was confronting the unknown.
Photographs of Odonata were to be seen everywhere.
They were regarded as both beautiful and terrifying.
Already, their arrival stirred fresh religious beliefs.
In some quarters, they were regarded as being sent by God to destroy man.
A more scientific approach to the problem was forthcoming.
As clouds of the invaders reached Texas, a U N fact-finding commission  reported that the Odonata (it now became their official name) lived for only seven months in their adult winged phase.
In that time, they fed exclusively on carrion; specimens kept in captivity refused to sample any living thing.
Almost concurrently, a report came from Bombay that the Odonata had been observed all over India, feeding on the corpses of Parsis.
The burial customs of the Parsi sect involve dead bodies being exposed on a grating at the top of a Tower of Silence.
All that is mortal of the body, except the skeleton, is devoured by vultures and the ubiquitous kitehawks of India, after which the bones of the departed fall through the grating into the tower below.
Word even came out of Tibet that the Odonata had been assisting at sky-burials, where corpses are left in sacred mountainous places for the attention of scavenger birds.
Before the Odonata invasion, the morbidly repressed cultures of Europe and the United States were unable to face death, or to discuss the subject with the same openness of the inhabitants of India and the East.
But the ever-mounting numbers of their dead were, in fact, a subject for concern.
Millions of people had a horror both of burial and of cremation.
Europe, in particular, was filling with old graveyards.
The immense graveyard in Queens, New York, was famed as a particularly depressing city of the dead.
Almost spontaneously, people began to dispose of corpses via the Odonata.
Some say the idea originated in Greece or Turkey as a tourist stunt.
Others speak of a Spanish grandee who offered up the corpse of his lovely young wife in this way, hoping in his grief that her elements might be dispersed about the air.
Yet others say that the poor countries of Africa put out their corpses to be devoured — by creatures regarded with superstitious awe — as the least burdensome method of disposal.
Yet others accused bankrupt nations of Eastern Europe of adopting ‘Odonata funerals’ as a way in which the state could economize on electricity and wood.
All these developments certainly happened within a few months of each other.
Once fear of the glittering new flying things was lost, they became worshipped.
They were clean creatures which did not excrete during their lifetime.
They did not ruin crops or attack living  things.
They would not enter buildings.
When they died, their carcasses were not corrupt, and contained useful minerals in small but quantifiable amounts.
In the air, they introduced an element of beauty and grace.
It was inevitable that new religions should develop round them.
As the Odonata became generally revered, so the tall towers grew up round the world's cities.
Cities vied with each other to build more beautiful towers.
None was built higher than six hundred metres, for the Odonata were low fliers.
To the top of Odonatist towers the dead of all nations were taken, to be exposed to the four winds — and to the Odonata.
As the habits of death changed, so did the habits of life.
Since then, a curious peace has descended on the world.
No major wars have been waged, and few minor ones.
Just as the dead might be said to take readily to flight, so the living found their spirits lifted.
An unsuspected shadow had faded and gone.
Alec died suddenly in his sleep one night.
His hair was white, as my daughters reported when they went to view the body before it was given to the Odonata.
Now he is known as The Man Who Changed the World, and there are statues to him everywhere.
No one remembers he had a younger brother.
But Ruth and I have inherited Uskair, and that's worth something.
A DAY IN THE LIFE OF A GALACTIC EMPIRE
IBROX Villiers Cley remained entirely within his chambers while the Second Galactic War was waged.
He saw few people.
His leisure time, which was ample, was spent mainly in aesthetic contemplation of the moral and social degeneration of which he considered himself a part, if apart.
Cley was ill, subtle, devious, sardonic, and a servant.
His manner was cheerful, even metallic, to cover his deep-rooted depression.
Cley served the Emperor of the Eternal Galaxy under the Banner of a Thousand Stars.
He served him well by telling him the truth and by refusing to scheme against him.
His distaste for other people kept him aloof from plots and treacheries.
The Emperor ruled over a million suns and three and a half million planets.
Most of the planets were inhabited, by robot task forces if not by human beings.
The Emperor was himself a prisoner.
The Emperor had been born and would die in what was called the Galactic Paradise.
Guards never left his presence.
Every man and woman was his slave.
And he was theirs.
The Conventional Rules of Duty bound him as they bound his subjects.
The Conventional Rules of Duty constituted, or rather replaced, all metaphysical systems within the Eternal Galaxy.
Ibrox Villiers Cley was almost as respected as the Emperor.
His chambers were in the Galactic Paradise on the planet Voltai.
His official title was Adviser of the Computers.
He saw the Emperor in person every third day.
Those meetings were enclosed within a Fifth Force Field, so that no one ever knew what passed between the Emperor and his  Adviser of the Computers.
No note was taken, no record was made.
The edicts continued from the Throne Computer.
The Galactic War continued, as it had for many generations.
The war was going well for the galactic empire.
Twenty-four solar systems held by the enemy had recently been destroyed.
Countless populations were starving.
Whole armies fought and died under the Conventional Rules of Duty.
They died without questioning the cause.
The number of their deaths was reported to Ibrox Villiers Cley.
Gley's chambers were built of one of the new metals created through the exigencies of war.
Cley himself had a sheen as of metal about him.
His temples were  palisades against the world of outside iniquity.
The perpetual light of Voltai came in through his long windows.
Cley's chambers had no internal lighting.
It was the fashion.
He preferred to live in chiaroscuro.
His rooms differed little, one from another.
In the sombre main chamber where most of his days were spent, there was no decoration, no contrasting texture.
In a case along one wall were stored the six hundred and seventy-seven volumes of the Eternal Galactic Encyclopaedia, each cube awaiting activation.
Cley rarely referred to the encyclopaedia.
His modest needs were served by an android called Marnya.
Marnya had beauty of a severe kind.
Her smiles were few and wintry.
She had been designed by Cley's father, long ago.
Marnya was always about in Cley's chambers as a silent presence.
She was like a shadow within shadows.
She was like an embodiment of the Conventional Rules of Duty.
She provided most of the company that Cley needed.
She was calm, loyal, without deceit and self-lubricating.
Reports came to Cley on his desk screen of the numbers of men, women and children who died every day for the sake of Empire.
Sometimes he read these casualties aloud to Marnya.
‘There are always more people,’ she said.
He tapped the screen.
‘These people are lost for ever.’
‘But were they precious?’
‘Not to me or you, Marnya, but to someone.
And to themselves.’
‘They became most precious when they fulfilled the Conventional Rules.’
‘Certainly that is conventional wisdom.’
She sat down beside him and laid a velvety hand over his.
‘They had no existence until the report showed on your screen, as far as you and I are concerned.
Their existence was as brief as a phosphor dot.’
‘They lived and died.
No doubt in a brutish way.’
‘It happened far away.’
‘Yes, it was far away.’
Sometimes, Ibrox Villiers Cley had Marnya play him a piece of music composed long ago on a planet now forgotten in a remote galaxy.
The music was written before the Conventional Rules were imposed on musicians.
It was good, sensible, male music, without display, yet with a poignance of which Cley did not tire.
In a case beside the encyclopaedia stood a solitary cube.
Marnya occasionally activated it for Cley.
The cube contained the works of a poet who had died in the distant town where Cley was born.
On the last pages of the cube, the infant Cley had inscribed a map.
The map showed the kind of town which did not exist anywhere in the empire.
It had not been formalized.
The street system did not accord to a grid pattern.
Roads ran here and there, houses were of various sizes.
The house where the old poet died was marked.
The whole map spoke of a rampant but vanished individualism.
The cube was Cley's only personal possession.
Cley did not pretend to or aspire to be a friend of the Emperor's.
There was too much power, there were too many regulations, in the air for emotions to flourish.
The Emperor merely consulted him.
He was merely one of the Emperor's tools.
This function he understood.
It was reliable, as things go.
Friendship he found more difficult to comprehend.
Nor did he cultivate relations with those on Voltai who admired him.
They thought of Cley as a guru.
He mistrusted ravishment by charm, spiritual appeal, force, wit or other blandishments.
Power favoured coldness, just as the empire favoured ruthlessness.
All empires are unscrupulous.
If Ibrox Villiers Cley was one thing, he was scrupulous.
Cley's closest acquaintance was Councillor Deems.
Councillor Ardor Deems was Galactic Minister of the Arts.
Deems was a soft and highly coloured man who spoke always in a low voice.
So low was Deems's voice that his auditors had to give it close attention.
This habitual quietness had earned Deems the reputation for subtlety in his dealings.
As he adapted himself to this reputation, Deems indeed grew subtle in his affairs, until man and reputation became one.
His gowns were always of softer material than the gowns of other ministers.
His cheeks remained stubbornly rosy, even as his thought grew more pallid.
He came one day softly to see Cley, to discuss with him whether to ban, as it was in his power to do, a new play entitled Forgotten Robe, Abyss, Glitter.
‘Certainly the play advocates a continuation of the war, as plays nowadays are required to do,’ said Deems, folding his hands and placing them gently on the table before him, as if to show that he concealed nothing.
‘But it also advocates extreme cruelty against animals as a matter of imperial policy, in order to dismay the enemy.
Is that not obscenity?’
‘The cruelty to which animals do you consider most obscene?’
‘The play specifies long-drawn-out public torture for many animals, especially those the playwright deems most to offend against the Conventional Rules of Duty.
To wit, cats, monkeys, meekrahs, jewkes and miniature elephants.’
The fine lines of Cley's face could be studied as he gazed towards the ceiling before speaking again.
‘You ask if this cruelty is obscene.
The play's not a covert satire against the state, is it?
It seems to me no more — and no less — obscene than the new Ministry of War headquarters just built on our satellite.
We ban plays.
No one bans architecture.’
‘The rules for censorship of architecture might be difficult to draw up.’
‘The Computers could do it without trouble.
But humanity has a basic need for ugliness and brutality in its public buildings.’
‘But not in its plays?’
‘The majority of people do not care to hear of the torture of elephants.
Except, of course, in our Eastern Region.’
Deems's eyes were soft, and did not rest long in one place, as if they sought something they feared to find.
‘And the torture of children?’
‘The majority do not mind that as much.
We are accustomed, almost from birth, to hear of children being maltreated.
Accounts of child abuse sell newsfaxes.’
‘If there is some hint of sexual abuse, certainly…
Ibrox, I am a liberal man.
I have wept to hear of children ill-treated.
Even children on quite distant planets.’
‘Congratulations.
Your grief did you honour, as you know.
You could relish both the pain of the children and your grief at the same time.’
‘Oh, I am sincere.’
He spoke without emphasis, and removed a white cloth from his collar with which to wipe his lips.
‘Such crimes are common on Voltai.
Other worlds, other mores…’
Although Deems spoke of other planets, Cley's chamber was perfectly prosaic, apart from its melancholy air.
There was no sign that decisions were taken here which would affect populations on distantly scattered worlds.
Cley's chambers suited the mentality of the entombed rather than the star-conscious.
After a pause, Deems said, ‘I take it that you would not ban performances of Forgotten Robe, Abyss, Glitter?’
‘Last galactic day, seven billion people were destroyed by a panthrax bomb on the planet Jubilloo.
Do we ban panthrax bombs?
Until we do, why bother about banning plays?
They kill no one.’
Councillor Ardor Deems took a turn about the long room.
His slender figure was plunged first into light then into shadow as he passed before the slitted windows.
Ibrox Villiers Cley did not stir in his seat.
His gaze remained fixed  on the polished surface of the table, which dimly reflected the glooms and gleams of the room.
The councillor approached nearer to Cley than custom demanded.
‘I hate this war.
I hate it as much as you do, Ibrox.
It has become a part of life.’
‘War has always been a part of man's life.
Ever since the days when we were creatures of one world.’
Deems nodded.
‘I heard just recently that a first cousin of mine was destroyed in the Battle of the Lesser Sack.’
‘Did you love him?’
‘I hated him.
I hate his destruction more.
There's the family to consider…’
Cley smiled and nodded.
‘The Lesser Sack was a great victory for the empire.’
Deems's manner altered.
He pulled his chair nearer to Cley's and spoke in his softest voice.
‘You will be seeing the Emperor again tomorrow?’
He then repeated the question with variations, as his custom was, as if unable to rely on the understanding of even his most intelligent listener.
‘You have an audience with him at nine hours?’
When he received a glance of affirmation, he leaned forward, to speak even more quietly.
‘The war must end, Ibrox.
It must be terminated.
We are destroying worlds we should be using.
The Emperor will not consider proposals for peace.
His will is set on continuous war.’
When Cley made no comment, Deems continued.
‘As long as we are winning the war, and there are victory parades and banners and speeches, the vast majority of the population is also for the war.
Their personal miseries become insignificant when compared with bloodthirsty accounts from our various war sectors.
They can feel their petty lives caught up in great events.
They forget they are mere statistics.
Their psychic health —’
‘I am Adviser of the Computers, Deems, not a rabble to be addressed.’
‘Pardon me.
I will approach the central question.
Let us get to the  point.
Factions of the enemy hierarchy have made contact with me.
They are prepared to sue for peace.
Before peace can come about, something must be done about the Emperor.’
The steely profile of Ibrox Villiers Cley appeared not to be listening.
Deems's voice sank further.
‘Something must be done about the Emperor.
His mind must be changed.
He must prefer peace.
I have in my possession a new drug which will have the required effect upon him.’
He paused and then said, in a whisper, ‘My party wishes that you will administer the drug to the Emperor during your audience tomorrow at nine.’
From his pocket Deems produced an object which resembled a short pencil.
He laid it on the table halfway between him and Cley, his head on one side as he appeared to measure the distance precisely.
Cley did not touch the weapon.
‘There are, I take it, inducements to — encourage me to use this drug against the Emperor?’
‘Not ‘against’, Ibrox, ‘on’.’
‘The inducements?’
‘We do not put pressure on you.
We believe that your own high intelligence will suffice to induce you to use such a weapon which will stop the war at last.’
‘You think well of my intelligence.’
‘Come, Ibrox, you are considered one of the most intelligent men who ever lived.’
He allowed a whisper of reproach into his tone.
‘Hence your position.
You will do this thing, won't you?
It is a noble undertaking, no less.’
The long room contained a long silence.
‘How does the drug work?’
‘Its name is mascinploxyrhanophyhaninide, or MPRP for short.
It is delivered by aerosol.
You have but to press a button.
It sedates areas in the limbic brain from which the instincts of aggression rise.
Permanently sedates them…
You have but to press the button at nine, Ibrox, and at nine-five our beloved empire will be moving  towards peace.
Otherwise the drug is harmless, apart from some side effects.’
‘What side effects?’
Deems eyed Cley narrowly, watching for his response.
‘Blindness.’
Cley made no response.
After a moment, he said, ‘An aggressive weapon is not the most promising way through which to try to achieve peace.’
‘We all depend on you, Ibrox.
Not to be melodramatic, but the empire awaits your decision.
Your name will be imperishable if you do this thing in the name of peace.
You must do it for humanity's sake.’
He put a finger delicately on the MPRP weapon.
Cley rose to his feet and stood gazing down at the councillor.
‘I want you to examine this act in which you propose we should conspire with the enemy against our emperor.
Whatever its motives, it represents a physical attack.
It is by physical attacks that battles and wars begin rather than end.
Yet, as a preliminary to peace, you wish to make an attack.
‘Do you not see that over a million wearying years of galactic history, so-called peace has invariably had its prelude in attack, so that the seeds of further conflict were sown?
You merely perpetuate a status quo of constant warfare.
‘How can war be eradicated?
It is a permanent human condition.
The baby emerges from the womb crying anger.
Even the excision of the entire limbic brain would not suffice to remove aggression.
This aggression of yours, represented by this MPRP weapon, springs not from the limbic brain but from the neocortex.
It is an intellectual form of aggression, born of ambition, self-seeking.’
‘I seek only peace.’
‘Humanity is an aggressive species and no drug will alter those inherent characteristics.’
‘You are being cynical and evasive.’
As he spoke, Deems rose, clutching the MPRP weapon.
‘I prefer my cynicism to your self-deceiving optimism.’
‘Ibrox, my party wishes merely to see an end to conflict.
We desire to finish with galactic war for ever.
Is that self-deceiving?’
‘It is nothing if not self-deceiving.
Your party wishes to elevate itself.
It would conduct conflict by means of backdoor dealing.’
‘Backdoor!
Our aspirations are of the loftiest.’
‘That is what plotters always say.
Deems, it happens that I have read this play which so disturbs you.
It is written by a self-seeker.
You should conscript him to your party.
We do not have great writers any more, men to whom we can turn for enlightenment and discussion of the most engaging problems.
The Conventional Rules of Duty have swept such men away.
They languish in our reformatories.
Those remaining seek fame or money, preferring those trumpery things above an immovable integrity.
Your play is written for a materialist and spiritually bankrupt society — the people of Voltai.
It is designed to shock and titillate them.
It can do no harm since its audience is already corrupt.
Any public which did not rise up in protest at the expense and ugliness of the Ministry of War edifice is corrupt.’
‘But that magnificent building on which you pour such —’
Cley held up a commanding hand.
‘Humankind condemned itself a long while ago to a perpetual diet of catastrophe.
It burdens itself with the consequences of its own indifference to what is best.
Go into a tavern tonight and listen to the music played there.
What is of merit, what is not ephemeral, is shunned.
The good in man is out of fashion.
Mankind has chosen — or perhaps it was never a choice — a perpetual diet of catastrophe.
Since it cannot and will not save itself, it cannot be saved by anything you or I might do.
Not to mention your party.
No, not even by killing the Emperor.’
Deems's voice barely reached Cley's ears.
‘We have evidence that the Emperor is mad.’
‘Then he represents the people well.
People like mad rulers.
They relish the rhetoric.
Words like blood and loyalty and revenge and endurance awaken something primitive in their auditors, who enjoy the sensation of adrenalin coursing in their veins.
They enjoy enmities.’
‘They enjoy defending themselves against enemies.
They are not cattle.
The Emperor has become the enemy and must be destroyed.’
‘For the sake of our enemies?’
Cley folded his arms and stared at  Deems.
‘The Emperor is not your enemy, Deems, except in so far as he stands in the way of your advancement.
He aids and abets you in the task of self-destruction.
We have no real enemies.
You realize that?
We have no real enemies throughout the whole galaxy.
Our battlefields were once a cathedral, silent until the congregation of mankind entered.
Enemies are as much an ancient invention as God.’
Deems made to speak but thought better of it.
‘Mankind has always been alone, ever since it left Earth, millennia ago.
Mankind had been unable to endure the — the purity of that situation.
And the responsibility that situation brings.
It has thought only about building ‘empires’, absurd, repressive and unstable power-structures.
Empires failed on our mother planet — how much more philosophically untenable are they across a dozen, a hundred, a thousand, a thousand thousand planets?
Yet, rather than think out new and just ways of distributing the riches to which we have all fallen heir, it uses those riches as the basis for deadly quarrels.
‘Mankind's real love is not of life, but of self-destruction.’
Deems raised the MPRP weapon and pointed it at Cley's face.
‘We have to get you out of the way before we deal with the Emperor.’
Cley said, ‘If that weapon kills aggression, as you claim, then it will have no effect on me.
My cynicism, to which you have drawn my attention, prevents my aggression.
I have never wished for power.
I have no ambition.
I am used.
You have used me in the past.
In order to enjoy solitude, I am prepared to be used.
But I fancy MPRP is unlikely to change my character.’
He spoke easily, spinning out his words, until Marnya had come softly up behind Deems and taken the councillor in her grasp.
The arms that held Cley tenderly were strong.
As Deems struggled fruitlessly, the MPRP weapon fell from his grasp and rolled under the table.
‘You could have fired your drug at Marnya, Deems, and it would not have harmed her.
Androids have no limbic brain, and no desires.’
Deems was pale.
His voice was husky.
‘I'm sorry to have  threatened you, Ibrox.
My desires ran away with me.
I cannot bear your diseased view of mankind.’
‘How is that, when you are diseased yourself?’
‘Is to desire change a disease in your eyes?’
‘You don't desire change.
You desire power.
That's the disease.’
Deems was silent, hanging his head and then asking in a subdued voice, ‘What will you do with me?
Remember I am an old man.’
‘You are free to leave.
Everything that has transpired in this room has been recorded.
Take your drug with you.
It does not work.’
As Marnya released the councillor, the latter said, ‘The drug does work.’
‘You lie.
I also know who sent you to me.
You were ordered by the Emperor to test me.
There is no wish for peace, on our side, even on the enemy's.
Only I wish for peace.’
‘It's useless talking to you.’
As he made to leave the chamber, Deems said, ‘If you perceive that the Emperor does not trust you, why continue faithful?’
Cley gestured with his left hand.
‘Through cynicism.
I like being tested.
It interests me.
One day in the future, the treacherous Deems-figure who arrives to make the test will employ an argument so sophisticated that I shall be convinced by it, and enter the Emperor's Council Room and kill him.’
‘I will report on what you say.
So you do still have hope, of a sort?’
‘So does the Emperor, of a sort.
He prays for the Deems-figure to win.’
Ibrox Villiers Cley permitted himself a smile.
‘I have no hope for humanity, if that's what you mean.
Only for myself.
Hope that the day may come when I am surprised by goodness.’
He crossed over to Marnya and took her patient arm.
‘Goodbye, Deems,’ he said.
Deems wiped his lips on his cloth.
He left the chamber without answer, knowing the fate of those who failed on an imperial mission.
Cley was left once more in his chambers, in the shadowy silence which was now his greatest pleasure.
CONFLUENCE
THE INHABITANTS of the planet Myrin have much to endure from Earthmen, inevitably, perhaps, since they represent the only intelligent life we have so far found in the galaxy.
The Tenth Research Fleet has already left for Myrin.
Meanwhile, some of the fruits of earlier expeditions are ripening.
As has already been established, the superior Myrinian culture, the so-called Confluence of Headwaters, is somewhere in the region of eleven million (Earth) years old, and its language, Confluence, has been established even longer.
The etymological team of the Seventh Research Fleet was privileged to sit at the feet of two gentlemen of the Oeldrid Stance Academy.
They found that Confluence is a language-cum-posture, and that meanings of words can be radically modified or altered entirely by the stance assumed by the speaker.
There is, therefore, no possibility of ever compiling a one-to-one dictionary of English-Confluence, Confluence-English words.
Nevertheless, the list of Confluent words which follows disregards the stances involved, which number almost nine thousand and are all named, and merely offers a few definitions, some of which must be regarded as tentative.
The definitions are, at this early stage of our knowledge of Myrinian culture, valuable in themselves, not only because they reveal something of the inadequacy of our own language, but because they throw some light on to the mysteries of an alien culture.
The romanized phonetic system employed is that suggested by Dr Rohan Harbottle, one of the members of the etymological team of the Seventh Research Fleet, without whose generous assistance this short list could never have been compiled.
AB WE TEL MIN The sensation that one neither agrees nor disagrees with what is being said to one, but that one simply wishes to depart from the presence of the speaker 
ARN TUTKHAN Having to rise early before anyone else is about; addressing a machine
BAGI RACK Apologizing as a form of attack; a stick resembling a gun
BAG RACK Needless and offensive apologies
BAMAN The span of a man's consciousness
BI The name of the mythical northern cockerel; a reverie that lasts for more than twenty (Earth) years
BI SAN A reverie lasting more than twenty years and of a religious nature
BIT SAN A reverie lasting more than twenty years and of a blasphemous nature
BI TOSI A reverie lasting more than twenty years on cosmological themes
BI TVAS A reverie lasting more than twenty years on geological themes
BIUI TOSI A reverie lasting more than a hundred and forty-two years on cosmological themes; the sound of air in a cavern; long dark hair
BIUT TASH A reverie lasting more than twenty years on Har Dar Da themes (cf)
CANO LEE MIN Things sensed out of sight that will return
CA PATA VATUZ The taste of a maternal grandfather
CHAM ON TH ZAM Being witty when nobody else appreciates it
DAR AYRHOH The garments of an ancient crone; the age-old supposition that Myrin is a hypothetical place
EN IO PLAY The deliberate dissolving of the senses into sleep
GEE KUTCH Solar empathy
GE NU The sorrow that overtakes a mother knowing her child will be born dead
GE NUP DIMU The sorrow that overtakes the child in the womb when it knows it will be born dead
GOR A Ability to live for eight hundred years
HA ATUZ SHAK EAN Disgrace attending natural death of maternal grandfather
HAR DAR DA The complete understanding that all the soil of Myrin passes through the bodies of its earthworms every ten years 
HAR DAR DI KAL A small worm; the hypothetical creator of a hypothetical sister planet of Myrin
HE YUP The first words the computers spoke, meaning, ‘The light will not be necessary’
HOLT CHA The feeling of delight that precedes and precipitates wakening
HOLT CHE The autonomous marshalling of the senses which produces the feeling of delight that precedes and precipitates wakening
HOZ STAP GURT A writer's attitude to fellow writers
INK TH O Morality used as an offensive weapon
JILY JIP TUP A thinking machine that develops a stammer; the action of pulling up the trousers while running uphill
JIL JIPY TUP Any machine with something incurable about it; pleasant laughter that is nevertheless unwelcome; the action of pulling up the trousers while running downhill
KARNAD EES The enjoyment of a day or a year by doing nothing; fasting
KARNDAL CHESS The waste of a day or a year by doing nothing; fasting
KARNDOLI YON TOR Mystical state attained through inaction; feasting; a learned paper on the poetry of metal
KARNDOL KI REE The waste of a life by doing nothing; a type of fasting
KUNDULUM To be well and in bed with two pretty sisters
LAHAH SIP Tasting fresh air after one has worked several hours at one's desk
LA YUN UN A struggle in which not a word is spoken; the underside of an inaccessible boulder; the part of one's life unavailable to other people
LEE KE MIN Anything or anyone out of sight that one senses will never return; an apology offered for illness
LIKI INK TH KUTI The small engine that attends to one after the act of excretion
MAL A feeling of being watched from within
MAN NAIZ TH Being aware of electricity in wires concealed in the walls 
MUR ON TIG WON The disagreeable experience of listening to oneself in the middle of a long speech and neither understanding what one is saying nor enjoying the manner in which it is being said; a foreign accent; a lion breaking wind after the evening repast
NAM ON A The remembrance, in bed, of camp fires
NO LEE LE MUN The love of a wife that becomes especially vivid when she is almost out of sight
NU CROW Dying before strangers
NU DI DIMU Dying in a low place, often of a low fever
NU HIN DER VLAK The invisible stars; forms of death
NUN MUM Dying before either of one's parents; ceasing to fight just because one's enemy is winning
NUT LAP ME Dying of laughing
NUT LA POM Dying laughing
NUT VATO Managing to die standing up
NUTVU BAG RACK To be born dead
NU VALK Dying deliberately in a lonely (high) place
OBI DAKT An obstruction; three or more machines talking together
ORAN MUDA A change of government; an old peasant saying meaning, ‘The dirt in the river is different every day’
PAN WOL LE MUDA A certainty that tomorrow will much resemble today; a line of manufacturing machines
PAT O BANE BAN The ten heartbeats preceding the first heartbeat of orgasm
PI KI SKAB WE The parasite that afflicts man and Tig Gag in its various larval stages and, while burrowing in the brain of the Tig Gag, causes it to speak like a man
PI SHAK RACK CHANO The retrogressive dreams of autumn attributed to the presence in the bloodstream of Pi Ki Skab We
PIT HOR Pig's cheeks, or the droppings of pigs; the act of name-dropping
PLAY The heightening of consciousness that arises when one awakens in a strange room that one cannot momentarily identify
SHAK ALE MAN The struggle that takes place in the night between the urge to urinate and the urge to continuing sleeping 
SHAK LA MAN GRA When the urge to urinate takes precedence over the urge to continue sleeping
SHAK LO MUN GRAM When the urge to continue sleeping takes precedence over all things
SHEAN DORL Gazing at one's reflection for reasons other than vanity
SHE EAN MIK Performing prohibited postures before a mirror
SHEM A slight cold afflicting only one nostril; the thoughts that pass when one shakes hands with a politician
SHUK TACK The shortening in life-stature a man incurs from a seemingly benevolent machine
SOBI A reverie lasting less than twenty years on cosmological themes; a nickel
SODI DORL One machine making way for another; decadence, particularly in the Cold Continents
SODI IN PIT Any epithet which does not accurately convey what it intends, such as‘Sober as a judge’, ‘Silly nit’, ‘He swims like a fish’, ‘He's only half-alive’, and so on STAINI RACK NUSVIODON Experiencing Staini Rack Nuul and then realizing that one must continue in the same outworn fashion because the alternatives are too frightening, or because one is too weak to change; wearing a suit of clothes at which one sees strangers looking askance
STAINI RACK NUUL Introspection (sometimes prompted by birthdays) that one is not living as one determined to live when one was very young; or, on the other hand, realizing that one is living in a mode decided upon when one was very young and which is now no longer applicable or appropriate
STAIN TOK I The awareness that one is helplessly living a role
STA SODON The worst feelings which do not even lead to suicide
SU SODA VALKUS A sudden realization that one's spirit is not pure, overcoming one on Mount Rinvlak (in the Southern Continent)
TI Civilized aggression
TIG GAG The creature most like man in the Southern Continent which smiles as it sleeps 
TIPY LAP KIN Laughter that one recognizes though the laugher is unseen; one's own laughter in a crisis
TOK AN Suddenly divining the nature and imminence of old age in one's thirty-first year
TUAN BOLO A class of people one meets only at weddings; the pleasure of feeling rather pale
TU KI TOK Moments of genuine joy captured in a play or charade about joy; the experience of youthful delight in old age
TUZ PAT MAIN (Obs.)
The determination to eat one's maternal grandfather
U (Obs.)
The amount of time it takes for a lizard to turn into a bird; love
UBI A girl who lifts her skirts at the very moment you wish she would
UDI KAL The clothes of the woman one loves
UDI UKAL The body of the woman one loves
UES WE TEL DA Love between a male and female politician
UGI SLO GU The love that needs a little coaxing
UMI RIN TOSIT The sensations a woman experiences when she does not know how she feels about a man
UMY RIN RU The new dimensions that take on illusory existence when the body of the loved woman is first revealed
UNIMGAG BU Love of oneself that passes understanding; a machine's dream
UNK TAK An out-of-date guidebook; the skin shed by the snake that predicts rain
UPANG PLA Consciousness that one's agonized actions undertaken for love would look rather funny to one's friends
UPANG PLAT Consciousness that while one's agonized actions undertaken for love are on the whole rather funny to oneself, they might even look heroic to one's friends; a play with a cast of three or less
U RI RHI Two lovers drunk together
USANA NUTO A novel all about love, written by a computer
USAN I NUT Dying for love
USAN I ZUN BI Living for love; a tropical hurricane arriving from over the sea, generally at dawn 
UZ Two very large people marrying after the prime of life
UZ TO KARDIN The realization in childhood that one is the issue of two very large people who married after the prime of life
WE FAAK A park or a college closed for seemingly good reasons; a city where one wishes one could live
YA GAG Too much education; a digestive upset during travel
YA GAG LEE Apologies offered by a hostess for a bad meal
YA GA TUZ Bad meat;(Obs.) dirty fingernails
YAG ORN A president
YATUZ PATI (Obs.)
The ceremony of eating one's maternal grandfather
YATUZ SHAK SHAK NAPANG HOLI NUN Lying with one s maternal grandmother; when hens devour their young
YE FLIG TOT A group of men smiling and congratulating each other YE FLU GAN Philosophical thoughts that don't amount to much; graffiti in a place of worship
YON TORN A paper tiger; two children with one toy
YON U SAN The hesitation a boy experiences before first kissing his first girl
YOR KIN BE A house; a circumlocution; a waterproof hat; the smile of a slightly imperfect wife
YUP PA A book in which everything is understandable except the author's purpose in writing it
YUPPA GA Stomach ache masquerading as eyestrain; a book in which nothing is understandable except the author's purpose in writing it
YUTH MOD The assumed bonhomie of visitors and strangers
ZO ZO CON A woman in another field