

1
They are watching me, thought Rupert Stonebird, as he saw the two women walking rather too slowly down the road.
But no doubt I am watching them too, he decided, for as an anthropologist he knew that men and women may observe each other as warily as wild animals hidden in long grass.
The situation had nothing particularly unusual about it — an unmarried man visiting the house he had just bought and wondering where he should put his furniture, and two women-sisters, perhaps — betraying a very natural interest in the man or the house or both.
One day, he thought, we shall probably know each other, and for that reason he turned away from the window, not feeling quite equal to meeting the unashamed curiosity of their glances as they came nearer.
But now the taller one, who looked older, was gazing rather ostentatiously away.
The smaller one seemed to find it necessary to raise her voice, so that Rupert heard a sentence of their conversation before they passed out of earshot.
‘The vicar's wife and her sister — isn't that just what we look like,’ said Penelope Grandison, ‘and laden with parcels too.
Not the kind of people who have everything sent.’
‘We've been shopping,’ said Sophia Ainger, ‘so of course we're laden.’
She spoke rather absently for she  was remembering a vase of stiff-looking artificial flowers of an unknown species, seen fleetingly in a funeral director's window, which now overlaid her memory of the bright Kensington shops and brought her back to the reality of her life in North London.
The afternoon's shopping had been arranged to console her sister Penelope, who at twenty-five was still young enough to suffer disappointments in love as commonly as colds or headaches.
On this occasion it was to be hoped that humiliation and hurt pride had been assuaged by a new pair of shoes and a many-stranded jet necklace — like early travellers taking presents to the natives, Sophia felt.
‘Men seem to prefer young girls of eighteen,’ said Penelope gloomily, ‘and then where are you.’
‘But there have always been girls of eighteen, even in my day,’ Sophia protested.
‘Well you just married the curate, so it was all right.
One wouldn't expect a clergyman to be interested in young girls of eighteen.’
‘I don't see why not — after all I was only just twenty-one when I married Mark.’
‘How old would you say that man standing in the window of that house was?’ asked Penelope tentatively.
‘Oh, in his thirties probably.
I didn't see him very clearly,’ Sophia added.
Yet she had retained an impression of somebody so ordinary-looking that his very lack of distinction was in itself reassuring.
She hoped that if he was a churchgoer-which was unlikely these days he would not recognise her as the vicar's wife.
He had probably not even noticed her, a tall, rather too thin woman of thirty odd, with dark auburn hair.
Penelope, with her brighter red hair and rather flamboyant appearance, was much more distinctive.
‘I suppose Mark will call on him as he's living in the parish?’
Penelope suggested hopefully.
‘He will do what he ought to do — you can depend on that.’
‘It's a comfort when people do what they ought to do.
Not like him,’ said Penelope bitterly.
‘Never mind, Penny.
He wasn't good enough for you, anyway,’ said Sophia.
‘But men and women never do match each other in that kind of way — that's life.’
‘No, women are usually too good for men, but Mark is much too good for me,’ said Sophia.
‘Do you know, he told me not to worry about supper tonight but to enjoy my afternoon out.
He said he'd get something.’
Penelope did not answer.
Her brother-in-law, with his remote good looks, never seemed quite real to her.
She found it difficult to imagine him getting something for supper.
‘FRYING TONIGHT.
ROCK SALMON- SKATE PLAICE.’
Mark Ainger read from the roughly chalked up notice in the steamy window.
Which would Sophia prefer? he asked himself.
And which would tempt Faustina's delicate appetite?
Rock salmon — that had a noble sound about it, though he believed it was actually inferior to real salmon.
Skate — he imagined that was one of those flat bony fish, with the teeth showing in a sardonic grin.
Only plaice was familiar to him, so he supposed it had better be that.
Plaice, then, and two helpings — better make it three if Faustina was to be included — perhaps ‘portions’ was the word — and some chips.
He must get this right, not make a fool of himself by stumbling over the words, not using the correct terminology or not knowing which fish he wanted.
Turning down the collar of his raincoat and arranging it to expose his clerical collar — for he was not ashamed of his calling — Mark entered the shop.
‘Three portions of plaice and some chips, please,’ he  said firmly in his pleasant baritone voice.
‘Mind, Father, it's hot — have you got something to put it in?’
Mark lifted up his zip-fastened bag and the fragrant, greasy, newspaper-wrapped bundle was placed carefully inside it.
Good-nights were exchanged and he left the shop with a feeling of satisfaction, as if a rather difficult task had been successfully accomplished.
This was the very fringe of his parish, that part that would never become residentially ‘desirable’ because it was too near the railway, and many of the big gaunt houses had been taken over by families of West Indians.
Mark had been visiting, trying to establish some kind of contact with his exotic parishioners and hoping to discover likely boys and men to sing in the choir and serve at the altar.
He had received several enthusiastic offers, though he wondered how many of them would really turn up in church.
As he walked away from the house, Mark had remembered that it was along this street, with its brightly — almost garishly — painted houses that Sophia had once seen a cluster of what she took to be exotic tropical fruits in one of the windows, only to realise that they were tomatoes put there to ripen.
‘Love apples,’ she had said to Mark, and the words ‘love apple’had somehow given a name to the district, strange and different as it was from the rest of the parish which lay over the other side of the main road, far from the railway line.
Here the houses were less colourful, drably respectable but hardly elegant.
On the extreme eastern boundary of the parish, however, where the church and vicarage were rather oddly placed, a number of small terrace houses had been bought up by speculative builders, gutted, modernised, and sold at high prices to people who wanted small houses that were almost in town but could not afford the more fashionable districts  of Islington, St John's Wood or Hampstead.
It was in one of these that Sophia and Penelope had seen the stranger.
Afterwards he went by way of St Basil's Terrace, looking as Sophia had done earlier at the newly done up houses with their prettily painted front doors and rather self-conscious window-boxes and bay trees in tubs, when a woman's voice called out behind him, ‘Good evening vicar — been getting fish for pussy?’
When he turned round, rather startled, the voice went on, ‘Oh, I know what you've got in the bag — you can't hide anything from me!’
‘No, Sister Dew, I don't suppose I can,’ said Mark in a resigned tone.
All the same he did not feel inclined to reveal that the fish was not only for Faustina — who was never called ‘pussy’— but also for his and his wife's supper.
‘How you do love pussy,’ Sister Dew went on.
‘Only the other day I was at the vicarage, seeing Mrs Ainger about my stall at the bazaar-I'm doing the fancy work this year, you know — and there was pussy, bold as brass, if you please, walking into the lounge as if she owned it.’
But she does, Mark thought, though he said nothing.
Oh, Mrs Ainger’, I said, ‘you wouldn't want pussy going in your lounge, would you.’'
Sister Dew smiled up at Mark, for she was a little dumpy woman.
Her prominent blue eyes, seeming to bulge with curiosity, met Mark's yes, which were also blue, but with that remote expression sometimes found in the eyes of sailors or explorers.
Although invariably kind and courteous he had the air of seeming not to be particularly interested in human beings — a somewhat doubtful quality in a parish priest, though it had its advantages.
‘You'll find pussy going on the beds next,’ Sister Dew went on.
‘On the beds and in the lounge-you couldn't have that.’
Mark's smile did not reveal that Faustina naturally went on the beds as well as in the lounge.
He was wondering if, strictly speaking, a vicarage could be said to have a lounge — he would have thought not.
Sister Dew was a tedious little woman but she must be listened to because of all his parishioners she was the one most likely to take offence.
She was a retired hospital nurse and Mark had often wondered why her noble profession, so intimately connected with the great events of life, should have made her so petty-minded.
Perhaps it was their very greatness that made her so — one couldn't be noble all the time.
‘How pretty those houses are,’ said Mark, feeling that he ought to stay and talk to her a little longer.
He was hungry and conscious of the delicious greasy bundle in his bag, but he believed fish and chips were usually heated up in the oven anyway, so they wouldn't spoil.
‘Yes, and nice people coming to live in them.’
She lowered her voice.
‘I've heard this one we're standing by has been bought by a television producer.
Associated Rediffusion,’ she added reverently.
Mark puzzled over the words, but they meant nothing to him.
‘And there's Miss Broome opposite, with the mauve front door — she's sweet, I think.
Just the kind of person we want at St Basil's.’
Mark's face brightened for he remembered who Miss Broome was — a nice-looking youngish woman who had been to church the last two or three Sundays.
‘Her mother was a canon's widow,’ said Sister Dew, in her reverent Associated Rediffusion voice.
‘So her father must have been a canon,’ said Mark, though he felt that for some reason it was the canon's widow who cut more ice here.
Since Miss Broome's parents were both dead, it could never be known how it had been in life.
‘She's a librarian or something like that,’ Sister Dew went on.
‘And that lovely fur coat!
Chinchilla, I would have said, but I suppose it couldn't be.
Grey squirrel, more likely, though one doesn't see that much nowadays.
Well, I mustn't keep you, vicar, or pussy will have something to say, won't she.’
Sister Dew scuttled off to her own house, which was at the as yet unfashionable end of the terrace and Mark hurried along the short distance to the vicarage.
Beyond it lay the Victorian Gothic church and some large houses of the same period, now mostly turned into flats.
Sophia was in the kitchen, laying the table for supper.
‘What is chinchilla?’
Mark asked, as he handed over the fish and chips.
‘Why, a kind of fur, pale grey and very expensive worn mostly by wealthy Edwardian ladies with a bunch of Parma violets and perhaps a toque.’
‘Ah yes, the kind of hat your mother used to wear.’
‘Why do you want to know about chinchilla?
I can't believe you've come across any in Love Apple Road this afternoon.’
‘It's the kind of fur Sister Dew thought Miss Broome's coat might be — but apparently it would be too expensive even for a canon's daughter.’
‘Oh yes — but how well it would suit Ianthe Broome she's just the type for chinchilla.’
‘And so are you, darling,’ said Mark.
‘And all I bring you is fish and chips.’
Sophia had, in a sense, married beneath her, for although Mark came of a good clerical family he was without private means.
Sophia's mother spoke in hushed tones of her son-in-law's parish — much too near the Harrow Road and North Kensington to be the kind of district one liked to think of one's daughter living in, though of course a vicarage was different.
The clergy had to go to these rather dreadful places, but it was a pity 
Mark couldn't have got something ‘better’, like a Knightsbridge or South Kensington church, or even a good country living.
‘I love fish ant chips,’ said Sophia warmly, ‘and I think they're ready now.’
No sooner hat the dish been taken from the oven than a tortoiseshell cat entered the room, and leapt, via Mark's knee, on to the table.
‘You wouldn't want pussy on the table, as Sister Dew might say,’ said Mark, making a feeble attempt to remove her.
‘No, Faustina,’ said Sophie more sternly.
‘We do not leap on to the table for our food.
We take it from our dish in the proper place.’
‘But there is nothing in the dish,’ Mark pointed out.
‘No, but we must be patient,’ said Sophia, helping the cat first.
‘Whatever would Daisy and Edwin Pettigrew say if they could see such behaviour!’
The Pettigrews, brother and sister, lived next door to the vicarage.
Edwin was a veterinary surgeon and Daisy looked after the animals who were sometimes boarded with them.
‘Well, one naturally expects a cattery to be more austere,’ said Mark.
‘It must be like animals leading a monastic life.’
When they had washed up they went into the sitting room — neither ‘lounge’ nor ‘drawing room’seemed right to describe it — and listened to a concert on the wireless, for they had no television set and no grateful parishioners had yet clubbed together to provide one.
Mark thought out his letter for the October number of the parish magazine, while Sophia sorted out a basket of quinces which her mother had sent up from the country.
‘I shall make jelly,’ she said, ‘and keep some on a dish here — they smell so delicious.’
She sighed, not wanting to add that they reminded her of her childhood home  in case Mark should be hurt.
In these less gracious surroundings she had tried to recapture the atmosphere of her mother's house with bowls of quinces, the fragrance of well polished furniture, and the special Earl Grey tea, but she often realised how different it really was.
The vicarage had been built to match the church and the style of the rooms had not yet, and perhaps never would, become fashionable again.
‘How was Penelope?’
Mark asked.
‘Oh, much as usual.
I helped her to choose a dress.
And she was going for an interview for a new job tomorrow.’
Sophia did not mention the unsuccessful love affair.
Mark could not really enter into such things.
‘I suppose her autumn social life will be starting,’ he said absently, ‘and I suppose the note of my October magazine letter ought to be something about the autumn and winter social activities,’he went on, taking up his pen again.
‘And perhaps a welcome to the strangers in our midst?’
‘Yes, that would be most appropriate,’ said Sophia.
She suspected that Mark was thinking of the West Indians who had come to live in the parish and of course that was very right.
But she was thinking more of Ianthe Broome and the man she and Penelope had seen that afternoon, and wondering what they would be like.
There was always that slight excitement and uncertainty about living in a London parish — one never knew who might turn up in church on Sunday.
2
Daisy Pettigrew changed her reading for her long distance glasses, so that she could see the vicarage garden more clearly.
Sitting in her window, she commanded a good view of the vicarage garden and of the ‘object’ whose identity had been puzzling her for some days now.
It looked like — and surely it was — a statue of the Virgin Mary, and before long, no doubt, it would find its way into the church among all the other statues, though why it was now in the garden puzzled her a little .
Grey stone and blue drapery, she thought, the whole thing rather shabby, not brightly painted like the other statues, but still a popish image.
As she watched, Daisy saw Sophia come out into the garden with Faustina in her arms.
The cat looked like some great noble bird, a hawk or even an eagle, the golden streak down her nose giving the effect of a beak.
She struggled from Sophia's embrace and jumped down among the windfall apples, rolled one over with her paw, then turned and stalked indifferently away among the Michaelmas daisies.
Sophia went back into the house and came out again with a bowl of washing, from which she shook out a large Union Jack.
This she draped over the line, pinning it with a row of clothes pegs.
Wherever did she find that, Daisy wondered, that symbol of Empire.
What rare objects, what richness, the attic of a vicarage must hold!
Probably not many in this  neighbourhood or, for that matter, in any other would have a Union Jack on their clothes line.
Of course one didn't say Empire now, but Commonwealth — common weal, weal and woe…
Daisy's thoughts wandered inconsequentially.
Then she saw Sophia go over to the statue of the Virgin Mary.
Was she about to make some obeisance to it?
Daisy leaned forward, at once horrified and fascinated.
But no, she was removing the blue drapery, and now, with that gone, what had seemed to be a popish image turned out to be merely a tree stump with a blue cloth spread over it to dry.
The shape and folds of the cloth had suggested a draped figure.
Sophia now picked up Faustina again and went back into the house with her.
She makes too much of that cat, Daisy thought, for a young woman that is.
It was a pity she had no children….
Somewhere downstairs a clock struck a quarter to nine.
Daisy left her position in the window and hurried down to get ready for the morning surgery.
This was likely to be crowded, for her brother had a large number of patients, many of whom came in taxis and private cars from the more fashionable districts farther afield.
Going into the big general waiting room, Daisy no longer noticed the many photographs of grateful animals and their owners which decorated the walls, most of them signed with fulsome messages indicating every degree of gratitude.
Some who went to the surgery thought that Daisy looked like an animal herself, moving sometimes like a slow marmalade cat, other times like a bustling sheep dog-for she was a woman of moods — and seeming to combine the best and worst qualities of each.
She was sandy-haired and rather fat and usually wore blue or grey tweeds, though with the passage of years she had become comfortably indifferent to dress.
She went over to the round table in the middle of the  room, moved The Field and Country Life into slightly different positions, concealed the one ashtray to discourage smoking, and went down the passage to see if her brother was ready.
This passage or corridor was carpeted in moss green, now faded and stained in places from water and the urine of nervous animals, so that it looked more like some natural substance, moss or close-cut turf, than man-made carpet.
At the end of the passage was a stained-glass window with a design of tulips, and on the left the door leading to the surgery.
Edwin Pettigrew was, like his sister, of sandy colouring, a kindly-looking man more interested in animals than in human beings, though he was an expert at calming and reassuring the agitated and often hysterical women who brought their animals to see him.
He had not been able to deal so skilfully with his own wife, however, that relationship needing more of himself than he could spare from the animals, and she had left him many years ago.
‘All ready, Daisy?’ he asked, looking over the top of his spectacles.
A loud cry was heard coming from somewhere underneath them.
‘They want their breakfast,’ said Daisy.
‘I must go to them.’
She descended to the basement where the boarding cats were housed and began to prepare their breakfast.
Cries rose on all sides of her as she filled the dishes, but she worked on steadily oblivious, like some eccentric female St Francis, brooding a little about the image seen in the vicarage garden, which, although it had turned out to be only an old cloth flung over a tree stump, was an indication of the way things might go.
Not that she had anything against the vicar personally, though it had been hard to forgive his refusal of her request for an ‘Animals’ Sunday' to which people might bring their pets to be blessed.
She glanced round at the  cats to see how much food would be needed.
Their cries rose louder and more urgent now in their primitive longing for meat.
They were great and splendid creatures, perhaps hardly in need of any blessing from man or God, she thought defiantly, and it was wonderful to be able to satisfy their hunger with raw meat, a real privilege.
One did not get the same feeling opening tins of cat food, admirable though it was in many ways.
Now they were all feeding, and she stood back, watching them with love.
Then she moved over to the basement window and contemplated the pairs of legs striding along the pavement to work.
One pair — those of Ianthe Broome — interested her particularly.
They wore ladylike stockings with seams, in a colour described in Marshall's hosiery sale as ‘medium beige’, and ended in brown court shoes of good leather with a sensible heel.
Daisy wondered where the canon's daughter was going.
Ianthe always hurried past the vet's house, fearful of seeing or hearing something dreadful.
The basement cattery seemed to her a sinister place, though she knew that the animals were most lovingly tended by Miss Pettigrew.
They had got into conversation one evening when Ianthe was coming back from the library where she worked, and it had reassured her — coming as a stranger to this rather doubtful neighbourhood — to meet somebody whom her mother would have described as a ‘gentlewoman’.
Ianthe was the only child of elderly parents, who seemed to be a whole generation removed from those of her contemporaries.
When her father died it had been necessary for her to do some kind of work and the training in librarianship had seemed the most suitable.
Working among books was, on the face of it, a ladylike occupation, Mrs Broome had thought, and one that  would bring her daughter into contact with a refined, intellectual type of person.
She had never seen Ianthe handing out books to the ill-mannered grubby students and cranks of all ages who frequented the library of political and sociological books where she worked.
On the crowded train a man gave up his seat to Ianthe and she accepted it gracefully.
She expected courtesy from men and often received it.
It was as if they realised that she was not for the rough and tumble of this world, like the aggressive women with shaggy hair styles who pushed their way through life thrusting their hard shopping baskets at defenceless men.
The man who had offered the seat had seen Ianthe as a tall fragile-looking woman in a pretty blue hat that matched her eyes.
He might also have noticed that her dark hair was touched with grey and that although she was not exactly smart there was a kind of elegance about her.
She saw herself perhaps as an Elizabeth Bowen heroine — for one did not openly identify oneself with Jane Austen's heroines and To The North was her favourite novel.
Even her little house was somehow in keeping with this picture, although it was definitely not St John's Wood and there was no delicate wrought iron balcony with steps leading down to the green garden.
Yet her small garden was green, if only because of much rain and leaves rather than flowers, and there was a little mossy stone cherub left behind by the previous owner.
It was so much more congenial than the flat near Victoria — unsuitably dominated by Westminster Cathedral — where she had lived with her mother.
Ianthe arrived at the library five minutes before she need have done.
Mervyn Cantrell, the librarian, was unpacking his lunch.
He was a tall thin irritable-looking man in his early forties, who had the idea that he could not ‘take’ restaurant food, at least of the kind served in the restaurants where the rest of the staff had their midday meal — luncheon was hardly the  word for it — and therefore always brought a packed meal with him.
Today it was a cold fish mayonnaise with lettuce and french dressing in a little bottle, brown rolls, and a special goatsmilk cheese obtainable only at one particular shop in Soho.
‘Good morning, Miss Broome,’ he said, for they were not always ‘Ianthe’and ‘Mervyn’to each other and the early morning was usually a very formal time, ‘I hope you're getting settled into your new house.’
‘Yes, thank you — my furniture seems to fit in very well.’
‘You've got some nice things, haven't you.’
There was a tinge of envy in his tone, for his humdrum childhood home in Croydon had not provided him with the kind of ‘things’ his taste now craved.
‘Well, family things, you know — but one gets attached to them.’
Mervyn had visited the flat once for tea on a Sunday afternoon when her mother was still alive, but the occasion had not been very successful.
Mrs Broome had not thought much of Croydon as was evident from her patronising manner.
‘I remember you had a lovely Pembroke table — I coveted that.’
He laughed, not very mirthfully.
‘And those dining-room chairs — Hepplewhite, aren't they?’
‘Yes, I believe so,’ said Ianthe uncertainly.
She found the conversation embarrassing and wondered if the time had come when she could no longer avoid asking him to come and see her new house.
‘Surely you must know if they are,’ he said testily.
‘You must come and see for yourself when I've got things a bit tidier,’ she said, trying not to be irritated.
Poor Mervyn, she knew that she ought to feel sorry for him, living with his disagreeable old mother — at least, this was how she appeared in Ianthe's imagination — disappointed at not having got a job in one of the University libraries, unable to find staff accurate enough to  appreciate the niceties of setting out a bibliographical entry correctly, with it seemed few friends of either sex, unable to eat restaurant food — really, the list seemed endless when one thought about it.
‘I shall be sorting out some of the applications for Miss Grimes's job this morning,’ Mervyn said.
‘She's really getting past her work and it'll be a relief when she goes.
What we need is a younger person.’
Ianthe sighed, perhaps foreseeing the day when both of them would be replaced by younger persons.
‘A young man, I think,’ he went on, holding up a letter.
‘This one sounds quite promising, but of course I must see him first — one can't always tell from the application, he added primly.
‘No, he might be quite unsuitable,’ Ianthe agreed, half hoping that he would be.
She would have preferred a woman of her own age and background.
She did not like men very much, except for the clergy, and found younger women rather alarming.
Miss Grimes, with whom she had worked for several years, was hardly the most congenial of companions but at least she was familiar.
This morning she was dusting books in the reading room, which was so far empty of readers.
‘And how's his nibs this morning?’ she grunted in her slightly Cockney voice.
It was this voice and expressions like ‘his nibs’ which jarred on Ianthe.
Indeed, Miss Grimes was sometimes altogether jarring.
She was a squat, dusty-looking woman on the threshold of sixty, who had been taken on in the library during the war and whom Mervyn had tried unsuccessfully to dislodge ever since he had become librarian.
But now the passage of the years was doing it for him.
‘Time like an over-rolling stream’, Mervyn had said, ‘bears even Miss Grimes away.’
But Ianthe did not like jokes about hymns.
‘I'll help you with the books,’ she said.
‘It's not your day, is it, dear?’
‘No, but they've got to be done, and Shirley's making the tea.’
Ianthe had not told her mother that she sometimes hat to dust the books in the library.
Later when she was drinking her tea Mervyn came into the room with a card in his hand.
Ianthe realised from his triumphant expression that he had caught her out in a mistake and waited with resignation to hear what it was.
‘Government in Zazzau,’ he declared.
‘The place of publication is London, not Oxford.
It was published by the Oxford University Press for the International African Institute — do you see?’
From behind his back he now produced the book itself, open at the title page.
‘Of course— how stupid of me.
I'm so sorry, I'm afraid I do make mistakes sometimes.’
‘But there is no need to make that kind of mistake,’ he said rather obscurely and left the room with a springy step.
So Ianthe's day passed, punctuated by cups of tea and a lunch of welsh rarebit and trifle at a cafe run by gentlewomen.
It was not much different from other days.
At five minutes to five, Shirley, the typist who had been helping Ianthe to file some cards, covered up her typewriter, put on the black imitation leather coat she had just bought, and hurried away singing.
Ianthe herself stayed until nearly six o' dock to avoid the rush-hour crowds.
She was still not completely used to the journey northwards to the small empty house, when for so long she had gone southwards to the big flat near Westminster Cathedral, where her mother had waited, eager to hear every detail of her day.
As she walked from the Underground to St Basil's Terrace Ianthe noticed that curtains had appeared in the windows of the house nearly opposite to hers where the  new arrival had moved in.
Perhaps they might become friends, she thought doubtfully, or at least neighbours, passing the time of day if they met in the road.
It was sad coming back alone to an empty house, Ianthe thought, but how much worse if it had been a single furnished room, like poor Miss Grimes.
Ianthe had always wanted a house of her own and as soon as she had shut the door behind her she forgot the lonely homecoming in the pleasure she still felt at seeing her furniture and possessions in their new setting.
Here were the Hepplewhite chairs and the Pembroke table, coveted by Mervyn Cantrell, portraits of her grandparents and of her father in cope and biretta, the comer cupboard with the lustre jugs collected by her mother, the old silky Bokhara rugs on the polished parquet floor of the sitting room, the familiar books in the white-painted bookshelves, and the china ornaments she remembered from childhood.
Ianthe was not the type to pour herself a glass of sherry or gin as soon as she got home after a day's work, nor yet to make a cup of tea.
One did not make tea at half-past six in the evening like the ‘working classes’, as her mother would have called them.
Instead she set about cooking herself a suitable supper in the almost too perfect little kitchen.
The grill was heated for a chop, tomatoes were cut up, and a small packet of frozen peas tipped out of its wrapping into a saucepan.
‘We have come to this,’ her mother used to say, ‘eating frozen vegetables like Americans.’
She had been deeply conscious of her position as a canon's widow.
Frozen vegetables were, somehow, a lowering of standards, but they were quick and convenient and really fresher than anything one could get in the London shops.
When the meal was ready Ianthe ate it in the dining room, which opened on to the garden now piled with drifts of sycamore leaves.
While she ate she read, another  thing her mother would have disapproved of, but her ‘book’ was the parish magazine and somehow that made it better.
It gave her a comfortable glow to think of the church and the life that went on around it, dear and familiar and with the same basic pattern everywhere.
During their years in London together Ianthe and her mother had not attached themselves to one church, Mrs Broome liking to hear a good preacher and fine music.
Sometimes they had to attend the fashionable church in Mayfair where Canon Broome's brother-in-law was rector.
Now that she was free to choose, Ianthe looked forward to going to the same church every Sunday and finding her place in the congregation.
Indeed, one of the reasons why she had liked this house was because it was near St Basil's which appeared to be a ‘suitable’ church for her.
She was just about to make some coffee, when the front door bell rang.
She went into the hall a little nervously, her eye on the chain which could be hooked across the door to guard against burglars, but it seemed silly to put it up.
Opening the door a crack she saw a man in a clerical collar and a woman beside him.
The vicar and his wife, of course.
‘We do hope you've finished your supper — dinner,’ said Sophia, uncertain what form Ianthe's evening meal might have taken.
‘And that you aren't in the middle of watching your favourite television programme,’ said Mark conscientiously, for his parochial visiting now made this question automatic.
‘I have finished my supper and I haven't got a television set,’ said Ianthe, smiling.
‘How nice of you to come.’
In the hall Sophia looked around her with unconcealed curiosity.
It had been of course her suggestion that Mark's pastoral visit should be no longer delayed.
‘And she may be lonely,’ Sophia had added, ‘wanting to meet  people of her own kind, if we can be called that.’
‘Those were painted by my grandmother,’ said Ianthe, seeing that Sophia was examining the watercolours of Italian scenes which hung in the hall.
‘People seemed to stay abroad so much longer in those days and to have time to do things like that.’
‘Yes, they were leisured days,’ said Mark a little uncomfortably, feeling that he should say that things were ‘better’now when great coachloads of people could whirl round the Italian lakes in an eight-day tour.
But he found himself unable to say it, especially not to this so very obvious gentlewoman.
A friend for Sophia? he wondered, following the ladies into the sitting room.
He always felt slightly guilty that there were so few suitable for this role in the parish.
Now Sophia was interested in the furniture and objects, and it was not until they had finished their coffee that the talk turned to parish matters.
‘We are having our Harvest Thanksgiving next week,’ said Mark, glancing without much hope towards the little leaf-filled garden.
‘Oh, then I must bring some flowers or fruit,’ said Ianthe.
‘I know how difficult it is in London — I suppose tropical fruits would be allowed?’
‘Certainly-they're really most appropriate here,’ said Mark.
‘What though the spicy breezes Blow soft o'er Ceylon's isle,’
Sophia quoted.
‘How one longs for the days of Bishop Heber sometimes!’
It was an inconsequential remark but she hoped it might lead to some interesting revelation on Ianthe's part, that Bishop Heber had been an ancestor or that she loved Victorian poetry, for, looking at the bookshelves, she was sure that she did.
But Ianthe seemed not to know how to answer Sophia's remark and soon they were on to another topic  — the strangers in the parish and whether it was likely that they would come to church.
‘Well, you come,’ said Sophia, ‘and last Sunday I noticed the man who lives opposite you sitting at the back.’
‘You mean the television producer?’ asked Ianthe, puzzled.
‘That seems rather unlikely doesn't it?’
Ah, but he isn't — he's not in television at all.
Sister Dew had it all wrong.
His name's Rupert Stonebird and he's an anthropologist.’
‘Darling, how do you know this?’ asked Mark, but without much surprise, for Sophia knew many things.
‘Stonebird,’ said Ianthe.
‘What an interesting name.
It sounds like a character in fiction.
And you say he's an anthropologist.’
‘Yes, Daisy Pettigrew told me.
I suppose he goes around measuring skulls and that kind of thing.’
‘Measuring skulls — here?’ said Mark solemnly.
‘Whatever would he want to do that for?’
The three of them dissolved into laughter at the idea of it, and Ianthe went to make some more coffee.
‘Measuring skulls and that kind of thing……’
Rupert Stonebird would have sighed inwardly, for he was used to this particular joke, but explained politely — if anyone was still listening — that he was actually a lecturer in social anthropology, which was concerned with the behaviour of men in society rather than with the size and shape of their skulls.
But probably by this time nobody would still have been listening.
People were not really very interested in what one did, and a quick classification was all that was needed to distinguish an academic type from a farmer or stockbroker.
Rupert was a quiet sort of person who disliked pushing himself forward and was therefore well fitted to observe the behaviour of others.
Nevertheless, now that he had come to live in this new house he was aware that he would probably be an object of interest to his neighbours.
He was thirty-six years old and not yet married, mainly because his trips to Africa — where most of his work had been done — had not left him much time to find a suitable wife, though others in similar positions seemed to have achieved wives and marriages, whether suitable or not.
He was quite good-looking, of medium height with dark hair and brown eyes.
He wore glasses for reading.
His coming to live in this particular house had been preceded by a change in his life which he was finding  a little difficult to accept.
For it had been on a cold Sunday evening in the spring, after he had been looking over the house with the idea of buying it, that he had happened out of curiosity to ‘pop in’, as fashionable Anglo-Catholics said, to Solemn Evensong and Benediction at St Basil's at the end of the road.
The service was no novelty to him for his father had been a High Anglican vicar in another part of London and Rupert had not lost his boyhood faith until his first year at Oxford — late really, he had thought, for a clergyman's son.
And now, eighteen years afterwards, in a poorly attended North London church of hideous architecture and amid clouds of strong incense, he seemed to have regained that faith.
It had been an uncomfortable and disturbing sensation and he was still wondering whether it hadn't been only the incense, the spring evening, and nostalgia for his boyhood.
He had almost considered not buying the house, but it was what he wanted, and how was he to know that things would be any different in another district?
So far he had attended Mass at St Basil's only once, sitting at the back and hurrying out after the service before anyone could speak to him.
He had not been to any of the social functions advertised — it would have seemed like living his life backwards to enter voluntarily a church hall full of women and cups of tea — he could see his mother at the urn and himself as a boy handing round those very cups.
He did not think that anyone at St Basil's had even noticed him so far.
He could not know that Sophia was taking a keen interest in him and had even been considering him — provided he were not divorced or otherwise unsuitable-as a husband for her sister.
The next time he went to church she waylaid him after the evening service, and tried to persuade him to enter the hall, where — as he had guessed — a cup of tea was about to be made.
He had  murmured some excuse but had been unable to refuse an invitation to supper at the vicarage during the coming week.
‘My sister will be there and perhaps one or two of our parishioners, so I hope it won't be too dull for you,’ Sophia said.
‘Oh, I'm sure it won't be,’ said Rupert politely.
‘You won't expect anything too elaborate — I mean, in the way of food,’ said Sophia in her most sensible tone.
‘Well, I was brought up in a vicarage myself and know how things are or can be,’ he said confusedly.
He wondered if he had sounded discourteous, though ‘things’ could have a wider meaning than just food.
‘One does not go out for a meal just for the food,’ he added, hardly improving the situation.
Sophia laughed.
She was at once amused and happy at his vicarage connections which seemed to bode well.
‘You're a clergyman's son, then?’ she asked.
‘Yes.’
‘Oh, how splendid!’
Sophia's face seemed to light up and her tone to brighten.
Most unlikely that he would be divorced, she thought, taking this naive and optimistic view of the sons of the clergy.
But he did go to church, so perhaps she was right.
She decided not to probe any more deeply for the moment.
Sophia then invited Ianthe Broome and Edwin Pettigrew, thinking that they might ‘do’ for each other, at least as partners for the evening.
Then it seemed unkind to leave Daisy out, so she was invited too.
A woman of Daisy's age would hardly expect to have a man invited for her, Sophia decided.
And anyway an extra woman was useful when it came to bringing things from the kitchen and clearing dishes.
Sometime before the guests were due to arrive, Mark went down to the cellar to bring up the wine.
He peered in the half darkness at the metal rack in which two  bottles, the remains of an Easter present from Sophia's mother, sat in lonely dignity for each was a good wine of its kind.
‘Red or white, darling?’ he called, seeing that there was one of each.
‘Red, I think,’ said Sophia.
‘It's a sort of casserole or beef stew we're having.’
Mark picked up the dark-looking bottle to read the label.
‘This seems to be port,’ he said, ‘so it will have to be the white.
Oh, but this is the Niersteiner, the last bottle, and it wouldn't go very well with beef’ He had been saving it for Sophia's birthday.
‘Well, let them drink beer or cider,’ said Sophia.
‘Neither Edwin nor Daisy drinks much and I don't suppose Ianthe Broome does.’
‘So it's only Mr Stonebird we're considering — as a clergyman's son and an anthropologist he might drink a great deal.’
‘Is his name really that?’ said Penelope, who had just come into the kitchen.
‘He sounds quite interesting.’
‘Yes, I think he may be,’ said Sophia.
‘He's about thirty-five — dark and not bad looking.’
‘And not married?’
‘No, I don't think so.
He seems to be living alone in one of the little houses in St Basil's Terrace.’
‘Are you sure he isn't living with his mother?’
‘I haven't seen a mother but I suppose there could be one in the background.’
Sophia looked worried for a moment.
‘I suppose I ought to have made more enquiries when I was inviting him — I mean, it would seem discourteous to ignore her, if she exists.
But he didn't mention her.’
‘Then perhaps we can assume that she doesn't exist,’ said Penelope.
‘But of course there may be other ties.’
She had now reached the age when one starts looking for  a husband rather more systematically than one does at nineteen or even at twenty-one.
At that moment the front door bell rang and Sophia went to answer it.
Penelope could hear a woman's voice talking to her sister in the hall.
Who could this be? she wondered rather crossly, not having realised that there was to be another woman there.
Then she realised that it must be Ianthe Broome, the canon's daughter they were always talking about, and perhaps in some way a kind of ‘rival’ for the affections of a man she had not yet seen.
Even Penelope realised that it was a somewhat farcical situation.
But she was reassured when Ianthe came into the room, and her observant eye took in every detail of Ianthe's ladylike but hardly fashionable appearance-the hair smooth and neat, gathered into a little roll at the back — the dress of a rather uninteresting shade of blue, with the skirt a good two inches too long by Penelope's standards — the stockings with seams, and the shoes with sensible heels and rounded toes.
The jewellery, consisting of a small aquamarine and pearl pendant on a gold chain, and a gold bracelet with a turquoise clasp, was obviously real.
‘This is my sister Penelope,’ said Sophia.
‘Penny, this is Miss Broome — or perhaps we may call you Ianthe?
It's such a pretty name.’
‘Please do,’ said Ianthe, who was temporarily a little bewildered at Penelope's appearance and unconventional clothes.
Conversation between strange women at the beginning of a party is often strained and this occasion proved to be no exception.
After a pause Penelope said, ‘I hear you've just come to live in one of those little houses in St Basil's Terrace they look so pretty.’
‘Yes, I'm very pleased with mine,’ said Ianthe.
‘She has it most elegantly furnished,’ said Sophia enthusiastically.
‘It's really no credit to me,’ said Ianthe.
‘All the furniture came from my old home — I was lucky to have it.’
‘I think I can hear Edwin and Daisy at the door,’ said Sophia in a relieved tone, going out into the hall.
‘Oh, and Mr Stonebird too.
Now we're all here.’
Rupert Stonebird entered the room a little shyly.
He had changed into a dark suit as a kind of protective colouring, so that he could sit quietly observing rather than being observed.
He had noticed Ianthe coming out of her house and now saw her as a woman of about his own age, nicely dressed, worthy no doubt, quite pretty but not particularly interesting.
The sisters — Sophia and Penelope — made a stronger impression.
Sophia, with her long neck and auburn hair, looked like a figure in a minor Pre-Raphaelite painting, her velvet dress a deep peacock blue.
But there were hollows in her cheeks and she was too thin for beauty.
Penelope had the same colouring and generally romantic air, but was shorter and dumpier with rather fat legs.
She wore a black sacklike dress, a large silver medallion on a chain, black nylon stockings and flat-heeled shoes.
Her hair was dressed in a ‘beehive’ style, which was now collapsing at one side.
The Pre-Raphaelite beatnik, Rupert thought, wondering if anybody had ever called her that.
‘Mark is in his study,’ Sophia explained.
‘A young couple called about putting up their banns and he has to talk to them, but he won't be long.
Shall we have a glass of sherry?
And now Faustina is with us — come along, darling.’
Faustina walked slowly into the room and Daisy Pettigrew stooped to pick her up.
The cat crouched uneasily in her arms, then uttered a curious low cry and struggled free.
Penelope turned away from the little scene, to avoid  the inevitable explanations and interpretations of Faustina's behaviour and found herself facing Rupert Stonebird.
She had been disappointed in her first sight of him, but she gave him an amused little smile, hoping that he was not one who doted on cats.
‘Have you any animals?’ she asked.
‘No, I haven't really got round to it,’ he said, frowning a little, as if he ought to have done.
‘I suppose studying the human animal is enough for you,’ said Penelope.
‘Yes, it does take up most of my time — that and moving into a new house.’
Rupert was surprised that Penelope appeared to know what he did, with no jokes about measuring skulls.
It was rather a relief.
‘Shall we go into the dining room?’ said Sophia.
‘I think everything's ready now.’
‘Beer or cider?’ asked Mark, a shade unconfidently.
After they had been served, Rupert found himself under fire again.
‘I hear that you have worked in Africa,’ said Daisy, fixing him with an accusing stare.
‘Yes, my field work has been in Africa, mostly,’ he said patiently.
‘What work did you do, exactly?’ she continued.
‘Oh, nothing much, really,’ he said feebly.
The eyes of four respectable women, bright with friendly interest, were looking eagerly towards him and somehow he found himself unable to explain that he had been making a study of extra-marital relations, detached and scientific though this had of course been.
‘I mean it was merely a study of kinship,’ he added, seeing before him now the outraged faces of his colleagues at his letting the side down by describing such work as ‘nothing much, really’.
‘A very complicated subject, I imagine,’ said Edwin Pettigrew.
‘I hoped that perhaps you had been doing something for the welfare of these poor peoples,’ persisted Daisy.
Rupert hesitated, unwilling to admit that anthropologists did no good, yet for the moment unable to think of a positive example that would convince her.
‘Are you settling down well in your house?’ she asked, feeling that a change of subject was now called for.
‘Quite well, thank you, though as the weather gets colder, heating becomes rather a problem,’ he said.
The conversation now became highly technical, touching on the advantages of electric and paraffin convector heaters, oil fired central heating, open fires, boilers, and the like.
Penelope felt rather bored and irritated and began to speculate on whether Rupert had a car and would offer to run her home.
She laid great stress on these little courtesies, the formal acts of politeness that women in their emancipated state seemed to be in danger of losing.
They rose from the table with Daisy stressing the need for a heater that could not be knocked over by cats.
‘The man who can invent that will make a fortune,’ she declared.
Once in the drawing room the party seemed to divide, Ianthe talking to Edwin Pettigrew about dogs, Mark rather nobly taking on Daisy, and Sophia and Penelope plying Rupert with questions about himself, his life, and his work, probing to find out without actually asking whether he had a mother, wife, fiancee, or ‘friend’ in the background.
‘I did wonder,’ said Sophia at last in desperation, ‘whether I had committed a grave social error in asking you to dinner alone when you may very well have a mother, wife or fiancee who should have been invited too.’
Rupert laughed.
‘I can assure you that I have none of  those — er-appendages.’
‘Then you are without female dependants,’ said Sophia, almost like a chairman summing up at a meeting.
‘Well, I have a sister,’ he admitted.
‘A sister?’
But that was nothing.
‘Yes, married and living in Woking.’
‘Ah yes, Woking,’ said Sophia thoughtfully.
‘There's a mosque there, I believe.
‘A mosque?’
Rupert sounded surprised, as he had every right to.
‘It's funny how one associates places with irrelevant things,’ said Penelope, who had been listening to Sophia's probings with a kind of fascinated horror.
At that moment the telephone rang in the hall.
The call was for Edwin Pettigrew, who seemed to be expecting it.
‘A very nervous poodle having her first puppies,’ he explained.
‘I thought it would be some time tonight.’
‘I really ought to be going,’ said Penelope, ‘what with having a long journey and work tomorrow.’
She waited, but without much hope, for Rupert to offer to run her home in the car they did not know he possessed.
‘Oh, darling, I thought you'd stay the night,’ said Sophia.
‘You know you can if you want to.’
‘Well, if you must go I'll run you back in the car,’ said Mark, much to Penelope's disappointment.
‘And Ianthe and Mr Stonebird’—‘Rupert’ did not quite come out-'live so near that I dare say they can escort each other,’said Sophia.
She had sensed her sister's disappointment but realised that nothing could be done about it.
And if she flung Rupert and Ianthe together they would probably take a dislike to each other.
They walked away from the vicarage in silence.
‘I hear that you are a canon's daughter — and I am an  archdeacon's son,’ said Rupert lightly, trying to make conversation.
‘So we must have something in common.’
His tone faltered a little and he stared in front of him into the darkness.
‘Yes, a vicarage upbringing, I suppose,’ said Ianthe.
‘But somehow that can lead people into such different paths.’
‘Yes, sons of the clergy often go to the bad, and daughters too.
At least, one hears of it occasionally,’ he added hastily, afraid that Ianthe might misunderstand him.
She did not answer him because at that moment they came to her house.
There was a light in the hall and Rupert commented on this.
‘I always leave the hall light on when I go out,’ Ianthe explained.
‘I feel it discourages burglars and it seems more welcoming when one comes back to an empty house.’
Oh, this coming back to an empty house, Rupert thought, when he had seen her safely up to her door.
People — though perhaps it was only women — seemed to make so much of it.
as if life itself were not as empty as the house one was coming back to.
And now he too was returning to an empty house.
Groping for the light switch, whose position he had not yet memorised perfectly, he saw the evening's post still lying on the table in the hall where he had put it before he came out.
There was a fat envelope, probably the proofs of an article he had written for an anthropological journal.
There would be time to look at it before he went to bed.
Rupert opened the envelope and unfolded the bundle of galleys.
‘SOME ASPECTS OF EXTRA-MARITAL RELATIONS AMONG THE NGUMU’, he read.
Not strikingly original as anthropological titles go, but it looked well with his name set out underneath it in italic capitals.
The sketch map and kinship diagrams had  come out well, also, and the French summary, with its cosy phrase ‘chez les Ngumu’, seemed adequate.
How many offprints did he want-would the usual twenty-five free ones be enough? asked the letter accompanying the proof.
Better make it fifty, he thought, seeing himself distributing them like Christmas cards.
Then he remembered the eager questioning eyes of the four women he had met that evening — it would hardly be suitable for them.
And his colleagues would have read it in the journal anyway.
It seemed that he was like the poet with his nosegay of visionary flowers:
‘That I might there present it — O! to whom?’
All the same, he thought, better make it fifty.
When he was an old man the younger generation might clamour for it.
4
‘Miss Broome, this is John Challow.’
Ianthe looked up from her work to see Mervyn Cantrell standing at her elbow, with a tall, dark young man of about thirty hovering deferentially a pace or two behind him.
‘How do you do, Miss Broome?’ he said.
‘I must say all this is rather terrifying for me — these card indexes and things — or should one say indices?— I never know.’
He laughed, a rather confident, charming laugh.
‘How do you do?’
Ianthe murmured, not quite knowing what to say.
‘I thought it would be best if Mr Challow were to help you for a bit, Miss Broome,’ said Mervyn, ‘while he's getting settled down, that is .’
‘Why, of course,’ said Ianthe politely, wondering what she was going to do with him, and wishing, as she had before, that Mervyn had engaged a comfortable middle-aged woman to fill Miss Grimes's place.
‘I'll leave you to it then,’ said Mervyn.
‘Just ask Miss Broome anything you don't understand and she'll explain it.
Left by themselves Ianthe and John made a wary appraisal of each other.
She saw a young, rather handsome man, whose brown eyes looked at her in a way she found slightly disturbing, though this was not the kind of thing she would have admitted to anybody but  herself.
He saw a rather pretty woman, not very young, with an air of good breeding that somehow attracted him.
A woman rather shy of men, whose eyes did not quite meet his when he looked at her.
‘Fancy me working in a library again,’ he said, one hand resting idly on a card index.
‘Why, haven't you been doing this sort of work?’
Ianthe asked.
‘No, I've been freelancing the last couple of years.’
‘Oh, I didn't know one could do that in libraries.’
She looked puzzled.
‘You mean part-time work?’
‘No, not in libraries.
You might be rather shocked if I told you.’
‘Shocked?
Do you think so?’
Ianthe smiled uneasily, feeling that some kind of guessing game was being played between them and that she ought to play her part by making a suggestion as to what the work could have been.
‘People do so many unusual things nowadays,’ she said lamely.
‘Well, this was film work, actually — crowd work and that sort of thing.
Dancing in a night club scene at eight o'clock in the morning — TV commercials too, sometimes.’
John smiled and glanced quickly at Ianthe, as if to see how she was taking it.
‘How interesting,’ she said brightly, ‘and what a change from this sort of work.
What made you decide to come back to this?’
‘Well, film work's very precarious, of course— so I thought I'd better get a steady job for a bit , especially when my money ran out.’
Ianthe's smile was becoming a little forced now.
She was just trying to think what she could say to bring John back to the subject of the library and its workings when Shirley came in with two cups of tea.
‘Well, I can't say that I've really earned this,’ said John, taking a cup, ‘but perhaps I can be forgiven my  first day.
Is it China tea?’
‘China tea?
No, I don't think so, but it certainly does look rather weak.’
‘I should imagine you would like China tea?’ he said, looking at her intently.
‘I do, very much,’ Ianthe admitted, ‘but somehow it doesn't seem to go with work.
Now, shall I show you what I'm doing here?’
For a few minutes she explained the system on which the cards were arranged, then let him try to select some for a bibliography she was compiling on nutrition in underdeveloped countries.
‘Nutrition,’ John said, after he had been working for a short time.
‘That doesn't really sound like food, does it.
At least not the kind of food one would like to eat.
By the way, what does one do about lunch?
Are there any good places round here — not too expensive of course?’
‘Well, there's Lyons and the ABC and a coffee bar, where Shirley sometimes goes, and various pubs, of course.’
‘Where do you go?’
Ianthe hesitated.
Today she had brought sandwiches, as she wanted to spend her lunch hour writing personal letters, but she felt reluctant to reveal to this young man the name of the little restaurant near Westminster Abbey, run by gentlewomen, where she often lunched.
‘I quite often bring sandwiches’ she said.
‘But I believe the pub on the corner's quite good.’
‘I can't imagine you in a pub,’ said John, ‘or Mr Cantrell, for that matter.’
‘No, he usually brings his own lunch and eats it here.’
For some reason Ianthe felt tired by so much talking and was glad when half-past twelve came and John suggested tentatively that he might go out.
Left to herself she unpacked her sandwiches and got out her writing things.
She was absorbed in a letter when Mervyn Cantrell  came into the room.
‘Oh good, you haven't finished your lunch yet,’ he said.
‘I've just been brewing some coffee — I expect you'd like a cup.
What's in your sandwiches?’ he asked cosily, lifting the corner of one.
‘Cold meat,’ he declared, sounding disappointed.
‘That's not very interesting.’
‘No.
I just had a bit of my Sunday joint left over,’ said Ianthe apologetically.
‘Have you ever tried a cold egg-and-breadcrumbed veal cutlet eaten in the fingers — holding it by the bone of course?’
‘And with a paper frill?’ asked Ianthe.
‘It sounds lovely, but somehow I never seem to have time to make things like that ant as you know I usually go to the Humming Bird for lunch.’
‘I can't bear those two who run it — English gentlewomen with a vengeance, I always think — the kind that have made England what she is.’
‘I think Mrs Harper and Miss Burge do a very good job under rather difficult conditions, said Ianthe, ‘after all the whole place is very small and the kitchen especially so.’
‘Quite.
And who but two women like that would be pigheaded enough to try and run a restaurant there?’
‘Miss Burge's brother was an admiral, and Mrs Harper is the widow of a cathedral organist.
I can't remember which cathedral.’
Ianthe frowned, trying to recall the name.
‘You imply that she is used to producing a four-course dinner on a primus in the organ loft,’ said Mervyn, then, losing interest in the subject, he went on ‘How do you think John Challow's shaping?’
Ianthe hesitated.
She certainly had not thought of him as ‘shaping’ at all in any direction.
‘It's rather early to  tell,’ she said.
‘I suppose he's used to this kind of work and will be able to do it once he gets into our ways.’
‘Our ways — and what ways they are!’
Mervyn sighed and prepared to go back to his work.
‘Perhaps he isn't quite what we've been used to, but I thought we might give him a trial.
All the other applicants seemed so highly qualified, I thought they'd probably turn up their noses at what — between ourselves, Ianthe — is really rather a stooge's job.
Besides, one gets so tired of willing gentlewomen of uncertain age,’ he laughed rather cruelly, ‘just when we'd succeeded in getting rid of old Grimes too.’
Ianthe said nothing.
She felt guilty that she had not yet been to visit Miss Grimes in her bed-sitting room somewhere off the Finchley Road, really within easy distance of where she lived, so there was really no excuse.
She made a resolution to go before Christmas.
When John returned from lunch — very punctually, just before half-past one — Ianthe found herself studying him and taking in the details of his appearance.
She could find no fault with his dark grey suit, red patterned tie and white shirt.
Only his shoes seemed to be a little too pointed — not quite what men one knew would wear.
He was less talkative now and settled down to work quietly, only occasionally asking her a question about what he was doing.
When tea was brought he took out a book he had been reading over his lunch.
It turned out to be — most improbably, Ianthe thought — a paperback selection of the poems of Tennyson.
‘You read poetry?’ she asked rather formally.
‘Oh, yes — do you?’
‘Yes,’ she said hesitantly, wishing that now she had not commented on the book, for one did not talk about poetry with chance acquaintances.
It was a precious thing to be kept to oneself.
She felt she did not know  where to begin with Tennyson, imagining him plodding through In Memoriam, though perhaps Maud was more likely.
Then she remembered that it was only a selection of the poems he had been reading and she did not need to speculate further, for — much to her surprise — he began to read
‘Now lies the earth all Danae to the stars
And all my heart lies open unto thee…=
I like that,’ he said.
‘How do you pronounce Danae, by the way?’
‘I don't know,’ she said in confusion, for she felt his eyes upon her.
‘Anyway,’ he said, closing the book, ‘I suppose I'd better get on with my work now or I'll get the sack.
But you wouldn't tell Mr Cantrell, would you.’
Ianthe bent her head over her work and said nothing.
This was not at all what she had imagined when Miss Grimes left.
It would be better, she felt, if John were to work with Shirley, the typist, as he was only going to do odd jobs.
He might even be a suitable ‘boy friend’ for her.
She would mention it tactfully to Mervyn some time.
Altogether she was rather relieved when it was time to go home.
‘I hope there's a post office still open,’ said John, as he got up to go.
‘They stay open quite late,’ said Ianthe.
‘I'll need to draw something to keep me going till pay-day,’ he said, taking a post office savings book from an inner pocket.
Somehow the sight of this touched Ianthe, who had never herself been in the position of having to wait till pay-day.
There must be many people who knew this state of financial insecurity but she found that she did not want to think about them.
She looked forward rather selfishly to a quiet evening at home surrounded  by familiar objects, perhaps reading or listening to a concert on the wireless.
Her first impulse, therefore, when she saw the vicar's sister-in-law, Penelope, walking from the underground station just in front of her was to hurry past and pretend she hadn't seen her.
But her natural good manners got the better of her and she found herself saying ‘good evening’ and reminding Penelope that they had met at the vicarage.
‘Yes, of course I remember,’ said Penelope.
‘You live in one of those sweet little houses, like Mr Something-bird the anthropologist.’
‘Mr Stonebird,’ said Ianthe seriously, as if Penelope had really forgotten his name.
Penelope laughed.
‘Does he take an active part in the life of the parish?
Will he be at this meeting tonight?’
‘Oh, of course— the meeting to discuss the Christmas bazaar,’ said Ianthe, remembering now that it would have been impossible for her to have had the quiet evening she had planned.
‘I shouldn't think he'll be there.
Men don't usually take much part in these things,’ she added, more from experience than from cynicism.
‘And are you coming to help?’
‘Well, Sophia likes me to, you know.
But most of these good people are a dead loss when it comes to planning anything unusual or amusing,’ said Penelope fiercely.
She was hoping very much that Rupert Stonebird would be there.
Surely it was his duty to be? she told herself, not realising that at that very moment he was sitting listening to a paper being read at a learned society, his mind occupied with a particularly tricky question he intended to ask when the speaker sat down.
‘I shall see you later then,’ said Ianthe, when they reached her house.
‘Eight o'clock, isn't it?’
Penelope went hopefully into the vicarage where she found Sophia smiling over a letter which had just come by the evening post.
‘Isn't it splendid,’ she said, waving the letter at Penelope, ‘Mother has persuaded Lady Selvedge to come and open our bazaar.
That ought to draw people — the title, you know.’
‘But Sophia, would people here care about that sort of thing?’ said Penelope doubtfully.
‘Now if it were Lady’ she named a titled person at that time popular on television —‘it might make a difference.
But who is Lady Selvedge, after all?’ she asked on a note of challenge.
‘The former wife of Sir Humphrey Selvedge — his relict, but not his widow, I suppose you might say.
Oh dear,’ Sophia looked depressed, ‘perhaps it isn't so splendid after all.
Sir Humphrey was unfaithful and she had to divorce him — at least she did divorce him so that he could marry again, I believe.’
‘But she hasn't remarried?’ asked Mark anxiously.
‘No.
One hopes that her principles wouldn't allow it.’
‘I don't suppose for a moment that anyone has asked her,’ said Penelope.
‘She's pretty dreary, as far as I remember.’
‘Penny, we do not look upon divorce and remarriage in that way,’ said Mark sternly, but — Sophia thought rather in the tone he used when Faustina jumped on to the table and began licking the butter dish.
‘I'm sure that Lady Selvedge is a woman of the highest principles.’
‘You've met her, dear,’ said Sophia.
‘She was at that cocktail party the Sheldonians gave — don't you remember?— when we were staying with Mother the summer before last.’
‘Well, I suppose I must have met her, then, if you say so, but somehow I can't remember anything about her.’
‘No, I don't suppose you do,’ said Sophia soothingly.
‘And in any case high principles aren't the kind of things one notices at a cocktail party — or perhaps only in a negative way, as when somebody drinks tomato juice  rather than gin.’
‘And that might be only because of her figure,’ said Penelope.
But Mark had now become absorbed in an idea for a sermon that had suddenly come to him.
He was quite a forceful preacher, too intelligent for the majority of his congregation, so that the rather dry instructive sermons to which he inclined personally had to be diluted and sweetened to suit their taste.
Mark usually achieved this by thinking out an arresting beginning, nearly always of the same type, asking his congregation to imagine themselves standing gazing at the Pyramids or the Acropolis or even the New York skyline, hardly realising, until Sophia pointed it out to him, that these sights would be unfamiliar to the majority of his hearers.
But now these beginnings had become something of a joke between them and the congregation had learned to accept them with amused tolerance.
They always made Sophia think how much more Mark would be appreciated in a different sort of parish, though she never said anything about it now.
If he felt that his work lay here, it was not for her to question his decision, but she sometimes wished that something might happen to make him change his mind.
‘People seem to be coming to the door,’ said Penelope.
She saw with disappointment that Rupert Stonebird was not among the little group that Sophia was now bringing into the room.
Ianthe Broome, Daisy Pettigrew, Sister Dew and one or two others whose names she could never remember, now sat down round the table and began to discuss the final arrangements for the bazaar, which had always been exactly the same and always would be, except that from one year to another a pint more or less milk might be ordered for the teas.
Penelope's way home took her along St Basil's Terrace, or if it had not done she would have arranged  her journey to include it, even if it had meant a slight detour.
In the weeks that had passed since she had met Rupert Stonebird at the vicarage her interest in him had deepened, mainly because she had not seen him again and had therefore been able to build up a more satisfactory picture of him than if she had been able to check with reality.
It was therefore important and exciting to notice that there was a light in a ground-floor window of his house and that, by a fortunate piece of carelessness on somebody's part, the curtains had not been drawn.
Walking as slowly as she dared, Penelope was able to see that there were two figures in the room-Rupert himself and a woman, not very tall and wearing a dark, tweedy-looking suit.
It was difficult to see exactly what she looked like, for she and Rupert were bending down over a table examining something together.
The room looked like the dining room; a sideboard with some bottles and a bowl of fruit on it was visible, and Penelope was now able to see that the remains of a kind of meal — a loaf of bread, a hunk of orange-coloured cheese and two glasses — were set out on one half of the table.
Altogether it was a little disturbing — the man, the woman, the Omar Khayyam-like details — or like a Victorian problem picture in the Royal Academy.
What exactly had they been — or were they now — doing?
Penelope walked slowly away from the house, then pretended to be locking at an empty house which was to be sold two doors away from where Rupert lived.
As she did so she was conscious of voices by his front gate.
Rupert's visitor, whoever she had been, was now leaving and he was giving her instructions how to get somewhere.
‘Goodbye, Esther,’ he called out, ‘and many thanks for bringing them.’
Penelope walked on, thinking, ‘Esther’, some glamorous Jewess, no doubt.
And what had she been bringing?
The footsteps behind her seemed to be hurrying, almost as if they were trying to catch her up.
‘I suppose I can get a bus for Baker Street somewhere here?’ said a rather gruff voice, addressing Penelope.
Penelope turned round.
‘Oh yes, I'll show you.’
She smiled for the woman was short and dumpy, with roughly-cut grey hair — in her middle fifties, at least.
So it was all right.
The appearance of her ‘rival’ so encouraged Penelope that it was as if Rupert himself had come out of his house and made her a declaration of love.
5
Lady Selvedge and Mrs Grandison arrived at Victoria Station on the day of the bazaar shortly after noon, and proceeded to look for a place where they might have lunch, or luncheon, as they called it.
Mrs Grandison had promised her daughter that they would not inflict themselves on her for a meal — realising that Lady Selvedge might well be something of an infliction — and had assumed that from Victoria they would take a taxi to some Soho restaurant or perhaps Simpsons in the Strand.
Indeed, during the train journey she had been weighing in her mind the advantages of an Italian dish ‘something with funghi’— as against sole in an exquisite sauce or a cut off a splendid classic sirloin.
She was therefore a little disconcerted to find when they left the station that instead of waiting for a taxi Lady Selvedge began to stride away in the direction of Victoria Street, saying ‘I know just the place for us to get a snack.
There's a very good tea-shop just near here.’
‘Don't you think,’ Mrs Grandison suggested, ‘that we need a little more than just a snack?
After all we have a long and tiring afternoon ahead of us?’
But of course, as she now remembered, Lady Selvedge had the reputation of being mean.
‘Oh, you can get quite substantial dishes here,’ she said.
‘I used the word ‘snack’ figuratively.’
Mrs Grandison followed her apprehensively into one  of those ubiquitous tea-shops which cater for the multitudes of office workers and others who want a cheap meal at any time of the day, and which, excellent though they are, can hardly be compared with the restaurants Mrs Grandison had been hoping to lunch in.
Fortunately, as it was still only a quarter past twelve, there was no queue and Lady Selvedge and Mrs Grandison were able to walk straight up to the counter and take their trays.
‘Do not handle food you do not intend to consume’, Lady Selvedge read loudly from a printed notice.
‘That seems most sensible and hygienic, don't you think so, Dorothy?’
Mrs Grandison could not but agree with her.
‘I will have steak pudding and mashed potatoes,’ said Lady Selvedge.
‘And do I see greens there?
I will have some of those.’
Mrs Grandison chose ham and salad, thinking sadly of the splendid sirloin, for she had decided that it would have been that if she had been given the choice.
They found a table for four occupied by one young man, and arranged their food around them.
Perhaps they looked a little incongruous sitting in their smart hats and fur coats, talking more loudly than anybody else.
Lady Selvedge was a tall, pale-faced woman, with a camel-like caste to her features-perhaps a Hapsburg lip if one took a more kindly view.
Because of her husband's matrimonial adventures and the fact that she was by no means the only Lady Selvedge she was usually known as Lady (Muriel) Selvedge.
The parentheses gave her a sense of not existing, un-being perhaps was not too strong a word.
She would have preferred Muriel, Lady Selvedge, with its dowager-like dignity.
Sometimes people addressed letters mistakenly to Lady Muriel Selvedge, and on these occasions she imagined herself as the daughter of an earl, a marquess, or even a duke, comfortably  unmarried.
Mrs Grandison, the mother of Sophia and Penelope, had the remains of her daughters' Pre-Raphaelite beauty, now much faded and overlaid with some other quality, which had made her the President of the Women's Institute in the village where she lived but which did not seem to be quite Pre-Raphaelite.
Lady Selvedge ate quickly, commenting on the excellence and cheapness of the food as she did so.
‘Luncheon for only three and ninepence,’ she declared, reaching out towards a miniature steamed pudding and drawing it towards her, ‘excellent!’
At this point the young man, who had been reading a folded newspaper, looked up and said in a slightly truculent voice, ‘Excuse me, madam, but that's my pudding you're about to eat.’
‘Oh no, this is mine,’ said Lady Selvedge firmly, making a shielding movement with her hands round the pudding in its little dish.
‘I think the young man is right,’ said Mrs Grandison ‘I don't remember seeing you take a pudding.
The dishes get rather confused when they're all together on the table,’ she added, trying to put things right.
‘Oh well then, I suppose it is not mine,’ said Lady Selvedge grudgingly pushing the pudding back towards the young man, who then proceeded to eat it in a kind of defiant confusion.
‘Those sort of people eat far too much starch,’ said Lady Selvedge to Mrs Grandison in an audible whisper.
‘Meat pie, chips, roll and butter, and now this stodgy pudding.
A dish of greens would be much better for you,’ she said, raising her voice and turning towards the young man.
‘If you'll pardon me, madam, I think you're — bloody — interfering,’ he stammered, flushing scarlet from the surely unaccustomed — boldness and violence of his  language.
Then, gulping down the remains of his cup of tea, he got up and left the table.
This would not have happened in Simpsons, thought Mrs Grandison grimly.
She had been a fool to let Muriel choose a place to have lunch and would take good care that it did not happen again.
‘There will be time for us to have a look round Westminster Abbey,’ said Lady Selvedge, not in the least disturbed by the upsetting little incident of the pudding.
‘I always like to have a good look round the Abbey.’
We dare not ask for the grace of humility, but perhaps we don't need to when it is so often thrust upon us, thought Sophia, beating together eggs and sugar for a sponge cake, knowing that her cake would not rise as high as Sister Dew's.
When she took it from the oven she was pleased with it, but later, placing it on the trestle table in the hall where refreshments were to be served, she saw that Sister Dew's was higher.
‘So you've made one of your sponges,’ said the latter in a patronising tone.
‘It looks quite nice.’
‘But yours is much better, Sister Dew,’ said Sophia nobly.
‘I don't know how you do it.’
‘Oh, I'm sure she's got a light hand with pastry,’ said Sister Dew.
‘I suppose one is born with a light hand in these things.’
‘Yes, I suppose so,’ Sophia agreed.
‘Miss Broome has promised to make some sausage rolls.’
‘Oh, I'm sure, she's got a light hand with pastry,’ said Sister Dew eagerly.
‘I hope I get a chance to taste one of her sausage rolls.’
‘Yes — is that her coming now?
I thought I saw somebody pass the window,’ said Sophia.
Her tone was a little agitated for she had also just seen Faustina mount the refreshment table and pick her way delicately among the dishes of the cakes and savouries, sniffing the air, ready to pause and pounce when she came upon something that took her fancy.
Luckily Sister Dew allowed herself to be distracted and opened the door for Ianthe and her covered dish.
‘Now here's Miss Broome with her sausage rolls,’ she said fulsomely.
‘They do look good, I must say.
But they're not for Pussy,’ she added, with a disapproving look at Faustina now held firmly in Sophia's arms.
‘I hope they're all right,’ said Ianthe.
‘It's quite a long time since I made any.
How this reminds me of old times,’ she sighed, looking round at the hall with its decorated stalls and paper chains and lanterns hanging from the rafters.
‘What time is the bazaar to be opened?’
‘Half-past two,’ said Sophia.
‘I wonder if Mr Stonebird will come?’
‘I didn't see any sign of him when I passed his house,’ said Ianthe.
‘Not that I looked, really.’
‘But you might have seen signs,’ Sophia reassured her.
‘Yes, one might, though I'm not sure quite what.
Is your sister coming this afternoon?’
‘Yes, she's promised to help with the teas and refreshments.’
At that moment Penelope appeared, bringing with her a breath of Chelsea — or was there, Sophia wondered, some newer and more fashionable district it might have been, such as Islington, Earls Court or Camden Town?
Sophia wished her sister had not been wearing tartan trews, but it would never do to say anything.
And what did one wear at these parish functions?
Poor though the district was, old Saturday morning clothes would not do — one must be seen to have made an effort.
Sophia herself was wearing a green jersey suit and a small hat, but she felt that she did not look so absolutely right as Ianthe, whose plain blue woollen dress was set off by a feather-trimmed hat which had just the right touch of slightly  dowdy elegance — if there could be such a thing.
Her long training in church circles was evident too in her ease of manner with the other parish women, which contrasted with Penelope's slightly defiant air resulting from shyness and uncertainty.
Penelope wished now that she had worn a dress or suit instead of the elegant tartan trews, but they had seemed the only way to make Rupert Stonebird notice her.
Standing behind the refreshment table, though, she now realised that only her upper half was visible.
And anyway he had not yet arrived.
He would probably slip in at the last minute, just as a matter of duty.
We should have taken a taxi, thought Mrs Grandison unhappily as she and Lady Selvedge, jostled by crowds, hurried down the passage leading to the northbound Bakerloo trains.
She should have insisted, have pretended that Sophia's part of London was inaccessible by public transport, and of course, when one came to think of it, there was quite a long walk from the station.
Mrs Grandison's pointed Italian-style shoes were already beginning to pinch her left foot.
Lady Selvedge, she now realised to her surprise, was wearing low-heeled walking shoes, not really quite the thing with her elaborately draped velvet toque but eminently sensible.
‘This is the train,’ she declared.
‘Come along, Dorothy, or we shan't get a seat.’
A great many people seemed to be crowding in, presumably returning home for their Saturday half day.
Was it right, Mrs Grandison asked herself, that she should stand while men sat?
But the question was academic, for there was nothing she could do about it.
This was no way for the opener of a bazaar and the guest of honour to arrive, she thought indignantly.
Perhaps they would be able to get a taxi at the station.
But it was not the kind of station that has taxis waiting  outside it, and the two ladies were forced to walk through the crowded streets, now full of people doing their weekend shopping.
‘So many black people,’ said Lady Selvedge in her penetrating voice.
‘And do I see yams on that stall?
I don't think the vicarage can be here — Dorothy, are you sure we're going in the right direction?’
‘I have always been by car or taxi before,’ said Mrs Grandison shortly.
‘Of course the streets near a station are always sordid.
Think of Victoria.’
‘Well, Buckingham Palace is near Victoria,’ said Lady Selvedge unhelpfully.
‘And so are some of the best parts of Belgravia — not to mention Westminster Cathedral.’
‘That's a Roman Catholic cathedral,’ snapped Mrs Grandison, whose feet were now hurting considerably, ‘so I see no reason why we should mention it.
If only Mark could have got a living in a better district, she thought, as she had so often thought before.
‘My son-in-law was offered the living of St Ermin's when it fell vacant recently,’ she said, ‘but he felt there would be more scope here.’
‘Scope?’ echoed Lady Selvedge as if the word were unfamiliar to her.
‘Ah, scope, I see what you mean.
Yes, scope is a great thing where the clergy are concerned.’
‘This part of the district is becoming quite fashionable,’ said Mrs Grandison as they approached the terrace where Ianthe Broome and Rupert Stonebird lived.
‘Such pretty little houses — and there is St Basil's spire,’ she added encouragingly.
‘Ah, yes — you see, it hasn't been such a-long walk after all,’ said Lady Selvedge.
‘I always believe in saving a taxi fare where possible.’
‘Sophia will be waiting for us at the vicarage,’ said Mrs Grandison.
‘I expect you would like to go upstairs to tidy yourself before the opening.’
‘Tidy myself?’
Lady Selvedge raised a hand to her  elaborate hat.
‘Oh, I doubt if that will be necessary.
Ah, my dear,’ she said, seeing Sophia at the front door, ‘Here we are, you see, safe and sound.’
‘How nice to see you.
I take it you've had lunch?’
It would be disastrous if they had not, Sophia thought.
‘Yes, thank you, an excellent meal and only three and ninepence.’
Where could they have lunched?
Sophia wondered.
‘Perhaps you'd like to sit down and rest for a while?’ she suggested.
‘Rest?
Oh no, thank you.’
Then what were they to do?
Sophia wondered.
‘I should like to go upstairs,’ said her mother plaintively and left them.
‘Do you know, I thought I saw yams on one of the vegetable stalls as we were coming along,’ said Lady Selvedge.
‘It reminded me of our time in Nigeria.
Humphrey was there, you know.’
When Mrs Grandison had rejoined them it was still not quite half-past two, but Mark came in to say that as everybody was already waiting in the hall and it would be difficult to restrain them from buying things much longer, the bazaar might as well be opened immediately.
Lady Selvedge allowed herself to be led on to the platform and was introduced in a short speech by Mark, who found himself unable to think of very much to say about her, confused as he was by the talk of ‘high principles’, cocktail parties, and her former husband's misdeeds which he remembered having with Sophia and Penelope.
It was obviously good of her to have given up an afternoon — perhaps a precious afternoon in these days when all time was precious —‘to come from afar to open the bazaar’.
Here Mark stopped, dismayed at finding himself breaking into rhyme.
There was some laughter and he took the opportunity to sit down.
Lady Selvedge then rose and made her little speech — the one she always  made on these occasions, for the ‘cause’, whether Church, Conservative Party or District Nursing Association, was always a good one and it was safe to urge her hearers to spend just a little more than they thought they could afford, however relative the amount might be.
Penelope had taken note of the two quite personable looking men who had just come into the hall! and were standing looking about them with some bewilderment, as if uncertain what they ought to do.
Then, to her  surprise and annoyance, she saw that they were greeting Ianthe Broome with every appearance of being old friends.
‘Why, Mervyn, and Mr Challow, too,’ said Ianthe, who had experienced a shock of dismay mingled with pleasure on seeing them, ‘how did you know about St Basil's bazaar?’
‘Oh, you let slip a word about it,’ said Mervyn, ‘something about making two dozen sausage rolls, so we thought we'd come along.’
‘Shall we buy something off your stall, Ianthe?’
John asked.
‘Yes, of course you must,’ she said quickly, a little taken aback by his use of her Christian name.
‘I'm not sure that there are many things suitable for men, though,’ she added, looking helplessly at the aprons, bed jackets and hand-knitted babies' woollens.
‘I'll have this mauve bed jacket for Mother,’ said Mervyn.
‘It'll be just the job.’
‘This blue one's pretty.
It would suit you,’ John said, lowering his voice and looking at Ianthe intently.
‘That's swansdown round the neck, isn't it, that soft fluffy stuff.’
Ianthe turned away, slightly embarrassed, and began wrapping up the purchase.
Sister Dew, who was also helping at the stall, said gushingly, ‘Well, Miss Broome, you are a good saleswoman — another bed jacket gone  already!
Now who wants a nice apron or a baby's romper suit?
Haven't you got a little nephew or niece?’ she asked, thrusting a small knitted garment at Mervyn.
But at that moment Lady Selvedge and Mrs Grandison were seen approaching the stall and Sister Dew quickly switched her attention to them.
Both bought a gratifyingly large number of things before passing on to the next stall, where Miss Pettigrew sat behind pyramids of tinned food, most of which, on closer inspection, proved to be for cats.
‘We hoped we might get a peep at your house,’ said Mervyn to Ianthe.
‘Oh yes, of course,’ said Ianthe.
‘It will be a good chance for you to see it later on — a cup of tea or a glass of sherry — I should be so pleased.’
‘I'm dying to see where you live,’ said John.
‘Perhaps we should pass on to the home-made cakes,’ said Mervyn.
‘I should like to buy a sponge before they all go.’
Whoever can they be?
Sophia wondered.
They did not seem quite the sort of men one imagined Ianthe knowing as friends, though she had certainly greeted them cordially enough.
Perhaps they were former choirmen or servers from her father's old parish — that might be the answer.
Sophia could imagine them in cassocks, doing something with candles or incense.
Having, as she thought, placed them, she turned her attention to her own stall.
Mark was approaching with an elderly clergyman, Father Anstruther, a former vicar, who had on his retirement bought a house just on the boundary of the parish, rather tactlessly, some thought, but as he was a celibate there was no wife to poke her nose into parish affairs which was something to be thankful for.
‘Ah, Mrs Ainger, you see before you the dog returning to his vomit,’ he said cheerfully, greeting Sophia.
Not the happiest of phrases, she thought, though one  could see what he meant.
‘You know we're always glad to see you,’ she said, not quite insincerely for he was a source of amusement in many ways and quite willing to take Sunday duties when Mark was on holiday.
‘We always had a big crowd here in the old days,’ said Father Anstruther, glancing round the hall, which certainly might have been fuller.
‘People came from miles around.’
He shook his head, then took a plate and wandered off to choose cakes for his tea.
‘Fairies,’ he murmured, ‘who was it now who used to make such deliciously light fairies?’
‘Why, Father, it was Mother,’ said Sister Dew oddly.
‘You always did say that her fairies were the lightest you ever tasted.’
Mark and Sophia drew away together, feeling themselves to be excluded.
‘Old times and fairy cakes,’ Sophia whispered, ‘we can't compete.’
‘A bond of fairies,’ said Mark.
‘Obviously a title for something.
And people came from miles around, did they — well, things aren't quite what they were thirty years ago.’
‘No, darling, but Mother and Lady Selvedge have come from quite a long way — miles, really — and those two young men talking to Ianthe are strangers, and I dare say Mr Stonebird will look in,’ said Sophia comfortingly.
‘Penelope will be so disappointed if he doesn't.
‘Why, does she like him particularly?’
Sophia sighed but did not answer, for on such an occasion as this there wasn't really time to go into whether Penelope particularly liked Rupert Stonebird or not or to embark on the sort of explanation that a man couldn't be expected to understand.
If I were to go in now, thought Rupert, I should attract  far more attention that if I'd gone earlier.
The whole thing must be nearly over — hardly anything on the stalls — nothing to eat — people looking surreptitiously at their watches wondering if they were at all justified in slipping away home.
Perhaps, though, he might stroll out in the direction of the church hall, to see if people were coming out, then he would feel that he had made some kind of an effort.
If he met anyone he could say, with perfect truthfulness, that he had been absorbed in correcting students' essays and had not realised the time until it was after five o'clock?
It was disquieting, though, the way he seemed to have to make these excuses to himself, as if his conscience which he had, so he thought at the age of sixteen, successfully buried, had suddenly reawakened to plague him, not about the fundamentals of belief and morality but about such comparative trivialities as whether or not one should attend the church bazaar.
Was it to be like this from now onwards? he wondered apprehensively.
He opened his front door, walked out and crossed the road.
He had nearly reached the church when he saw a group of people approaching him.
Miss Broome — Ianthe — the vicar's sister-in-law — Prudence, Jenny, was it?— or one of those fashionable names that often seemed so unsuitable for their bearers — and two men whom he had not seen before.
It must obviously be too late to go to the bazaar now, he thought with relief as he came face to face with the group, but he found himself trotting out the excuse about correcting papers and not noticing the time before anyone had had the chance to comment on his non-attendance.
‘We did rather wonder what had happened to you,’ said Ianthe.
Only somebody as naive and unworldly as Ianthe could have come out with such a disconcertingly honest statement, thought Penelope, who had of course wondered  even more.
‘Ianthe has invited us in to have a glass of sherry,’ she said, hoping that Ianthe would invite Rupert too.
‘Yes — would you like to join us?
It isn't worth your while going to the hall now.
They were packing up the stalls when we left,’ said Ianthe.
‘Oh, I'm sorry, you don't know Mervyn Cantrell and John Challow, do you.
We all work together.’
‘Well, I'm only a sort of stooge,’ said John.
‘Mervyn and Ianthe are the clever ones.’
They turned towards Ianthe's gate and went into the house.
It was pleasantly warm in the little hall, Rupert thought, noticing the red glow of a paraffin heater, almost like a sanctuary lamp or the lamp that was said to have burnt clear in Tullia's tomb, for close on fifteen hundred years.
He must set about getting something like that himself.
There was a coal fire in the sitting room and when Ianthe had drawn the curtains to shut out the November evening everybody agreed with John when he exclaimed how ‘cosy’ it was.
Really there was no other word for it, though only he or Mervyn could have said it.
‘And there's that lovely Pembroke table,’ said Mervyn, bending down to examine it.
John and Rupert sat down rather stiffly, not quite liking to roam about the room appraising the furniture and objects, as Mervyn was doing.
Ianthe and Penelope went upstairs to take off their coats.
Penelope was interested to see Ianthe's bedroom, which was at the back of the house, looking over the garden.
Here as in the rest of the house, the furniture was good and well cared for.
The hangings were rather chintzy and old-fashioned.
The dressing table held only a silver-backed brush, comb and mirror and two trinket boxes, with an old-fashioned flowered china tree for holding rings placed in one corner.
No cosmetics of any  kind were visible.
The bed looked neat, smooth and austere, and the books on the table beside it had dark sober covers and were obviously devotional books and anthologies of poetry.
It was a typical English gentlewoman's bedroom, Penelope thought, in boringly good taste.
There was something chilling and virginal about
‘Oh, you've got a little statue or something in your garden,’ she said, going over to the window.
‘It's too dark now to see exactly what it is but it looks rather sweet.’
‘Yes, it's a kind of cherub.
It was here when I came,’ said Ianthe.
‘Perhaps it's significant or prophetic,’ said Penelope.
‘Yes, perhaps.
I hope it means that I'm going to settle down happily in this house.’
Penelope hadn't exactly meant that.
She had been thinking of the three men downstairs, though perhaps one could hardly count John as being in the running.
Perhaps one could hardly count Mervyn either, which left only Rupert.
And that, of course, was unthinkable.
Yet they did live near to each other, so there might be danger.
‘Your sister and brother-in-law have been so kind to me,’ Ianthe went on.
‘I really feel at home in the parish.’
‘I know Sophia is glad to have you here,’ said Penelope.
‘She meets so few people of her own sort.
If only Mark had taken St Ermin's when it was offered to him.’
‘Would she have been happier, do you think?
I mean, if her husband had taken the living only for her sake?’
Ianthe asked.
‘No, of course you're right.
I suppose a wife should consider her husband's work before her own happiness,’ Penelope agreed, for like many modern young women she had the right old-fashioned ideas about men and their work.
‘Well, we must be getting downstairs or those poor men will think they're never going to get that glass of sherry,’ said Ianthe more lightly.
She really is perfect in this setting, Rupert thought, as she came into the room.
Surely Landor's lines about Ianthe ought to have come into his head if he could have remembered them.
‘Let me do that for you,’ he said, for it did not seem fitting for her to be pouring out drinks.
‘I'm afraid sherry is all I have,’ she apologised.
‘I hope everybody likes it.’
John, who had hoped there might be some gin, jumped up and began to hand round glasses.
‘What shall we drink to?’ he asked, when everybody had been served.
There was a moment's silence — perhaps of embarrassment, as if too much of an ‘occasion’ were being made of it.
A rather strange collection of men and women, thought Rupert with an anthropologist's detachment, none of whom really know each other but between whom waves and currents of feeling are already beginning to pass.
What, indeed, could they drink to?
Then Mervyn came to the rescue.
‘Why, to the success of St Basil's bazaar,’ he said.
‘That's surely the obvious toast.’
6
As Christmas approached and the weather became colder, Faustina assumed her pear-shaped winter body and spent the evenings curled up in her basket by the boiler in the kitchen, while Sophia stirred various mixtures stiff with fruit and nuts and laced with brandy.
A week before Christmas she was icing the cake one evening when Mark came in with a letter in his hand.
‘I've been thinking,’ he said, ‘we ought to ask Ianthe Broome's uncle to preach some time.
I'd thought of a course of Lenten addresses.’
‘A course?’ said Sophia.
‘Isn't that rather rash?
We don't know what he's like yet — wouldn't it be better to ask him for an odd Sunday first before we let ourselves in for a course of sermons?’
‘I should imagine he must be all right,’ said Mark.
‘You mean because he's Ianthe's uncle?’ said Sophia.
‘And because he's a canon's brother-in-law?
How far can the influence of a canon be expected to extend?’
‘Well, I've written the letter now,’ said Mark.
‘And if he isn't much good it will be all the better for us.
I never see why people should expect interesting preachers in Lent.’
‘No, of course— humble fare with no meat and sermons of the same kind,’ said Sophia.
‘Ought Faustina to be licking out that bowl?’ asked Mark.
‘Yes, there's a bit of almond paste in it and she likes that.
I'm just going to give her some milk.’
‘Is this all you're putting on the Christmas cake this year?’ asked Mark, picking up a rather battered-looking plaster Father Christmas.
‘Yes, I forgot to buy new decorations.’
‘People have robins and holly and Yule legs,’ said Mark.
‘I'm sure Sister Dew does.’
‘No doubt— and we have our old solitary Father Christmas left over from several years ago.’
Sophia placed him in the middle of the cake which was covered with white icing forked up into ridges.
‘He looks like King Lear in the snow, deserted by his daughters,’ said Mark.
‘But many old people are lonely and neglected at Christmas, so our cake decoration won't be so inappropriate after all.
It should put us in mind of the old people in our own parish.’
‘Daisy Pettigrew is doing her usual food parcel scheme for the old age pensioners,’ Sophia reminded him.
‘Yes, and their cats will be looked after too — one only hopes Daisy won't put in more food for them than for the humans.’
Faustina looked up from her saucer, her dark face made all the more reproachful by its beard of milk.
In the library where Ianthe worked the approach of Christmas had made itself felt, though it would be too much to say that any particularly Christmas spirit or noticeable increase of goodwill could be discerned, even though Shirley had hung up a few coloured paper chains.
On the last day before the holiday Mervyn seemed more irritable than usual.
‘Mother is a Spiritualist, you know,’ he said to Ianthe, ‘and somehow that doesn't seem to make our Christmas  a particularly jolly one.’
‘I suppose preoccupation with those who have — er — died isn't quite in accordance with the spirit of Christmas,’ said Ianthe tentatively.
‘No — and our relations and friends who have passed over seem to be a particularly dreary bunch.
Perhaps it's the fault of the medium — she's a Miss Stylish and lives in Balham, not very promising, you'll agree,’ said Mervyn sourly.
Ianthe never knew how to talk to him when he was in this sort of mood.
She felt she could have done better than she did with her next remark.
‘Balham,’ she said, thoughtful yet desperate, ‘that's on the Northern Line, isn't it.’
‘Yes, my dear.
It's black on the Underground map, so very suitable, I always think.
Picture us arriving there on Boxing Day in time for tea by public transport, of course.’
Then, before Ianthe could comment further, he switched in his usual way to another subject.
‘Now here's something wrong again,’ he said, taking up a card.
‘London colon — not semi-colon and not comma.
I should have thought it wasn't too difficult for other people to get the details right occasionally.
That doesn't seem too much to ask, does it?
I can't see to everything myself’
Ianthe and John were silent, feeling that no adequate answer could be made.
In any case it was Shirley who had typed the card and she was in a higher or lower world that cared nothing for such trivia.
Just before five o'clock Mervyn came up to Ianthe carrying a wrapped bottle with a Christmas label tied round the neck.
She produced from her shopping bag the box of crystallized fruits she had bought for him, and a mutual exchange took place.
‘This is Madeira,’ said Mervyn.
‘It seems a suitable  present for a respectable unmarried lady who might be visited by the clergy.’
Ianthe murmured her thanks.
‘I don't think of Ianthe like that,’ said John.
‘'A respectable unmarried lady’— that makes her sound old and dull.’
‘Well, I am that,’ said Ianthe, with the uncomfortable feeling that she was being a little coy.
‘You're old compared with John,’ said Mervyn a little too sharply.
‘Yes, of course— quite a lot older,’ said Ianthe, surprised at his tone.
‘What does age matter,’ said John gallantly.
‘In some cases it does,’ said Mervyn and then went out of the room.
‘Oh dear,’ said Ianthe.
‘He's in a funny mood today, and I don't feel I've thanked him properly for his Christmas present.’
She was able to do this when he came back after having given Shirley her present.
‘Three pairs of seamless mesh nylons in a shade called ‘Incatan’,’ he declared.
‘How many of these girls who wear this colour have ever heard of the Incas of Peru?’
John looked at Ianthe and winked, a curiously old-fashioned gesture that made her want to laugh.
Mervyn had his back to them and was getting a bottle of sherry and some glasses out of his private cupboard.
‘A little drink before Christmas,’ he announced.
After one glass Ianthe said she must go, as she had decided to visit Miss Grimes on the way home.
She had bought some cigarettes for John and was wondering when she could give them to him.
She had put on her hat and coat and was about to leave when he came up to her with two bunches of violets, so that she was able to press the cigarettes into his hand while taking the flowers from him.
Ianthe hurried down the library steps holding the flowers to her face.
Their cold fresh scent and passionate yet mourning purple roused in her a feeling she could not explain.
It was with a slight shock of coming back to reality that she remembered her resolution to visit Miss Grimes on her way home that evening, as part of her contribution to Christmas goodwill, a sort of ‘good turn’ done to somebody for whom one felt no affection.
To love one's neighbour, she thought as she trudged resolutely up the Finchley Road, must surely often be an effort of the will rather than a pleasurable upsurging of emotion.
She had decided to take food rather than flowers.
Old people liked little delicacies and Miss Grimes probably couldn't afford to buy all she wanted.
A tin of shortbread, a box of chocolates and a jar of chicken breasts in aspic had seemed suitable.
She hoped Miss Grimes wouldn't think them too extravagant.
The house where Miss Grimes had a room was in a side road, tall and of red brick, with many little cards by as many bells.
It made Ianthe uncomfortable to think of so many people living alone.
Should she offer to have Miss Grimes in her house? she wondered in a rush of wild impractical nobility.
That would be true Christian charity of a kind that very few can bring themselves to practise.
Miss Grimes answered the bell quickly, for her room was on the ground floor.
It was a large, almost gracious, room with a high ceiling and long windows hung with faded blue brocade curtains.
There were some rather good pieces of furniture and china.
Why, she had seen better days, thought Ianthe in surprise, for the Miss Grimes she had known in the library, with her raffish appearance and slight Cockney accent, had not suggested anything like this.
‘I always wanted to have nice things,’ she explained, seeing Ianthe's interested looks, ‘so I collected these over the years.’
‘Oh, I thought they might have been in your family.’
‘Oh no, dear,’ Miss Grimes laughed.
‘I've always rather liked the idea of being a ‘distressed gentlewoman’— it's got a nice old-world sound about it.
And people think more of you if you have nice things — as if you'd once had a ‘beautiful home’,’ she gave the words a slightly scornful emphasis that made Ianthe feel uncomfortable.
‘I've brought you a few things,’ she began, taking up her basket.
‘So I can see, dear.
What's this ah, bottle — violets,’ she scrabbled with her not quite clean hands in the basket and took out Mervyn's bottle and John's violets.
‘Oh, it is good of you, dear, it really is.’
Ianthe opened her mouth to speak but she could not bring herself to explain that these were her own Christmas presents.
It served her right for thinking too much of the violets; not caring much for drink, she did not mind losing the Madeira.
‘And there's some shortbread and chocolates and a jar of chicken breasts,’ she said, taking them out of the basket and putting them on the table.
‘Oh my — what a feast,’ said Miss Grimes, tearing the wrapping paper off the bottle.
‘Madeira.
‘Have some Madeira, m'dear’— I'll keep this for Christmas if you don't mind.
But now you must have a drink with me.
I find this Spanish Burgundy-Vino Tinto they call it — not bad.
Reminds me of holidays on the Costa Brava.’
Ianthe remembered that Miss Grimes had been to Spain for her holiday one year, but she supposed that she must have bought the wine specially when Ianthe had said she was coming to see her.
It was rather touching, especially when one realised that she had practically no money but her old age pension.
‘I get a bottle of this every week,’ Miss Grimes went on.
‘It's six-and-six — quite cheap really.
You want to warm it a bit, though.’
She laughed and took a gulp of wine.
‘We had one of those social workers come round a few weeks ago — she was doing a sort of survey of old age pensioners — some idea that they could live on twenty-five shillings a week for food.
She asked me to join in like a kind of guinea pig and keep a weekly budget.
She was a bit surprised about the wine — told me I'd be better off spending the money on haricot beans and lentils.
They'd got it all worked out what we ought to eat — would you believe it!’
Ianthe took a rather prim sip of wine.
She had not imagined Miss Grimes spending six-and-six a week on drink and might well have taken the attitude of the officious social worker.
There was something slightly shocking about an old woman drinking wine alone in a bed-sitting room.
Haricot beans and lentils — or chicken breasts in aspic if they could be afforded — were really much more suitable.
‘Now tell me the library gossip,’ said Miss Grimes.
‘What's this new young man like?
More to our Mervyn's taste than a girl, I shouldn't wonder.’
She gave Ianthe a sly look.
Really, she wasn't a very nice old woman, thought Ianthe, beginning to feel indignant that Miss Grimes wasn't conforming more to type.
‘He's very pleasant,’ she said, but somehow she did not want to talk about John.
‘He might do for you — it's not too late,’ said Miss Grimes jovially.
‘Oh, but he's younger than I am,’ said Ianthe, and then found herself flushing with annoyance at having taken Miss Grimes's joke seriously.
‘Well, you're not on the shelf yet, even if you are a librarian.
Ianthe felt obliged to laugh at this and after telling Miss Grimes about some of the everyday happenings at the library, she got up to go.
She was relieved to be out in the cool night air, but the journey home was an awkward one and she felt a little sorry for herself as she waited for her second bus.
She had set out with the idea of doing good by visiting poor lonely Miss Grimes but she did not seem to have achieved anything much.
Miss Grimes had certainly been glad of the presents but she had not really seemed as destitute and lonely as Ianthe had expected — perhaps secretly even hoped — and she found herself resenting the way she had taken the violets.
How tired and drab she looks, thought Rupert Stonebird, walking up the road behind her.
by no means‘lightly advancing thro’ her star-trimm'd crowd' — he had even gone so far as to look up Lantor's lines about Ianthe — but perhaps women couldn't be expected always to live up to what poets wrote about them.
He turned into his house, thankful not to have had to make conversation with her.
More Christmas cards lay on the mat in the hall.
The first one he opened — an obviously carefully chosen new-old Victorian snow scene — was signed ‘Penelope’.
He stared at the signature, wondering who could have sent it?
One of his students, perhaps.
Then he remembered that the vicar's sister-in-law was called Penelope — but why should she sent him a card?
It must be somebody he had forgotten.
The next card, signed ‘Esther’, showed an African carving of startling unsuitability and crudeness.
On the back was printed ‘Proceeds from the sale of this card will be given to the Fund for Needy and Indigent Anthropologists (FUNIA).’
Really, he thought in disgust, must they even cash in on Christmas?
Then he remembered  with a sinking heart that he had rashly accepted an invitation to spent the holiday with a colleague ant his wife who had, as they put it, ‘taken pity on your loneliness at this so-called festive season’.
They were agnostics perhaps even old-fashioned Rationalists — and had a family of young children.
No doubt he would be woken up in good time to go to church.
7
Penelope found Christmas disappointing.
Not that it ever really came up to her expectations, but this year — spending it at the vicarage with Mark and Sophia and her mother — she had hoped for at least a glimpse of Rupert Stonebird.
It had been a blow to learn that he had gone away to spend Christmas with ‘friends in the country’, and she imagined him surrounded by fascinating girls all more attractive than herself.
Rupert had not specified what the ‘friends’ consisted of, so nobody could have known about the anthropological colleague and his wife and their children aged seven, five, and three, or pictured Rupert going to church alone on Christmas morning, helping to wash up after the adequate but plain Christmas dinner, spending the evening talking shop, and retiring early to his hard uncomfortable bed.
He came back to London on Boxing Day evening, but the vicarage party went to the theatre that night and asked Ianthe Broome to join them.
So nobody saw Rupert return to his house, or standing in his overcoat in the unheated hall, opening late Christmas cards, then going from room to room switching on electric fires.
The New Year came and with it a kind of hope, though of what Penelope was not sure.
She was invited to a few parties, kissed good-night outside her door in South Kensington, taken out to lunch by a young man  training to be a chartered accountant, and to an Italian film by another who was ‘in the City’; she was beginning to forget about Rupert when one evening towards the end of January she was later than usual leaving Toogood and Shelve, the publishers, where she worked as secretary to Mr Shelve.
An elderly female novelist had come in at a quarter to six and Penelope had found herself trying to explain why her latest novel had not been reviewed in the Sunday Telegraph, why it had not been advertised more widely, why copies had not been displayed on the bookstall of a friend's local station, why it had not yet been reprinted.
It was perhaps fortunate for both of them that Mr Toogood was in America and Mr Shelve was at home in Haslemere with influenza, but publishers had to go to America and they were also as likely as anyone else to catch influenza, Penelope explained.
‘This would not have happened with Mr Chatto or Mr Windus,’ said the female novelist, as Penelope at last managed to get her out of the building.
‘I shall go to the Army and Navy Stores,’ she announced.
‘They are sure to have copies of my book there.’
Penelope thought it wiser not to point out that the Stores would certainly be closed by the time she got there, but felt she had done enough in showing her which bus to take.
She had come rather out of her way and now walked back along a square where a learned society had its premises.
In the days when she had first known him she had wondered idly whether she might see Rupert round here, ‘going in’ or ‘coming out’, though she was not clear when this might be expected or even what he might have been doing.
This evening, however, she was surprised and excited to notice that the great carved door was wide open and that groups of people were coming out.
An elderly man with a white pointed beard was being shepherded into a chauffeur-driven car by the short rough-haired woman in a thick tweed suit, who had been at Rupert's house that evening in the autumn; a little man carrying two heavy-looking suitcases was hurrying away as if to catch a train; a group of younger men and women was standing on the pavement, talking and laughing.
‘Well, Rupert, back to your solitary meal in your neo-Edwardian house rather too far west of St John's Wood,’ said a voice near Penelope.
‘And I must away to my Green Line bus — Lydia will be keeping something hot for me.’
Penelope dared not stop or turn her head, for she realised that Rupert must be close behind her.
It was fortunate that at that moment the handle of her basket, insecurely mended, should suddenly give way, scattering the contents over the pavement — a library book, some oranges, and a rather shamefully adolescent bag of liquorice all-sorts.
‘Let me help you — why, it's Father Ainger's wife's sister.’
Rupert looked at Penelope seriously, concentrating on the relationship as an anthropologist should.
‘Yes, Sophia is my sister.
We met at dinner at the vicarage and at Miss Broome's house after the bazaar,’ said Penelope firmly reminding him.
‘Were you on your way to the vicarage now?’
Penelope hesitated, hardly remembering where she had been going.
Home, she supposed, to wash her hair and do her nails — to have what her contemporaries called ‘an early night’.
On the other hand, she could have been going to see Sophia.
Where was he going?
That was the point.
‘Would you like to have a drink with me?’
Rupert asked, without waiting for her answer.
‘That is, if you have no immediate engagement.’
Penelope could not help smiling at the formality of his words.
‘That would be very nice,’ she said.
They walked along together, neither quite knowing what to say, until they reached the pub, which was full and rather cosy.
When they were settled down with their drinks she asked him about the learned society.
Somebody had been reading a paper there, which apparently happened quite often, Penelope learned, and they usually finished at about this time.
So there might be an advantage in working late and coming home a rather roundabout way, she reflected.
Now that she saw Rupert again he was rather less interesting than she had remembered — a little older, slightly inhibited in his conversation, and unresponsive to her semi-flirtatious looks and remarks in a way that puzzled her.
It must be something to do with being an anthropologist, she decided.
It seemed a dark mysterious sort of profession, perhaps in a way not quite manly, or not manly in the way she was used to.
Her young men hitherto had been in the City, or in advertising, chartered accountancy, or even television.
They took her to the sort of restaurants she could mention without shame next day when her colleagues at work asked ‘Where did he take you?’
And now here was Rupert, asking her if she was hungry and would she like a sandwich.
He had suddenly realised that he hadn't had any lunch.
‘No thank you,’ said Penelope, feeling that he could hardly sit there eating a sandwich unless she did too.
But her life had been, though in different ways, as narrow and sheltered as Ianthe's.
Men could and did eat sandwiches while their female companions ate nothing.
Rupert went to the bar and came back with more drinks for them both and a thick and delicious-looking ham sandwich for himself.
Penelope poured tonic into her gin and looked  away from him.
Rupert, devouring his sandwich with enjoyment, looked at her.
Her beautiful red hair was arranged in its usual chaotic beehive, but there was something strange about her eyes which had a curious bruised look about them.
Perhaps it was just purple eye-shadow lavishly applied, he decided eventually.
She was wearing a navy blue duffel coat with a tartan-lined hood, black stockings and pointed shoes with very high heels.
As he had remembered, there was something slightly comic about her appearance.
The pub suddenly seemed to empty.
Crowds of people went out and a young clergyman came in and ordered a pint of bitter.
He seemed to be on good terms with the people behind the bar.
He was handsome in a blonde rugger-blue sort of way.
‘Curate having a drink,’ said Penelope rather scornfully.
‘Bringing the church to the people.’
‘Yes, I suppose it's a good thing when they can do that,’ said Rupert, seeming not to notice the scorn in her voice.
‘I should think your brother-in-law gets on well with people,’ he added formally.
‘Mark?
Oh yes, he does, but only because he feels he ought to.
Really he's a very remote sort of person.
He hardly even notices those endless cups of tea.’
Rupert smiled.
‘Yes, it's a pity — I mean, the endless cups of tea.
I grew away from the Church being a clergyman s son, of course, and now that I've come back to it I find it the same only more so — fewer people and even more cups of tea.’
‘There should be more people and lots of wine,’ said Penelope impetuously.
‘Yes, but just imagine the practical difficulties.
And of course the outward trappings……’
He paused.
‘Don't affect the inward truth, do you mean?’
Penelope asked.
She was beginning to feel very hungry, hardly strong enough for a serious talk about religion.
She found his ‘return to the Church’ peculiarly disconcerting, almost as if he might be going to become a clergyman himself.
And when one came to think of it he did look a little like a clergyman in his dark grey suit, especially when he wore his spectacles.
‘Have you ever been married?’ she asked, boldly changing the subject.
‘No — that hasn't come my way — marriage,’ he said rather oddly, as if it were the sort of thing about which one had no conscious choice.
‘But other things — oh, lots of other things, I'm sure,’ went on Penelope, now a little desperate.
He smiled.
‘There are other things, after all.
What was it Dr Johnson said —‘Love is only one of many passions and it has no great influence on the sum of life’.’
He finished his drink, drained it, Penelope thought, ‘with an air of finality’, like a character in a novel.
Soon he would get up and say he must be going.
‘I suppose as an anthropologist you look on everything with detachment,’ she said.
‘Not quite everything.’
He smiled — enigmatically, surely.
‘Do you like your house?’ she asked.
‘Are you happy in it?
‘Yes — and I have good neighbours which is pleasant.’
Penelope supposed he must mean Ianthe Broome and Sophia and Mark.
‘Do you know, one of them brought me an oxtail the other evening?’
‘An oxtail?’
Penelope saw it being carried in the hand, stiff and furry at one end like a kind of African fly switch.
‘Whatever for?’
‘To eat — it was in a basin.’
‘Oh, I see — cooked.
But surely not a whole oxtail?’
‘Well, I don't know — it lasted me two meals.
I  suppose it must have been a portion,’ he said uncertainly, feeling that the word was wrong.
‘Fancy that.’
A mixture of scorn and jealousy made Penelope also express herself uncharacteristically.
‘I thought it was very kind,’ Rupert went on.
‘It's such a bore cooking when one's alone.’
How naive he was, thought Penelope, trying to see Ianthe bearing a portion of oxtail up to his door.
But somehow it was difficult — impossible really — to imagine her doing anything with oxtails.
‘Do you live far from here?’
Rupert was asking.
‘No, I can get a bus to South Kensington.’
‘Then I shall get a train in the opposite direction,’ he said, thinking that there was something sad about it, especially now that she was thanking him politely for the drinks.
It might be amusing to run across her some time.
No doubt he would see her at the vicarage.
Penelope went to the top deck of the bus and lit a cigarette.
The ‘evening’, if such it could be called, had not been exactly successful, though one obviously shouldn't expect too much of a chance meeting.
It was something that it had happened at all.
The conversation about oxtail had made her realise how hungry she was and she stopped at a delicatessen shop on the way home and bought a pizza.
She inserted her key as quietly as possible in the front door of the house where she had a room and crept upstairs.
A strong smell of coffee emanating from the basement reminded her that Mrs Crouching, her landlady, was having one of her monthly ‘evenings’— mild social occasions when she and her friends met to talk over important topics of the day.
Race relations seemed almost cosy discussed at this distance from Notting Hill or Brixton, Penelope thought scornfully.
But that had been last month.
Tonight it might be the Common Market or the future of space travel.
As Penelope mounted further to the third floor where she and the other lodger had their rooms, she was relieved to hear the limpid notes of a recorder playing ‘Brother James's Air’.
This meant that Jocasta was unlikely to come bouncing out and invite her in to listen to a Mahler symphony on her record player.
It also meant that the bathroom would be free for her to wash her hair.
But before that she would make a cup of tea and read for a bit.
It was a pretty room, with pale green walls and a chintzy covered divan, piled with rose-coloured velvet cushions.
Penelope lay among them, eating the cold leathery pizza — surely not quite as it was meant to be? and drinking sweet tea.
Because she had felt it might be vaguely suitable she had chosen to read a volume of Donne
Whoever guesses, thinks or dreams he knows
Who is my mistress, wither by this curse…=
Why should the book have opened at that poem?
All the same he had been rather cagey about Ianthe Broome, not saying who it was that had brought the oxtail.
I must be subtler than that, Penelope thought — just bringing food won't be enough.
‘Reading, were you?’
Rupert picked up the book which lay on the little table by the fire.
It turned out to be the poems of Tennyson, bound in green morocco.
Could she really have been reading that? he wondered, looking around for the novel stuffed behind a cushion.
‘Yes, but I was just going to make some coffee,’ said Ianthe.
‘Would you like some?’
How convenient women were, Rupert thought, accepting her offer, the way they were always ‘just going’ to make coffee or tea or perhaps had just roasted a joint in the oven or made a cheese soufflé.
‘I didn't think people read Tennyson nowadays,’ he said, ‘but then of course you aren't just ‘people’.’
Ianthe flushed and busied herself with the coffee tray.
She had not exactly been reading Tennyson but had remembered John quoting one of his poems during the first days of their acquaintance.
Now lies the earth all Danäe to the stars
And all my heart lies open unto thee……
She was ashamed to think that Rupert might have discovered her looking it up.
How comfortable it is here, he thought.
Much better than sitting in pubs with young girls or even drinking with one's colleagues, the hastily snatched pint of bitter before they caught their trains home to their wives.
There was a delicious smell wafting from a pink hyacinth which was growing in a glass on the table at his side.
It seemed typical of Ianthe, the slightly school-mistressy touch of growing the bulb in water so that its white Medusa-like roots were visible.
One could almost imagine her saying ‘Now, girls,’ and explaining about osmosis or whatever the process was called.
What an admirable person she was!
‘I'm thinking of giving a small dinner party in the spring,’ he said.
‘My daily woman has offered to cook the meal.
I do hope you will be able to come.
The other guests will just be two of my colleagues and their wives, to whom I owe hospitality’— the way he said it made them sound utterly negligible, almost beneath contempt.
Ianthe looked up at him and smiled.
‘That would be very nice,’ she said.
‘I should like to come.’
Looking at her Rupert remembered his colleagues and their wives.
A vague idea formed in his mind — not that he loved her but that he would like to see her always in his house, like some suitable decoration or finishing  touch.
‘My dining room faces north and is difficult to heat,’ he said rather briskly.
‘I've been looking at some of those paraffin convector heaters.
What do you think of them?’
Had she ever loved or been loved? he wondered.
Perhaps living with her widowed mother had limited her opportunities.
A maid whom there were none to praise
And very few to love……
Where had that fragment of Wordsworth come from?
It must have been seeing her reading Tennyson that had dredged up an old forgotten quotation.
He scarcely heard her soft voice going on about paraffin heaters and electrical wall fans.
He only became as it were conscious again when he realised that she was on to another topic.
Apparently there was talk of a party from the parish going to Rome after Easter.
Would he be joining it?
Then he remembered that he had a conference in Perugia over Easter.
He could certainly arrange to come on to Rome afterwards though he did not think he had quite enough courage to join the parish party.
Rome for Rupert meant the Vatican Library, the Museo Preistorico Luigi Pigorini, and restaurants in Trastevere, but azaleas were massed on the Spanish Steps at Easter and he could see that this might be the ideal setting for Ianthe.
‘The vicar and his wife, of course,’ she was saying, ‘and I expect Penelope will come too.
It should be lovely.’
Yes, he might have an amusing time with the two women, he thought suddenly, in the nicest possible way.
Who knew what might come of it?
8
Ianthe was disconcerted, even a little shocked, to see the bottles of milk still standing outside the door of her uncle's Mayfair rectory when she arrived there to luncheon on Quinquagesima Sunday.
It looked as if nobody had been to church that morning and she even began to wonder whether there would be any lunch.
Then she realised that her uncle would have entered the church through a side door connecting with the vestry, while her aunt, who enjoyed rather poor health, would not have set foot outside even to take in the milk.
She was not sure what their present domestic arrangements were and whether there was some splendid woman in the kitchen who had perhaps failed in her duty on this occasion
Ianthe picked up a bottle in each hand, then had to put one of them down to ring the front door bell.
It seemed a long time before anyone answered and she felt rather stupid standing there with the bottles.
Eventually it was the Reverend Randolph Burdon himself who came to the door, looking a little surprised, as if he had expected somebody else.
He was a tall stout man with a florid complexion, who looked well in vestments seen from a distance.
Close to he was somewhat overwhelming and earthy, the priest of a pagan cult rather than an Anglican rector of the twentieth century.
Appropriately enough he was holding a bottle of wine with the corkscrew  already inserted.
‘An unfair exchange,’ he said, taking the milk bottles from Ianthe.
‘You will find your aunt in the drawing room.’
He put the milk bottles down on a small table in the hall, where they were to remain until Ianthe left, and as far as she knew, for ever after.
‘Ah, my dear,’ said the languid voice.
‘How are you, Aunt Bertha?’ said Ianthe, bending to kiss her aunt's pale powdery cheek.
She then wished that she had greeted her with less solicitude for she would now have to hear how her aunt was.
Fortunately a gong sounded at that moment and Bertha sprang up with surprising alacrity and led the way to the dining room, where Randolph was already at the sideboard carving the meat.
He seemed to be in a gloomy yet exultant mood at the approach of Lent.
‘You know that I have been asked to give a course of sermons at St Basil's?
I shall want your advice about that.’
‘My advice?’ said Ianthe.
‘Yes, as to the type of thing required.’
‘But you must know that, surely, with all your experience,’ Ianthe protested, knowing that her uncle was quite a celebrated preacher.
‘My dear, this is a fashionable London parish, so called,’ said Randolph.
He carved the saddle of mutton savagely, as if he were rending his parishioners.
‘What hope is there for them this Lent?
I suppose they can give up drinking cocktails.’
Ianthe thought the word ‘cocktails’ a little old-fashioned, and so evidently did her aunt, who protested that everyone drank whisky or gin and tonic now.
‘Somebody has got to minister to the rich,’ she added complacently.
She was often thankful that her husband had not felt the call to serve in a slum parish or on a new  housing estate.
Life in a Mayfair rectory suited her very well and she had private means.
It had always seemed so hard, that saying about the rich man and the kingdom of heaven.
‘I suppose St Basil's is a poor parish?’
Randolph asked in an almost hopeful tone.
‘Yes,’ said Ianthe.
‘The congregation tends to be a poor one and there are quite a number of coloured people living in the district.’
Randolph sighed.
‘If only I had that opportunity such a rewarding experience working among people of that type.’
‘But they are much more naturally religious than we are,’ said Ianthe.
‘It is the white people who are the heathen.’
‘No, dear, you must be mistaken,’ said Bertha in a pained tone.
‘Ah well, it was not meant that I should work in such a parish,’ said Randolph.
‘Bertha's health wouldn't have stood any district but W1 or SW1.
Anything near the Harrow Road, or the canal, or Kensal Green cemetery had to be avoided at all costs.
My particular cross is to be a ‘fashionable preacher’, as they say.
Bertha is quite right when she says that somebody must minister to the rich.’
‘Of course,’ said Ianthe.
‘And you have some very nice people in your congregation,’ she added consolingly.
‘Yes, both my church wardens are titled men,’ said Randolph simply.
He stood with the carving implements poised over the ruined saddle.
‘Let me give you some more mutton, my dear.’
‘No, thank you, uncle — I've had plenty.’
‘You aren't a great meat-eater, are you, dear,’ said Bertha, ‘so the approach of Lent won't be so much of a hardship for you.’
Ianthe murmured  noncommittally .
‘I have to eat meat, unfortunately — doctor's orders,’ Bertha went on.
‘He has forbidden me to fast or even keep the days of abstinence.
‘You are not to think of making do with a collation on Ash Wednesday’, he said to me.
‘You must have a full meal with meat’.’
‘I don't think it does one any harm to fast a little— if one is in good health,’ Ianthe added hastily.
‘I hope you will savour the Lenten fare, as I call it, that is being offered in this church,’ said Randolph.
‘We're trying lunch hour services with a short address this year.
They have them at St Ermin's, of course, and I know Ossie Thames used to get quite a lot of office workers when he had them at St Luke's.
I've got quite an interesting lot of preachers.’
Ianthe said she would try to come, though it seemed as if Wednesdays in Lent were going to be almost too devotional with her uncle's course of sermons at St Basil's in the evenings.
She felt she would have to attend those.
‘Try and bring some of your fellow workers with you,’ said Randolph.
‘Yes, perhaps I will,’ said Ianthe.
When Ash Wednesday arrived, however, she found herself going alone to the service.
She knew that Mervyn Cantrell was an agnostic, though on this particular day, as he pointed out to her, his packed lunch consisted of tuna fish sandwiches and hard boiled eggs in deference, as it were, to the beliefs of others.
Ianthe did not think of asking John to accompany her, because it was difficult to imagine him in a church.
Then, too, she had felt rather shy of him since Christmas when he had given her the violets and had tried not to encourage his obvious interest in her.
She often found herself making excuses to avoid him though in some ways she was interested in him, even attracted to him.
But he was  younger than she was and so very much not the type of person she was used to meeting.
Ianthe was not as yet bold enough to break away from her upbringing and background, and while she did not often think of herself as marrying now, she still hoped, perhaps even expected, that somebody ‘suitable’ would turn up one day.
Somebody who combined the qualities of Rupert and John, if such a person could be imagined.
Today John had gone out to lunch before her and she ate her sandwiches quickly, then started out on the brisk quarter of an hour's walk to her uncle's church.
When she got there she found that it was rather full, but being a regular churchgoer she did not mind going up to the front where there were plenty of empty pews.
She had never particularly liked the church as a building — there was a coldness and lack of ‘atmosphere’ about it that had nothing to do, she felt sure, with the wealthy congregation.
Some of them indeed seemed to be at the service, looking somehow different from the ‘office workers’ for whom the services had been arranged.
Poor things, with their cocktails, Ianthe thought, remembering her uncle's scorn, some of their faces under the elegant hats and above the fur coats were kindly, even noble.
She was sure that they were thoroughly nice, good people.
The organ started to play and Ianthe's attention was diverted by the entry of the preacher, so that she did not notice John walking quietly up the aisle and slipping into the pew behind her.
The service began with a prayer, then there was a hymn, and then the address.
It was of a suitable Ash Wednesday character and left the congregation feeling sober and a little cast down.
It was not until the last hymn that Ianthe happened to turn her head slightly and not so much see him as become conscious that he was sitting behind her and presumably had been throughout the service.
Understandably, therefore, her last prayer was a little self-conscious.
She knelt longer than she would normally have done, not out of devotion but to give him time to get away.
Yet she was not surprised to find him waiting for her outside the church, apparently absorbed in the design of an iron pineapple on the railings.
‘Why hullo, John — have you been in church?’
It was all she could think of to say.
They were now walking along together as it was too cold to stand about.
‘That fur collar suits you,’ he said.
‘It's nice and warm on a day like this,’ said Ianthe apologetically, feeling herself like one of the rich members of her uncle's congregation.
John's overcoat of a thin material in the rather common ‘Italian’ style did not look very warm, she thought with a pang.
They walked in silence for a few minutes.
One could hardly assume that he had not gone to church out of piety and because it was Ash Wednesday, Ianthe thought, but it was rather puzzling and disturbing to think that she couldn't even attend to her devotions in peace.
‘We must hurry or we shall be late back,’ she said rather distantly.
‘I'm sure Mervyn won't mind us being a few minutes late, and for such a good cause,’ said John earnestly.
‘I didn't know you went to church regularly,’ said Ianthe.
‘Well, I haven't done up to now.’
He put his hand under her elbow as they crossed the road.
‘I really only went today because of you.
I'm afraid I followed you.’
‘But that isn't the right reason for going,’ she protested.
‘Haven't you ever done such a thing?’
He smiled down at her and Ianthe found herself noting, quite irrelevantly, that he was taller than Rupert Stonebird.
‘Only when I was a schoolgirl,’ she admitted.
‘You shouldn't have followed me.
If you'd wanted to go to  church you could have gone to St Ermin's which is much nearer.
You must pass the poster announcing their Lent services every time you go to your bus stop.’
‘Yes I do, but I wanted to be where you were,’ he said simply.
Ianthe was touched and flattered in spite of herself.
This ridiculous young man, she told herself.
And yet why shouldn't he be fond of her.
He could be…= well, a younger brother.
Having, as she thought, settled their relationship satisfactorily, Ianthe was then conscious that he was looking at her in a way that did not seem quite what she thought of as brotherly, though she had never had any brothers of her own to make the comparison with.
‘Oh there you are, you two,’ said Mervyn irritably.
He held an open book in his hand.
‘I can't have all my staff out to lunch at the same time.’
‘I'm sorry,’ said Ianthe.
‘We've been to church.’
‘That doesn't impress me.
A friend of mine knew a clergyman who used to have bouillabaisse flown over specially from Marseilles every Ash Wednesday.
I don't call that self denial.’
‘Well, we didn't have anything like that,’ John protested, and Ianthe, remembering her uninteresting cheese sandwich, also felt that Mervyn was being a little unjust.
‘Is there something wrong with that book you're holding?’
John asked,.
Mervyn did not answer but thrust the book towards him.
The pages appeared to be stained with gravy or some kind of reddish sauce.
‘However can that have happened?’ asked John.
‘I thought people weren't allowed to take books out of the library.’
‘Normally they aren't,’ said Mervyn with a baleful glance at Ianthe.
‘But the staff sometimes use their discretion.
’‘Oh dear-was it somebody I gave permission to?’ asked Ianthe.
‘It was.’
‘And he seemed such a nice young man,’ said Ianthe helplessly, for by what standards was one to judge the kind of person who might be allowed to take a book out of the library if not by the usual ones of manner, speech, dress, and general demeanour?
‘'Nice’ he may be but his taste for Brand's A1 Sauce — or is it HP?’— Mervyn examined the page more closely —‘does seem to be excessive.
Why is it, I wonder, that when books have things spilt on them it is always bottled sauce or gravy of the thickest and most repellent kind rather than something utterly exquisite and delicious?’
‘I suppose because the people who read sociological and political books don't eat exquisite and delicious food,’ said Ianthe sensibly.
‘Of course,’ said Mervyn thoughtfully, ‘it could just be a genuine tomato sauce from a dish of spaghetti or ravioli.
Yet it is difficult to imagine anyone reading Talcott Parsons and manipulating spaghetti at the same time.’
He dosed it up, obviously delighted to have found a reasonable explanation.
‘I'm glad the young man's name is cleared,’ said Ianthe.
‘She rather likes good-looking young men,’ said Mervyn rather spitefully, turning to John.
‘I once caught her letting one eat his sandwiches in the library which, as you know, is strictly forbidden.’
‘It was such a cold day,’ said Ianthe, ‘and you're not allowed to eat in the Public Record Office, so I thought just for once…=’She stopped, feeling that too much attention was being drawn to her and that they ought to be getting on with their work, especially as the Ash Wednesday service had made them late coming back  from lunch.
During the afternoon she worked hard and realised almost with dismay that she was going home not to a comfortable evening by the fire but to yet another Lenten service at which her uncle was to be the preacher.
It was a relief to see Sophia standing in the window of the vicarage drawing room and beckoning her to come in.
Ianthe was sure it must mean that her uncle had been unable to come-for some comparatively harmless reason- and that there was to be no service that evening.
But Sophia had something else to tell her.
‘I feel I must show somebody the parcel I've just had,’ she said, greeting Ianthe on the doorstep.
‘I was so astonished that I've been waiting until people started to come to church so that I could show somebody and you're the first and most suitable.
Come and see.’
Ianthe went into the drawing room which was in considerable disorder.
Clothes were strewn on the sofa and chairs and Faustina was dragging a silver lame belt along the carpet.
‘Look!’ said Sophia, with a gesture.
‘Clothes — and from Lady Selvedge.’
‘How generous of her!
I suppose she knew you'd planned to have that big jumble sale after Easter.’
‘But they're not jumble — they're for me!
Look at this suit — it's a real Paris model with a mink collar.’
‘Yes, so it is,’ said Ianthe, stroking the fur.
‘Did she say they were for you?’
‘Yes, she wrote a little note.
I suppose Mother had been telling her what a poor parish this is and what a pity Mark hadn't taken a more wealthy living.
If only the clothes had been plainer and more suitable for the vicar's wife of such a poor parish,’ Sophia lamented, holding up the lame cocktail dress whose belt Faustina had now taken out into the hall.
‘When should I ever wear this?’
Ianthe looked at it doubtfully.
‘Yes, it is rather elaborate, isn't it, with that sequin trimming at the neck.
Still you're about the same height, and they're obviously such good clothes.’
‘Yes, like those wardrobes of titled ladies one used to see advertised,’ Sophia agreed.
‘Worn only once, or suddenly going abroad.
I used to wonder about them.
Perhaps somebody decided to enter a religious order just after she'd bought a whole new wardrobe…= I shall have to wear them obviously — it will teach me a rather curious and special kind of humility.
People will think I've been terribly extravagant and I shan't be able to defend myself.’
‘What will your husband think?’
Ianthe asked tentatively.
‘Mark?
Oh, he probably won't notice.
He is not of this world, you know, in some ways we're so far apart.
I'm the sort of person who wants to do everything for the people I love and he is the sort of person who's self-sufficient, or seems to be…=’ she paused.
‘Then there's Faustina.’
Faustina?
Ianthe was puzzled for a moment.
Oh the cat, she thought but, perhaps wisely, didn't say it.
Instead she remarked that cats were usually considered to be particularly self-sufficient sort of animals.
‘But they aren't always,’ said Sophia.
‘I feel sometimes that I can't reach Faustina as I've reached other cats.
And somehow it's the same with Mark.’
‘Oh dear,’ Ianthe heard herself saying, feebly, she felt, but it was difficult to know how best to express her sympathy.
She felt she wanted to shut herself away from life if this was what it was like.
Yet Sophia was not usually the kind of person to say disturbing things.
Wives shouldn't talk thus about their husbands, she thought resentfully, especially when they were clergy wives.
Nor could one really compare a sacred and honourable estate like marriage to a relationship with a cat.
‘I think I'll go into church,’ Ianthe went on.
‘It must be nearly time for the service to start.’
‘Yes,’ said Sophia, meekly now, ‘it is time.’
She bundled the clothes onto a chair, leaving Faustina burrowing into the middle of them.
She sat humbly in the cold church, making some effort to get into the right mood for the service.
God is content with little, she told herself, but sometimes we have so little that it is hardly worth the offering.
9
In February or March, when spring was waiting to burst out but the trees were still leafless and the earth grey and cold, Sophia used sometimes to pretend that she was in Italy — not necessarily in a beautiful or famous part but perhaps in some obscure little town in the Alban Hills or a dusty coastal village between Naples and Sorrento.
Sometimes she walked in imagination in a Roman suburb, passing tall old houses with balconies and secret leafy gardens glimpsed through a gate in the wall.
She would even extend her fancy into the shops she visited, seeing them as markets where she could choose a fish by the brightness of its eye, a chicken by its stiff yellow claws and plump breast, or pick out tangerines with the leaves still on them.
If only one could apply the same tests to people, she thought, and of course in a way one did; but as life went on this kind of choice came to be a luxury — one took what came one's way.
If the fish was fresh it was because it had been deep frozen within minutes of being caught and packed up to be bought by her goodness only knew how many months later for Mark's Lenten supper.
He ate it cheerfully enough or sometimes abstractedly.
Mark came home one evening to find Edwin Pettigrew, the vet, drinking tea in the kitchen with Sophia.
‘You could try a little minced veal,’ he was saying.
‘Lean veal, of course— not just scraps.’
Faustina was in her basket by the boiler, looking understandably complacent.
‘Oh the best meat, of course,’ said Sophia.
‘Well, you know what they are,’ said Edwin apologetically.
‘Yes, and they can't let us know their wants,’ said Sophia.
‘Not in so many words perhaps,’ said Mark, ‘but they do manage somehow to make their wants known and perhaps even more persistently than we do.’
He could smell fish cooking and wondered if it was Faustina's coley, then realised that in view of the conversation about the finest minced veal it was more likely to be something for themselves.
All the same he rather hoped it wasn't coley, suitable Lenten fare though it might be.
‘We were talking about the trip to Rome after Easter,’ said Sophia, pouring out a cup of stewed tea for Mark.
‘Edwin is hoping to be able to come, and of course Daisy will.’
‘How many are going?’ asked Edwin.
‘Surely not the whole parish?’
‘No — regular communicants only, if you see what I mean,’ said Sophia.
‘That is, our own friends and the people who really do come to church regularly.
Of course that means Sister Dew, and Ianthe Broome.’
Her face brightened as she saw herself walking down the Spanish Steps with Ianthe.
‘How did the idea originate?’
Edwin asked.
‘Oh it was one of Mark's sermons, in a sense.
He said something like ‘Those of you who are familiar with the church of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome’, and it turned out that hardly anybody was.
So we thought we might make up a party from the parish and go to Rome.’
‘Daisy has a friend living in Rome,’ said Edwin, ‘Nellie Musgrove — they were at school together.
She teaches English and feeds the stray cats in the Forum.’
‘Ah, what would these foreigners do without English ladies,’ said Mark.
‘And will you be able to leave somebody in charge of the animals?’ he asked Edwin.
‘Oh yes, Jim Mangold is shaping very well and I'm thinking of getting another assistant to do clerical work, keep the records and that sort of thing.’
‘Yes, a girl would like that kind of work, i said Sophia, wishing that Penelope could take the job.
‘I had thought of getting a young man,’ said Edwin, ‘though perhaps in a way it's hardly a job for a man.
One feels that anything to do with card indexes is more in a woman's line.’
‘You mean it's slightly degrading?’ said Sophia.
‘Oh no,’ Edwin protested.
‘A card index may be a noble thing, especially if it has to do with animals.’
Mark watched them arguing with a faint smile on his face.
‘Yes, it could be noble work,’ Sophia agreed.
‘Think of Sir Edwin Landseer's portraits of animals,’ she added, perhaps irrelevantly.
Edwin did not apparently need to think of them and rose to go.
‘Was Faustina not well then?’
Mark asked.
‘Alittle off her food — nothing to worry about, Edwin said.’
‘Is it coley for supper?’
‘No, darling — that's Faustina's.
We're having halibut.’
‘I should have thought it would be the other way round.’
‘I feel you need something nice tonight,’ said Sophia.
‘Ianthe wasn't in church last Sunday,’ she added.
‘I hope she isn't ill.’
‘You could go round and see her,’ said Mark, ‘or telephone.’
‘Yes, but the telephone is downstairs and if she's in  bed she would have to get out to answer it.
I don't think Ianthe's the type of person to have a telephone by her bed,’ Sophia mused.
‘Not self-important enough, somehow.
I think I'll go and call on her after supper.’
Sophia could see the light on in the hall as she came up to Ianthe's front door, but the front rooms were in darkness.
She rang the bell and waited.
There was silence, then the sound of footsteps coming downstairs.
The door was opened and Rupert Stonebird stood before her, holding a hot water bottle in his hand.
‘Oh…=’ they said together, staring at each other.
Sophia was the first to recover.
‘I came to see Ianthe,’ she said.
‘I was worried because she wasn't in church on Sunday.’
‘No, she's ill,’ said Rupert almost eagerly.
‘I called — quite unexpectedly — just before you came and found her in bed, so I'm filling her hot water bottle.’
‘So I see,’ said Sophia, unable to keep a note of indignation out of her tone, for it was most disquieting that the man she intended for her sister's husband should be discovered filling the hot water bottle of another woman.
Besides, filling hot water bottles was not man's work — fetching coal, sawing wood, even opening a bottle of wine would have been suitable occupations for Rupert to be discovered in, but not this.
‘You should have taken the cover off before you filled it,’ she went on, taking the bottle, almost snatching it, out of Rupert's hand.
‘Look, it's all wet.’
‘Yes, the water spluttered up,’ he said unhappily, uncomfortable with the new fierce Sophia.
After all it hadn't been his fault that Ianthe was in bed with ‘flu.
He had called to ask her advice about the small dinner party he intended to give in the next week or so.
He had been dismayed, almost horrified, when she had opened the front door a crack and displayed herself pale and ill and  obviously in need of cherishing.
He had not expected it of her and wished he could have gone away quickly without even asking if there was anything he could do for her.
Ianthe was also dismayed, for she had expected Sophia or some other female member of St Basil's congregation to be on the doorstep.
And when she had seen a man's shape she had thought for one wild moment that Mervyn or even John had called with flowers.
She did not know what to do with Rupert so had asked him to refill her hot water bottle.
After all, there was something almost like a brother about him and he was a near neighbour.
‘I'll take that up to her,’ said Sophia, hugging the bottle to her.
‘Oh, good — then I'll go,’ said Rupert in a relieved tone.
‘She won't want too many visitors at a time.
Would you explain to her then?’
‘Yes, certainly.’
Sophia went up the stairs and heard Rupert leave the house.
‘May I come in?’ she asked, pausing outside Ianthe's door.
‘Oh, it's you, Sophia — how nice.’
Sophia noticed with mingled pity and satisfaction that Ianthe was looking extremely plain in her sickness, with red nose and eyes, pale lips, and straggling hair.
‘My dear, you look wretched,’ she said.
‘Yes, I feel awful anyone seeing me like this,’ said Ianthe faintly.
‘But as it was only Rupert Stonebird it didn't seem to matter.’
Sophia went over to the bed and started to tidy it.
‘If you'll sit in that chair for a minute, I'll remake your bed — then you'll be more comfortable,’ she said.
‘And then I'll get you something to eat or drink — have you had supper?’
‘Well, no — I had a cup of tea.
I was just thinking of heating up some soup when Rupert came.’
‘Now you get back into bed and I'll go and get you something — are there some eggs in your kitchen?’
‘Yes, I think so.’
‘How long have you been like this?’
Sophia asked.
‘Well, I didn't get up Sunday, then I thought I'd better go in to work on Monday, but I came home early and I've been in bed ever since.’
‘And today's Wednesday.
What a pity I didn't know — Sister Dew could have looked in on you.’
‘Oh, I don't think that would be necessary,’ said Ianthe quickly.
‘Perhaps a trained nurse isn't quite what one wants at a time like this,’ Sophia agreed.
Ianthe lay back on her pillows.
Down in the neat little kitchen Sophia made an omelette, cut thin bread and butter and arranged the quarters of a peeled orange on a crown Derby plate.
‘Nice things’ Ianthe had and it was a pleasure to use them.
Sophia also reflected with some satisfaction on the way she had spoken about Rupert-'only Rupert Stonebird', who ‘didn't seem to matter’.
Perhaps after all there was no need to fear that there might be anything between them.
Rupert too had seemed glad to relinquish the hot water bottle and let her take over, though one never really knew what a man was feeling.
‘We were talking about the trip to Rome just now,’ said Sophia, going into Ianthe's room with the tray.
‘It's only a few weeks away now.
Just think of those lemon groves outside my aunt's villa in Ravello.
You must see them!’
10
‘No sooner do you get back than John chooses to go off,’ said Mervyn peevishly on Ianthe's first day back after her illness.
‘I suppose he's got flu now and I'm expected to manage as usual with only half of you here.
Suppose I was to get ill, what would happen then?’
‘I don't know,’ said Ianthe meekly.
‘We must hope it doesn't happen.
But perhaps John's just late.’
‘I suppose it could be that, though he isn't usually.
Do you think he's satisfactory?’
Mervyn lowered his voice, as if hoping that Ianthe might say something derogatory.
‘His work, I mean.’
‘Yes, I suppose he's all right,’ said Ianthe reluctantly.
‘I'm beginning to wonder if I wasn't a bit impetuous offering him the job just like that.
But then that's what I'm like — you ask Mother.
One day I bought six pomegranates on the way home — imagine it, six!
We didn't know what to do with them.
Of course Mother doesn't like anything with seeds, or anything foreign, come to that.
She doesn't really like fruit at all.’
He laughed.
‘And another day I bought a hip bath in a junk shop talk about Edwardian house parties…=’ Mervyn rambled on, but Ianthe was hardly conscious of what he was saying beyond feeling that he didn't seem to expect an answer.
At a quarter to eleven coffee was brought in, but there was still no sign of John.
‘Perhaps he's too ill to get to a telephone,’ said Mervyn in a satisfied tone-'that's what it is.’
‘But in that case somebody ought to go and see him,’ said Ianthe, remembering her own recent illness and how forlorn she had felt.
‘Yes, there ought to be somebody to bring him soup and toast and cooling drinks.
And to shake the crumbs out of the bed,’ said Mervyn.
‘How dreadfully uncomfortable it is to be ill when one lives alone.
I have to go to a cocktail party at the Library Association this evening,’ he went on, ‘so I'm afraid I shan't be able to be the ministering angel.
Mother doesn't like me to be late for the evening meal.
When is Mothering Sunday, by the way?’
‘Next Sunday,’ said Ianthe.
‘Do remind me to get something for Mother before then — a potted plant or something growing.
I suppose it's too late for cyclamen so it'll have to be tulips or daffs — which do you think?’
‘I always like daffodils growing in a pot,’ said Ianthe, ‘then you can watch them coming out.’
‘And then dying,’ said Mervyn.
‘Yes, but you don't think of that when you see them in bud,’ Ianthe protested.
‘What is John's address?’ she asked, a flutter of nervousness starting up inside her.
‘You mean you'd go?
Oh, that is kind — much better than a visit from me.
Women know what to do when you're ill.
’ Mervyn took out his diary and looked in the back.
‘The address is 28 Montgomery Square, SW1.
But don't let the SW1 deceive you.
It's Pimlico, not Knightsbridge or Belgravia.
Should you take some Beecham's powders along, do you think?
Or will a cooling hand on the brow be enough?’
Ianthe, who had been thinking in terms of daffodils and lemon barley water, had not seen herself being so practical.
And on the bus to Victoria she began to wish she had not been quite so rash in offering to visit John.
Supposing he were not ill at all?
It was surely — the words came in the tone of voice her mother would have used —‘most unsuitable’, and it seemed especially so when the bus passed the block of flats where she and her mother had lived.
Ianthe was surprised not to fed the usual pang of nostalgia as she glanced down towards  Westminster Cathedral.
Instead she found herself remembering things she had disliked about the flat — the row of closed doors in the long dark passage, the kitchen looking out on to a brick wall, the occasional stiflingly hot summer evening when she had longed to be in the country.
How much nicer her own house was.
She realised that she was feeling almost excited, as if she were going on an adventurous journey into unknown country.
Montgomery Square turned out to be in that part of Pimlico which has not yet become fashionable again, though some of the houses at one end appeared to be newly painted.
Ianthe remembered as she walked along looking for number 28 that her dressmaker had lived very near here, but somehow, after she had made one or two mourning dresses for her after her mother had died, Ianthe had lost touch with her.
Today she happened to be wearing the dress of violet-coloured wool which was the last thing Miss Statham had made for her — drifts of its full skirt could be seen at the front of her grey squirrel coat.
‘Oh, Miss Broome, that dress — I'd know that colour anywhere.
And how are you, my dear?’
Ianthe was disconcerted to find the little dressmaker at her side, peering up into her face.
If this rather delicate visit to John were to be carried out it must be done immediately, before her courage failed.
She didn't feel she had the strength to face an interruption now.
‘I'm quite well, thank you,’ she said, ‘but I'm on my way to visit a friend who is ill.’
‘A friend who is ill…=’ Miss Statham took her  words and repeated them so that they sounded like a line from a Victorian poem.
She looked down at Ianthe's basket with the bunch of daffodils and bottle of lemon barley water.
‘Someone in bed?’ she asked.
‘Yes, someone in bed.’
That sounded more like the title of a modern television play, Ianthe thought.
And would he be in bed?
She supposed it was quite likely that he would be.
Now she was at the door of number 28, which had not been repainted, but still Miss Statham lingered.
‘This is a lodging house, Miss Broome,’ she explained.
‘Are you sure you've got the number right?
I think it's mostly Indians and commercial travellers here.’
‘Yes, my friend lives here,’ said Ianthe firmly, feeling almost tempted to add that he was an Indian commercial traveller.
‘Poor soul, she will be glad to see you,’ said Miss Statham.
‘You'll let me know if there's any work I can do for you, won't you, Miss Broome.
Skirts have gone so much shorter — you'd hardly believe the hems I've taken up.
Almost above the knees, some.
 Deaconess Blatt too.’
She chuckled reminiscently.
‘So nice to have run into you like this.’
Ianthe promised that she should make her a summer dress and with this managed to get rid of her.
She mounted the steps to the front door of the house and stood looking for the right bell to ring.
There were two windows on either side of the door with elaborately patterned lace curtains.
Perhaps in one of these rooms John lay and tossed on a bed of fever.
Ianthe rang what seemed to be the ground floor bell.
Let the door be opened by somebody ordinary and undemanding, she prayed, some comfortable woman who will ask no questions.
Perhaps the clergyman who eventually did open the  door might have been included in this category, surprised though she was to see him.
Ordinary, undemanding, comfortable — though perhaps he should not be, a clergyman was sometimes all these.
‘Good evening,’ she said.
‘Good evening,’ he replied.
They stood then for a moment in mutual silence and surprise, rather as Sophia and Rupert had stood on Ianthe's doorstep, or like two strange cats meeting each other for the first time.
‘I heard the bell ring,’ he ventured at last.
‘So I opened the door.
I don't live here, but it seemed the obvious thing to do.’
‘Thank you,’ said Ianthe.
‘I wanted to see Mr Challow.
I hear he's ill.’
Perhaps dead, she thought suddenly; that might explain the clergyman's presence.
‘Perhaps you were visiting him?’ she asked.
‘Mr Challow?
No — I was visiting Mrs Gammon who owns the house.
I'm the vicar of St Mary's.’
‘Is Mrs Gammon ill as well, then?’ asked Ianthe helplessly.
‘Not that I know of.
She's not at home.
It's her bingo night,’ the vicar explained.
‘Bingo?’
Ianthe gave the word a horrified emphasis, for it sounded unsuitable coming from his pale lips.
‘Tombola’ would have seemed more dignified.
They were standing in a narrow hall, with a bicycle propped against one wall and stairs leading down to a basement.
The floor was littered with papers — coupons offering ‘3d off’ soap powder and frozen peas, and literature about television insurance and reconditioned sewing machines — which had evidently been thrust through the letter box.
There was no sound in the house, apart from what might have been the twittering of a caged bird coming from one of the closed doors on the ground floor.
Then a kind of muffled shouting could be  heard somewhere underneath them, as if somebody was having a fight or an argument.
Ianthe felt tired and rather hopeless.
‘I've come to see a young man from the place where I work,’ she said, trying to sound firm and businesslike.
‘He didn't come to work this morning and we're afraid he may be ill.’
‘A non-appearance at work doesn't necessarily mean illness,’ said the vicar, with what Ianthe considered unbecoming cynicism.
‘He might have been at bingo.’
‘Surely not in the morning?’
Ianthe protested.
‘I was speaking metaphorically — they do not as yet have morning sessions.’
‘Well, I wonder where I can find him,’ said Ianthe.
She was getting tired of standing in the hall with this unhelpful clergyman.
‘I expect Maureen — Mrs Gammon's daughter — will be able to tell you.
She's in the basement watching ‘the telly’ ' — he picked out the words sarcastically —‘though she did glance away from the screen just long enough to tell me that it was her mother's bingo night.
Perhaps she'll do the same for you.
I hope you will not have had a fruitless journey, Mrs er —’
‘Miss Broome,’ said Ianthe firmly, putting down her shopping basket which was beginning to feel very heavy.
‘Good night,’ said the vicar, opening the front door.
‘Good night,’ said Ianthe, watching him go.
She had not liked him very much but she judged him to be one of those unfortunate men who dislike their neighbours even more than they dislike themselves and as such he was to be pitied, plodding on from day to day among his bingo-playing telly-watching parishioners.
How much nicer Mark Ainger was, assuming in his remote kindness that everybody knew about the things he was interested in himself and being much too charitable to  pass judgement on other people's amusements, however unlike his own though they might be.
The sounds of shouting and gunshots might have alarmed Ianthe had she not realised that they were coming from the television programme in the basement.
As she stood uncertainly at the top of stairs leading down, she began to wonder how she was going to make herself heard above the noise.
But fortunately at that moment there was a break in the programme.
She heard a jolly male voice saying,
Something something something means Lots and lots of chocolate beans.
What the ‘something’ was she didn't catch — perhaps Life itself?
‘Excuse me,’ she began, ‘I wonder if you could tell me…=’
A tall girl, her dark hair obviously just washed and half done up in rollers, came to the bottom of the stairs.
‘…= where I could find Mr John Challow,’ Ianthe said.
‘Number four — on the first floor,’ said the girl, ‘but I don't know if he's in yet.’
‘He's all right then — not ill?’
‘I don't know.
I haven't seen him for a day or two,’ said the girl, ‘but he usually comes in about now.’
‘Thank you-I'll go and see,’ said Ianthe, hurrying away when she realised that the television programme was starting again.
She felt disquieted at the lack of interest the girl had shown — anything might happen in this sort of house, she told herself indignantly.
And supposing he were not ill at all— how embarrassing that would be.
As she mounted the stairs there was a sound of rushing water.
An Indian wearing a turban came out of a door on the half landing and, with a slight bow, waited  for her to pass.
Again her mother's face and voice came before her, and she hurried past the Indian, annoyed with herself for feeling embarrassed.
It was with a considerable sense of agitation that she found herself opposite room number four.
She knocked — surely too timidly for anybody within to hear — and a faint voice said ‘Come in.’
Opening the door a crack she saw John lying in bed, unshaven and tousled, his pillows tumbled and the blue rayon eiderdown slipping on to the floor.
Although from her upbringing it might have been thought that ‘visiting the sick’ would be a part of her daily life she had hardly ever — thanks to the Welfare State — had to perform this duty, and then only with her mother or father.
She had certainly never visited a sick young man alone.
‘Ianthe — I knew you'd come,’ he said simply.
She put down her basket and advanced towards the bed.
The only chair she could see was being used as a bedside table and held a glass of water, a strip of Aspro tablets and a box of paper handkerchiefs.
However romantically ill John might look, it seemed, that he had nothing worse than an unromantic cold.
‘We were worried about you,’ Ianthe explained, sitting down on the edge of the narrow bed.
‘So I told Mervyn I'd come and see if you were all right.’
‘Were you worried about me?’ he asked, his voice breaking into a croak.
‘Well, of course,’ she said in confusion, unable to meet the penetrating glance of his brown eyes.
‘I've brought you a few things,’ she said, glancing back to where her basket stood on the floor.
‘Thank you,’ he said.
‘And you brought yourself — that's the most important thing.’
In a sense he was right.
When one is ill it's the knowledge that somebody cared enough to come and see one  that matters more than the flowers and the lemon barley water.
‘I must try and make you more comfortable,’ she said.
‘Hasn't anybody been looking after you or bringing you food?’
‘I've only been ill since Saturday evening and of course yesterday was Sunday and most people stay in bed anyway then.’
Ianthe reflected for a moment on this depressing picture of the bed-sitting-room world, with no churchgoing to give meaning to the day, though presumably Mrs Gammon might go sometimes.
‘You might have been seriously ill,’ she said.
‘Well, what happened when you were ill last week did anybody come to see you?’
‘Yes, the vicar's wife and…=’ Ianthe hesitated, unwilling to mention Rupert Stonebird.
‘I nearly came,’ said John, looking up at her, ‘but then I thought you mightn't like it.
I mean if you were in bed and not feeling and looking your best.’
Ianthe could think of no ready answer, so she looked round the room to see if there was anything practical she could do.
In one corner there was a sink and a gas ring, partly hidden by a screen, a pile of unwashed crockery on a small table and a red plastic bucket filled with empty tins, tea leaves and broken egg shells.
Indignation surged up within her — that he should have to live like this.
‘I'll wash up some of these things,’ she said.
He tried to protest, but rather weakly.
‘You shouldn't be doing things like this for me,’ he said.
‘But one likes doing things for people,’ said Ianthe firmly, for of course she had been brought up to think that one should, though perhaps this situation was a little different.
As she worked she could not help contrasting this cheerless room with her own spare room where — had it not been impossible, she told herself  quickly — John might now be lying.
The comfortable bed — she was sure this one was not — the restful pale green walls to look at instead of this busy pattern of soiled beige and brown abstract shapes — the soft cream Indian carpet instead of the one dirty patterned rug by the bed on the frayed chocolate brown linoleum.
John loved beautiful things, she felt sure; it must be painful for him to live in such surroundings, perhaps humiliating too for him to have her realise that this was all he could afford to live in.
At last she had finished her work at the sink and looked doubtfully at his bed — surely it would be more comfortable if it were remade?
The sheets were twisted and the blankets had slipped down to one side.
‘You must get out of bed,’ she said, ‘and sit in this chair-then I can remake your bed.’
‘Oh, I couldn't let you do that,’ he said.
‘They'll see to it for me.’
A disquieting picture of the girl in the basement came into Ianthe's mind and she was almost shocked to realise that she did not like to think of her looking after John.
She stood in the middle of the room with a vase of daffodils in her hand, not quite knowing what to do.
‘I'd rather see you like that than making my bed for me,’ said John.
‘I shall think of you every time I look at them.’
He lay back on the pillows, smiling at her.
Somehow she wished he had not said that.
It was too obvious, glib almost, and she did not know what answer to make.
‘I suppose I ought to go now,’ she said, picking up the eiderdown from the floor and making a vague attempt to straighten the blankets.
‘I hope you'll soon be better.’
‘It was sweet of you to come — it's done me so much good.
I'm really ashamed of this awful place, but of course I'm not staying here long.’
He raised his head and smiled to her again in a curious way, his eyes seeming to  be laughing at her.
‘I'm thinking of moving to a room on Campden Hill,’ he added.
‘Campden Hill?
Oh, that's where my aunt's sister lives — my aunt by marriage, you see — in Aubrey Walk,’ Ianthe said.
John was silent, perhaps because of this rather daunting information, the proximity of Ianthe's aunt's sister making his room on Campden Hill seem rather less likely.
Ianthe was trying to imagine what the room would be like and where exactly the house would be but somehow did not like to ask for further details.
She gathered up her handbag, gloves, and empty basket and prepared to leave.
‘Is there anything else you need?’ she said.
‘Well…
’ He hesitated.
‘I hardly like to ask — it's so embarrassing.’
What could it be?
Ianthe wondered.
‘Something I can get for you?’ she asked.
‘No, not that exactly.
It's only that I haven't been able to get to the bank, being ill and all that, and I haven't got any money for the rent.
I suppose I could let it go for this week, though.’
‘Oh no, you mustn't do that,’ said Ianthe quickly.
She found it most distasteful to think of him owing money to the bingo-playing woman in the basement.
She took out her wallet and found that she had six pounds and ten shillings which she placed on the chair by his bed; ‘Will that be enough to be going on with?’ she asked.
‘Oh, that's fine, but I feel so awful asking you.
Are you sure you've left enough for yourself?’
‘Yes, of course— I've got some silver and I can go to the bank tomorrow.’
‘I couldn't ask just anyone.’
No, of course he couldn't ask just anyone, Ianthe thought, as she walked towards the bus stop, but she  was glad that he had felt able to ask her.
She wanted to do things for him — it seemed to give some purpose to her life to have somebody depending even a little on her.
That was what one was here for, she thought; doing things for people like Miss Grimes and John was, after all, one's Christian duty.
The fact that it was much pleasanter doing things for John was really quite irrelevant.
What a pity it was that he should have to live in that depressing room.
If only conventions were not so rigid she could easily have had him for a lodger.
But of course that wouldn't do at all.
As she passed the vicarage she was startled to see Faustina picking her way along the front wall with a palm cross in her mouth.
How unsuitable, she thought censoriously, though of course the crosses had not yet been blessed.
The cat had probably been in the vestry and undone the parcel they were in, though it was just as likely that Sophia had given her one to play with.
Ianthe entered her house, her thoughts now on John again.
There was a folded note lying on the floor by the front door.
It was an invitation from Rupert Stonebird to the dinner party he had mentioned some time ago.
She put it down on the table in the hall and went upstairs smiling.
She had been wondering if she would have gone to visit Rupert if he had been ill, or if she would have left in to Sophia.
11
The day comes in the life of every single man living alone when he must give a dinner party, however unpretentious, and that day had now arrived for Rupert Stonebird.
‘My dining room faces north and is difficult to heat,’ he had said to Ianthe, and now he stood in it looking out of the window at the cold March day, fully conscious of his words.
Daffodils were coming up in the garden but it would be dark when his guests came to the house to eat their meal.
He could not expect them to be warmed by the idea of daffodils coming up outside.
Light the paraffin stove now, he thought, crouching uncertainly with a box of matches, wondering if it ought to be propitiated in some way.
A libation of pink paraffin had already been poured into it — like a great can of pink gin — it ought to burn well on that.
Mrs Purry, his daily woman, was due to arrive during the afternoon to polish and lay the table, hoover the carpet, dust the room, and — most important of all — cook the meal.
Rupert was not one of those men with any sort of talent in the kitchen, but he could at least light the stove.
When the flame was burning blue and steady (as it said in the book of instructions) he left the room gladly, shutting the door firmly behind him.
His study, with its big untidy desk strewn with folders of notes and the proofs of a book he was correcting, was to him the most congenial room in the house.
He worked contentedly for some time and was deep in the intricacies of a genealogy  when the telephone rang.
It was a colleague, Everard Bone, who with his wife Mildred was to be one of the guests at the dinner party that evening.
‘Such a nuisance, Mildred seems to have flu,’ he said irritably.
‘She thought it would be unwise to come out this evening, so I m afraid that's that.
She sends her apologies, of course.
‘I'm so sorry,’ said Rupert, ‘but I quite see that she shouldn't come out.
I'd been looking forward to seeing you both, and I had wanted to discuss that Unesco thing with you.’
‘Oh, I shall be coming,’ said Everard.
‘I only rang to say that Mildred can't.’
‘But can you leave her?
Will she be all right?’
As a bachelor it seemed slightly shocking to Rupert that a colleague, even though an anthropologist, should think nothing of abandoning his wife when she was ill.
It smacked a little too much of a primitive society.
‘Oh yes, my mother is staying with us — so she'll look after Mildred.’
‘That's all right, then-I'll see you this evening.’
Rupert had never met Everard's mother, but remembering his own mother and how comforting she had been in his childhood illnesses he was immediately reassured.
Now all that remained was to find a suitable woman to replace Mildred.
The other guests were to be two more anthropologists — Gervase Fairfax and his wife Robina — and of course Ianthe Broome.
Rupert went over in his mind the unattached women he knew, beginning with Esther Clovis, the formidable secretary of the Foresight Research Centre, and ending with a pretty young typist who worked in the department of the University where he lectured.
Then he suddenly remembered Sophia Ainger's sister, the rather odd young woman he had met in Bloomsbury that evening and taken out for a drink.
The Pre-Raphaelite beatnik, in other words.
She would be suitable, but what was her name and where did she live?
And was it likely that she would be free at such short notice?
Dare he even ask her?
The obvious thing to do was to ring Sophia at the vicarage.
‘Penelope?’ said Sophia.
‘Well, she might be free.
Though of course,’ she added, good sister that she was, ‘she does go out such a lot.
And if it's this evening, I rather doubt…= Still, you could try.
I'm sure she'd love to come if she could.’
So it was that about half an hour later the telephone rang again at the vicarage.
It was Penelope, to tell Sophia that she had suddenly been asked to go to dinner at Rupert Stonebird's that evening, but that she wouldn't have time to go home and change first.
She would come to the vicarage and borrow something of Sophia's.
Penelope arrived muffled up in a duffel coat and with her hair wild and untidy.
‘And I'm in my old tartan skirt and black sweater,’ she lamented.
‘You'll have to lend me a dress.’
They went upstairs to Sophia's bedroom.
‘There's my new green wool,’ said Sophia a little reluctantly, ‘but I haven't worn it yet.’
‘Oh, not wool,’ said Penelope in disgust.
‘Besides, it's got long sleeves, hasn't it?’
‘Well yes, but it's winter dress so it will be quite suitable.
I dare say Ianthe Broome will be there and she'll probably be wearing a wool dress.’
‘Yes, blue, I shouldn't wonder.
Haven't you got anything else?’
‘There's my old black one — you might do something with that.’
‘But it would be down to my ankles!
Besides, it's got Faustina's hairs all over it.’
‘Yes, she particularly likes to lie on my lap when I'm wearing it,’ said Sophia, examining the skirt of the  dress.
‘It's rather beautiful, really.
The hairs are almost woven into the material, like a kind of mohair.
I know,’ she said suddenly, flinging down the black dress, ‘Lady Selvedge's parcel.
I told you she'd sent me some cast-offs and they're much too grand for me to wear.
I'm sure we could find something for you.’
Half an hour later Penelope was encased — for it was a fraction too tight for her — in the lame cocktail dress with the hem roughly tacked up, the sequin trimming torn away from the neck and a string of black beads hanging down below the waist.
Sophia thought this looked rather odd and had offered to lend her a string of cultured pearls, but the beads seemed to go with the piled up hair style and the long pointed-toed shoes that Penelope was wearing.
‘Good luck,’ said Sophia, seeing her off on the doorstep.
She felt somehow that her sister needed it, for it seemed only too probable that if Rupert was interested in any woman it was in Ianthe.
Archdeacon's son and canon's daughter-what could be more suitable when one came to think of it.
It was true that Penelope was a vicar's sister-in-law, but that was a poorer, meaner thing altogether.
Sophia tried to see her sister as a spinster and it was not so very difficult — a rather eccentric spinster not even looking as if she might once have been ennobled by some tragic love affair.
There was a precedent for it, too.
Her father's eldest sister, the aunt who now had the villa near Ravello where Sophia hoped to spend a few days after the visit to Rome, was in some ways very much like an older version of Penelope.
‘Ah, Penelope’— Rupert was pleased to have remembered her name —‘how nice to see you.
It was good of you to come at such short notice and lucky for me that you had no date for this evening, as you so easily might have done.’
He was talking rather too much, he knew, but her appearance in the dress of silver lame — like some  kind of armour remembered from childhood play-acting it looked to his inexperienced eyes — was quite startling and such a contrast to Ianthe's sober blue wool dress.
‘No, I wasn't doing anything this evening,’ said Penelope too brusquely, ‘and one's always glad of a free meal.’
Goodness, whatever had made her come out with that! she wondered in horror.
It was so much the sort of remark one could only make to a girl friend, but Rupert took it very nicely and said with only slightly forced heartiness, ‘Jolly good, and it's an excuse for me to have a better meal than usual, too.
Mrs Purry generally turns up trumps,’ he added, surprised at the rather strange effect Penelope seemed to be having on his conversation.
‘Mrs Purry,’ said Penelope, giggling a little.
‘What a lovely name!’
‘Yes, she's a good soul,’ said Rupert, again uncharacteristically.
‘Would you like to leave your coat in the spare bedroom?
It's the door facing you at the top of the stairs.
Ianthe's arranging some flowers on the table.’
So she's here already, thought Penelope, seeing that there was a fur jacket lying on the spare room bed.
She fingered it.
Moleskin!
Did anybody have things made of moleskin nowadays?
And Sophia said she had a grey squirrel fur coat too.
Perhaps this one had belonged to her mother?
It was an old lady's fur, somehow.
And the silk scarf with it in a faded paisley design looked like something brought back by a missionary aunt from India about thirty years ago.
But of course it was real silk, so tiresomely good, like all Ianthe's things.
And what was she doing arranging flowers on the table — wasn't that Mrs Purry's job?
No — she was presumably seeing to the food and Rupert didn't look the kind of man who would be good at arranging flowers.
Penelope went over to the long mirror to survey the general effect of her dress.
It was certainly tight and the skirt was perhaps a little too short now, but none the worse for that, she told herself stoutly.
Since she could not hope — and indeed did not wish — to be at all like Ianthe she could at least provide a complete contrast.
At the bottom of the stairs she met Ianthe coming out of the dining room with some leaves in her hands.
‘Hullo, Penelope, I've been doing the flowers,’ she said, as if an explanation of her emerging from the dining room with leaves seemed to be called for.
‘Yes, so I heard.’
Penelope glanced over Ianthe's shoulder through the open door of the dining room.
Just a vase of red tulips on the table, she thought.
Nothing very remarkable about that.
‘The spring flowers are so lovely now,’ Ianthe went on.
‘In the shops, I mean.’
‘And in the South of France and the Scilly Isles — or so one imagines,’ said Penelope.
‘Yes, of course,’ said Ianthe with rather excessive enthusiasm!
‘Rupert is with Dr Bone in the drawing room.
I must go and dispose of these leaves, there were really too many.’
She's difficult to talk to, Penelope thought, moving towards a room where she could hear voices.
Perhaps we shan't ever be jolly good friends.
We've really nothing in common, except Rupert.
‘Ah, Penelope.’
Rupert repeated his earlier greeting and came towards her with a glass jug that looked as if it contained some kind of cocktail.
‘I expect you're ready for a drink.
Will you risk my dry Martini or would you rather stick to sherry?’
The idea of sticking to sherry sounded so very safe and dull that Penelope naturally chose the Martini.
Rupert introduced Dr Everard Bone, who was tall and fair-rather good-looking in an austere way, she decided.
‘Everard's wife has flu,’ Rupert explained, ‘so we owe the pleasure of your company this evening to that rather unfortunate occurrence,’he went on, feeling that in  some obscure way he was being complimentary neither to Penelope nor to the absent Mildred Bone, but not quite seeing how else he could have put it.
At that moment Ianthe came into the room and accepted a glass of sherry.
Then the front door bell rang and while Rupert went to answer it a somewhat uneasy conversation started up between the two women and Everard Bone about his wife's flu and the likelihood or not of his catching it from her.
‘I particularly don't want to get it at the moment,’ he said rather irritably.
‘We've got this Unesco thing coming on — oh, here are the Fairfaxes,’ he declared, as the door opened to admit a tall middle-aged man and an even taller woman, obviously husband and wife, who had grown to look like each other in a rather unfortunate way, their small heads and long stringy bodies seeming as if they must have combined the worst features of each.
‘I'm sorry we're late, but these newly fashionable districts are so remote that we had difficulty in finding our way here,’ said Gervase Fairfax.
His voice had a sarcastic edge to it, once assumed for the benefit or otherwise of his students, and now its permanent tone.
‘Gervase would not ask the way, and the street lamps were so few and far between that it was impossible to use our map.
‘And Robina would not take a taxi, even if we had seen one.’
‘Well, here you are now, which is the main thing,’ said Rupert a little awkwardly, yet determined not to apologise for the remoteness of his house when he remembered the hours he had spent waiting in the rush hour for a Green Line bus to their house at Warlingham or Woldingham or some such rustic name.
‘Yes, here we are.’
Robina Fairfax's mouth opened in a smile which revealed teeth that could only have been her own, so variously coloured and oddly shaped were they.
She gulped down the Martini offered to her and sat down on the sofa by Penelope, who edged away into her corner, recognising in Robina Fairfax's shapeless grey woollen dress and strings of painted wooden beads the kind of woman she sometimes met at her landlady's ‘evenings’.
It seemed almost as if she would have to side with Ianthe against the anthropologists, and this was not at all what she had intended.
But when they were sitting at the oval table in the dining-room, eating Mrs Purry's admirable steak and kidney pudding and drinking a full-bodied Burgundy, Penelope found herself next to Rupert, who talked very pleasantly about Italy, remembering that Penelope was shortly to visit Rome with the parish party, and told her of things she ought to see and restaurants where she might eat.
He even dropped a hint that he had a conference in Perugia at about the same time and might very well find himself in Rome after it was over.
‘Which could be fun,’ he added, looking first at Penelope and then at Ianthe.
‘We could have given you an introduction to Professor Vanchetti in Rome,’ said Gervase Fairfax, who was Penelope's other neighbour, ‘but unfortunately he dropped down dead the other day.’
‘Oh dear,’ Penelope murmured.
‘Yes, near St Peter's, just by the obelisk, I believe.
In the Vatican City’— the sarcastic edge of his voice seemed to sharpen —‘so that was all right.’
‘He had borrowed a book of Gervase's,’ said Robina.
‘Now I suppose we shall never get it back.’
‘It was an expensive book too, though fortunately I hadn't spent any money on it.
It was sent to me as a review copy.
Of course I haven't written the review — I doubt if I should have had time, my own work takes up too much.’
He gave a short laugh.
‘You are still working up your field material?’ asked  Everard Bone politely.
‘Certainly!
And you too, I imagine?’
‘But of course— my wife says that we anthropologists are like a housewife faced with the remains of yesterday's stew and wondering whether it can possibly be eked out to make another meal.’
‘You can do that all right with a stew,’ said Penelope.
‘Add a few more vegetables, some carrots or a tin of peas, and a bouillon cube — or even just water — and serve rather a lot of potatoes with it.’
‘But how does it work with an anthropologist's material?’ asked Ianthe.
‘Surely that's more difficult?’
‘Surprisingly, it isn't,’ said Everard.’
Many have made only one short field trip and yet they go on using that material in articles and even books for the rest of their lives.
Just a few more vegetables or a bouillon cube,’ he turned to Penelope, smiling, ‘and sometimes a great deal too many potatoes.’
‘Lentils too,’ said Robina, with her toothy laugh.
‘I wonder what is the equivalent of lentils in anthropological writing?’
The laughter that greeted this remark was interrupted by her husband protesting that novelists were just as bad, writing the same book over and over again.
‘But life can be interpreted in so many different ways,’ said Ianthe in her quiet voice.
‘Perhaps there the novelist has the advantage and he can let his imagination go where it will.’
She saw herself again in John's room in Pimlico, washing up at the sink in the corner.
‘Even the most apparently narrow and uneventful life,’ she began thoughtfully, then stopped, uncertain of what she was going to say next.
What did it mean for her-that little episode-what was its significance in the pattern?
‘Haven't the novelist and the anthropologist more in common than some people think?’ said Everard.
‘After all, both study life in communities, though the novelist  need not be so accurate or bother with statistics and kinship tables.
How are you finding the church life here?’
He turned to Rupert.
‘Is it rewarding or amusing in any way?
‘Church life?’ said Robina.
‘What's that got to do with Rupert?’
‘He has lately recovered his childhood faith,’ Everard explained, ‘as I also did some years ago.’
‘Goodness — do people do that?’ said Gervase incredulously.
‘Oh, the church here is very pleasant,’ said Rupert, seeming a little embarrassed, probably because of the presence of Ianthe and Penelope.
‘Penelope is the vicar's sister-in-law,’ he added quickly.
‘And Ianthe is a canon's daughter.’
There was a short silence, as if in acknowledgement of or tribute to these facts.
‘It's the hymns that are the great stumbling block,’ Everard went on, ‘but really the only thing is to abandon oneself to the words uncritically and let them flow over one.’
‘The great translators of the Oxford Movement sitting in their gothic studies,’ said Gervase.
‘Hymns pouring off the assembly line.’
‘Yes,’ said Rupert.
‘I think we must agree that Keble was not at his most inspired when he wrote the hymn which we sang at  Candlemas not so long ago — beginning, if I remember rightly,
Ave Maria!
Blessed maid,
Lily of Eden's fragrant shade…=’
‘But one must imagine the crowded churches in the East End of London,’ said Everard, ‘and the great processions — not just a few sophisticated Anglo-Catholic intellectuals pondering every word with critical detachment.’
‘Personally I should find the endless cups of tea one of the more trying aspects of church life,’ said Gervase.
‘Women like them, I suppose — do they?’
He turned to Ianthe.
‘As far as I can gather from my limited field work they seem to be produced on every possible and impossible occasion.
And I suppose they always were.’
‘Yes, I can still see my mother at the urn.’
Rupert smiled reminiscently.
‘My Mother at the Urn — what's that?
A newly discovered work by one of the minor Pre-Raphaelites?’ said Robina.
‘Well, I suppose at this point we retire and leave the gentlemen to their port.
I know you all want to talk about that Unesco thing,’ she added in a slightly threatening tone.
The three women went upstairs to the spare bedroom.
Ianthe and Penelope waited while Robina tried various doors.
Penelope sat down at the dressing table and tried to do something to her hair.
‘Child, your dress has split at the back,’ said Robina, coming back into the room.
‘Oh, I wonder if there's a needle and cotton anywhere,’ said Ianthe helpfully.
‘The stuff has frayed and pulled away from the seam,’ said Robina.
‘I don't think sewing it together would be the slightest use.’
‘The dress was rather tight to begin with and now I've eaten too much,’ said Penelope despairingly.
‘Steak and kidney pudding, baked apples and cream, and Stilton cheese — what can you expect!
If only I had a stole or something to cover it up.’
‘You could wear my fur jacket,’ Ianthe suggested.
‘But that would look rude — as if I thought the house wasn't warm enough, which it really is with all that paraffin burning away.’
‘You could wear this Indian bedspread as a shawl,’ suggested Robina, and even went so far as pull it off  the bed and advance towards Penelope with it.
‘I couldn't wear that,’ she said indignantly.
‘He'd recognise it and it would look so odd.’
‘I don't think men notice these things,’ said Robina comfortingly, ‘and that means they won't notice the split seam either.’
They went downstairs and into the drawing room.
Penelope was careful to walk to her chair with a sort of sideways movement, so that nobody should see the back of her dress.
Very shortly afterwards the men came in, Rupert carrying a decanter of port and a bottle of brandy.
Mrs Purry, who looked suitably like a black Persian cat, then brought the coffee in.
‘I thought you might like some brandy with your coffee,’ said Rupert.
‘Or there's port, of course.’
‘Brandy for me, please,’ said Robina.
‘I don't think I will have either, thank you,’ said Ianthe.
‘I always feel port is really for men and brandy is rather associated with illness or disaster for me.’
Penelope hardly knew which to choose after this, but decided on brandy; she had a vague idea that for women port was a rather low-class drink, since they did not — perhaps could not — appreciate it in the rather ritualistic way that men did.
‘You haven't allowed yourselves much time to thrash out the Unesco project,’ said Robina vigorously.
‘Well, it hardly seemed to need such drastic treatment as thrashing,’ said Rupert.
‘No,’ said Gervase.
‘Money has been offered and a very large amount, so it seems best to accept the assignment thankfully.
We think we can produce what is wanted between us.’
The men talked on about the project, and the women feeling themselves to be excluded — as perhaps they were — started a conversation among themselves.
But such conversations, unless they spring up spontaneously  among friends, are usually poor and wretched things.
I don't want to be talking to you, thought Penelope desperately, trying to appear interested in what Robina Fairfax was saying about a place in West London where she had bought a piece of statuary for her garden at a very reasonable price.
Ianthe had gone into a kind of day dream and found herself wondering what John did in the evenings.
It was a relief to all of them when at half-past ten Robina got up and declared firmly that they had a long journey and must now go.
Everard Bone also remembered his sick wife, perhaps for the first time that evening, and offered to give the Fairfaxes a lift somewhere in his car.
Rupert, left alone with Ianthe and Penelope, found himself heaving a sigh of relief, flopping down into a chair, and suggesting a cup of tea.
‘See how influenced by church life I've become,’ he said.
Now that he was left alone with the two women, both of whom (he imagined) rather admired him, Rupert felt a sense of power, though there being two of them rather limited the scope of what he could do — cramped his style, he might almost have said.
In the end, after the tea had been made and drunk, there seemed nothing for it but to escort them home, leaving Ianthe at her front door and walking the short distance to the vicarage with Penelope.
As he had helped her on with her coat, Rupert had noticed her dress had split at the back, which he found provocative and rather endearing.
Had not Sophia been standing on the front steps of the vicarage calling Faustina in, he would have taken Penelope in his arms and kissed her.
But she was not to know that he had had this desire, and went into the house with head bent, feeling that she had been a failure.
12
‘Rome-you're welcome to it as far as I'm concerned,’ said Mervyn spitefully, the day before Ianthe was due to leave with the party from St Basil's.
‘But Rome in the spring, surely that will be lovely,’ John protested.
‘It's not like Paris, you know.
I believe it can be uncomfortably hot.
And I'm sure you won't like the food.
All that  cannelloni — or all those  cannelloni , I should say — very much overrated.’
‘Perhaps Ianthe will stick to spaghetti and ravioli,’ said John, mentioning the better known varieties of pasta which English people would probably be familiar with in tinned form.
‘Grated cheese on everything,’ Mervyn went on, ‘though it is Parmesan, I'll grant you that.
Mother would find it much too rich, I know.’
‘Well, it's a good thing she isn't going, then,’ said John.
‘They tell me you only get that very strong black espresso coffee — not even  cappuccino — and the cups are only half full,’ Mervyn persisted, so that Ianthe had to protest that she wasn't going to Rome only to eat and drink.
‘Of course he goes on like this because he's jealous,’ said John, when he and Ianthe were alone.
‘If only he could get away from his mother he'd love to go to Italy.’
‘Yes, poor Mervyn, if only he could.’
Ianthe spoke perfunctorily, for she was walking away from the library with John who had not left her as he usually did to go to his bus stop.
He seemed to be about to ask her something.’
‘I was wondering if you'd come and have a drink with me before you go home,’ he said at last.
‘That would be very nice, but surely it's too early for a drink?’
‘No — it's half-past five.
But perhaps a cup of tea would be better — cosier — if you know of anywhere round here?’
He stopped in the middle of the pavement and took her arm.
‘There's the Humming Bird,’ said Ianthe, naming the cafe where she sometimes had lunch.
It would be the first time she had ever been with John to a place that was part of her own particular world, unless one counted the Ash Wednesday lunchtime service at her uncle's church.
But now that she came to think of it she had never been out to any sort of meal with John.
There was to her something romantic about the idea of sitting with him in the place where she had so often sat alone, eating a poached egg or macaroni cheese at a shaky little oak table.
‘No, we don't do evening meals,’ Mrs Harper was saying to an obvious middle-aged civil servant as they entered.
‘But I could knock you up a couple of poached eggs or a buck rarebit — how would that do?’
‘Shall we have poached eggs?’
John asked, as they sat down.
Ianthe hesitated.
The eating of eggs together had not figured in the romantic picture, perhaps no actual food had suggested itself.
Then she realised that he must be hungry and she felt a pang of that pity which is akin to love.
‘Yes, let's have that,’ she agreed.
‘And cakes and China tea?’
‘Yes, lovely.’
Mrs Harper gave Ianthe a piercing look through her pince-nez as she came to take the order.
Ianthe felt that some kind of explanation for her presence at this unusual time and with a young man was expected, but did not feel herself capable of providing it
‘Do you want milles feuilles?’ she asked in a tone of peculiar significance.
‘Oh yes, please,’ said John.
When she had gone away he said to Ianthe, ‘You won't forget to send me a postcard of that fountain, will you.
The one where you throw the money and wish.’
‘No, I won't forget.’
‘Will you throw a coin in?’
‘It depends.’
Ianthe hesitated, seeing herself with the parish party.
Perhaps it was easier to imagine Sister Dew doing it than Mark and Sophia.
‘I wonder what you'll wish for,’ John went on, looking at her intently.
Mrs Harper came up to the table with the tea so Ianthe's answer had to be delayed.
In any case she did not know what it was to be and took refuge in the business of drawing the cups and the teapot towards her.
‘I expect you'll wish I was with you — or at least I hope you will,’ said John at last.
Poached eggs were placed before them.
‘I thought your friend would probably be able to tackle two,’ said Mrs Harper cheerfully to Ianthe.
‘This is the first meal we've ever had together,’ said John when she had gone.
‘Yes, I suppose it is, really.’
‘We'll have lots more together, won't we.
We'll go to Italy together one day, don't you feel it?’
‘I don't know,’ said Ianthe, confused.
‘Perhaps I'll go with Mervyn and his mother and we'll avoid  cannelloni and Parmesan cheese,’ she added jokingly.
They ate their poached eggs, then John handed Ianthe the plate of cakes.
‘I don't think I can eat any more,’ said Ianthe.
‘You must be in love or something,’ said John.
‘That's what loss of appetite usually means.’
‘I'm not used to eating a meal at half-past five,’ Ianthe protested.
‘I suppose that's why I'm not hungry.’
‘If you're not going to eat those milles feuilles,’ said Mrs Harper, hovering reproachfully by the table, ‘that gentleman over there would like them.’
‘Of course it's lovely having tea,’ said Ianthe, afraid that she had sounded ungracious.
‘I have enjoyed it, John.
But now I really must be going.
I've still got most of my packing to do.
‘I'll come to the station with you and get your ticket.’
‘Oh, but I've got the return half, thank you.’
All the same John insisted on coming with her as far as the ticket barrier, and stood holding her hand while she attempted to say good-bye.
Suddenly he drew her towards him and kissed her.
‘Good-bye, darling,’ he said.
‘I wish I was coming too.
Take care of yourself.’
Ianthe hurried on to the escalator and began walking down.
At the bottom the warm air blowing about her seemed to increase her agitation.
A piece of newspaper was swirled against her legs and she collided surprisingly, almost nightmarishly, with a nun.
What was a nun doing, hurrying in the opposite direction in the rush hour, flashed into her mind as the nun spoke.
‘Why, Ianthe Broome, of all people!’ she exclaimed.
‘Don't you remember me?’
She had an eager shining face and looked happy in a rather frightening way.
She was grasping a large man's umbrella.
Ianthe hesitated for a moment, trying to remember.
‘Agnes Dalby, isn't it,’ she said.
‘School, of course.
You were in the Upper Fourth when I left.’
‘And you were the Head Girl!’
‘I didn't know about…=’ Ianthe looked at the black robes.
‘My taking the veil?’ said the nun, so that she appeared to be joking.
Perhaps she had often had to put up this kind of defence Ianthe thought.
People surged forward, nearly knocking them over as a train came in.
‘Mustn't keep you,’ said the nun, ‘and I'm dashing off to St Alban's, then supper at the Restful Tray with Mother Josephine.’
She seemed to vanish as quickly as she had appeared, leaving Ianthe to be pushed forward into the train, where she stood in a daze until she found herself sitting down in a seat offered to her by a small boy.
‘You looked as if you could do with a sit-down,’ said the boy's mother.
‘I was watching that nun talking to you — it seems to have given you quite a turn.’
‘I was surprised to see her,’ Ianthe admitted.
The woman lowered her voice so that Ianthe could hardly hear it above the noise of the train.
‘I don't think they ought to let them out, walking about like that in those black clothes.
It gives me the creeps and I know it frightened the kiddies.
I mean it's not very nice, is it.’
‘Oh, I didn't mind,’ said Ianthe.
‘She's somebody I know.’
‘How dreadful for you, somebody you know being like that.’
Ianthe was glad when the woman and her child got out at the next station, for not only did she find the conversation embarrassing but she also wanted to think about the moments before her unexpected meeting with Agnes Dalby — moments which she had so far had no  chance of reliving or considering.
That John should have kissed her like that — in the way she had quite often seen boys kiss girls on their way home- and that she should not have minded, apart from the slight awkwardness of the people surging around them, would have seemed incredible to her a few months ago.
One did not behave like that in a public place with a young man, suitable or otherwise, and John was so very much otherwise.
It was not surprising that at this moment the image of her mother — the canon's widow in the dark flat near Westminster Cathedral should rise up before her.
But there was obviously nothing she could do about it now, she decided, and the holiday in Rome would no doubt put him out of her mind.
Resolutely, and determined to think no more than she could help about it, she opened her new copy of the Church Times which normally she would have looked forward to reading on her journey home.
Yet she reached the station where she got out without having progressed any further than the first page.
Walking past the vicarage, she wondered whether to call in to see Mark and Sophia, but judged that they were probably busy doing their packing.
When she got into her house she poured herself a glass of sherry and stood looking into the garden, not wanting any supper.
‘You must be in love or something,’ she heard John saying, then she remembered the unaccustomed poached egg and was glad to have found a sensible reason for her lack of appetite.
‘Two men and five women — er — ladies,’ said Mark rather despondently, as he and Sophia were doing their packing.
‘Still, I suppose I can always creep off somewhere by myself.’
‘Aren't most parties made up like that?’ said Sophia  consolingly.
‘And the odd thing is that of all the people who complained to you after that sermon that they'd never been to Rome only Sister Dew has taken advantage of this opportunity to go there.’
‘The others prefer to go to Broadstairs and Ilfracombe as usual.
Where they'll have the usual bad weather so that they can go on complaining.’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Sophia, ‘and I suppose we didn't really ask them to come with us, did we.
As it is, I don't know how Sister Dew is likely to fit in.
And I can't help feeling a tiny bit worried about leaving Faustina with both Edwin and Daisy away.
Though Daisy's tightened up the rules at the Cattery — did I show you her new brochure?’
Mark took from Sophia the cyclostyled leaflet hardly a ‘brochure’ he felt — and read through the rules starting with ‘Sex (undoctored…= and Siamese cats cannot be accepted)’, going on to invite owners to bring bedding but ‘no bowls, please’, and ending with the injunction ‘This year we must ask you to leave your cat at the house and not go down to the Cattery.
We find that the cats already in the Cattery become unsettled with the noise that is made when settling new cats.’
‘I suppose you could go down,’ he said soothingly.
‘After all you are such an old friend.’
‘Yes, but one doesn't want to unsettle the other cats, and Faustina herself might become upset.’
‘I'm sure Jim Mangold will look after her splendidly.
You've often said yourself how good he is with her, and he has such a reassuring name.’
‘Oh, certainly — Jim loves Faustina.
I shan't worry really, but she's all I've got.’
For a moment Sophia was afraid that Mark was going to speak sternly to her, for his eyes had their rather distant look and his mouth was in a firm line.
But when he spoke again it was only to express some anxiety about  the conduct of the services while he was away.
Father Anstruther, the former vicar who lived rather too near, was to do duty for the time of Mark's absence — not an entirely satisfactory arrangement but the best that could be made.
‘Now indeed the dog will return to his vomit, as he so happily put it,’ said Sophia.
‘I only hope he won't upset anybody,’ said Mark anxiously.
13
A party of people sets out on a journey with all its different components like the jumbled up pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, Sophia thought, waiting for something — some event or just the passing of time — to fit them together into a whole.
In the bus going to the airport she looked around her to see what sort of people went to Rome in April.
She was not surprised to see two or three elderly ladies and nondescript middle-aged couples, but where were all the priests and nuns she had expected, the real glory of a flight to Rome?
The answer to this question was that they had other means of transport.
As the bus arrived at the airport a shooting brake drew up and a party of nuns got out of it.
Sophia commented on this to Ianthe who was sitting in front of her.
Ianthe was reminded of her meeting with the nun in the Underground the day before and Sophia remarked that nowadays some of them seemed hardly to be cloistered at all.
‘But it doesn't seem right for them to drive about like that,’ said Sister Dew.
‘It always gives me a bit of a turn to see a nun driving a car.’
Now priests and even a couple of bishops appeared and Sophia felt a sense of relief, as if their presence were some sort of guarantee of a safe flight.
‘Don't you feel a slight envy of the Roman Catholics  when it comes to making a trip like this?’ said Edwin Pettigrew to Mark.
‘Ah yes,’ Mark sighed.
‘The English College, the Irish College — there's a sort of cosiness about it all.
It must be like a homecoming to them.
An Anglican feels almost an intruder.’
‘Darling, you mustn't say such things,’ said Sophia indignantly.
‘You who so often preach about the catholicity of the Anglican Church, and believe it too.’
‘Oh yes, Father,’ said Sister Dew unctuously, ‘we always say that's one of your little hobby horses.’
‘We’, the stupid, ignorant, umbrage-taking members of Mark's congregation, thought Sophia, moving closer to her husband as if to protect him from them.
Now she took care to change the subject and what could be more natural than to talk to the vet and his sister about Faustina and to speculate on what she might be doing at this moment.
But Faustina's remoteness, now of distance also, made it difficult to guess.
Mark, too, after the slightly disquieting observations about Roman Catholic priests, seemed to have removed himself from her.
Looking for Ianthe and Penelope, Sophia saw that they were deep in conversation, which she welcomed as a good sign.
The two unattached women seemed to have been drawn together perhaps by their very unattachedness but more certainly by Rupert Stonebird's dinner party and the idea that they might meet him in Rome.
‘Perugia,’ Sophia heard Penelope murmur.
‘Is that far from Rome?’
‘It isn't really very far,’ said Ianthe.
‘I looked it up on the map as a matter of interest.’
‘But distance is only relative,’ said Sophia.
Love will find out the way, she thought, though it was a little difficult to picture Rupert like the lover in the poem, galloping over the earth and swimming the seas to reach the  loved one, especially as he had not as yet shown much sign of loving either of the two women.
The presence of the two bishops, not to mention the priests and nuns, gave confidence to everybody as the plane rose into the air.
Sister Dew, who had not flown before, let out a cry at seeing fields and houses beneath her.
‘Jim Mangold will be feeding them now,’ said Daisy Pettigrew comfortingly, ‘and I expect Faustina will be getting her share.
I can almost hear them crying out for their dinner.
Look, dear,’ she opened her capacious shopping bag and invited Sophia to peer into its depths.
Sophia saw some tins of a well-known brand of cat food, neatly packed into the bottom of the bag.
‘For those poor deprived ones in Rome,’ Daisy murmured.
‘I hope you remembered to bring a tin-opener,’ said Sophia, in confusion, for the idea of taking food to the deprived Roman cats had set up in her head a muddled train of thought, which had something to do with Anglo- and Roman Catholicism, as if the latter had need of nourishment from the former.
When the stewardess came round with cigarettes and miniature bottles of spirits and liqueurs, the St Basil's party bought them eagerly.
Cigarettes, so cheap and in such large numbers, were snapped up even by non-smokers, who regarded them as some new kind of currency; and the little bottles, so exquisitely miniature, ‘twee’, as Sister Dew put it, could have nothing wicked about them even for teetotallers.
‘Of course I'm thinking of the bottle stall for the Christmas bazaar,’ said Sister Dew virtuously, tucking the little bottles into her bag.
Sophia noticed that the tall handsome priest sitting over the other side from her also bought a great many of the little bottles.
In what seemed a very short time the plane began to come down and bits of northern Italy could be seen below.
Sophia, who had not made this flight before, was disappointed that it did not look more like the Italian landscape she remembered from the ground.
This greenish greyish land with patches of dark trees might have been anywhere.
The Italians, and indeed all foreigners, are known to be cruel to animals, thought Daisy, looking down to see if she could catch some peasant beating a horse or kicking a dog.
Now there is a whole ocean between John and me, Ianthe thought, but soon she was caught up in the bustle of landing.
Groups of priests and nuns, the latter waving handkerchiefs and carrying bunches of flowers, came into view.
It was almost as if they had been hired to give the tourist a suitable first impression of the Eternal City.
‘Look,’ said Edwin Pettigrew to Mark, ‘our Roman Catholic friends are being whisked through all the formalities, and Mark saw that the priests had been gathered into a little group under the leadership of a jolly-looking, curly-haired Irishman with a strong brogue.
‘Did ye get the little bottles?’
Mark heard him ask.
Leonardo da Vinci, thought Penelope, seeing the curious angular statue from the bus.
Presumably this identified the place as being Italy, but it might have been anywhere.
Depression had descended on her, hemmed in by all these people, driving along a straight dreary road.
There were all the handsome Italians of good family?
The only Italian she might have got an introduction to — and though elderly he might have had a son — had dropped down dead in the Vatican Square.
And Rupert Stonebird was in Perugia, which was miles away.
He had not said definitely that he would be coming to Rome, only that he might…= 
Italy, thought Sister Dew, well it doesn't seem very romantic so far.
She was beginning to wish she had gone to the toilet again on the plane — it had been so nice and clean, and who knew when she would get another chance?
Tea, too — that was what she wanted now, a good cup, and where was she going to get that?
Yet she was not downhearted.
With a vicar's wife and a canon's daughter in the party she had faith that somehow all her wants would be taken care of.
Ruins, thought Mark, as the bus wound up the road by the Colosseum, the glory that was Rome.
‘Have we not all,’ he heard himself saying from the pulpit, ‘as we have gazed on the ruins of the mighty Colosseum…=’Well, a few more of his congregation would have done that by then.
They should have a sermon about Rome when he got back.
Perhaps another ‘Why I am not a Roman Catholic’ would be salutary from him as well as for them.
Again he heard the strong Irish voice ring out —‘Did ye get the little bottles?’— and knew that however cosy it might seem in imagination he would never be one of the party hurried through the customs to the English or Irish or Scottish College.
He was too old now and the whole thing was altogether too complicated.
There was Sophia too, his beloved wife, and even Faustina who was, he felt sure, fiercely Protestant.
Turning to Sophia he touched her hand.
She was looking-tired and a little sad.
The journey had been too much for her, he thought apprehensively, but when she spoke it was in a cheerful raised voice.
‘I think we'll go first to the pensione and leave our luggage and then straight to Babbington's’, she said.
‘I'm sure we could all do with a good cup of tea.’
14
When they got to the pensione Sophia prayed quickly to whatever saint arranged such things — one of the less well known women saints, she felt — that it was going to be all right about the rooms.
She and Mark would of course be sharing a room; Ianthe and Penelope had also expressed their willingness to share.
Edwin Pettigrew would have a single room, but it had not been  possible to get more than one, which meant that Daisy would have to share with Sister Dew.
Fortunately neither had raised any objection to this arrangement, but Sophia could not help fearing that there might be difficulties.
The pensione was of the reassuringly old-fashioned type which was used to catering mainly for parties of middle-aged English, American, German or Scandinavian women, though a few men in the shape of clergymen and husbands were also accommodated.
But women always seemed to be in the majority and the proprietor and his wife, both of whom spoke excellent English and German, could be seen at every hour of the day advising parties of determined-looking women in sensible shoes how to get to St Peter's or the Piazza Venezia or the English church, or which were the best shops to buy presents and souvenirs to take home.
Sophia had stayed here several times before, which was one reason why it had been chosen as suitable for the St Basil's party.
She greeted the proprietor in her careful  Italian and was welcomed by him in his careful English.
Penelope, standing behind her sister, wished that a more exciting hotel would have been chosen.
This was the wrong way to come to Rome, in such uninspiring company.
One should visit Italy for the first time either alone or with a lover, she decided.
When she and Ianthe were shown into their room she sat down on what looked to be the best bed and lit a cigarette.
Ianthe went over to the window and flung open the shutters and it occurred to Penelope that she was probably one of those people who didn't approve of smoking in bedrooms.
If that was so, she would just have to put up with it.
But Ianthe had not even noticed Penelope's cigarette.
She was conscious only that she was now in Rome for the first time in her life.
She wanted to stand on the balcony and look out over the roofs, listen to the strange sounds and watch the cars and scooters rushing by in the street below.
She was too tired to be aware of much except the slight headache which a long journey always gave her, yet she felt curiously light-headed and carefree.
‘There seems to be quite a lot of room for our clothes,’ said Penelope.
‘Two chests of drawers and this big wardrobe — which side will you have?’
‘Oh, I don't mind,’ said Ianthe, watching an old woman watering plants on a nearby roof ‘How I long for a cup of tea!’she went on, coming back into the room.
‘Well, we're just going out to have one,’ said Penelope, thinking how typical it was that Ianthe should long for such a dull and essentially English thing as a cup of tea.
She hardly liked to admit that she wanted one herself
‘Shall we go out now and meet the others then?’
Ianthe suggested.
The party was already waiting, and with Sophia leading the way they walked rather briskly to Babbington's tea room at the foot of the Spanish Steps.
All the  women exclaimed at the sight of the red, pink and white azaleas massed on the steps, but each thought privately that only she could appreciate the true beauty and significance of the flowers — Sophia feeling that here was the essence of the Italy she knew and loved, Penelope experiencing a lift of the heart as if the flowers held a promise of future romantic adventures, Ianthe knowing as she looked at the flower what she had only suspected before — that she was in love with John.
The emotions of Daisy and Sister Dew were of a different type.
Daisy thought, a people that loves flowers yet is cruel to animals; Sister Dew said to herself, I must get a coloured postcard of that to send to my friend.
The men's feelings were not so well defined and they were not to be diverted from their search for tea.
In the tea room their spirits were at once raised and depressed by the English-looking cakes, pots of jam and packets of tea in the showcases on the counter, but the dim interior, with its Kardomah-like decor, reassured and encouraged them.
The whole place suggested tea, and a good cup at that.
They found two adjacent tables and settled down, the men a little aloof from the women.
A waitress came and took their order in broken English though Sophia had started to speak Italian to her.
There were a few obvious English tourists, but even more elderly Italians, and even a few young couples, as if it were the fashionable thing to do.
‘Or perhaps they just like tea,’ said Ianthe, grateful for the cup that Sophia had poured out for her.
Oh, the benison of it, she thought, for she seemed to need comfort now, not only because she was tired after the journey and far away from John, but because she had admitted to herself that she loved him, had let her love sweep over her like a kind of illness, ‘giving in’ to flu, conscious only of the present moment.
She tried to  imagine what John would be doing; it would be past the time for office tea but not yet time to go home.
Was he thinking of her as she was of him?
She gazed ahead of her, seeing neither the pots of Chivers jam in the glass showcase nor the dark handsome young man in the opposite comer, who was staring at her fixedly.
Penelope had noticed him, staring at Ianthe like that, and wondered who he was.
It almost seemed for a moment as if he would come over to the table and speak, but then he turned away, looking rather puzzled and began to order his tea.
At that moment, too, there was another diversion — a large black and white cat appeared from some kitchen region and stalked down the passage between the tables.
Their first Italian cat and it was disappointingly sleek and well fed looking.
‘Come here, pussy,’ said Sister Dew.
‘Oh, I suppose he doesn't understand English — and isn't he fat,’ she added, with a reproachful glance at Daisy.
‘That's because it's in the English tea room,’ said Daisy.
‘One would naturally expect him to be well fed.’
‘Pettigrew and I are going for a stroll,’ said Mark, who had been finding the atmosphere of the tea room rather oppressive and not really what he had come to Rome for.
‘I expect they want to see a bit of night life,’ said Sister Dew.
‘Hardly at half-past five in the afternoon,’ said Penelope coldly.
She was finding the presence of Sister Dew intolerable and couldn't think why Mark and Sophia had invited her.
Surely she wasn't going to go everywhere with them.
‘Well, I expect it starts earlier on the Continent,’ said Sister Dew happily.
Now that the women were by themselves, the man whom Penelope had noticed staring at Ianthe seemed to pluck up courage to come over to their table.
Could it be  that Ianthe knew this good-looking young Italian? she wondered enviously.
‘It is Ianthe Broome?’ he asked tentatively and with no trace of foreign accent.
‘Why, yes.’
Ianthe looked puzzled for a moment.
‘And you're…=?’
‘Basil Branche.’
‘Basil Branche, of course!
Father Branche was one of my father's curates,’ she explained to the rest of the party, and began making introductions.
So he was a clergyman, thought Penelope, a little disappointed.
Still, he was very good-looking and not being dressed as a clergyman might be quite an asset to their party.
She began to wonder if he was unattached.
‘Are you staying long in Rome?’ asked Sophia politely —
‘I've already been here a  fortnight and shall probably stay a week or two longer before moving south,’ said Father Branche vaguely.
‘My word, you are having a nice long holiday!
Won a football pool or something on Ernie?’ asked Sister Dew.
He smiled faintly.
‘No, my health broke down and I was ordered to take a long holiday in the South of France or Italy.’
Goodness, were people ‘ordered’ to do such things in these days Sophia wondered, seeing the crowded  waiting-room at the doctor's surgery.
But perhaps he had been to a Harley Street specialist — it was easier to imagine the long holiday being recommended behind thick net curtains in one of those tall houses with several brass plates on the door.
‘How lucky that you were able to arrange it,’ said Ianthe, not in the least sarcastically.
‘Yes, a most extraordinary thing happened.
I was glancing through the personal column of the Church Times when I saw an advertisement for ‘a curate in poor  health’— those were the very words — to accompany two elderly ladies on an Italian tour, all expenses paid.’
He smiled.
‘So naturally I applied.’
‘They must have had a lot of replies,’ said Penelope.
‘How lucky that you were chosen.’
‘No, the strange thing is that I was the only applicant.
I suppose no other curate happened to be in poor health at that time.’
Father Branche looked puzzled for a moment, as if he might have said something amusing.
‘Or perhaps others didn't feel they could give in to it as I did.’
‘No, they felt it their duty to struggle on,’ said Daisy, half to herself
‘I suppose it was a nervous breakdown, that sort of thing,’ said Sister Dew knowingly.
‘What do you do — act as chaplain to these ladies?’
Sophia asked quickly, feeling that Sister Dew might go too far.
‘Not really, they just like to have an escort sometimes.’
‘They are able to get about, then?’
‘Goodness, yes — they're in their seventies and very active, especially the younger sister.
She was left some property in Italy by an elderly Count who had always admired her, even wanted to marry her, I believe.’
‘How romantic,’ said Sophia.
‘It seems to be not quite of this age, a story like that.’
Neither was Father Branche, she thought, a kind of ‘tame curate’ of the old-fashioned type beloved by elderly ladies.
One did not seem to meet many of them now.
‘I expect we shall run into you again, as English people do in Rome,’ she added, as they were leaving the tea room.
‘We are staying at the Pensione Laura.’
‘And we are at the Albergo di Risorgimento,’ said Father Branche, his voice seeming to rise in triumph at the noble word.
‘Perhaps we could all stroll back together,’ said  Ianthe.
‘I expect we shall just be spending the evening quietly — dinner at the pensione and then an early night.’
Penelope looked appealingly at her sister, but Sophia was no help.
‘Yes, we're all rather tired,’ she agreed.
‘We only arrived this afternoon — I think that's the best plan.’
‘I want to visit my old school friend Nellie Musgrove, who lives in the Via Botteghe Oscure,’ said Daisy firmly, ‘so I may get Edwin to take me along there.
I have some tins of cat food for her.’
If Father Branche was surprised he did not show it, but no doubt he was well used to English women in Rome and the kind of things they were likely to do.
Before they parted it seemed to Sophia that he was trying to draw Ianthe aside, as if to make an assignation with her, but she gave him so little encouragement, indeed seemed almost to avoid him, that he had to be content with looking forward to the doubtful pleasure of meeting the whole party the next evening after dinner at the Trevi fountain.
If it was fine, of course.
Dinner seemed to be hardly Italian at all, except that there was spaghetti, so English and German was the company.
But the Roman evening was not to be disposed of in quite the way they had imagined, with an early night because they were tired after the journey.
Everyone felt a desire to go out, even if only for a moment, to feel the pleasure of walking in a foreign city at night.
Edwin and Daisy marched off with a map and the numbers of suitable trams to find the Via Botteghe Oscure; Sister Dew, Ianthe, and a rather unwilling Penelope went to buy postcards; Mark and Sophia, the cares of the parish temporarily forgotten, strolled up to the Trinità dei Monti and down the Spanish Steps.
At this moment she is all mine and without Faustina, Mark thought, then added quickly, ‘I wonder what Faustina is doing now,’ for he could afford to be generous  among the azaleas, with Sophia's hand in his.
‘I don't know, she's so unpredictable.
Perhaps she's even giving to somebody else the love and devotion she's never given to me.’
Mark pressed her hand.
Sophia, looking up at him, saw that his usual remote look had gone and that he was smiling.
‘What amuses you?’ she asked.
‘I was thinking that an obviously romantic setting has something to be said for it.
I suppose I don't love you any more here than when we're walking together in Ladbroke Grove — how romantic that might sound to a foreigner, by the way — and yet it seems as if I do.’
‘But do we walk in Ladbroke Grove?’
Sophia murmured.
One of many photographers who had been lurking among the azaleas seemed to take hope at the sight of such an obviously affectionate couple and presented himself before them.
‘Why not?’ said Mark.
‘We could print it in the parish magazine.’
‘Or at least look at it in the winter,’ said Sophia.
‘If only Penelope could find love here.
What did you think of Father Branche?
Oh — I forget — you and Edwin had gone for a walk.
He's a sort of curate we met in Babbington's.
Apparently he used to know Ianthe and now he's here with two old ladies, for his health.’
‘He sounds an improbable sort of curate,’ Mark commented.
‘Yes, but very good-looking.
There might be something…
Oh, Mark, she does need to love and be loved.’
‘It isn't given to everyone to have that good fortune,’ he said rather stiffly, for he often found it difficult to know what to say about Penelope.
‘Oh don't talk like that — it's inhuman.
What is there  for women but love?’
‘Now, darling, you know there are many things,’ said Mark, the usual stern note coming back into his voice.
‘I've been taught to believe that there are — perhaps I've even seen it, but I don't know ,’ Sophia protested.
‘And mustn't all these things be a second best?
Oh, not to God — I know what you're going to say.’
They had now reached the house where Keats died and Sophia was diverted — fortunately, Mark felt.
‘And there is poor Penny with Ianthe and Sister Dew,’ Sophia went on.
‘They've been buying postcards.
What a way to spend one's first evening in Rome.
Still, I have hopes for tomorrow and the Trevi fountain.’
‘Oh, Mrs Ainger, such lovely cards,’ said Sister Dew.
‘I'm going to send this one to my friend’— she lowered her voice —‘the one who's had that big operation.
It'll cheer her up.
We've had ever such a nice walk.’
Ianthe and Penelope seemed less enthusiastic.
When they were in their room together they agreed that Sister Dew was ‘a bit of a trial’ and that seemed to draw them together.
And then there was the other bond between them.
‘I suppose Rupert Stonebird will be at that conference in Perugia now,’ said Penelope casually.
‘Yes, with a lot of odd anthropologists,’ said Ianthe, who was unpacking her suitcase and arranging her various possessions.
Penelope noticed a leather photograph frame and wondered whose photograph Ianthe carried about with her.
When the frame was unfolded and set up she saw that it contained two photographs — one of a good-looking white-haired clergyman wearing a biretta, and the other of a ‘sweet-faced’ woman, her slender hand fondling the large cameo brooch at the throat of her dark dress.
Her parents, of course, and like so much that was connected with Ianthe, almost too good to be true.
The conversation about Rupert petered out; perhaps the thought of a crowd of anthropologists was somehow unfruitful and put a stop to the wanderings of the imagination.
It seemed easier to discuss the encounter in Babbington's.
‘Do you think we'll be seeing much of Father Branche?’
Penelope asked.
‘Basil Branche,’ Ianthe murmured, a smile playing about her lips.
‘I can hardly remember him, really.
He stayed such a short time.’
‘Did his health break down?’
‘Yes, I believe it did.
He was said not to be very strong.
Of course the work in my father's parish wasn't particularly exhausting.’
Ianthe moved over to the balcony and stood looking out into the noisy Roman night.
She could not concentrate on Basil Branche when John was so much in her mind.
For one whose thoughts were normally disciplined it was disconcerting and humiliating to find how much he was creeping into them.
Perhaps ‘creep’ was hardly the word, though there was something appropriate about its insidiousness.
Still, she had promised to send him a postcard and the wording of that would need careful consideration.
‘Look,’ she called to Penelope, ‘such a strange illuminated sign — BANCO DI SANTO SPIRITO,’she spelled out.
‘Bank of the Holy Spirit?’ said Penelope.
‘It is a real bank or something to do with the Vatican?
It reminds one of those great red signs you sometimes see in London — TAKE COURAGE — have you ever noticed them?’
‘Yes,’ said Ianthe, ‘I believe it's a kind of beer — but how many people must have been strengthened and comforted by seeing that message shining out into the night.’